URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/293.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yoon v Roads and Maritime Services [2013] NSWADT 293 (20 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Yoon v Roads and Maritime Services
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 293
Hearing Date(s):
10 September 2013, 2 October 2013, 30 October 2013
Decision Date:
20 December 2013
General Division
Leal S, Judicial Member
The decision under review is affirmed
Catchwords:
Passenger Transport Act - wheelchair accessible taxi licence - cancellation
- failure to give preference to wheelchair jobs
Legislation Cited:
Passenger Transport Act 1990
Passenger Transport Regulation 2007
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR
Principal judgment
Soo Min Yoon (Applicant)
Roads and Maritime Services (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
Smythe Wozniak (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
2006, Mr Soo Min Yoon has been the operator of the Wheelchair Accessible Taxi
('WAT') licence number 105553 attached to taxi
licences are issued by the Director-General to address the shortage of
taxi-services experienced by those in wheelchairs. The
aim is to ensure that
sufficient, properly equipped taxis are available to meet the needs of members
of the community who are in
wheelchairs. A specific radio network, the Zero 200
Network, has been established to deal with request for WAT taxi-services, and
manage the allocation of work to WAT licensed taxi-cabs. WAT licences are
available at the significantly discounted price of $1000
for a period of 12
14 December 2012, the application for renewal of Mr Yoon's WAT licence was
granted in relation to taxi T5329.
subsequent review revealed that taxi T5329 had failed to show preference to take
hirings from persons confined to a wheelchair and
therefore had not complied
with the conditions of the licence. The review found that between 1 November
2012 and 29 February 2013,
taxi T5329 had only performed 21 wheelchair
28 March 2013, Mr Yoon was issued with a Notice to Show Cause as to why the
licence should not be cancelled. He failed to respond
to this notice and on 5
May 2013, his licence was cancelled.
1 June 2013, Mr Yoon applied for an internal review to reconsider the decision
to cancel his licence. In his application, Mr Yoon
having health problem for last 7-8 months, however it is my fault that I didn't
do wheelchair jobs.
decision was affirmed on 18 June 2013 following an internal review. The internal
review found that:
During the period of review records show that
T5329 performed 21 WAT journeys. These figures are not considered to be adequate
not considered to be showing preference to persons confined to wheelchairs.
Therefore, the delegate cannot be satisfied that Mr Yoon
has complied with the
licence conditions and performed wheelchair accessible work as a priority over
other taxi work. As such and
by application of s32G(1) of the Act, Mr Yoon's
licence is cancelled.
25 June 2013, the applicant filed an application for review of this decision and
on 3 July 2013, Mr Yoon's application for a stay
of the decision to cancel his
WAT license was granted by this Tribunal.
Relevant legislation
Passenger Transport Act 1990
provides that the Roads and Maritime
Services may at any time vary, suspend or cancel a licence if..owing to the
default of the licence,
or the agents or employees of the licensee..the
provisions of the Act or the Regulations, or the terms and conditions of the
have not been, or are not being complied with.
148(1) of the
Passenger Transport Regulation 2007
provides that the driver of a
wheelchair accessible taxi-cab that is available for hire must accept a hiring
offered by a person
using a wheelchair in preference to a hiring offered by a
person not using a wheelchair.
to this case, a WAT licence is issued subject to the following conditions (as
made under the authority of
Passenger Transport Act 1990
Condition 6(vii)
- the taxi-cab operating under the authority of this licence is available for
hire for a minimum of 10 hours each
and every day; and
Condition 9 -
The licensee must ensure that all drivers of the taxi-cab comply with any
reasonable request made by the authorised
taxi network or wheelchair accessible
taxi booking service that this taxi-cab is associated, is complied with, in
relation to acceptance
of wheelchair accessible taxi booking and driver
changeover.
of the Act provides that a licence is subject to the conditions prescribed
by the regulations.
of the Act provides that a person aggrieved by a decision to cancel the
person's licence may seek a review in this Tribunal. In determining
application for review, the Tribunal is to make the correct and preferable
decision having regard to the material before it, and
any applicable written or
unwritten law.
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
is well established that in considering an application for review the Tribunal
is not constrained to have regard only to the material
that was before the
Director-General, but may have regard to any relevant material before it at the
time of the review:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
Discussion of evidence
addition to the reasons provided in the internal review for affirming the
cancellation of Mr Yoon's WAT licence, namely that he
had not performed
wheelchair accessible work as a priority over other taxi work (in breach of
clause 148 of the
Passenger Transport Regulation
), the respondent submitted that
Mr Yoon had also breached conditions 6(vii) and 9 of his licence.
Yoon was unrepresented before the Tribunal.
support of his application, Mr Yoon provided a medical report dated 30 May 2013
stating that he was being treated for diabetes,
hyperlipidaemia and depression.
A further report by the endocrinologist, Dr Mark Borkman, dated 11 July 2013
states that despite
suffering from diabetes mellitus, Mr Yoon is fit to hold a
'commercial driver's licence subject to annual review' as his diabetes
controlled, there are no hypoglycaemic episodes and there is hypoglycaemia
awareness...he is using medication which minimises
the risk of hypoglycaemia and
there are no end organ effects that interfere with driving.' A report by Dr Hyan
Cho dated 26 July
2013 states that Mr Yoon 'has recovered from depression
and...is fit to drive.'
Yoon also provided a list of private wheelchair jobs completed by him between 1
November 2012 and 18 February 2013, showing 15
jobs, and a further list for the
period 3 July 2013 to 10 August 2014, showing 35 jobs completed.
Yoon gave oral evidence at hearing before the Tribunal.
told the Tribunal that he had started work as a taxi driver in 2001 and became
the operator of a wheelchair accessible taxi in
2006. He told the Tribunal that
he was aware of the condition that his taxi be on the road 10 hours a day 365
days a year. He told
the Tribunal that whilst he had tried to get drivers to
drive his taxi, this had proven difficult. At a result, he had continued
drive the taxi himself seven days a week, for over 90 hours a week.
agreed that the advantage of having a WAT licence over a regular short term
licence was its cost, in that it costs $1000 a year
rather than $30 000 a year.
He added that the insurance for a wheelchair accessible taxi is higher and there
is an extra radio fee
to pay of $300 per month.
told the Tribunal that he had taken on more wheelchair jobs than alleged by the
respondent. In support of this, he referred to
his list of personal jobs that
related to direct rather than radio bookings. In order to take these personal
wheelchair jobs, he
had to refuse wheelchair jobs offered to him by
told the Tribunal that over the past six years, he had been able to renew his
licence without incident, and without any issue as
to the number of wheelchair
jobs he had been taking. He told the Tribunal 'I am putting the excuse that I
was sick with high cholesterol,
diabetes and depression.'
noted the concern of the respondent that despite his medical condition, he had
nevertheless been able to take non-wheelchair passengers.
In response, he told
the Tribunal
Wheelchair jobs are hard work. You put them in and
out, with a normal passenger, you stay in your car. That's why I cannot do some
of the wheelchair jobs. The time of the review was November 2012 to February
2013. Around December to February is holiday season,
most of centres and schools
are closed and we don't get much WAT work at that time. This period is the time
with the least WAT jobs
of the whole year.
Yoon told the Tribunal that he had rejected some wheelchair jobs because of his
health. Due to his depression, he hadn't wanted
to work much but needed to
support his family. At that time, he had rejected wheelchair jobs because he
found them too hard.
told the Tribunal that he was now accepting many more wheelchair jobs. He told
the Tribunal that:
This shows I am healthy and am doing proper
wheelchair jobs. It shows I am doing my job properly. I have done this work for
time. I know what to do. This is the first time I have had a
cancellation. I've done my job properly for six years. The only time
I didn't do
it properly was because of my medical condition. I am okay now.
Tribunal expressed its concern in relation to the long hours worked by Mr Yoon.
Mr Yoon explained some of the difficulties he
had experienced in getting drivers
for his taxi. He told the Tribunal that a solution to this problem might be for
him to drive only
during the week and to advertise for a driver to do the
weekend shifts. He told the Tribunal that it would be easier to get a driver
weekend shifts because the money is better on the weekend. He told the Tribunal
that he was reasonably confident he would be
able to find a driver for the
respondent was concerned by the evidence given by Mr Yoon that he employed no
additional drivers to operate the taxi and was the
sole driver of the taxi. In
order to adhere to the conditions stipulated for operators of wheelchair
accessible taxis, Mr Yoon was
obliged to keep his taxi on the road 365 days a
year for a minimum of 10 hours a day. The respondent submitted that it would be
impossible to adhere to those conditions with a sole driver.
Yoon conceded as much.
the event of Mr Yoon re-applying for a WAT licence, the respondent agreed that
Roads and Maritime Services might well be favourably
disposed towards him were
he to present evidence to show the steps he had taken to ensure the relevant
conditions could be met and
the relevant regulations adhered to. Evidence that
Mr Yoon was employing an additional driver to ensure that the taxi could be on
the road a minimum of 10 hours a day for 365 days a year would, the respondent
agreed, help Mr Yoon's case for a renewal of his licence
the hearing, the respondent made an application to re-open the case in order to
consider evidence that had not previously
been placed before the Tribunal. This
application was not pressed following a subsequent application by the respondent
for a revocation
of the stay given to Mr Yoon on 3 July 2013, which was
subsequently revoked on 27 November 2013.
Tribunal finds that between the period November 2012 to February 2013, 116
wheelchair jobs were offered to the Taxi T5329 operated
by Mr Yoon and only 21
of these were accepted by him. The Tribunal accepts the evidence put forward by
Mr Yoon that a further 15
private wheelchair jobs were accepted by him during
this time. This means that, over all, T5329 accepted 36 wheelchair jobs for the
relevant period. The Tribunal accepts Mr Yoon's evidence that during this
period, he was the only driver for T5329.
Yoon has sought to explain the small number of wheelchair jobs taken over this
period by citing health problems, including depression,
diabetes and
hyperlipidaemia.
does not adequately explain why Mr Yoon, as the sole driver of the taxi T5329,
was nevertheless able to accept 386 non-wheelchair
jobs during this period. The
Tribunal accepts Mr Yoon's evidence that wheelchair jobs involve greater
physical exertion for a taxi
driver but, given the great disparity between the
few number of wheelchair jobs taken during this time in comparison to the far
number of non-wheelchair jobs taken, the Tribunal has difficulty
accepting that Mr Yoon's health issues alone explain his failure
to accept more
wheelchair jobs.
Tribunal does not accept Mr Yoon's submission that during this period, many
centres are closed and so few wheelchair jobs are
offered. The records shows
that 116 wheelchair jobs had been offered to Mr Yoon during this period, only 21
of which had been accepted.
the evidence before it, the Tribunal finds that during the period November 2012
to February 2013, Mr Yoon did not prioritise wheelchair
jobs and is therefore in
breach of clause 148 of the
Passenger Transport Regulation
the basis of these findings, the Tribunal is satisfied that for the relevant
audited period of November 2012 to February 2013,
Mr Yoon accepted only 21 of
the 116 wheelchair jobs offered to him by the Zero 200 radio network. Although
the Tribunal accepts that
he took a further 15 private wheelchair jobs during
this period, this does not explain or excuse the number of wheelchair jobs
by him during this period. The Tribunal is satisfied that during this
time, he did not adequately comply with requests made by the
network in relation
to the acceptance of wheelchair accessible taxi bookings and is therefore in
breach of condition 9 of his licence.
the basis both of the records provided by the respondent and Mr Yoon's own
evidence, which he gave openly, the Tribunal accepts
that as the operator of the
taxi T5329, Mr Yoon failed to ensure that his taxi was on the road for 10 hours
a day 365 days a year
and is therefore in breach of condition 6(vii) of his
licence. The Tribunal agrees with the respondent that this condition assumes
that taxi operators are employing additional drivers as it would be close to
impossible for a sole driver to meet this condition.
Tribunal notes that Mr Yoon has operated T5329 for six years and until this
year, has always had his operator's licence renewed.
The Tribunal accepts the
medical evidence before it that Mr Yoon has recovered from his health problems,
and notes his willingness
to reorganise his shifts to attract an additional
driver for the weekend, should he be granted a further WAT licence in the
the reasons set out above, however, the Tribunal is of the view that the
decision to cancel Mr Yoon's licence is the correct and
preferable decision and
therefore should be affirmed.
decision under review is affirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (92.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter