URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1085.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) v Health Secretary in respect of New South Wales Ambulance (Virtual Clinical Care Centre Clinicians) No 2 [2025] NSWIRComm 1085 (25 September 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) v Health Secretary in respect of
New South Wales Ambulance (Virtual Clinical Care Centre Clinicians)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1085
Hearing Date(s):
1, 2, 3 and 7 July 2025
Date of Orders:
25 September 2025
Decision Date:
25 September 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner McDonald
(1) I direct New South Wales Ambulance to conduct a review
at least three months before the expiry of the nominal term of the NSW
Paramedics (State) Award 2023, to ascertain whether the assignment of the
position of Clinical Team Leader to work level
Manager - Level 1 continues to
deliver fair and reasonable conditions of employment for that position and to
seek input from and
consult with the Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) and
the Health Services Union NSW with respect to that
(2) I recommend that persons employed as
Senior Clinicians in the VCCC as at the date of this decision, and who have been
so employed
for a period of at least six months, continue to be engaged by NSWA
in the role of Senior Clinician in the VCCC, if the employee
so wishes, on the
basis that they shall continue to be paid at the rates paid to a Senior
Clinician immediately before the delivery
of this decision, until such time as
the rates paid to a Clinical Team Leader under the NSW Ambulance Paramedics
(State) Award 2023
or any successor of that award, exceeds the rates paid to a
Senior Clinician immediately before the delivery of this
(3) The parties are to advise the
Commission by no later than 4pm on 3 October 2025 whether they consent, in light
of this decision,
to the variation of the NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award
2023 (Paramedics Award) in the form set out in paragraph [100] of
this decision
and if so, the date upon which the variation shall take
(4) If the parties consent to the
variation of the Paramedics Award in the form set out in paragraph [100] of this
decision and
the date upon which the variation shall take
(a) the Paramedics Award will be so varied on 7
October 2025, with effect from the agreed date and these proceedings will be
dismissed; and
(b) the Respondent is to file by
not later than 4pm on 7 October 2025:
(i) a variation
schedule setting out the variations to be made to the Paramedics Award;
(ii) a clean copy of the Paramedics
(5) If the parties do not consent to the
variation of the Paramedics Award in the form set out in paragraph [100] or are
as to the date on which the variation is to come into effect, the
matter will be listed for directions on 8 October 2025 at 3pm.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Awards and enterprise agreements
— Interpretation — Whether assignment of an existing
classification in the NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award 2023 to a
particular work level is “required”
within the meaning of cl 5(n) of
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Industrial disputes
— Procedure and Powers - Powers of Industrial Relations Commission
resolving an industrial dispute — Application of
Relations Act 1996
(NSW) to orders made pursuant to dispute resolution powers in
ss 136(1)(b)
(1)(d), when order made sets conditions of
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Awards and
enterprise agreements — Variation — Nature of so called rebuttable
presumption
that award provides fair and reasonable conditions of employment
— Whether presumption rebutted — Application of Award
Principles — Whether assignment of an existing and a new classification in
the NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award
2023 will set fair and reasonable
conditions of employment, would not be contrary to the public interest and
whether there is a substantial
reason to vary the Award — Variation,
recommendation and directions made
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW), ss, 3(f), 10, 13, 17, 130, 135, 136,
137, 146, Dictionary
Industrial Relations and Other Legislation Amendment
(Workplace Protections) Act 2025 (NSW), Sch 1, [7]
Cases Cited:
Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) v Health Secretary in respect of
New South Wales Ambulance (Virtual Clinical Care Centre Clinicians)
NSWIRComm 1066
; 336 IR 165
Banozic v Industrial Relations Secretary in
respect of the Department of Communities and Justice (Corrective Services NSW)
[2023] NSWIRComm 1038
Beck v Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWIRComm
City of Sydney Wages/Salary Award 2014
[2014] NSWIRComm 49
Crown Employees (Police Officers - 2009) Award
[2012] NSWIRComm 23
Local Government Engineers' Association of New South Wales v MidCoast
Council (No 2)
[2022] NSWIRComm 1069
New South Wales Nurses and Midwives'
Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
Princes Linen Services Pty Ltd v
United Workers' Union
[2021] FWCFB 1903
; 306 IR 121
Re City of Sydney Award
[2014] NSWIRComm 49
(2014) 247 IR 386
Re Crown Employees (Police Officers - 2017) Award and
Paramedics and Control Centre Officers (State) Award
[2021] NSWIRComm 1040
Health and Community Employees Psychologists (State) Award
(2001) 109 IR
Re Pastoral Industry (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 27
(2001) 104 IR
Re Public Hospitals Nurses (State) Award (No 4)
(2003) 131 IR
Services Pty Ltd v United Workers’ Union
[2021] FWCFB 1903
State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
; 337 IR 182
(Non-Government Pre Schools) (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 335
Texts Cited:
NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award 2023
Principal judgment
Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) (Notifier)
Health Secretary in
respect of New South Wales Ambulance (Respondent)
Health Services Union NSW
(Intervenor)
Representation:
F Anwar (Notifier)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
K Smith, Crown Solicitor
E Lindsay, Australian Paramedics Association (NSW)
Barker, Health Services Union NSW
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
Issues for Determination
What is the meaning of the last sentence in cl 5(n)
of the Paramedics Award?
Does the Arbitrated Case Principle apply?
Does cl 5(n) apply to the classification of the CTL
role to Manager – Level 1?
Should the Variations to the Paramedics Award
proposed by NSWA be made?
NSWA’s Arguments in favour of Variation of the
Paramedics Award
The Proposal to Re-classify VCCC Triage
Reduced responsibility and risk associated with the
VCCC Triage Clinician role
Nature of the work comparable to an on-road
paramedic or paramedic specialist
Nature of the work not comparable to that of an
Maintenance of Relativities
Funding Constraints
Other Relevant Matters
Conclusion regarding the proposal to re-classify
VCCC Triage Clinicians
The Proposal to Classify CTLs as Manager –
The CTL will fulfil an important clinical support
and supervision function
CTL’s will not perform an educational role or
perform some of the work currently performed by Senior Clinicians
Maintenance of Relativities
Funding Constraints
Conclusion regarding the proposal to classify CTL at
Manager – Level 1
Recommendations and Orders
Introduction
decision concerns whether New South Wales Ambulance (NSWA) is permitted,
pursuant to cl 5(n) of the NSW Ambulance Paramedics
(State) Award 2023
(Paramedics Award), to assign three positions within the Virtual Clinical Care
Centre (VCCC) to certain work levels
under the Paramedics Award.
NSWA seeks to assign the positions of VCCC Triage Clinician Paramedic and VCCC
Clinician Paramedic Specialist to the ‘Paramedic
- Level 1’ and
‘Paramedic – Level 2’ work levels respectively. Second, NSWA
seeks to assign the VCCC Clinical
Team Leader position (CTL) to the
‘Manager – Level 1’ work level.
VCCC is a remote-control centre with the primary function of conducting
“secondary triage” to connect low acuity cases
called in to Triple
Zero (000) with appropriate care pathways, to avoid unnecessary emergency
ambulance responses and reduce the
burden on hospital emergency departments, as
well as improving clinical outcomes and patient experience by directing patients
the most appropriate care setting for their needs. The VCCC also operates the
Clinical Advice Line, which provides clinical support
and advice to on-road
paramedics. While the VCCC is operated by NSWA, it is staffed by doctors and
nurses as well as paramedics.
proceedings commenced by way of a dispute lodged by the Australian Paramedics
Association (NSW) (APA) pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act
). The APA’s original complaint, as articulated in
its Notification of an Industrial Dispute, was that NSWA had not engaged
genuine consultation in respect of its proposal, in breach of its obligations
under sub-clauses 5(n) and 6(a) of the Paramedics
Award. Following conciliation
and the provision of further information by NSWA to the APA, including advice
NSWA intended to proceed
with its proposal, the dispute coalesced into the APA
and the Health Services Union NSW (HSU), (which had been given leave to
in the dispute), opposing NSWA’s proposal, including on the
basis that it constituted an ‘extra claim’ in breach
‘no extra claims’ clause contained within the Paramedics Award.
14 November 2024 I delivered a decision in respect of two questions that arose
in respect of the dispute which, by consent, had
been ordered to be heard and
separately determined before the balance of the arbitration of the dispute:
Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) v Health Secretary in respect of New
South Wales Ambulance (Virtual Clinical Care Centre Clinicians)
NSWIRComm 1066
; 336 IR 165 (First Decision). In answering the two questions, I
determined that the position of VCCC Triage Clinician had, as a
matter of fact,
been assigned by NSWA to work level Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2 by reason of the
fact that persons appointed to the
role (albeit on a temporary basis) were
assigned the “Position Classification” of “Aeromedical
Operations Officer”
which equated to the position of Aeromedical Control
Centre Officer (ACCO) under the Paramedics and Control Centre Officers (State)
Award 2021 and its successor Awards including the Paramedics Award; and by
reason of the transitional provisions in cl 49 and Section
9 of the Paramedics
Award (First Decision at [134] – [145]). As might be expected, persons
employed at Paramedic - Level 3
are paid more than persons employed at Paramedic
- Levels 1 and 2.
Unions argued that, in those circumstances, the proposal to re-classify or
re-assign VCCC Triage Clinicians from Paramedic - Level
3, Band 2 to Paramedic -
Level 1 or 2 constituted an ‘extra claim’ contrary to s 51 of the
2023 of the Award. Clause
51 provides:
“51. No Extra Claims
Other than as provided for in the
Industrial Relations
, there shall be no further claims/demands or proceedings
instituted before the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
extra or reduced wages, salaries, rates of pay, allowances or conditions of
employment with respect to the employees covered
by the Award that take effect
prior to 30 June 2026 by a party to this Award.
For the avoidance of doubt, the Parties may, during the term of this Award,
discuss additional opportunities for system improvements
and, if agreed, a
further pay increase may be provided to recognise the contribution of employees
to those system improvements.”
light of this contention, the first question I was asked to answer
“Is the proposed classification of employees who hold the position of
Virtual Clinical Care Centre Triage Clinician as a Paramedic
or Paramedic
Specialist (Work Level of Paramedic (Level 1) or Paramedic (Level 2)) an 'extra
claim' for the purpose of clause 51
of the NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State)
Award 2023?”
my answer to that question was ‘no’, the APA proposed that, instead
of NSWA’s proposal, the Paramedics Award
be varied, pursuant to s 17 of
, to enshrine the VCCC Triage Clinician role in the Award as a
position within Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, that is, to classify them
same level as ACCOs. That proposal gave rise to the second of the questions I
was asked to answer, namely:
“Would the inclusion of persons holding the Virtual Clinical Care Centre
Triage Clinician role in a new clause 5(d)(iii)(2)
of the NSW Ambulance
Paramedics (State) Award 2023, in the terms set out in Schedule 1 to these
orders, be an 'extra claim' for the
purpose of clause 51 of the NSW Ambulance
Paramedics (State) Award 2023.”
light of my finding that the VCCC Triage Clinician role had already been
assigned work level Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, my answer
to the second
question was ‘no’, as the APA’s proposal, which would
essentially formalise what had already occurred,
would cause no change to the
remuneration or conditions of employment in respect of the VCCC Triage Clinician
role (First Decision
answer to the first question was also ‘no’ by reason of cl 5(n) of
the Paramedics Award which provides:
“(n) The creation and/ or assignment of a classification to a
work level in this Award must be done by genuine consultation
between the
parties with a mind to achieve agreement. Should agreement not be achieved
either party may elect to refer the matter
to the Industrial Relations
Commission in line with the provisions of clause 47 of this Award. For the
avoidance of doubt, in the
event a dispute relating to Clause 5 of this award is
not resolved in conciliation, the employer bears the onus to prove that the
change of classification is required.”
[101] of the First Decision I held that:
“The creation and/or assignment of a classification to a work level is not
a “further” claim or demand, in the
sense of a claim or demand not
otherwise anticipated or dealt with by the Paramedics Award, nor would any
subsequent referral of
a dispute about such classification and/or assignment to
the Commission, as allowed for by cl 5(n), constitute a proceeding prohibited
cl 51. Clause 51 is directed to claims or demands extraneous to matters
otherwise covered by the Paramedics Award. I agree with
NSWA’s submission
that: “A change that falls within the express text of the Award and for
which the Award provides an
express mechanism of implementing cannot be
described as a ‘further’ claim or demand, or one for ‘extra or
conditions of employment, within the meaning of cl 51.”
delivery of the First Decision unfortunately did not resolve the parties’
differences. As I explained in the First Decision
“... in the absence of consent from the APA and the HSU to NSWA’s
proposal, NSWA will have to prove to the Commission
that the assignment of the
VCCC Triage Clinician position to work level Paramedic Level 1 or Paramedic
Level 2 is “required”.
The APA, if it pursues its counter proposal,
will need to establish that the Commission may vary the Paramedics Award in the
sought, pursuant to s 17 of the
Consequently, if the parties remain in dispute, noting that the
APA has formally indicated its preparedness to consider further conciliation
after the separate questions have been answered, the matter may need to proceed
to a further arbitration, as envisaged by cl 5(n)
of the Paramedics Award, to
determine whether such classification is “required”; and/or whether
the Paramedics Award
should be varied in the manner proposed by the APA.”
I had determined that the VCCC Triage Clinician role was already assigned to
work level Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, the APA no
longer presses for the
Paramedics Award to be varied in the manner it proposed, however NSWA continues
to press its proposal, albeit
in a slightly altered form, and the Unions
continue to oppose it.
full history of the VCCC is set out in the First Decision and I discuss parts of
that history later in this decision. For present
purposes I simply note that the
VCCC is still in the process of being permanently established. To date,
paramedics appointed to the
VCCC Triage Clinician role have only been appointed
on a temporary basis. While NSWA intended to commence recruiting paramedics to
the role permanently in or around late 2023/early 2024, that process has been
delayed by reason of this dispute.
the delivery of the First Decision, NSWA revised the proposed VCCC structure.
NSWA now proposes to fill 24 full time equivalent
(FTE) VCCC Triage Clinicians
at Paramedic - Level 1
Paramedic - Level 2, (the later being a
specialist paramedic) and 25 FTE VCCC CTLs at Manager – Level 1. The
original proposal
did not have the role of CTL. Instead, there were to be 12 FTE
“VCCC Senior Clinicians” who were to be classified as
“Paramedic Educators” at work level Paramedic - Level 4, Band 2. It
was also originally proposed that there would be
25 FTE VCCC Triage Clinicians
at Paramedic - Level 1 and 12 FTE VCCC Triage Clinicians at Paramedic - Level 2.
The VCCC Senior Clinician
role in the revised proposal is to be discontinued.
Overall, the new proposed structure has the same number of FTE paramedic
(as opposed to nurses and doctors) as was in the original
is important to note that as at 31 March 2025 there were only 3.28 FTE VCCC
Triage Clinicians, all of whom are specialist paramedics,
that is, their
substantive positions are classified at work level Paramedic – Level 2,
and my understanding is that that figure
is largely unchanged, pending this
addition to the salaries payable under the Paramedics Award applicable to
paramedics assigned to work levels Paramedic - Level
1, Paramedic - Level 2 and
Manager - Level 1, the roles of VCCC Triage Clinician and CTL will also attract
the Control Centre Allowance
(CCA). In addition, any employee who has obtained
the necessary qualification and credentialling as required by the employer to be
a Paramedic - Level 2, is entitled to the Specialist Operations Allowance (SOA),
to remunerate them for the maintenance and utilisation
of their specialist
has modelled and compared the remuneration of the current and proposed
operational positions in the VCCC, incorporating base
salaries effective 1
January 2025, applicable allowances, and average shift penalties based on the
roster projections. In respect
of the VCCC Triage Clinician position and the CTL
position that modelling shows the
Award Classification
Annual Base Salary
Control Centre
Special Operations
Shift Penalties
Total Projected Salary
Paramedic on DDAN Roster (Day, Day, Afternoon, Night, Shifts) produces
and average ordinary time shift loading of 25.76%
Triage Clinician VCCC -Interim
$ 128,185.01
$ 33,020.46
$ 161,205.46
Triage Clinician VCCC P1 (proposed)
Paramedic Level
$ 95,816.03
$ 26,375.92
$ 128,766.45
Paramedic Level 1 yr 6
$ 98,383.22
$ 27,037.11
$ 131,994.82
Triage Clinician VCCC P2 (proposed)
Paramedic Level 2 yr 1
$ 105,266.09
$ 28,810.14
$ 140,650.73
Paramedic Level 2 yr 2
$ 108,423.94
$ 29,623.60
$ 144,622.04
Paramedic Level 3 yr 3
$ 111,676.75
$ 30,461.52
$ 148,712.77
VCC Clinical Team Leader (Proposed)
Manager Level 1
$ 115,434.13
$ 32,885.11
$ 160,544.67
Paramedic on DDNN Roster (Day, Day, Night, Night, Shifts) produces an
average ordinary time shift loading of 26.48%
Senior Clinician - Interim
Paramedic Educator Year 1
$ 151,206.19
$ 40,039.40
$ 191,245.59
Paramedic Educator Year 2
$ 161,461.89
$ 42,755.11
$ 204,217.00
VCCC Duty Manager
Manager Level 3
$ 124,233.00
$ 36,134.19
$ 172,592.63
projections were not disputed by the Unions.
can be seen, a CTL who receives both the CCA and the SOA will be paid around
$660 less than the incumbent VCCC Triage Clinicians
who are being paid at the
ACCO rate. Each of the incumbents, who are all specialist paramedics, will be
able to apply for the permanent
CTL role, as I discuss later in this decision.
On the other hand, going forward, VCCC Triage Clinicians will be paid between
and $12,492 less than what VCCC Triage Clinicians are presently entitled
to be paid.
aid in comprehension of this decision I remind readers that in the First
Decision I concluded (at [109]) that the reference to
“classification” in cl 5(n) refers equally to “position”
and that those words are used synonymously and interchangeably
in the Paramedics
Award. Equally, the term “classification” is used in the Paramedics
Award and by the parties in their
evidence and submissions, to refer to the work
level at which a particular position is “classified”. Accordingly,
to “classification” and “classified” in this
decision may refer to the name of the position or to the work
level to which the
position is assigned.
is also helpful to point out at this stage of the decision (as it was a matter
does not actually fly in a
plane or a helicopter with an ill or injured patient. That role is usually
undertaken by a doctor and/or
a nurse or, occasionally, an on-road paramedic,
usually a specialist paramedic. Rather, an ACCO is responsible for the
of planes, helicopters and other specialist retrieval resources to
transport critically unwell patients to hospital. More information
role is set out later in this decision, but it suffices to note that they are
essentially responsible for organising
all of the logistics of getting a
critically unwell patient to appropriate medical care.
Determination
primary issue for determination as framed by the parties is whether the
re-assignment/re-classification of the VCCC Triage Clinician
role from Paramedic
- Level 3, Band 2, to Paramedic - Level 1 and Paramedic - Level 2; and the
assignment/classification of the CTL
role to Manager – Level 1, is
“required” within the meaning of cl 5(n) of the Paramedics Award.
The proper construction
of that word and the whole of the last sentence in cl
5(n) was the subject of much debate between the parties. Both parties agreed
however, that I must first determine what is meant by the final sentence in cl
5(n) and particularly the term “required”,
as this would determine
the test against which NSWA’s proposal could be adjudged.
the parties were at odds as to the meaning of the last sentence of cl 5(n), the
proper construction of that sentence is indeed
the first issue I have to
determine. For the reasons I will explain below, I have determined that the
sentence simply refers to the
fact that NSWA bears the usual burden, as the
proponent of a variation to an award, that the proposed variation should be
parties identified two sub-issues which also require resolution,
(1) whether the Arbitrated Case Principle in cl 9 of the Award Making Principles
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
; 337 IR 182) must be
satisfied in circumstances where NSWA seeks to create or assign a classification
to a work level pursuant to
cl 5(n) of the Paramedics Award; and
(2) whether cl 5(n) applies to the classification of the CTL role to Manager
– Level 1 in circumstances where the position
falls within the existing
scope of the “Team Leader” role which is identified within the
Manager – Level 1 work
level prescribed in cl 5(i) of the Paramedics
I was to find that the re-classification/classification of the VCCC Triage
Clinician and CTL positions as proposed by NSWA was
not “required”
pursuant to cl 5(n), NSWA proposed that the Paramedics Award should be varied in
any event, to permit
the re-classification/classification, despite the ‘no
extra claims’ clause in the Award. For the reasons I will now set
have determined that the Paramedics Award should be varied pursuant to cl 5(n)
so as to allow the re-classification of the
VCCC Triage Clinicians from
Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, to Paramedic - Level 1 and Paramedic - Level 2; and
the classification of
the CTL role at Manager – Level 1. Consequently, I
do not need to determine whether the Paramedics Award should be varied in
face of the ‘no extra claims’ clause.
What is the
meaning of the last sentence in cl 5(n) of the Paramedics Award?
the Respondent’s Outline of Submissions dated 14 April 2025 (NSWAS) at
[12], NSWA submitted that the “first issue is
to determine the
imposed by the word ‘required’ in cl 5(n) of the
Award” (emphasis added). This submission was also repeated in
Respondent’s oral closing
submissions.
However, latter in
oral closing submissions (and in the Respondent’s Outline of Submissions
in Reply dated 24 June 2025 (NSWARS)
at [2]), counsel for the Respondent
submitted that:
“... the focus of the sentence, in my submission, is on the question of
onus, not the question of standard of proof and what
it’s doing to avoid
doubt is confirming the ordinary principle that the employer bears the onus to
displace a presumption that
the existing, in this case classification structure,
sets fair and reasonable conditions of
employment.”
contended that the word “required” in cl 5(n) should be construed
consistently with the ordinary requirements for
varying an award during its
nominal term, meaning that NSWA must demonstrate that the proposed change in
classification is fair and
reasonable, not contrary to the public interest and
made for a substantial reason: ss 10, 17(2), 17(3)(c), 17(4) of the
APA, in its Outline of Submissions dated 10 June 2025 (APAS), contended that the
final sub-clause of cl 5(n) should be construed
as requiring NSWA to prove to
the Commission that the change of classification is “necessary for a
reason other than to reduce
the amount payable by NSWA to its
employees.”
However, this
submission was not specifically repeated in the APA’s oral closing
submissions. Rather the APA submitted in oral
closing submissions, for the first
time, that “required”, “means required to fulfil the function
of NSW Ambulance
more broadly and VCCC more
specifically”.
Counsel for
the APA submitted that NSWA “would need to adduce some evidence to
demonstrate that but for this change in classification
there is some function of
the VCCC or the Ambulance more broadly that is not functioning
properly...”
HSU also submitted, in its Outline of Submissions dated 10 June 2025 (HSUS) at
[13], that the word “required” should
be construed as
“importing necessity”.
made the following submissions in support of its construction of the word
“required”, at RS [13] – [15] (with
footnotes):
“13. In ordinary language, ‘required’ has a range of possible
meanings: from desired or appropriate, to necessary
indispensable.
Where in that range
the usage in cl 5(n) falls is informed by the evident purpose of that subclause
and the context of the IR Act.
14. The evident purpose of cl 5(n) is to provide a process for the creation and
assignment of classifications to the work levels
set out in cl 5 where a
proposed new position does not fall within the scope of an existing
classification or NSWA seeks to change
an existing assignment of a
classification. The last step in that process is arbitration in the
Commission.
Having regard to the Commission’s arbitration powers in s 136(1) of the IR
Act, the means by which the creation or assignment
of a classification must be
given effect in arbitration is by a variation of cl 5 of the Award: J [111(5)].
There are well-established
requirements in the IR Act and the Commission’s
jurisprudence for varying an award, in particular that the person seeking the
variation must displace a presumption that the existing terms of the award set
fair and reasonable conditions of
employment,
in the sense of
‘represent[ing] a proper and proportionate balance between the
entitlements afforded [to] employees and the
interests of those employing
and, where the award
is within its nominal term (as the Award is), the Commission must be satisfied
that the variation is not contrary
to the public interest and there is a
substantial reason to make it: s 17(3)(c).
15. It should not be supposed that the drafters of cl 5(n) intended the word
‘required’ to impose a higher standard than
these existing and
well-established principles. This is confirmed by the phrase ‘[f]or the
avoidance of doubt’ which
begins the sentence containing that word. A
construction of ‘required’ that imposed a higher standard –
for example,
of necessity – would be industrially impractical because it
would seriously impede NSWA in evolving its operations and structuring
workforce notwithstanding that the corresponding classification changes are fair
and reasonable, consistent with the public interest
and made for a substantial
I noted at [
NSWA’s approach to the construction issue was somewhat inconsistent, on
the one hand applying the usual principles of interpretation
of industrial
instruments, such as consideration of the industrial context and purpose of the
provision, to give content to the word
“required” in the form of a
standard or measure; and on the other, submitting that the word did not impose
any standard,
but only confirmed that NSWA bore the onus of establishing that
the proposed variation to the Paramedics Award should be made. In
any event, on
NSWA’s case, both roads lead to the same place: that NSWA bears the usual
“onus of proving that the change
is required or necessary to set fair and
reasonable conditions of employment, against a presumption that the existing
of employment are fair and reasonable.”
Unions sought, through the accepted principles of award interpretation, to give
content to the word “required” in
the form of a standard or measure,
insisting that it required NSWA to demonstrate something more than what the
and the authorities require a party seeking a variation of an
award to establish.
the First Decision I set out at [12] the summary of the principles to be applied
to award interpretation provided by Davies J in
New South Wales Nurses and
Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
and there was
no contest between the parties as to the nature of those principles. However,
what the Union parties, and to a lesser
extent NSWA failed to properly consider
was the metes and bounds of the Commission’s jurisdiction to deal with
industrial disputes
and its powers when resolving an industrial dispute notified
to it pursuant to s 130 of the
and how the Commission’s
“required” in cl 5(n).
Commission is a creature of statute. Its powers and functions must be
exclusively found in the legislation conferring jurisdiction
Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWIRComm 9
Local Government
Engineers' Association of New South Wales v MidCoast Council (No 2)
NSWIRComm 1069
Banozic v Industrial Relations Secretary in respect
of the Department of Communities and Justice (Corrective Services NSW)
[2023] NSWIRComm 1038
[111] of the First Decision I set out what I considered to be the procedure
provided for by cl 5(n). I concluded that pursuant
to that procedure “if
agreement on the creation and/or assignment of the classification [position] is
not achieved, either
party can refer the matter to the Commission in line with
cl 47 of the Paramedics Award” and “if the dispute is not
in conciliation, NSWA “bears the onus [in arbitration for what
would be a variation of the Award] to prove that the change
of classification is
required.””
submitted that the process contemplated by cl 5(n) and cl 47 “is that a
dispute referred to the Commission will be dealt
with in accordance with the
ordinary provisions of the Act dealing with
That submission
must be accepted. It is possible that the referral to the Commission could also
be commenced by an application to
make or vary an award, but regardless the
route taken, the Commission would be constrained by the jurisdiction and powers
Commissioner Sloan explained in
MidCoast Council
the Full Bench determined
(at [54] to [60]) that parties cannot through an enterprise agreement
confer a jurisdiction on the Commission
which it does not possess. The same
conclusion must be reached, but more emphatically, if the jurisdiction is said
to be conferred
by an instrument which is one of the Commission’s own
130(1) of the
enables certain entities to notify an industrial
dispute to the Commission “for the purpose of resolving the
Section 130(2) also enables the Commission to act on its own
initiative to resolve an industrial dispute. Upon being notified of
industrial dispute or acting on its own initiative, the Commission has
dispute. Section
146(1)(b) provides that the Commission has, as one of its functions,
“resolving industrial disputes”.
sets out what the Commission may do in arbitrating an
industrial dispute:
(1) The Commission may, in arbitration proceedings, do any one or more of
the following—
(a) make a recommendation or give a direction to the parties to the
industrial dispute,
(b) make or vary an award under Part 1 of Chapter 2,
(c) make a dispute order under Part 2,
(d) make an order or determination with prospective application,
whether on an interim or final basis, including an order or determination
the interpretation or application of an industrial instrument for the purposes
of resolving the dispute,
(e) make another kind of order it is authorised to make, including on
an interim basis.
(2) Any such action may be taken by the Commission on its own initiative
or on application by any person authorised to notify the
Commission of the
industrial dispute.
136(2) is significant in the context of cl 5(n). Section 136(2) sets out the
circumstances in which the Commission make take
one or more of the actions
listed in s 136(1). I will return to s 136(2) again below.
exercising its function to resolve industrial disputes (or to make or vary an
award), the Commission must take into account the
public interest, having regard
to the matters set out in s 146(2)(a) – (c).
object of cl 5(n) of the Paramedics Award is the “creation and/or
assignment of a classification to a work level in the
Award”. In my view
that can only be achieved by the Commission, having been notified of the
industrial dispute arising due
to the lack of agreement about the
“creation and/or assignment of a classification to a work level in the
it is appropriate to do so, varying the Award pursuant to the
power given to the Commission by s 136(1)(b). None of the other actions/powers
listed in s 136(1) are available to achieve this outcome, or as I will shortly
explain, if they are, any order made by the Commission
creating or assigning a
classification to a work level will amount to a variation of the Award in any
Full Bench held in
Mid North Coast
at [74] that the power to make
directions under s 136(1)(a) does not extend to making directions which would
set terms and conditions
of employment; and at [60], that the power in what is
now s 136(1)(e)
upon a source of power being found elsewhere in the
Act, authorising the Commission to make the order sought. It is not a power that
exists “at large”. And plainly
an order creating or assigning a
classification to a work level in the Paramedics Award is not a ‘dispute
order’ within
the meaning of s 136(1)(c) and s 137 of the
power provided for in s136(1)(d) of the
was not available at the
time of the First Decision. It was incorporated into the
2025 pursuant to the
Industrial Relations and Other Legislation Amendment
(Workplace Protections) Act 2025
(NSW). It is, however, a power that is now
available to me, despite the fact that proceedings were commenced before the
commencement
of the amending
do not consider that an order “creating and/or assigning a classification
to a work level” in the Award would be an
interpretation or application an industrial instrument. Even if it could be said
to be an order
the application of the Paramedics Award, such an
order would set conditions of employment. The definition of an
as provided for in the Dictionary to the
includes “any order of the Commission under this Act that sets conditions
of employment”.
whether the Commission, in making an order “creating and/or assigning a
classification to a work level” in the Paramedics
Award is invoking the
power in s 136(1)(b) or s 136(1)(d), it amounts to a variation of the
Paramedics Award. As such the requirements
of Part 1 of Chapter 2 of the
must be met given that s 17(4) expressly provides that s 17
“extends to a variation or recission of an award in the course
arbitration by the Commission under Chapter 3 to resolve an industrial
APA submitted at APAS [21] that:
“Clause 5(n) of the Paramedics Award provides a mechanism for the
“creation and/or assignment of a classification to a work
under that the award. It is not a provision that provides for
the variation of the Paramedics Award.”
cl 5(n) is not a provision that provides for the variation of the Paramedics
Award how is the “creation and/or assignment
of a classification to a work
level” to be achieved in the event agreement cannot be reached? It can
only be achieved, as I
have outlined, by the Commission exercising its powers
under s 136(1)(b), (or possibly s 136(1)(d)), to vary the Award. Or by an
application being made directly for a variation of the Award pursuant to s 17.
On any view clause 5(n) is an express provision in
the award that provides for
its variation.
the circumstances, the word “required” in cl 5(n) must
encompass the requirements for variation of an Award set out in the
. The question is, does the final sentence in cl 5(n) involve the
moving party having to establish something more than, or different
to, what Part
1 of Chapter 2 of the
requires? I do not believe it does.
is helpful at this point to set out the whole of s 17:
(1) The Commission may vary or rescind an award.
(2) Sections 11, 13 and 15 apply to any such variation or rescission. The
other provisions of this Division continue to apply to
the award as varied.
(3) An award may be varied or rescinded in any of the following
circumstances only—
(a) at any time with the mutual consent of all the parties to the
making of the original award,
(b) at any time to give effect to a decision of the Full Bench of the
Commission under section 50 or 51 (National and State decisions),
(c) during its nominal term if the Commission considers that it is
not contrary to the public interest to do so and that there is
a substantial
reason to do so,
(d) after its nominal term if the Commission considers that it is not
contrary to the public interest to do so.
(4) This section extends to a variation or rescission of an award in the
course of an arbitration by the Commission under Chapter
3 to resolve an
industrial dispute.
nominal term of the Paramedics Award has not expired. Consequently, before the
Commission will make an order “creating and/or
assigning a classification
to a work level” in the Paramedics Award the criteria set out in
s 17(3)(c) must be met.
addition to needing to meet the criteria in s 17(3)(c), NSWA submitted,
referring to
Re Pastoral Industry (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 27
(2001) 104 IR 168
that it, as the moving party, would also be obliged to
“displace a presumption that the existing terms of the award set fair
reasonable conditions of employment.”
Full Bench discussed this so-called rebuttable presumption in
State Wage Case
2024 (No 3)
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
; 337 IR 111 at
- [79] in terms which I
consider shed considerable light on the proper construction of cl
“70. We affirm the longstanding principle that applicants for the making
or variation of awards bear the onus when seeking
to alter the status quo to
establish a case for doing so. This will usually be both an evidentiary and a
persuasive onus, although
in some cases, as discussed below, there may be no
evidence required. However, the nature and function of this onus is apt to be
misunderstood and misapplied if cast in terms of a universally applicable
rebuttable presumption that existing awards set fair and
reasonable terms and
conditions of employment. For this reason, the formulaic application of such a
presumption in this context should
be avoided. It should not be regarded as a
proxy or substitute for the task of ensuring that any award the Commission makes
meets the statutory obligation in s 10 to set fair and
reasonable conditions of employment for employees. ...
79. The so-called rebuttable presumption can be a useful way of framing or
informing the question of onus, particularly where an
applicant seeks to remove
a condition that has been considered previously to conform with s 10.
But the ultimate consideration is
always whether an applicant has met their
evidentiary or persuasive onus; while understanding that the nature and degree
of evidence
sufficient to discharge the onus will vary according to the nature
of the case. ...”
while there is not, in all cases, a rebuttable presumption that existing awards
set fair and reasonable terms and conditions
of employment which must be
overcome by an applicant for the making or variation of an award, an applicant
must establish, in all
cases, that the proposed award or varied award will set
fair and reasonable conditions of employment for employees. In the present
matter I consider that as NSWA proposes to reduce the remuneration paid to VCCC
Triage Clinicians, NSWA will have to displace a presumption
that the current
assignment of the role to work level Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, provides for
fair and reasonable conditions of
employment. NSWA does not contend otherwise.
for NSWA submitted in oral opening and closing submissions that the use of the
word “required” in cl 5(n) begs
the question: “required for
what?”. I agree. He also submitted that the question is not answered by
substituting the
word “necessary” for the word
“required”. I also agree with that submission. Such a substitution
begs the question: “necessary for what?”. Both words are
simply adjectives, capable of being interchanged with each other
changing the ordinary meaning of the phrase.
submitted that the answer to the question is: “[required] to set fair and
reasonable conditions of employment for employees
covered by the
is well understood the “interpretation of an industrial instrument
commences with the ordinary meaning of the words used
understood in the light of
its industrial context and
There are no
words which follow the word “required” in cl 5(n). If the parties
intended there to be a standard or test
that NSWA had to meet, over and above
what must otherwise be demonstrated to achieve a variation of an award, words
defining that
standard or test could easily have been included.
already observed, the object of cl 5(n) of the Paramedics Award is the
assignment of work levels to positions, in the absence of
consent, by variation
of the Award. The relevant “industrial context and purpose” of the
final sentence in cl 5(n) is
variation of an Award. An award sets conditions of
employment and the Commission will not make or vary an award unless those
are fair and reasonable: s 10,
and Award Making
Principle 2.1.1. In the absence of any words to otherwise explain what is meant
by “required”, I consider
the last sentence in cl 5(n) is simply
referring to the usual onus that applicants for the making or variation of
awards bear when
seeking to alter the status quo to establish a case for doing
so. In particular, it makes plain that NSWA must prove that the creation
assignment of a classification to a work level will set fair and reasonable
conditions of employment.
Unequivocal
support for this interpretation is provided by the words, “[f]or the
avoidance of doubt” at the beginning
of the last sentence in cl 5(n). As
counsel for NSWA submitted:
“Those words indicate that the last sentence of cl 5(n) does nothing other
than confirm the position that would otherwise apply,
having regard to the
remainder of the subclause. What is the position that would otherwise apply? The
position is that consistent
with the preceding sentence and cl 47, the dispute
would be dealt with in accordance with the ordinary provisions and principles
that apply to dealing with disputes under the
Industrial Relations Act
include the provisions and principles that apply to making a variation of an
award in an arbitrated
I noted above at [
pursuant to s 136(2) of the
, if a dispute is notified to the
Commission, the Commission, unless it acts upon its own initiative, may take
action pursuant to
s 136(1), including relevantly in this case, variation of an
award, “on application by any person authorised to notify the
of the industrial dispute.” Clause 5(n) provides that “either party
may elect to refer the matter to the Industrial
Relations Commission in line
with the provision of clause 47”. It may be the case, as it was here, that
a Union party refers
(notifies) the dispute to the Commission. In that event
there could be a question arising as whether the Union party, as the party
instigating the case, bears the burden of demonstrating that the proposed
creation and/or assignment a classification to a work level
occur. The last sentence of cl 5(n) makes clear that even if one or both of the
Union parties to the Paramedics Award notifies the
dispute to the Commission,
the onus of satisfying the Commission that the proposed variation should be made
will be upon the employer.
support for this view is obtained from the extrinsic material attached to the
Statement of Agreed Facts (SOAF) that was tendered
on the hearing of separate
questions and which was referred to HSUS at [18]. At [44] of the First Decision
I set out part of the
content of an email sent by Ms Forsyth-Sells of the
Respondent to Ms Jacobs of the APA at 3.21pm on 20 December 2023. The totality
of that email, which was attached to the SOAF, reads follows:
Regarding the email below, Health is not permitted to have a leave reserved
agreement per clause 6.8 of the attached NSW Government
Fair Pay and Bargaining
Policy 2023. (link for reference) I note that you raise these
classifications informally in our discussions
and we understood that it was the
intention of the APA on to put this on the record.
We also relevantly have drafted the award to conceive of discussions regarding
existing and future classifications and their position
in the work levels. Hence
clause 5(n) of the proposed award. This deliberately allows the parties to work
collaboratively to resolve
any issues about the assignment of classification to
work levels in the award during the term of the award.
On that, we have had to make one last minute change. The CSO had concerns about
the draft of 5(n) and have proposed the following
slight amendment. They believe
it was potential breach of the Act and the IRC may reject the clause entirely as
it could be interpreted
to contravene the procedure of dispute resolution.
An alternate drafting is outlined below which we believe achieve the same
meaning as the original clause without disrupting procedural
rules and the Act.
I'll give you a ring shortly to discuss.
Given the timing we have instructed Crown Sols to proceed with sending over
consent orders I confirm that the changes were included.
We will also note we
still require the executed MoU.
Current clause:
The creation and/ or assignment of a classification to a work level in this
Award must be done by genuine consultation between the
parties with a mind to
achieve agreement. Should agreement not be achieved either party may elect to
refer the matter to the Industrial
Relations Commission in line with the
provisions of clause 47 of this Award. For the avoidance of doubt, in the event
a dispute relating
to Clause 5 of this award is not resolved in conciliation,
the employer bears the onus to apply for arbitration.
Proposed Clause:
The creation and/ or assignment of a classification to a work level in this
Award must be done by genuine consultation between the
parties with a mind to
achieve agreement. Should agreement not be achieved either party may elect to
refer the matter to the Industrial
Relations Commission in line with the
provisions of clause 47 of this Award. For the avoidance of doubt, in the event
a dispute relating
to Clause 5 of this award is not resolved in conciliation,
the employer bears the onus to prove that the change of classification
Kind regards,
...” (Errors in original, emphasis added)
is abundantly clear that the change to cl 5(n) proposed
by the Respondent
was not designed to implement a standard of proof higher than it would otherwise
have as an applicant for the variation of an award
under the Act. Rather the
change was designed to address the fact that if the dispute was not resolved in
conciliation, the processes
prescribed in the
for resolution of
the dispute would apply, including that “any person authorised to notify
the Commission of the industrial
dispute” could apply for the issue of a
certificate of attempted conciliation, thereby enabling the Commission to deal
the dispute by arbitration: s 135,
The processes prescribed
are not processes that the parties can contact out of or
otherwise alter.
The obligation to “apply for arbitration”
was not one that could be imposed on NSWA, exclusively or at all.
the parties were concerned with precisely the issue I identified in [
], that is, if the
Unions notified the dispute, would they carry the burden of satisfying the
Commission that NSWA’s proposal
should not be implemented? Both versions
of cl 5(n) as set out in Ms Forsyth-Sells email were directed to that issue and
indicate an intention by the parties that NSWA should be the party
carrying the evidentiary and persuasively burden of making out
a case to alter
the status quo. The second version achieved what the parties clearly intended,
without offending the
. It did not however, alter in any way what
NSWA would have to establish in an arbitration of the dispute in which it sought
the variation
of the Paramedics Award
completeness I note that s 136(2) does not require the party
“applying” for the exercise of the powers in s 136(1)
party that notified the dispute. However, the party applying for the exercise of
those powers must be “authorised
to notify the Commission of the
industrial dispute”, which NSWA, as the employer is, pursuant to s
130(1)(b) of the
therefore conclude that the last sentence in cl 5(n) merely confirms that NSWA
bears the evidentiary and persuasive onus of establishing:
(1) that the variation will set fair and reasonable conditions of employment,
which in the case of the position of VCCC Triage Clinician,
will require NSWA to
rebut the presumption that the current assignment of the role to work level
Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, provides
for fair and reasonable conditions of
employment; and
(2) that the proposed Award variation is not contrary to the public interest and
that there is a substantial reason to make the variation,
pursuant to the
requirements of s 17(3)(c).
question arises as to the whether NSWA must also establish that its application
for variation meets the requirements of the Arbitrated
Case Principle in the
Award Making Principles. I address this question below.
arriving at the determination in [
] above, I have considered and rejected all of the
contrary arguments made by the Union parties. I do not consider it necessary to
address each of the arguments made by the Union parties, however I will address
some of them.
noted above, the APA submitted that “required” “means required
to fulfil the function of NSW Ambulance more broadly
and VCCC more
specifically”. This formulation implicitly accepts that cl 5(n) does
indeed ask the question “required
for what?”. So far as I can
ascertain, the APA submitted that its answer to the question was available and
should be preferred
because while cl 5(n) provides “flexibility” to
NSWA, that flexibility is to be read in the context of the ‘no
claims’ clause which would otherwise “entrench the parties’
responsibilities.”
said in the First Decision at [101] clause 51, (being the ‘no extra
claims’ clause), “is directed to claims
or demands extraneous to
matters otherwise covered by the Paramedics Award.” I do not consider that
cl 51 has any bearing on
the interpretation of cl 5(n).
APA submitted at APAS [10] – [11], by reference to the First Decision at
[118], “that the purpose of the final sub-clause
of clause 5(n) is to act
as a safeguard against NSWA re-classifying positions that are currently (and
indisputably) assigned to a
particular work level, so as to result in a
reduction in its employees’ pay” and that to “give effect to
that evident
purpose, the words
“the [NSWA] bears the onus to prove
that the change of classification is required”
should be construed as
a stipulation that NSWA bears the onus to prove to the Commission that the
change of classification is necessary
[for a reason other than to reduce the
amount payable by NSWA to its
employees].”
I said at [118] of the First Decision was:
“Clause 5(n) expressly allows for a “change of classification”
provided either of two pre-conditions are met: the
parties agree or NSWA can
establish before the Commission, that the “change of classification is
required.” Those two
pre-conditions are extremely important safeguards
that ensure, contrary to the HSU’s slightly histrionic submission that I
outlined at [86] above (sic – reference should be to [88]),
that there is no “risk to the Award and therefore, [the]
workforce”.
I explained at [100] of the First Decision (with emphasis added):
“Clause 5(n) permits “the creation and/or assignment of a
classification to a work level” in the Award, during
the life of the
Award, in two instances: where the parties agree; or where the employer, that
is, NSWA, can prove to the Commission
that the “change of classification
is required.” Clause 5(n) must be given its full force and effect. If the
and/or assignment of a classification to a work level would have the
effect of giving employees covered by the Award, extra
salaries, rates of pay, allowances or conditions of employment, the parties must
have intended that to be permitted, (provided
either of the two conditions set
out in cl 5(n) are met), despite cl 51.”
I have already said at [
] above, there is simply nothing in the text of cl
5(n) to indicate that the final sub-clause of cl 5(n) operates to
the creation and/or assignment of a classification to a work level where this
would result in a reduction in remuneration, or requires
NSWA to establish that
its proposal is necessary to fulfil the function of NSW Ambulance more broadly
and VCCC more specifically.
While I accept that awards are to be seen as
beneficial instruments, the task remains one of interpreting the document based
objective meaning
of the text
. The Commission is not “free
to give effect to some effect to some anteriorly derived notion of what would be
fair or just.”
any event the interpretation I prefer does operate beneficially to the
employees. The final is sentence in cl 5(n) is indeed a
‘safeguard’
(not a barrier) in that it confirms that NSWA bears the evidentiary and
persuasive onus of establishing that
a variation to the Award should be made,
regardless of who notifies the dispute to the Commission. NSWA is not permitted
to unilaterally
embark on reclassification (which would be a “risk to the
award”) or even classification of a new position where the
Unions do not
agree with the classification, with the Unions then having to seek the
assistance of the Commission to ‘overturn’
or prevent such
HSU submitted at HSUS [10], by reference to the decision of
Princes Linen
Services Pty Ltd v United Workers' Union
[2021] FWCFB 1903
; 306 IR 121, that
the word “required” “carries with it an element of a
compulsion or directive”
such that the Commission should require NSWA to demonstrate that its proposal
was “necessary”. However, the context in
which the word was used in
Princes Linen Services
was entirely different to its use in cl 5(n). That
case involved the interpretation and application of the following award
“An employee other than a shift worker who is required to work two (2)
hours overtime which overtime finishes after 4.30pm,
or is required to work
after 6.30pm, (whichever is the earlier) without being notified on the previous
day or earlier that he will
be so required will receive an allowance in
accordance with clause 18.7.”
employer in that case contended that for an employee to be entitled to the meal
allowance, there must be a direction from the
employer to do the work, whereas
the union contended that the word ‘required’ did not carry an
element of an imposition
and that it was simply enough that the employer needed
the work to be done. The employer prevailed.
HSU pointed to other uses of the word “required” in the Paramedics
Award which were similar to its use in
Princes Linen Services
, broadly in
the context of employees being required to hold certain qualifications or to
perform certain duties and the fact that
each time the word is used, “it
imports necessity”.
the context in which the word was used in
Princes Linen Services
other places in the Paramedics Award, indicates that the word is used in those
contexts to refer to a
imposition. That is not the context in
which the word is used in cl 5(n). Clause 5(n) does not identify a particular
imposition.
use of the word “required” in
Princes Linen Services
other places in the Paramedics Award does not beg the question “required
for what?” or “required by whom?”
as this is made clear within
the clauses. In
Princes Linen Services
the word was used to indicate a
requirement to work two hours overtime which finished after 4.30pm or to work
after 6.30pm, without
prior notification. Similarly, to take an example from the
Paramedics Award, cl 5(m) of the Award provides (with emphasis added):
“All employees are
to complete such further instruction
and/or in-service courses relating to their duties as may be
the employer from time to time. In addition, all employees for whom it is a
requirement
of their position to maintain paramedic registration are
to maintain current competency and complete such further
instruction, in-service courses and/or other requirements as are necessary
maintain this registration.”
5(m), like other clauses in the Paramedics Award, makes clear what is required.
Clause 5(n) on the other hand does not stipulate
a particular requirement that
must be met. The word “required” is used in entirely different way
in clause 5(n) to its
use elsewhere in the Paramedics Award.
HSU submitted at HSUS [14] – [16]:
NSWA’s approach wrongly coalesces the
principles applicable to interpreting awards and determining whether the
conditions of
varying an award are met pursuant to s.17 of the IR Act.
15. The Commission’s task involves two distinct steps, namely, determining
a. NSWA’s proposed reclassification of clinicians is
’ pursuant to cl.5(n) of the Award; and, if so
b. the conditions in s.17 of the
(NSW) are met.
16. NSWA seeks to scramble these steps into one by submitting that the
Commission ought to construe cl.5(n) of the Award by reference
to both steps
simultaneously. Even if the Commission were to find that the proposed
reclassification was ‘
’ per cl.5(n), it may
nonetheless exercise its discretion not to vary the Award on the basis that it
would be contrary to the
public interest, or there was no substantial reason to
submission does not address the basis upon which the Commission might
“find that the proposed reclassification was
per cl 5(n).” It is also difficult to envisage how the Commission
might conclude on the one hand that a reclassification was
“required” – to fulfil the function of NSW Ambulance more
broadly and VCCC more specifically or for some other
reason – but then
determine on that other hand that there was “no substantial reason”
for the reclassification.
Does the Arbitrated Case Principle
APA submitted (at APAS [19]), that “even if the final sub-clause of clause
5(n) is construed as reflecting the requirements
varying the Award, the
Commission should not grant the relief sought unless the arbitrated case
principles are satisfied.”
Award Making Principles as made in the
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
NSWIRComm 25
; 337 IR 182, relevantly provide:
1. Preamble
1.1 These Principles guide the exercise of discretion when making or varying
awards under Part 1 of Chapter 2 of the
Relations Act 1996
2. Mandatory considerations
2.1 When determining an application to make a new award or to vary an existing
award, whether by consent or otherwise, the Commission
must have regard to:
1. whether the terms of the award as made or varied will set
fair and reasonable conditions of employment for employees; and
2. the public interest, and in that respect must have regard
1. the objects of the Act, including the effect of the award as
made or varied on:
1. the promotion of productivity and efficiency;
2. the promotion of participation in industrial relations by
employees and employers at an enterprise or workplace level;
3. the prevention and elimination of discrimination in the
workplace, in particular ensuring equal remuneration for all persons
of equal or comparable value;
4. the encouragement of co-operative workplace reform and
equitable, innovative and productive workplace relations; and
5. strategies to attract and retain skilled staff where there
are skill shortages so as to ensure effective and efficient delivery
2. the state of the economy of New South Wales and the likely
effect of the decision on that economy; and
3. in respect of an award that will apply to public sector
employees, the fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the
effect of the award as made or varied on the position and outlook.
3. When an award may be varied or another award made without the claim
requiring consideration as an Arbitrated Case
3.1 Provided it otherwise complies with the requirements of the Act, an award
may be made or varied without the application needing
to be considered as an
Arbitrated Case under Principle 9:
1. in accordance with an express provision in an award that
provides for its variation;
9. Arbitrated Case
9.1 Other than as allowed elsewhere in these Principles, an application for
increases in remuneration (including for new service
increments or
superannuation contributions higher than those mandated by Commonwealth
legislation) or changes in conditions in awards,
will be determined as an
Arbitrated Case and, unless otherwise allocated by the President, will be heard
by a Full Bench of the Commission.
9.2 An Arbitrated Case may be granted if it meets one or more of the following
1. there has been a change in work value that meets the
requirements of the Work Value Changes Principle;
2. there has been an increase in productivity or efficiency in
respect of public sector awards that meets the requirements in the
Productivity
and Efficiency Principle;
3. the application addresses undervaluation on a gender basis
in accordance with the Gender Based Undervaluation Principle;
4. a special case is established in accordance with the Special
Case Principle; and
5. there has been a change in the value of money justifying a
change in rates of pay and conditions for public sector employees
that meets the
requirements of the Value of Money Principle.
9.3 When determining an Arbitrated Case, the Commission will have regard to
changes in the value of money since wage rates were last
9.4 Following determination of an Arbitrated Case the Commission will not
include a no extra claims clause in the settled award,
but may identify in the
decision the extent to which it is open to parties to the award to make further
claims that would take effect
during the life of the resultant award.
9.5 Claims that are based substantially on comparative wage justice will not be
countenanced other than to the extent contemplated
by the Gender Based
Undervaluation Principle.
9.6 There will be no double counting, provided however, that an Arbitrated Case
may rely upon a cumulation of the factors referred
to in these Principles.
9.7 In the following Principles the expression “the conditions under which
the work is performed” relates to the environment
in which the work is
an application for a new or varied award is made, it must be considered as an
Arbitrated Case under Principle 9, unless one of
the exceptions in Principle 3.1
applies. If an application for a new or varied award must be considered as an
Arbitrated Case under
Principle 9, the case may be granted if it meets one or
more of the criteria listed in Principle 9.2.
already noted at [
the APA submitted that cl 5(n) was not a provision that provides for the
variation of the Paramedics Award. I rejected that submission
] for the reasons set
out in that paragraph. Clause 5(n) is an express provision in an award that
provides for its variation and as
such, pursuant to Award Making Principle 3.1.1
the Paramedics Award may be varied, in accordance with the award provision,
the application needing to be considered as an Arbitrated Case under
Principle 9.
APA submitted
that Award Making
Principle 3.1.1 refers “to a general provision that may be invoked by all
parties to the award”, and
that it does not therefore apply in the present
matter as pursuant to my finding at [133] of the First Decision, only NSWA may
cl 5(n) to create and/or assign classifications to work levels. There is
nothing in Principle 3.1.1 to support such an interpretation
and I was referred
to no authority to support such a view. I therefore reject this
submission.
closing submissions counsel for the APA submitted that Principle 3.1.1. refers
to “a general all-purpose variations
Again, there is
nothing in Principle 3.1.1. to indicate that it applies only to clauses which
permit variations to the whole of the
Award. All that is required to avoid an
application for variation of an award having to be considered as an Arbitrated
Principle 9 is that the application for variation is made “in
accordance with an express provision in an award that provides
variation.” That is what the NSWA seeks to do this case.
the point was not argued by the Unions, I have considered whether the words
“in accordance with” in Principle 3.1.1
directs attention back to
what is required in the clause in the award permitting variation, such that an
Arbitrated Case under Principle
9 can only be avoided if the variation is made
“in accordance” with the stipulations of the variation clause. The
clause in this case requires NSWA to prove that the variation will set
fair and reasonable conditions of employment, that the proposed
Award variation
is not contrary to the public interest and that there is a substantial reason to
make the variation. But does it
also require NSWA to meet the Arbitrated Case
Principle, this being the usual burden falling on a party seeking to vary an
question is difficult to answer without engaging in circular reasoning –
there is a real ‘chicken or the egg’
conundrum. On balance, by
reason of cl 5(n) being a provision in an award that provides for the
award’s variation, I consider
that Principle 3.1.1. applies and there is
no need for NSWA’s application for variation of the Paramedic Award to be
with pursuant to the Arbitrated Case Principle. However, if I am wrong in
that view, I consider, for the reasons that follow, that
NSWA has established a
special case in accordance with the Special Case Principle and has satisfied the
intent of the Work Value
Principle, being a principle otherwise wholly directed
in entitlements arising from a significant net addition to
work requirements”, such that I consider it appropriate that the
Paramedics Award is varied as proposed by NSWA.
also accept the Unions’ submission, which was not contested by NSWA, that
the Commission must have regard to the mandatory
considerations set out in
Principle 2 of the Award Making Principles when determining NSWA’s
application.
Does cl 5(n) apply to the classification of the CTL
role to Manager – Level 1?
submitted that the assignment of the CTL role to work level Manager –
Level 1, “does not require NSWA to invoke the
process in 5(n) because that
position falls within the existing scope of the ‘Team Leader’
classification and has not
previously been
classified.”
understand this submission, it is helpful if I set out what the Paramedics Award
provides in cl 5 with respect to Manager –
Level 1. The Paramedics Award
relevantly provides:
“Manager Work Levels
The Manager Work Levels set out in subclauses (i) to (l) below are intended to
encompass employees who are registered paramedics
and appointed to management
(i) Manager - Level 1
(i) Manager - Level 1 means an employee
who meets the requirements of Paramedic - Level 1 and, in addition, meets the
requirements
of and is appointed to a Manager - Level 1 position as determined
by the employer.
(ii) Positions within Manager - Level 1 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Team Leader means an employee who
has successfully completed the requirements as set out for Paramedic and who has
successfully
completed the requirements for and is appointed to a Team Leader
position identified as such by the employer.”
submission must be rejected however, as it is not consistent with my
determination in the First Decision at [112] that
the expression “change
in classification” in the last sentence in cl 5(n), in circumstances where
a new classification
(position) is being created and assigned to a work level
for the first time, “merely refers to the alteration being proposed
creation and assignment of a new classification/position.” I concluded
that “NSWA will have to meet either of
the two pre-conditions prescribed
in cl 5(n) before it may introduce a new classification/position.”
consider that the position of “Clinical Team Leader VCCC”, also
referred to as the VCCC Clinical Team Leader or VCCC
CTL, is a new
position/classification, as evidenced by the draft role description tendered in
and as explained by Mr
Turner. That the CTL is a new position that is being assigned to a work level in
the Paramedic Award for the
first time was expressly accepted by the
While it is proposed that
the VCCC CTL role will effectively replace the VCCC Senior Clinician role, a
role that currently is classified
at work level Paramedic– Level 4, Band 2
(being a work level at which various “Educators” are assigned), it
not expressly contended by the Unions that the VCCC Senior Clinician role
was being re-classified through an artificial re-branding
exercise (although I
acknowledge APAS p 15 contained the heading “Re-classification of senior
clinicians to clinical team leader
position”.) Rather, the Unions
submitted that the proposed assignation of work level Manager - Level 1 was not
appropriate
in circumstances where the tasks to be performed by CTL’s are
substantially the same as Senior Clinicians. As I understand
it, under the
revised proposed for the VCCC, the role of VCCC Senior Clinician is to be
abolished. As of 31 March 2025, there were
7.39 FTE Senior Clinicians.
argued that cl 5(n) “should not be construed as implying a requirement for
the employer to go through the requirements
of that subclause when a position is
created which falls squarely within the terms of an existing classification in
cl 5, merely
because the employer proposes to give it a different title ... That
would elevate form over substance, for no discernible industrial
There are two
difficulties however with this submission. First, aside from the new position
including in its title “Team Leader”,
it is not all clear whether
the position “fall squarely within the terms of an existing
classification”. The position/classification
“Team Leader” is
expressed in the Paramedics Award in extremely broad terms. Second, NSWA agreed
to the mechanism set
out in cl 5(n). As said in the First Decision at [121], cl
5(n) “provides an agreed mechanism for implementing the assignment
work level of a new classification or the re-assignment to a work level of an
existing classification.” NSWA cannot avoid
the process required by cl
5(n) by assigning an existing title for a role which is in fact, a new position.
explained in the First Decision at [112], that cl 5(n) allows for
positions/classifications to be added to the work levels enumerated
described in cl 5 of the Paramedics Award without formal variation of the Award
where the Unions agree. There may well be many
instances where the Unions agree
that a proposed new position happily sits within the scope of a particular work
level/classification.
However, if agreement is not reached, cl 5(n) obliges NSWA
to satisfy the Commission that the proposed work level assignment will
fair and reasonable conditions of employment for employees to be employed in the
new position; and that the proposed Award
variation is not contrary to the
public interest and that there is a substantial reason to make the variation,
pursuant to the requirements
of s 17(3)(c).
Should the Variations
to the Paramedics Award proposed by NSWA be made?
proposes the following variations be made to clauses 5(b) and 5(c) of the
Paramedics Award to implement its proposal for the
structure of the
(b) Paramedic - Level 1
(i) Paramedic - Level 1 means a person
employed in or in connection with the provision of paramedicine or ambulance
who is a registered paramedic and otherwise meets the requirements of
and is appointed to a Paramedic - Level 1 position as determined
(ii) Positions within Paramedic - Level 1 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Paramedic means an employee
who is a registered paramedic and has successfully completed the necessary and
relevant training
and work experience as determined by the employer to become a
Paramedic and who is appointed to an approved Paramedic position, to
ambulance services or control centre functions within the scope of their
training and experience including the Virtual Clinical
Care Centre or other
virtual care settings.
(c) Paramedic - Level 2
(i) Paramedic - Level 2 means a person
who meets the requirements of Paramedic - Level 1 and, in addition, has
completed a
specialist qualification and/or training and/or acquired specialist
experience in an area of specialty as determined by the employer
and otherwise
meets the requirements of and is appointed to a Paramedic - Level 2 position as
determined by the employer.
(ii) Positions within Paramedic - Level 2 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Paramedic Specialist means an
employee who is a registered paramedic and who has successfully completed the
requirements
to be a Paramedic and who has completed the necessary and relevant
training and work experience as determined by the employer to
become a Paramedic
Specialist, to perform ambulance services or control centre functions within the
scope of their training and experience
including the Virtual Clinical Care
Centre or other virtual care setting. Paramedic Specialist will include:
(A) Intensive Care Paramedic means an
employee who is a registered paramedic and who has completed the necessary and
training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a
Paramedic Specialist - Intensive Care Paramedic and who is
appointed to an
approved Intensive Care Paramedic position.
(B) Extended Care Paramedic means an employee
who is a registered paramedic and who has completed the necessary and relevant
training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a Paramedic
Specialist - Extended Care Paramedic and who is
appointed to an approved
Extended Care Paramedic position.
proposes no formal amendment to the Paramedics Award with respect to the
assignment of the CTL role to work level Manager –
Level 1, because it
maintains that no variation to the Award is necessary. However, as I have
explained above, any order I were to
make to permit this assignment (pursuant to
s 136(1)(b) or (d)), will amount to a variation of the Award and hence must be
and published by the Industrial Registrar on the NSW industrial
relations website: ss 13, 17(2). Consequently, I consider that a
amendment to the Paramedics Award would be required if I am to find in favour of
the reasons I will develop below I have determined that the
position/classification of VCCC Triage Clinician should be re-assigned
level Paramedic – Level 3, Band 2 to work level Paramedic – Level 1
and Paramedic – Level 2 (in the case
of VCCC Triage Clinicians appointed
to the VCCC Triage Clinician (Paramedic Specialist) role); and that the
position/classification
of VCCC CTL should be assigned to work level Manager
– Level 1. However, I am not inclined to vary the Award in the manner
proposed (or not proposed, as the case may be) by NSWA. Rather, I consider that
the Paramedics Award should be amended as follows,
in order to properly identify
the position as indicated by the draft role descriptions and organisation chart
tendered in evidence
and to be more consistent with the evident intended
structure of cl 5 as a whole:
(b) Paramedic - Level 1
(i) Paramedic - Level 1 means a person
employed in or in connection with the provision of paramedicine or ambulance
who is a registered paramedic and otherwise meets the requirements of
and is appointed to a Paramedic - Level 1 position as determined
(ii) Positions within Paramedic - Level 1 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Paramedic - means an employee
who is a registered paramedic and has successfully completed the necessary and
training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a
Paramedic and who is appointed to an approved Paramedic position,
ambulance services;
(2) VCCC Triage Clinician (Paramedic) - means an employee who
is a registered paramedic and has successfully completed the necessary
relevant training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a
Paramedic and who is appointed to perform functions
within the scope of their
training and experience in the Virtual Clinical Care Centre or other virtual
care setting.
(c) Paramedic - Level 2
(i) Paramedic - Level 2 means a person
who meets the requirements of Paramedic - Level 1 and, in addition, has
completed a
specialist qualification and/or training and/or acquired specialist
experience in an area of specialty as determined by the employer
and otherwise
meets the requirements of and is appointed to a Paramedic - Level 2 position as
determined by the employer.
(ii) Positions within Paramedic - Level 2 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Paramedic Specialist - means an
employee who is a registered paramedic and who has successfully completed the
requirements
to be a Paramedic and who has completed the necessary and relevant
training and work experience as determined by the employer to
become a Paramedic
Specialist. Paramedic Specialist will include:
(A) Intensive Care Paramedic means an
employee who is a registered paramedic and who has completed the necessary and
training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a
Paramedic Specialist - Intensive Care Paramedic and who is
appointed to an
approved Intensive Care Paramedic position.
(B) Extended Care Paramedic means an employee
who is a registered paramedic and who has completed the necessary and relevant
training and work experience as determined by the employer to become a Paramedic
Specialist - Extended Care Paramedic and who is
appointed to an approved
Extended Care Paramedic position.
(2) VCCC Triage Clinician (Paramedic Specialist) - means an
employee who is a registered paramedic and who has successfully completed
requirements to be a Paramedic and who has completed the necessary and relevant
training and work experience as determined by
the employer to become a Paramedic
Specialist and who is appointed to perform functions within the scope of their
training and experience
in the Virtual Clinical Care Centre or other virtual
care settings.
(i) Manager - Level 1
(i) Manager - Level 1 means an employee
who meets the requirements of Paramedic - Level 1 and, in addition, meets the
requirements
of and is appointed to a Manager - Level 1 position as determined
by the employer.
(ii) Positions within Manager - Level 1 may
include (but are not limited to):
(1) Team Leader - means an employee who
has successfully completed the requirements as set out for Paramedic and who has
successfully
completed the requirements for and is appointed to a Team Leader
position identified as such by the employer;
(2) VCCC Clinical Team Leader - means an employee who has
successfully completed the requirements to be a Paramedic and who has
successfully completed the requirements for and is appointed to a VCCC Clinical
Team Leader position in the Virtual Clinical Care
do not propose to make these variations without first giving the parties an
opportunity to be heard.
NSWA’s Arguments in favour of
Variation of the Paramedics Award
summary, NSWA says that the re-classification of VCCC Triage Clinicians from
work level Paramedic – Level 3 to Paramedic
– Level 1 and Paramedic
– Level 2 is fair and reasonable, not contrary to the public interest and
made for a substantial
reason because:
(1) the role, context and support environment of a VCCC Triage Clinician have
changed substantially since the VCCC Triage Clinician
position was established,
such that the role now carries a substantially lower level of responsibility and
(2) unlike the current classification of VCCC Triage Clinicians at Paramedic
– Level 3, the proposed classification levels
reflect appropriate internal
relativities and the manner in which registered nurses and doctors in the VCCC
are paid; and
(3) the available funding envelope for the VCCC cannot accommodate appointing
paramedics as VCCC Triage Clinicians if they are paid
at Paramedic – Level
regards the assignment of the new position of VCCC CTL to work level Manager
– Level 1, NSWA says:
(1) the role will fulfil an important clinical support and supervisory function
in the VCCC;
(2) CLT’s will not, and (existing) Senior Clinicians do not, perform an
educational role as described in the Paramedic Educator
classification (hence
that it is not appropriate for them to be assigned to work level Paramedic
– Level 4 Band 2, as ‘Ambulance
Clinical Educators’ and
‘Ambulance Paramedic Educators’ are) and this would distort
relativities; and
(3) the VCCC is subject to funding constraints such that its effectiveness would
be compromised if CTL’s were classified as
Paramedic Educators.
pursuant to my direction, filed and served a table setting out the facts it
relies upon in support of its contention that its
proposal represents fair and
reasonable conditions of employment, is not contrary to the public interest and
there is a substantial
reason for the Paramedics Award to be varied to allow its
proposal to proceed. The Unions filed a joint document setting out the
relies upon in opposition to NSWA’s proposal.
order to explain why I have determined to find in favour of NSWA it is
convenient to set out each of NSWA’s contentions in
favour of its
position, the facts and matters it asserts support its contentions and my
findings in respect of those facts and contentions
in light of the material
relied upon and arguments made by all of the parties.
Proposal to Re-classify VCCC Triage Clinicians
Reduced responsibility and risk associated with the VCCC Triage Clinician
submitted that there have been significant changes to the structure and
operations of the VCCC since it was first established,
which have substantially
reduced the level of responsibility and risk associated with the VCCC Triage
Clinician role.
relied on the following facts in support this submission, which were largely not
in dispute. Indeed, the Unions’ witnesses
gave evidence that expressly
supported most of the following facts:
(1) the original form of the VCCC – the COVID-19 Virtual Clinical
Coordination Centre (C19VCCC) – was established in
September 2021 on an
urgent basis and rapidly in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
high demands on the Triple Zero
(2) because of the rapid and reactive establishment of the C19VCCC, there were
very limited systems, structures, processes and guidelines
in place to support
the work of VCCC Triage Clinicians in the early period of the VCCC’s
operations, such that a high level
of autonomy and discretion was required;
(3) in addition to performing secondary triage work, VCCC Triage Clinicians in
the early period of the VCCC’s operations were
involved in developing
systems, structures, processes and guidelines to support the future work of VCCC
Triage Clinicians, and in
defining their own roles;
(4) prior to 16 January 2023, VCCC Triage Clinicians were also required to
exercise clinical judgment to select cases for secondary
triage out of the
Statewide Pending Incident Queue (SPIQ);
(5) the operations and working environment of the VCCC and the work performed by
VCCC Triage Clinicians have changed – accordingly
to NSWA, substantially -
since the C19VCCC was established, including in that:
(a) there is now a range of policies and work instructions that structure and
guide the work of VCCC Triage Clinicians;
(b) the Manchester Triage System (MTS) has been introduced, which provides
systematic guidance that assists VCCC Triage Clinicians
in conducting clinical
assessments including in dealing with higher acuity cases;
(c) a videoconferencing facility is now available (GoodSAM), which can assist
VCCC Triage Clinicians to make a clinical assessment
by allowing them to see the
patient and their environment via their mobile phone, although it is commonly
possible to make an adequate
clinical assessment of the kinds of patients who
present to the VCCC without GoodSAM;
(d) a Referral Pathway Directory has consolidated, structured and streamlined
access to information about referral pathways, including
allowing for filtering
based on location and clinical condition;
(e) VCCC policies and resources are now centralised on an electronic SharePoint
(f) outside occasional periods of excess capacity, VCCC Triage Clinicians no
longer have to exercise clinical judgment to select
between cases in the SPIQ,
which has reduced their decision-making responsibilities and cognitive load
– appropriate low acuity
cases are now automatically sent to the VCCC if a
computer tool operated by the Triple Zero call taker, called the Medical
Dispatch System or “ProQA”, classifies the case as
appropriate for the VCCC;
(g) processes for the recording of information about patients have been
streamlined;
(h) VCCC Triage Clinicians now participate in structured training and mentoring
at their commencement;
(i) there are now robust clinical governance processes including audits,
structured clinical reviews, education sessions and morbidity
and mortality
reviews that help support safe clinical decision-making by VCCC Triage
Clinicians;
(j) there is now a range of clinical support roles in the VCCC including on-site
Staff Specialists (Medical Consultants), (i.e. medical
doctors) a Clinical Nurse
Consultant and Senior Clinicians (to be replaced by CTLs under the revised
proposal), and operational support
in the form of a Duty Manager, including to
assist in dealing with any higher acuity cases or cases requiring an upgrade to
an emergency
(k) there is now a multidisciplinary team in the VCCC, including registered
nurses and doctors in addition to paramedic specialists,
which is an attractive
and advantageous feature of the VCCC;
(l) the VCCC is now located in a purpose-built facility rather than a temporary
disaster recovery site; and
(m) VCCC Triage Clinicians are no longer, and will not be expected or required
to be, involved in developing systems, structures,
processes and guidelines to
support the future work of VCCC Triage Clinicians or defining their own roles;
(n) under the revised proposal, VCCC Triage Clinicians will not be expected to
answer the Clinical Advice Line, or participate in
clinical supervision or data
analysis and reporting.
Ms Stacey Quigley and Mr Asaeli Williams, Extended Care Paramedics (ECPs), who
have worked in the VCCC as both VCCC Triage Clinicians
and VCCC Senior
Clinicians, and who gave evidence for the Unions, agreed in cross examination
that the changes made since they commenced
working in the VCCC (October 2021 and
February 2022 respectively) have made it easier to perform the work of a VCCC
Triage Clinician.
Quigley, who commenced work in the C19VCCC very shortly after its establishment
and I understand is the longest serving VCCC Triage
Clinician, gave the
following evidence in cross examination as to the nature of the work at the
C19VCCC when it was first established
and how she assisted in the development of
the systems and structures that are now in place:
“Q. When you first started in the VCCC, you were, is this right,
making use of your knowledge and work that had already been
done to develop
referral pathways for ECPs to use?
A. It definitely gave a leg up on that, when we were sort of learning as
we went. So figuring out options, especially because not
ambulance, but community services and OT departments were all under pressure
during that time.
Q. Part of the work you did as a VCCC triage clinician in those earlier
days was helping to develop and document clearer referral
pathways and
additional referral pathways to be used in the VCCC; is that right?
A. Yes. Yeah.
Q. All of the work that you did in developing structures and guidelines
for the VCCC that you talk about in paragraph 50, you'd
agree with me, that
was really important work, wasn't it?
A. It was, yes.
Q. It's work that helps to support, even still today, the day to day work
of VCCC triage clinicians?
A. It was the beginning of, like building blocks to sort of expand
on ‑ improve, yeah. Because we had to deal with not just
one LHD, it was LHDs over the entire State, and no‑one really talks to one
Q. Those building blocks are built up over time‑‑
Q. ‑‑that's fair to say?
A. That's fair to say.
“Q. The work that you did, and others, obviously your colleagues in
those earlier days, it's fair to say that that work makes
things easier for VCCC
triage clinicians today than it was back then at the beginning?
A. Absolutely.”
Asaeli Williams gave the following evidence in cross examination:
“Q. Let me break it down. You'd agree that nowadays, as a VCCC
triage clinician, compared with when you first started, you
have more guidance
and support available to you in your work?
Q. That assists in performing the work of a VCCC triage clinician?
Q. In other words, the changes, over time, have alleviated some of the
challenges of being a VCCC triage clinician?
Q. One of the other changes that you talk about in your statements is
that, in general, nowadays, cases are direct‑sent to
the VCCC, rather than
clinicians reviewing the state‑wide pending incident queue to select a
Q. You were in the VCCC when you still had to review the state‑wide
pending incident queue?
Q. It's fair to say that that review required the exercise of a clinical
judgment by the VCCC clinician to work out which case to
pick out of the queue
to attempt secondary triage with?
A. Yeah, yeah.
Q. The exercise of clinical judgment to select between patients is no
longer a significant part of the VCCC triage clinician role?
A. Not in the clinician role,
the parties diverged was in regard to whether the changes in fact resulted in a
net reduction to the level of responsibility
assumed by VCCC Triage Clinicians
and/or a reduction in the “work value” of the role; and the timing
of the changes that
have occurred since September 2021 and how that timing
impacted upon NSWA’s proposal to now reduce the remuneration payable
VCCC Triage Clinicians.
APA argued that NSWA’s contentions “were a form of reverse
‘work value change’ reasoning” in that
NSWA contended, that
the “change in the nature of the work performed by the VCCC triage
clinicians constitutes such a significant
net reduction of the work requirements
as to warrant the downgrading to a lower
classification”.
APA contended that in the circumstances, the Work Value Changes Principle, being
Principle 10 of the Award Making Principles,
applied. As I have already
discussed, the Work Value Changes Principle is one criterion of five prescribed
in Principle 9.2 of the
Award Making Principles. If one or more of those
criteria are met, “an Arbitrated Case may be granted”.
I have already explained, I consider that the Arbitrated Case Principle does not
apply to this matter and consequently, nor does
the Work Value Changes
Principle. Nevertheless, I have had regard to the Principle in the event I am
wrong about its application
to the present matter and because I consider that
the Work Value Changes Principle offers guidance as to whether NSWA has
the presumption that the current assignment of the VCCC Triage
Clinician role to work level Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, provides
for fair and
reasonable conditions of employment.
APA referred
to the following
sub-principles of the Work Value Changes Principle:
“10.1 Changes in work value may arise from changes in the nature of the
work, skill and responsibility required or the conditions
under which work is
performed. Changes in work by themselves may not lead to a change in wage rates.
The strict test for an alteration
in wage rates is that the change in the nature
of the work should constitute such a significant net addition to work
requirements
as to warrant the creation of a new classification or upgrading to
a higher classification.
10.6 The time from which work value changes in an award should be measured is
the date of operation of any adjustment arising from
the last work value inquiry
or the date of a consent award where the parties agreed that the wage increases
in the consent award
reflect or include increases in work value, whichever is
the later.”
may again be observed that the Work Value Changes Principle is couched in terms
of an application being made to increase wage rates,
not to decrease them. Thus,
on its terms, I do not consider that the Principle applies to the present
application. In any event,
I have had regard to it.
APA submitted
change that justifies an alteration in rates must be ‘significant’,
meaning ‘to a meaningful degree,
not insignificant, not immaterial, not
trivial’ though not necessarily
submitted that consistent with the Work Value Changes Principle there must have
been a significant reduction in the level
of responsibility of VCCC Triage
Clinicians or their “work value”.
APA submitted that the changes that have occurred in systems and resources at
the VCCC since its establishment have not resulted
in a significant reduction in
the level of responsibility of VCCC Triage Clinicians or their work value. It
made the following submissions
in support of this view:
, it is uncontroversial that the MTS assists VCCC triage
clinicians and improves their efficiency by providing a structured framework
carrying out secondary triage. However, it does not diminish the level of
responsibility of VCCC triage clinicians or the level
of clinical expertise they
are required to have.
34. Even after the introduction of the MTS, in order to make correct decisions
the VCCC triage clinicians must use effective communication
and rapport-building
skills to obtain accurate details about a patient’s condition to rule out
differential diagnoses.
35. Further, VCCC triage clinicians do not slavishly follow the MTS in all
cases. From time to time, VCCC triage clinicians have
to stop following the MTS
and recommend that a case is upgraded immediately if there is a
‘discriminator’ or symptom
that is serious (for example, continuous
or multiple convulsions). Making such ‘judgement calls’ requires a
of clinical expertise and decision-making skills. It follows that,
although the MTS assists VCCC triage clinicians with making decisions,
ultimately the responsibility for making the correct decision (including, where
appropriate, the decision to depart from the MTS)
remains with the
clinicians.
, the introduction of the GoodSAM videoconferencing system
has not diminished the level of responsibility or the level of skills needed
perform the role of the VCCC triage clinicians. In some respects, the
introduction of the GoodSAM videoconferencing system has
made the role of the
VCCC triage clinicians more complex as they can carry out secondary triage in
relation to a wider range of clinical
presentations. For example, VCCC triage
clinicians can assist patients with setting dislocations as they are able to see
the patient
and their injuries.
, whilst the referral pathway directory makes it easy to
identify all available referral options, ultimately the VCCC triage clinicians
must rely on their clinical knowledge and skills to consider all potential
diagnoses and rule out differential diagnoses in order
to identify the most
appropriate referral option for the patient.
38. Identification of the most appropriate referral option depends on the VCCC
triage clinicians exercising their clinical judgment
to ask the right questions
to obtain information about the patient’s social circumstances, capacity,
competency and health
39. Further, referrals require VCCC triage clinicians to display strong
communication and interpersonal skills to ensure that the
patients have the
understanding, capability and support systems to implement the referral plan
formulated by them.
40. Accordingly, the introduction of the referral pathway directory does not
materially reduce the level of skills and clinical knowledge
connection with referrals.
, it is uncontroversial that incidents now come to the VCCC
primarily through an automated ‘direct send’ or ‘system
send’ process, rather than by the VCCC triage clinicians manually
reviewing and selecting appropriate pending incidents. As
a result of that
change, the workload and the volume of calls in the VCCC have increased
significantly.
42. Further, that change has resulted in a much wider range of clinical
presentations coming to the VCCC. That, in turn, means that
the scope of
clinical presentations that the VCCC triage clinicians are assessing and
triaging is much broader, requiring more clinical
expertise and carrying greater
clinical responsibility. The change has therefore made the role of the VCCC
triage clinicians more
challenging.”
the exception of the final paragraph of the above submissions, NSWA (and its
witnesses) were broadly in agreement with the matters
set out in the above
submission. NSWA does not suggest that the
responsibility of the
VCCC Triage Clinicians has substantially reduced, although it did submit it has
reduced somewhat, as I will
shortly explain. When assisting a patient, a VCCC
Triage Clinician carries the professional clinical responsibility for that
that all paramedics within NSWA do. The introduction of systems and
supports does not change that reality. Rather, NSWA says that
the development of
systems, governance and support structures means that VCCC Triage Clinicians no
longer have to work out
to operate in the virtual care setting,
unlike the VCCC Triage Clinicians who were engaged to operate the C19VCCC in
late 2021 and
early 2022.
Ms Turner explained there “were initially no policies, education or tools
in place articulating how to perform secondary
triage”. Thanks to the
development of systems, processes, policies and support structures, VCCC Triage
Clinicians no longer
have to define their own role. They no longer have to
manually review the SPIQ and exercise discretion to select those patients that
may be suitable for secondary triage. They no longer have to work out suitable
referral pathways and form relationships with referral
pathway providers. They
are no longer required to contribute, at least not in a substantive,
foundational way, to the development
of the systems and processes of the VCCC.
indicated above, the evidence of Ms Quigley and Mr Williams in cross examination
fully supports a finding that the operational
responsibility, as opposed to the
clinical responsibility, of VCCC Triage Clinicians has substantially reduced
since the C19VCCC
was established. In short, VCCC Triage Clinicians who were
initially engaged to establish the VCCC were required to exercise skills,
knowledge and judgment that is not now required in order to perform the
day-today work of secondary triage.
evidence also supports a finding that the development of systems, governance and
support structures as outlined at [
] above provides considerable assistance to VCCC
Triage Clinicians in meeting their clinical responsibility. As explained by Ms
the various systems assist VCCC Triage Clinicians to “make safe,
consistent decisions” and ensure that they “are
able to access
timely support when required.” Logically this should reduce the level of
individual clinical risk to which the
VCCC Triage Clinician is exposed, which in
turn should reduce their cognitive load and stress. It also compensates for the
associated with assisting a patient remotely, which I discuss in more
detail in the following section.
for in two respects, the changes since the VCCC was established, have not
however, significantly reduced the
responsibility of VCCC Triage
Clinicians. It is the case that VCCC Triage Clinicians no longer have to
exercise their clinical skills
to select cases from the SPIQ and they are no
longer required to provide advice to other paramedics via the Clinical Advice
However this reduction in clinical responsibilities is arguably offset by
the fact that improvements like GoodSAM and increases in
referral pathways, has
mean that VCCC Triage Clinicians are now using their clinical skills and
knowledge to help diagnose and treat
more and/or a wider range, of patients
Further, while I accept that the various systems and support structures help
reduce risk,
cognitive load and stress, that is offset somewhat by evidence that
the ProQA or ‘system send’ process, has resulted
in a higher
workload for the VCCC than was initially the case and that a wider range of
clinical presentations are referred to the
Nonetheless
I accept that the changes made since September 2021 have significantly reduced,
not increased, the challenges of being
a VCCC Triage Clinician and in
particular, has resulted in a significant overall decrease in operational
responsibility. In short,
the nature of the work, skill and responsibility
required of a VCCC Triage Clinician and the conditions under which the work is
has changed since late September 2021, in a way that could be said to
have reduced the ‘work value’ of VCCC Triage Clinicians.
consider that the changes merely reflect the evolving nature of the position
where skills or responsibilities are lost and
new ones gained without producing
a net reduction to work
requirements.
regards the timing issue the evidence established that:
(1) the work instruction referred to in [
] above, which
Ms Hayley Turner, the Chief Superintendent, Associate Director of the VCCC
referred to as part of the “policy
framework”, was first implemented
in September 2021 and that many changes had been made to it by March 2022,
although it continued
to evolve and improve thereafter;
(2) the structured training and mentoring referred to in [
] above, was in
place by the end of March 2022;
(3) at noted in [
] above, the automatic sending of incidents to the
VCCC via ProQA, rather than VCCC Triage Clinicians having to exercise clinical
judgment to select cases for secondary triage out of the SPIQ occurred on and
from 16 January 2023;
(4) the use of the MTS, as referred to in [
commenced in March 2022;
(5) the use of the GoodSAM video conferencing system, as referred to in [
commenced in May 2023;
(6) the Referral Pathway Directory referred to in [
] above, was in
place by October/November 2022, and NSWA has continued to add new pathways to
the directory since then;
(7) since March 2022 VCCC Triage Clinicians have not answered the Clinical
Advice Line, with this responsibility falling to VCCC
Senior Clinicians;
(8) clinical nurse consultants were first engaged on 15 October 2022 and
registered nurses were first introduced on 19 June 2023.
APA submitted that “for the purposes of assessing work value changes the
inquiry is limited to changes that occurred since
the date of the Paramedics
Award”. The Paramedics Award was made on 21 December 2023 by consent and
has a nominal term of 1
July 2023 to 30 June 2026.
APA submission is founded on Principle 10.6 of the Award Making Principles. As I
have already explained I do not consider that
that principle applies directly in
this proceeding. If it does, the fact that the VCCC Triage Clinician role was
not formally included
in the Paramedics Award when it was made indicates that
there was no agreement “that the wage increases in the consent award
reflect or include increases in work value” of VCCC Triage Clinicians,
which is what Principle 10.6, at least in part, is premised
upon. Indeed, as set
out in the First Decision, the extrinsic evidence with respect to the drafting
of cl 5(n) indicates that the
omission of the VCCC Triage Clinician role from
the express terms of the Paramedics Award, along with other positions, was at
one of the reasons cl 5(n) was included in the Paramedics Award, as
agreement on the appropriate classification of those roles within
the Award was
not able to be reached before the Award was made.
Nonetheless,
in circumstances where, as I found in the First Decision, NSWA had in fact
assigned the VCCC Triage Clinician role to
work level Paramedic – Level 3,
Band 2, it must now establish that reducing the assigned work level and thus
reducing the remuneration
payable to VCCC Triage Clinicians, will deliver fair
and reasonable terms and conditions of employment.
is true that the changes relied upon NSWA to support its case that the level of
responsibility and risk associated with the VCCC
Triage Clinician role has
reduced, were changes that had largely occurred within the VCCC’s first
year of operation. On the
evidence most of the substantive changes on which NSWA
relies had occurred by late 2022/early 2023, with less substantive changes
occurring from then until November 2023, when NSWA first proposed that the
permanent positions of VCCC Triage Clinician and VCCC
Triage Clinician Paramedic
Specialist would be assigned respectively to the Paramedic – Level 1 and
Paramedic – Level
2 work levels under cl 5 of the Paramedics Award. That
said, it is clear that the operations of the VCCC are continuing to evolve
improve. For instance, Dr Thomas Evens, Acting Executive Director of Medical
Services and Research and Senior Staff Specialist
in Pre-Hospital and Retrieval
Medicine in NSWA’s Aeromedical Operations, gave evidence that from August
this year it was intended
that an emergency doctor will be on-site at the VCCC
for 8 hours on both days of the weekend, as well has from 9.00am to 10pm, Monday
any event, the assignment of the VCCC Triage Clinician role to Paramedic –
Level 3, Band 2 in September 2021 occurred prior
to the changes set out at [
] and in circumstances
where, according to Ms Turner, the role had not been formally graded. Further,
none of the VCCC Triage Clinicians
were appointed through a formal recruitment
process. The first VCCC Triage Clinicians were recruited via an
‘Expressions of
Interest” process from ECP employees due to the need
for them to operate initially with a high level of autonomy and with the
capability to contribute to the development of the VCCC as it evolved. It is
not in dispute that the C19VCCC was “stood up
so quickly, there was a lack
of time to plan and establish clear systems and
processes.”
infer from the evidence that NSWA initially determined to pay ECPs appointed to
the role of VCC Triage Clinician the ACCO rate of
pay due to the need to get
employees into the roles quickly; the lack of systems and processes in the VCCC
requiring the appointment
of capable specialist paramedics who could operate
autonomously and also assist in the VCCC’s development and because
it was not known what exactly the role of VCCC Triage Clinician would
the circumstances, I consider that the significant change in nature of the work,
skill and responsibility required of a VCCC Triage
Clinician and the conditions
under which the work is performed, from the time the role was first established
in September 2021 until
now, points in favour of a re-assignment of the work
level of the role as proposed by NSWA.
Nature of the work
comparable to an on-road paramedic or paramedic specialist
submitted that the nature of the work, level of skill and responsibility
required of a VCCC Triage Clinician is comparable to
that of an on-road
paramedic or paramedic specialist, hence it is fair and reasonable that they be
classified at the same work level
as on-road paramedics and paramedic
specialists.
note that APA initially
that NSWA was not
permitted to base its claim for VCCC Triage Clinicians to be re-classified by
comparing the role with that of paramedics
and ACCOs as this would amount to a
“comparative wage justice” claim, which the Commission has treated
“with great
caution” and which Principle 9.5 of the Award Making
Principles states “will not be countenanced other than to the extent
contemplated by the Gender Based Undervaluation Principle.” However, this
argument was ultimately not pressed, and I consider
correctly so, as
“comparative wage justice” refers to an argument that employees
should be paid the same amount as employees
to the similarity in the nature of the work and the conditions under which the
work is performed. The argument made here
is that the classification of the VCCC
Triage Clinician role (and the CTL) is appropriate relative to other
classifications in the
award. There is no impediment to this form of
an analysis which, as was submitted in NSWARS, is “consistent with the
criterion of award-making being the setting of fair and reasonable terms
and conditions of employment for employees” and the
maintenance of
appropriate internal relativities is plainly relevant to the application of that
relied on the following facts to support its submission that the work of an VCCC
Triage Clinician is comparable to that of on-road
Paramedics – Level 1 and
(1) VCCC Triage Clinicians hold the same qualifications, undertake the same
general training and are subject to the same system of
regulation as on-road
paramedics and paramedic specialists;
(2) VCCC Triage Clinicians have the same scope of clinical practice and
authority to practise as when they are on road;
(3) VCCC Triage Clinicians follow standard paramedic practice and clinical
decision-making in performing their functions, just in
a different context and
by a different modality (in person versus remote);
(4) VCCC Triage Clinicians and on-road paramedics and paramedic specialists
perform the same core function of making a risk-based
clinical assessment of
undifferentiated patients to decide the appropriate clinical disposition and
care of those patients;
(5) the key accountabilities and key challenges of VCCC Triage Clinicians are a
subset of the key accountabilities and key challenges
of an on-road
(6) VCCC Triage Clinicians draw upon their skills, knowledge and experience
developed on road;
(7) on-road paramedics and paramedic specialists, like VCCC Triage Clinicians,
(a) deal with a varied range of undifferentiated patients;
(b) have well-developed communication and interpersonal skills;
(c) be able to build rapport with patients, their families and bystanders;
(d) be able to gather information verbally from the same kinds of
individuals;
(e) be able to evaluate the quality of that information;
(f) make decisions with limited or imperfect information and in circumstances of
complexity and uncertainty;
(g) deal with individuals who have limited health literacy or experience
language barriers;
(h) make decisions without having the opportunity to make clinical observations
or physically examine a patient;
(i) make decisions under pressure;
(j) make many decisions, frequently, and deal with the risk of decision
(k) be conscious of the possibility that a case will be more or less serious
than it is assessed through primary triage, and be prepared
to upgrade or
downgrade the response category if required;
(l) be familiar generally with alternative care pathways and able to refer a
patient to such a pathway if that is their appropriate
clinical disposition
(particularly, but not only, as an ECP); and
(m) have an understanding of pathophysiology and the pathophysiological
progression of conditions;
(8) compared with work as an on-road paramedic or paramedic specialist, VCCC
Triage Clinicians:
(a) focus on cases that are lower in acuity;
(b) typically, are not required to make critical or rapid decisions;
(c) typically deal with more cases in a shift but with a much lower case cycle
(d) are working from a single location, in a controlled environment, with
amenities, and are not required to deal with environmental
hazards or risks;
(e) do not engage in manual handling;
(f) do not miss crib breaks or work end-of-shift overtime;
(g) are not required to use their procedural skills;
(h) have easier access to higher-level clinical supports; and
(i) have the benefit of working in a multidisciplinary team;
(9) The additional challenges associated with conducting a clinical assessment
remotely compared with in-person on-road are mitigated
(a) the fact that the VCCC is typically dealing with lower acuity cases that are
suited to remote assessment and possible referral
to an alternative care
(b) the availability of decision-making support tools such as MTS and
(c) the availability of clinical support structures and a multidisciplinary team
of colleagues; and
(d) the clear instruction that, if a case cannot be dealt with adequately by
remote secondary triage, it is to be returned to the
(10) to the extent VCCC Triage Clinicians have any additional skills compared
with on-road paramedics, they are in the use of computer-based
tools comparable
to those used in other NSWA Control Centres and does not change the scope of
clinical practice. VCCC Triage Clinicians
covered by the Paramedics Award
receive the Control Centre Allowance and it is proposed that this will continue.
the above facts were largely undisputed by the Unions and their witnesses.
Indeed, the key accountabilities and key challenges
from the paramedic position
description tendered in evidence by the APA were read out, line by line to Ms
Quigley, by counsel for
NSWA, and Ms Quigley agreed that they were a fair
description of the responsibilities and challenges faced by VCCC Triage
Clinicians.
Ms Quigley accepted in cross examination that there were benefits to working in
the VCCC compared with working on-road
and when asked what they were she gave
the following evidence:
“The benefits, I think, are you are in a very controlled
environment. It's air‑conditioned or heated, you have access
toilets that are relatively clean. You are able
to‑‑...‑‑access kitchen
facilities ‑ it's a very
important thing to
be ‑ have access to ... The bathrooms, I should say. So as
an ECP, I might not see ED all day, and I won't
see a station all day, and I'm
trying ‑ I have an app on my phone that finds the closest
bathrooms, if I'm in area that I'm
not familiar
Asaeli Williams also accepted that there were advantages to working in the VCCC,
rather than working on the road, other than the
money, and volunteered that they
included that he finished on time, which was important as he has a young family;
that he was not
exposed to the elements or hazardous environments; and he
enjoyed working in a multi-disciplinary team.
Rebecca Richards, an ECP who worked as a VCCC Triage Clinician from July 2022 to
April 2024, (excluding a period of 5 weeks in
October 2023 when she worked as a
Project Officer in the VCCC), and from January to April 2025 as a VCCC Senior
Clinician, also accepted
in cross examination that there were some benefits in
working in the VCCC compared to being in an on-road environment,
“Whenever anybody asks me, I say it's really nice finishing on time, it's
nice that you get your breaks, you can go to the
toilet whenever you want and
there's a tap in the kitchen, you can put your lunch in the fridge. And I
also think it's been nice
to learn things from colleagues from other
backgrounds, particularly the nurses, the nurse
consultants.”
response to NSWA’s submissions directed to the formal similarities between
VCCC Triage Clinicians and on-road paramedics,
the APA pointed out that
paramedics employed by NSWA have to hold the same qualification to be
registered as a paramedic
undertake the same general training, are subject to the same system of
regulation and with exception of Intensive Care Paramedics
(ICPs) and ECPs, have
the same scope of practice authorised by NSWA. That submission may be accepted.
Those similarities do not advance
NSWA’s case.
APA referred to the following matters, which it says differentiates VCCC Triage
Clinicians from on-road paramedics:
(1) cases which VCCC Triage Clinicians triage are sometimes upgraded to category
2 or ‘face to face now’ responses. Generally,
category 2 cases are
regarded as high acuity;
(2) in the future, the VCCC will be ‘direct sent’ category 2 cases.
Category 2 cases have also been sent to the VCCC
in the past from time to
(3) notwithstanding that high acuity patients are less common than low acuity
patients in the VCCC, clinicians performing secondary
triage must:
(a) always be alive to the risk that they are in fact dealing with a higher
acuity case; and
(b) have the skills to identify and deal with higher acuity cases, including
upgrading cases when appropriate, which occurs daily
on average;
(4) unlike on-road paramedics, VCCC clinicians have to assess the nature and
severity of the health problem without being able to
use all five senses, in
particular touch;
(5) it is much more challenging to accurately assess the nature and severity of
the health problem without being able to use all
five senses and without being
able to take medical observations;
(6) to accurately assess the nature and severity of the health problem the VCCC
triage clinician must ask the right question;
(7) VCCC triage clinicians learn and develop the skill of asking the right
question based on their experience as well as the education
and training they
receive at the VCCC;
(8) VCCC Clinicians must have higher levels of clinical judgment and skill than
on-road paramedics due to the remote nature of their
(9) whilst both on-road paramedics and VCCC triage clinicians need excellent
communication skills and the ability to build rapport,
the fact that VCCC triage
clinicians have to interact with patients by telephone or by video conference
makes it more challenging
to build rapport;
(10) whilst it is helpful to have the GoodSAM software in some cases, it does
not take away all of the disadvantages of not being
there in person because:
(a) some subtle things (such as the patient’s skin colour) are much easier
to observe in person than using a video conferencing
software like GoodSAM;
(b) it is easier to pick up things like breathing sounds or lung sounds in
person than using a video conferencing software like GoodSAM;
(11) the GoodSAM video conferencing software does not work due to technical
difficulties about 11% of the time;
(12) unlike on-road paramedics, VCCC Clinicians engage in disaster management,
which involves assisting patients who are trapped
by flood waters and other
major disasters;
(13) VCCC Clinicians take on mental health referrals, which can involve highly
vulnerable patients, which requires higher levels
of skill and clinical judgment
arising from the increased risk of these patients;
(14) VCCC Clinicians undertake more cases (20-30 per shift) when compared to
on-road paramedics (6-12 per shift);
(15) VCCC Clinicians are subject to time pressures that are unique to their
role. In particular, they must:
(a) filter through the ‘red’ symptom list in the MTS within 3
minutes of taking the call; and
(b) take another call within eight minutes of completing their previous call.
(16) where a clinician has not started a new call within 10 minutes of their
previous call, the Duty Manager will undertake a welfare
check to ascertain
whether there are any issues.
(17) on-road paramedics can easily use their phone to:
(a) search the internet for information; and
(b) access the relevant framework documents and the clinical practice guidelines
using the NSW Clinical Practice Guideline app developed
by NSWA; and
(18) on-road paramedics:
(a) work as a double crew and can bounce ideas off each other; and
(b) if they need access to colleagues from other disciplines, they can easily
call the Clinical Advice Line.
first three matters of the matters listed in the preceding paragraph concern the
acuity of the patients dealt with by VCCC Triage
Paramedics. I understand that
in medicine, acuity refers to the severity and urgency of a patient’s
illness or condition.
Dr Evens and Ms Turner both gave evidence that the ProQA
system/ MPDS is designed to present VCCC Triage Clinicians with low acuity
patients, that is, those that are not in a life-threatening or critical
condition requiring immediate, in-person, medical attention
and who may be
suitable for a care pathway other than the emergency department of a hospital.
Consequently so-called Category 1 and
2 cases, being the cases of the highest
acuity, are generally not referred to the VCCC.
Turner gave evidence that at present the VCCC only receives Category 3 and 4
cases. However, she also gave the following evidence:
“ ... as part of future expansion, the VCCC will receive incidents from
Categories 2, 3 and 4 that have been identified as
clinically appropriate to
undergo secondary triage prior to an Ambulance resource bring dispatched. These
incidents will be identified
through comprehensive clinical review to determine
suitable system send determinants to be sent to the VCCC ....
The reason for this proposal is that there are some Category 2 incidents that
are not actually high acuity and are highly suitable
for virtual assessment and
likely referral. An example of a Category 2 case that may be identified as
suitable for secondary triage
is where a patient is described by the caller as
having breathing difficulties when they are in fact only vomiting ... Another
is the ‘not alert’ descriptor which presents across multiple
protocols within the Medical Priority Dispatch System (MPDS)
and is not a
reliable indicator of actual clinical presentation. For example, a Category 2
‘Back Pain - Not Alert’ may
include patients who are experiencing
back pain issues that are non-traumatic (i.e. not due to any recent trauma).
This is because
the scripted question asked by the call-taker is a broad,
subjective one – ‘is the patient responding normally?’
which often results in an answer of ‘no’ or ‘I don’t
know’. This may be due to their response
to the pain, or because they do
not usually lay on the couch, so they may be interpreted by the caller as not
behaving normally.”
am satisfied that it remains the intention of NSWA that only low acuity cases,
that are assessed as suitable for secondary triage
and possible alternate care
are to be sent to the VCCC, thereby freeing up ambulances to attend to more
urgent cases.
enough, on-road paramedics have to deal with all categories of cases and will
certainly have to deal with Category 1 and 2
cases. The evidence also made clear
that on-road paramedics and VCCC Triage Clinicians alike have to be alive to the
possibility
that a particular case is in fact a higher acuity case than first
thought and to have the skills to identify and deal with higher
acuity cases
including if need be, to upgrade the case (through the appropriate channels) to
ensure the patient receives more appropriate
MTS contains a set of criteria, referred to as the “red criteria”,
which VCCC Triage Clinicians are trained to run
through in the first three
minutes of assessing a patient in order to make an assessment at the outset as
whether a more urgent response
is required. As Mr Asaeli Williams accepted in
cross examination however, this is simply the VCCC’s “version”
of the assessment process that an on-road paramedic would make immediately upon
getting to a patient.
pointing out that VCCC Triage Clinicians generally focus on cases that are lower
in acuity and typically, are not required to make
critical or rapid decisions,
NSWA stressed, in oral submissions, that this did not mean that VCCC Triage
Clinicians should be treated
differently or less than, paramedics and
paramedics. Rather it submitted that the nature of the cases handled by VCCC
Triage Clinicians
meant that the skills involved in dealing with high acuity
urgent cases in person were used to a lesser extent in the VCCC or not
compared to an on-road paramedic (for instance, conducting a procedure on a
patient), but that other of their skills may
be used more than an on-road
paramedic, for instance the ability to assess a patient’s condition from
other than visual cues,
such that the net result is that the positions are
equivalent. Nevertheless, I also consider that dealing with high acuity
is necessarily more stressful than dealing with low acuity
NSWA submitted that the challenges faced by VCCC Triage Clinicians, including
all of those listed at [
(4),(5), (6),(9), (10) and (11)] above, merely
reflected that “practice in the VCCC is paramedic or paramedic specialist
in a different setting and by a different
they do not
indicate that VCCC Triage Clinicians have higher levels of clinical judgment and
skill than on-road paramedics.
agree with NSWA’s submissions. There are clear and obvious differences in
the way on-road paramedics work compared to VCCC
Triage Clinicians. There are
both advantages and disadvantages to both roles. Fundamentally however the task
is the same, as described
by Mr Alan Morrison, Associate Director, Professional
Engagement and Partnerships within the Clinical Capability, Safety & Quality
directorate for NSWA, that is:
“to provide urgent and non-urgent mobile health care to the community
across age and acuity spectra. [To] clinically assess
each situation to
determine the nature and severity of health problems and apply the required
knowledge and experience to provide
person-centred care with the best interest
of patients as their primary concern and responsibility.
[To] manage and assess undifferentiated [undiagnosed] patients “in
place” within the community (spanning age and acuity),
determining the
patient's disposition aligned to their health care
accept that it is challenging for a VCCC Triage Clinician to assess and assist a
patient remotely and that the systems that have
been put in place to assist them
in that task are not failsafe. There are systems nonetheless, over and above
those used by on-road
paramedics (as referred to at [
(17) – (18)]
above), as well as other professionals available to assist. Further,
uncertainty, complexity and the need to
make decisions with imperfect
information are features of both roles. As Mr Morrison explained:
“Complexity and uncertainty is ubiquitous to health practice. The
context for that changes. So there's complexity and uncertainty
practice with a patient face to face. There's complexity and uncertainty
when you practice in a virtual environment. It's
contextual, but they live
on the same level that involves complexity and uncertainty, and that's why I
don't see it as more difficult
or less difficult. Also, the cases that are
coming into secondary triage have already gone through a primary triage, and
already been designated as, for a generic term, low‑acuity
patients, and that secondary triage is seeking to explore that,
and then explore
appropriate health
Morrison provided a helpful example as to how both on-road paramedics and VCCC
Triage Clinicians both have to manage complexity
and uncertainly, albeit in
different contexts:
“... so if you've got a rural paramedic that's an hour from hospital and
they're going down the path of managing an acute heart
attack, and they're
considering the initiation of thrombolysis, and they've now go to take this
patient that is on the cusp of arresting
and travel and manage that patient for
the next hour, there is significant complexity and uncertainty on them, and
apart from their
ability to engage remotely, they are managing that complexity
and uncertainty. That is comparable to context of a virtual clinical
clinician who is looking at a patient, who has its own perspective.
They're not an hour from a hospital, but they are in a
room surrounded by
consultants and other senior clinicians, to look into that patient, to gather
the information they need to gather
and then form a clinical decision. So
there is complexity and uncertainty in that, but it's a contextual complexity
and uncertainty,
as opposed to a scale of complexity and
uncertainty.”
the advantages of working in a controlled environment, with amenities, a
reliable schedule and where manual handling and
procedural skills are not
required to be utilised, operate to balance out the particular challenge VCCC
Triage Clinicians face in
remotely assisting a patient.
matters referred to at [
(12)-(16)] above are to the effect that VCCC Triage
Clinicians have a higher or more challenging workload than on-road paramedics
due to having to engage in disaster management; taking on mental health
referrals and undertaking more cases than on-road paramedics.
evidence with respect to “disaster management” was given by Mr Alan
Bradley, an ICP who has worked in the VCCC as
a VCCC Triage Clinician since 9
November 2024. His evidence on this matter was as follows:
“Another role is in disaster management, which is extremely stressful.
VCCC Clinicians have had to try to help people for example,
stuck in a roof
cavity of a building while flood waters are rising, reassess very unwell people
regularly when help is not coming,
even welfare check on family members every
hour when a family member has died because help during the disaster was not
This type of remote work is unique to VCCC Clinicians.”
have no doubt that this work is very stressful, and that VCCC Triage Clinicians
now doubt may feel entirely helpless in some situations.
However, as Mr
Morrison’s example of the rural paramedic an hour from hospital with a
heart attack patient demonstrates, stress
arising from an inability to do more
to assist a patient is part and parcel of working as a paramedic.
Bradley also gave evidence of a mental health patient he successfully assisted
remotely, due to the skills he had developed as
a VCCC Triage Clinician, despite
not having the benefit of seeing the “physical manifestations” of
the patient’s
mental state. It seems to me whether a patient has mental or
physical health issues, the challenges and risks are similar. Indeed,
understand that mental health patients can pose a particular risk for on-road
paramedics, to which VCC Triage Clinicians are not
exposed, due to the
possibility of violence. I do not consider that VCCC Triage Clinicians are
called upon to exercise higher level
skills and knowledge than their on-road
colleagues – rather they are exercising the same skills and knowledge in a
setting and by a different modality”, where some skills
assume more importance, while others assume less.
regards the caseload, that is simply the result of the fact that individual
patients referred to the VCCC are generally able to
be dealt with more quickly
than patients attended to in person by on-road paramedics. While that is a
benefit to NSWA and to the
NSW public, it does not mean that the work of a VCCC
Triage Clinician is fundamentally different to that of on-road paramedics. I
have no doubt that both cohorts work hard during their shifts.
completeness I note that NSWA accepts that VCCC Triage Clinicians do have some
additional skills that on-road paramedics do not
require in their day-to-day
work, being the ability to use the computer systems used in the VCCC including
the computer aided dispatch
(CAD) system. As noted above these skills are
comparable to those used in other NSWA Control Centres and NSWA proposes that
Triage Clinicians will receive the Control Centre Allowance, which is in
the order of $7,000 a year, to compensate them for these
consider that the nature of the work, level of skill and responsibility required
of a VCCC Triage Clinician is comparable to that
of an on-road paramedic or
paramedic specialist. This points in favour of a re-assignment of the work level
of the role as proposed
Nature of the work not
comparable to that of an ACCO
submitted that the nature of work, level of skill and responsibility required of
a VCCC Triage Clinician is not comparable to
that of an ACCO and consequently it
is not fair and reasonable for them to continue to be paid the same as an
relied upon the following matters in support of this submission:
(a) are responsible for the deployment of NSWA’s fixed-wing, helicopter
and road retrieval resources;
(b) focus on high-acuity, critically unwell patients;
(c) have the primary functions of assessing the clinical urgency of critically
unwell patients referred to the Aeromedical Control
Centre (ACC); triaging those
patients against other patients waiting in the queue for aeromedical transport;
and allocating air and
specialist ground transport resources to patients based
on their comparative needs;
(d) do not assess patients directly;
(e) in performing the function of assessing clinical urgency, rely mainly on
information provided by other clinicians who have already
made a diagnosis, such
that they are dealing with differentiated rather than undifferentiated
(f) require extensive training to be able to perform the role, initially and on
an ongoing basis, including in matters such as aviation
safety, contracts,
authorisations, logistics and weather patterns; and
(g) are required to develop and exercise skills that on-road paramedics and
paramedic specialists are not, for example in flight
planning, logistics and
aviation safety;
(2) In contrast, VCCC Triage Clinicians:
(a) are not involved in triaging patients against other patients or allocating
resources between patients;
(b) focus on lower acuity patients;
(c) directly assess undifferentiated patients, rather than triaging on the basis
of information from other clinicians;
(d) typically deal with one patient at a time;
(e) typically are not expected to and do not make prioritisation decisions
between patients or cases. If they do, they are drawing
on their on-road
knowledge and experience;
(f) are not required to develop or exercise skills going beyond those required
of an on-road paramedic or paramedic specialist, other
than in the use of
relevant control centre technologies;
(g) are able to return cases to the SPIQ if they are unable to perform an
adequate remote clinical assessment or identify an appropriate
alternative care
pathway or have any discomfort in doing so; and
(h) receive significantly less extensive training.
Unions submitted that a VCCC Triage Clinician involves equivalent skills and
responsibility to that of an ACCO for the following
(a) VCCC Triage Clinicians, like ACCOs, have to assess the urgency of
(b) ACCOs, like VCCC Triage Clinicians, have a framework for assessing the
urgency of patients;
(c) both ACCOs and VCCC triage clinicians perform the task of assessing the
urgency of the patients remotely and they do not meet
the patients in-person;
(d) a prerequisite for both the ACCO position and the VCCC Triage Clinician
Paramedic position is a minimum of five years of experience
as a paramedic;
(e) like ACCOs, VCCC triage clinicians also triage one patient against
(f) both VCCC clinicians and ACCOs have the same scope of practice;
(g) there is no evidence as to how frequently ACCOs take calls or deploy
helicopters to assist patients;
(h) the role of a VCCC triage clinician is closely aligned to that of an ACCO in
terms of skill and responsibility.
cannot accept that a VCCC Triage Clinician involves equivalent skills and
responsibility to that of an ACCO.
the evidence clearly established that on-road paramedics as well as ACCOs and
VCCC Triage Clinicians are required assess the
urgency of patients. In fact, the
evidence indicated that ACCOs have an easier task of assessing the urgency of
patients when compared
to both paramedics and VCCC Triage Clinicians as patients
are usually only referred to the ACC after other clinicians have already
diagnosis, such that they are dealing with differentiated rather than
undifferentiated patients. While that differentiation
may have been undertaken
by a paramedic, often it will have been performed be a doctor, with many urgent
air transports taking place
in respect of patients who are already at a
fact that ACCOs and VCCC Triage Clinicians have the same scope of practice does
not indicate that the roles are comparable, as
so too do paramedics.
additional ‘degree of difficulty’ for ACCOs is essentially twofold.
First, they are required to triage patients against
other patients waiting in
the queue for aeromedical transport and to allocate air and specialist ground
transport resources to patients
based on their comparative needs. The Unions
suggested that this was also a function performed by VCCC. It referred to
evidence given
by Ms Richards to the following effect:
“• Once a VCCC triage clinician completes a patient call, they
address the next incident in the VCCC pending queue.
• The oldest highest priority call is answered first.
• If there are multiple calls that have similar wait times and which have
been categorised as the same priority, VCCC triage
clinicians exercise their
judgment to decide which of those calls is the higher priority and should be
answered first.
• VCCC triage clinicians make such decisions based on ‘concerning
caller statements’.
• She had to make such decisions virtually every
accept this that this task is analogous to the task performed by ACCOs however,
the much lower acuity of the cases referred to the
VCCC means that the task is
not comparable. Further, as NSWA submitted, to the extent VCCC’s do have
to make prioritisation
decisions between patients or cases, noting that they
typically do not, they are drawing on their on-road knowledge and experience,
rather than having to consider the numerous other complex logistical issues that
must be taken into account by an ACCO when making
prioritisation decisions.
ACCOs are required to acquire and exercise extremely advanced logical skills,
over and above those required by on-road or
VCCC Triage Clinicians. It is the
case that that both ACCOs and VCCC Triage Clinicians are required to have five
years’ experience
as a paramedic. However, the evidence established that
the training required for each role is vastly different. The ACCO training
comprised of approximately three months of training in matters such as aviation
safety, flight planning, aviation safety, contracts,
authorisations, logistics
and weather patterns. Additional consolidation training occurs over the first
year. By contrast, VCCC Triage
Clinicians receive two weeks of training then
perform approximately 2 – 8 supervised shifts before they are signed off
to practice
independently. This takes approximately one month.
Quigley gave evidence in chief that it was her “understanding that the
VCCC Triage Clinician [role] was assigned to the ACCO
classification because the
role is most closely aligned to the duties, expertise and responsibilities of
this role.”
As I said at
] the evidence
indicates that NSWA initially determined to pay ECPs appointed to the role of
VCCC Triage Clinician the ACCO rate
of pay due to the need to get employees into
the roles quickly; the lack of systems and processes in the VCCC requiring the
appointment
of capable specialist paramedics who could operate autonomously and
also assist in the VCCC’s development and because initially
known what exactly the role of VCCC Triage Clinician would entail. While it may
have been the case that in those circumstances
NSWA thought the ACCO rate may be
appropriate, as things have transpired, the role is not comparable with that of
an ACCO and does
not warrant being assigned to the work level Paramedic –
Level 3, Band 2.
Padraig O’Riordan, an ACCO and Rapid Launch Trauma Coordinator (RLTC) with
NSWA gave evidence for the APA to the effect that
the role of VCCC Triage
Clinician was “more similar” to the role of an ACCO or a RLTC than
an on-road paramedic because:
“a. they are using telehealth to assess patients;
b. They are making remote decisions where they do not have hands on a
c. They are undertaking triage every day as a core part of their role.
d. They are making decisions daily that impact not just a particular patient but
the whole health system.”
weight can be given to Mr O’Riordan’s evidence as he has never
worked as a VCCC Triage Clinician and his knowledge
of what they do was based
upon discussions he had with VCCC Triage Clinicians in late 2021/early 2022 when
he was considering applying
for the role. As discussed above, the role has
changed significantly since that time, leading to NSWA’s proposal. In any
as I have explained above the first three of the four matters referred to
by Mr O’Riordan are not in fact the same or similar
in each role. As for
the fourth matter – that VCCC Triage Clinicians and ACCOs make decisions
daily that impact the whole health
system – as counsel for NSWA submitted
in closing submissions “that’s something that could be said in one
another of almost every role in the New South Wales public health
do not consider that the nature of work, level of skill and responsibility
required of a VCCC Triage Clinician is comparable to
that of an ACCO. This
points in favour of a re-assignment of the work level of the role as proposed by
Maintenance of Relativities
submitted that the proposed re-assignment of the work level of VCCC Triage
Clinicians was consistent with the object of the
of ensuring equal
remuneration for work of equal or comparable value:
s 3(f); Award
Making Principle 2.1.2.3 and would maintain relativities within the Paramedic
Award and as against the awards applying
to other clinicians in the VCCC. It
also submitted that the Award Making Principles recognises the importance of
maintaining appropriate
internal and external relativities in determining what
are fair and reasonable conditions of employment. Specifically, NSWA referred
the following sub-principles with Principle 10 – the Work Value Changes
Principle, and Principle 12 – the Gender Based
Undervaluation
“10.2 In addition to meeting the test in 10.1, a party making a work value
application will need to justify any change to wage
relativities that might
result not only within the relevant internal award structure but also against
any external classification
to which that structure is related. There must be no
likelihood of wage leapfrogging arising out of changes in relative position.
10.4 In applying the Work Value Changes principle, the Commission will have
regard to the need for any alterations to wage relativities
between awards to be
based on skill, responsibility and the conditions under which work is
2.7 In applying the previous paragraph, consideration is to be given to measures
to address so far as possible, consistent with achieving
the outcome in 12.2
above, a legitimate concern that changes in wage relativities, not only within
the award in question but also
against external classifications to which the
award structure is related, will give to rise to claims that would cause wage
leapfrogging.”
submission was based on the following:
(1) registered nurses also perform the role of VCCC Triage Clinician. They
perform the same role but bring a different scope of practice
and different
knowledge and experience to it compared with paramedics;
(2) like paramedics, nurses performing the role of a VCCC Triage Clinician have
the same qualifications and operate within the same
scope of practice as they
would in a frontline clinical setting;
(3) nurses are less familiar than paramedics with assessing and treating
undifferentiated patients in an out-of-hospital setting,
yet despite this nurses
working as VCCC Triage Clinicians are not paid any differently from their
frontline counterparts;
(4) doctors working in the VCCC also do not receive an equivalent payment to the
Control Centre Allowance, or any other additional
payment for working in a
virtual care setting;
(5) paying paramedic or paramedic specialist VCCC Triage Clinicians differently
from their frontline counterparts in circumstances
where nurses and doctors in
the VCCC are not may lead to workplace discord and disharmony.
stressed that it was not advancing a comparable wage justice claim in the sense
deprecated by the Commission in previous cases
and in Award Making Principle
9.1. NSWA did not submit that the wage rates of VCCC Triage Clinicians should
be set by reference
to the wage rates applying to a classification under the
awards applicable to doctors and nurses working in the VCCC. It simply made
point that nurses and doctors working in the VCCC are not paid any differently
from their ‘front line’ counterparts,
and it would be disharmonious
to take a different approach to paramedics and paramedic specialists.
APA submitted that NSWA has not established that “nurses and doctors
working in the VCCC are not paid any differently from
their ‘front
line’ counterparts”, however Dr Evens and Mr Elliot Williams did
give unchallenged evidence to this
effect. The APA also submitted that NSWA had
not established that there was any discord arising within the VCCC from the
arrangement by which VCCC Triage Clinicians are paid more than on-road
paramedics. NSWA accepted that this was so.
the circumstances I do not consider that the fact that VCCC Triage Clinicians
are currently paid more than “their front line
counterparts”,
whereas the same is not true for VCCC nurses or doctors, provides a sound basis
for the re-classification proposed
the fact that the work performed by VCCC Triage Clinicians is - now - comparable
to their on-road counterparts and not comparable
to ACCOs, does point in favour
of a re-assignment of the work level of the role as proposed by NSWA, to ensure
maintenance of the
internal relativities within the Paramedics Award,
specifically so as to ensure equal remuneration for work of equal or comparable
Paramedic – Level 3, Band 2 rate of pay is higher than the wage rates for
all of the Manager work levels in the Paramedics
Award. The Manager Work Levels
in the Paramedics Award “are intended to encompass employees who are
registered paramedics
and appointed to management roles”: chapeau to cl
5(i)-(l). Implicitly paramedics appointed to management roles have management
functions. VCCC Triage Clinicians do not have management functions in the sense
that they are not required to supervise the delivery
of functions within the
VCCC, unlike the proposed CTL role and other roles within the VCCC It is not
fair and reasonable for employees
performing the basic (albeit complex)
functions of secondary triage in the VCCC, given what this now entails as
discussed above,
to be paid more than the persons employed to supervise the safe
and effective delivery of those functions and to provide clinical
leadership to
clinicians and non-clinicians in the VCCC. Nor is fair and reasonable for
employees performing secondary triage in
the VCCC to be paid more than their
on-road colleagues who are exercising the same skills and judgment, albeit in a
different setting
and by a different modality.
Constraints
submitted that the VCCC is subject to funding constraints such that its
effectiveness would be compromised if VCCC Triage Clinicians
continued to be
paid as ACCOs. It submitted that if it were necessary to pay paramedic or
paramedic specialist VCCC Triage Clinicians
at the ACCO rate of pay, NSWA would
not be able to continue supporting the employment of paramedics in the VCCC,
because it would
otherwise have to compromise on the total number of clinicians
employed in the VCCC, which would make it difficult for the VCCC to
function. Ms Turner gave evidence that paramedics have a unique perspective
from their operational and clinical experience
which contributes to the
effectiveness of the VCCC model of care. NSWA therefore submitted that it is in
the public interest to allow
it to reclassify VCCC Triage Clinicians “to
develop a viable and sustainable VCCC model that includes
paramedics.”
relied on the following matters in support of this submission:
(1) the NSW Government allocated NSWA a fixed amount of funding to permanently
establish the VCCC ($94.5 million);
(2) that funding allocation:
(a) would be exhausted by the original proposal for the VCCC and the revised
proposal; and
(b) accordingly, is not sufficient to fund the original proposal or the revised
proposal if VCCC Triage Clinicians must be paid at
the ACCO rate of pay;
(3) no other source of funding has been made available to permanently establish
(4) a reduced number of clinicians would adversely affect the viability and
effectiveness of the VCCC; and
(5) the revised proposal reflects an appropriate mix of skills, knowledge and
experience across disciplines and supervision levels
to support the safe and
effective operation of the VCCC.
APA pointed out that that NSWA has not invoked the Economic Incapacity Principle
contained in the Award Making Principle, thereby
undermining its argument
regarding the lack of funding, although I note that it is difficult to see how
it would apply, on its terms,
to the circumstances of this case.
Unions argued that NSWA had not established that NSWA would not be able to
continue employing paramedics as VCCC Triage Clinicians
if it had to pay them at
ACCO rates. They referred to the following matters which Ms Turner accepted in
cross examination:
(1) NSWA will incur annual labour costs of $3,120,000 to employ the 24 FTE
proposed VCCC clinicians (assuming a projected annual
salary excluding on-costs
is approximately $130,000 per annum), as contemplated in the revised
(2) the current funding can accommodate that labour cost;
(3) if NSWA was required to pay the proposed VCCC clinicians at the same rate as
they are currently paid (that is, at the ACCO rate)
(assuming a projected annual
salary excluding on-costs is approximately $160,000 per annum), then it could
employ 19.5 FTE proposed
VCCC clinicians and maintain the annual labour costs of
$3,120,000;
Unions went on to submit that:
(1) there is no evidence that a reduction in the total number of clinicians
below the numbers proposed in the revised proposal would
make it difficult for
VCCC to fulfil its functions;
(2) Ms Turner’s evidence about the number of employees in the revised
proposal does not say that any reduction in headcount
below those numbers would
make it difficult for VCCC to fulfil its functions;
(3) under cross-examination, Ms Turner, having regard to the changes made by
NSWA between the original proposal (123 FTE) and the
revised proposal (120 FTE),
conceded that there is ‘flexibility’ to restructure NSWA’s
operations;
(4) there is no evidence as to why a pay cut of approximately $30,000 to both
Senior Clinicians and VCCC Triage Clinicians is required
immediately;
(5) by substituting some of the paramedic VCCC triage clinicians with nurse VCCC
clinicians, it is possible for NSWA to:
(a) continue to have a multidisciplinary VCCC;
(b) maintain the current annual labour costs (and thereby stay within the
current funding envelope);
(c) maintain the total number of clinicians proposed in the revised proposal;
(d) continue paying paramedic VCCC triage clinicians at their current rate of
pay (i.e. at the ACCO rate of pay);
(6) NSWA has failed to establish that no further funding is available, as it has
relied on hearsay evidence about this matter which
should be given no weight;
Jones v Dunkel
inference should be drawn by the failure to call the
person who was the source of Ms Turner’s evidence regarding the funding
allocation.
response to these submissions NSWA submitted:
(1) while the “financial pie could be cut in a different
, consideration must
be given to the operational reality of rostering paramedics in a shift
structure, such that it is not a simple
case of reducing the number of FTE VCCC
Triage Clinicians as there is a need for a “certain number head count of
to fill rosters with appropriate
(2) the Unions’ calculations do not include on-costs; and
(3) there is a need to ensure an appropriate skill mix in the VCCC and
NSWA’s proposal achieves the appropriate mix.
Ultimately,
counsel for NSWA submitted in closing oral submission that even if the financial
pie could be cut in a different way,
“that would not make it fair and
reasonable to pay VCCC Triage Clinicians at the ACCO rate for the reasons ...
otherwise advanced.”
Ultimately,
I do not consider that the evidence with respect to the asserted funding
constraints provides a sound basis, on its own,
to reduce the remuneration paid
to VCCC Triage Clinicians. Certainly, the Commission will take into account cost
when making and
varying awards as cost considerations will necessarily be
relevant in determining whether an award sets fair and reasonable conditions
employment, in the sense that such conditions must represent “a proper and
proportionate balance between the entitlements
afforded employees and the
interests of those employing
cost alone has not been regarded as a reason, of itself, to reject a claim
(usually for an increase, not a decrease in remuneration)
otherwise made out on
the evidence.
Indeed reducing
wages, particularly in the public sector, solely because of insufficient
funding, would be extraordinary.
Ms Turner was not shaken in her evidence that “NSWA would be unable to
continue to support the employment of paramedics
in the VCCC if the requirement
to maintain an elevated rate of pay
Experienced and
qualified staff within NSWA have determined what they consider to be the optimal
mix of skills, knowledge and experience
for the VCCC team, for the funding they
have available to them. There is a risk that this optimal multidisciplinary mix
be able to be achieved if the Paramedic Award is not varied to better
reflect the work value of the paramedic employees. This alone
would certainly
not provide a basis to reduce the wages of a cohort of employees in the VCCC.
However, in circumstances where the
nature of the work, skill and responsibility
required of a VCCC Triage Clinician and the conditions under which they perform
work has changed substantially since the role was assigned to Paramedic
– Level 3; and where it is demonstrable that the work
is comparable to
paramedics assigned to Paramedic – Levels 1 and 2, and not to Paramedic
– Level 3, the funding constraints,
together with these matters, establish
that it is in the public interest that the variation is made and that there is a
substantial
reason for the variation to be made. As counsel for NSWA
“It’s in the public interest for the important work of the VCCC to
continue with a diverse multidisciplinary cohort of
VCCC triage clinicians that
includes paramedics and paramedic specialists but also in a sustainable way and
with a classification
structure that appropriate reflects the nature, skill and
responsibility of the work involved relative to other employees under this
Other Relevant Matters
the basis that it may have had to establish a special case to vary the amount
pursuant to the Special Case Principle, in the event
that I was not persuaded
that the variation sought was ‘required’ within the meaning of cl
5(n), and/or because the matters
needed to be deal with as an Arbitrated Case
under Award Making Principle 9, NSWA pointed to the following further facts in
of its proposal:
(1) all interim VCCC Triage Clinicians since July 2023 have been, and continue
to be, appointed on a temporary, nine-week, roster-by-roster
basis, and have
retained their substantive positions;
(2) to date, only paramedic specialists, not non-specialist paramedics, have
been engaged as VCCC Triage Clinicians;
(3) paramedics who are not paramedic specialists, with at least five years of
experience and appropriate training in VCCC systems
and processes, are capable
of performing the role of a VCCC Triage Clinician; and
(4) the parties were in discussions about the proper classification of VCCC
Triage Clinicians before the commencement of the Paramedics
Award, and the
Unions have been consulted about NSWA’s proposals.
fact that all VCCC Triage Clinicians employed to date have been employed on
temporary contracts and have retained their substantive
positions and the fact
that there are currently only 3.28 FTE specialist paramedics appointed as VCCC
Triage Clinicians, pending
this decision, operates to ameliorate the adverse
impact a reduction in wages would otherwise have.
HSU submitted that “the potential consequences of NSWA’s proposal
are severe: having regard to the wage rates as at
1 July 2025, VCCC Clinicians
would receive an immediate and significant pay cut.” The reality is
however, that only around
four people will be directly affected by the
re-classification. Further, the strong indication is that those four specialist
currently employed as VCCC Triage Clinicians will more likely than
not, if they wish, be recruited to the role of CTL, with the result
decrease in wage they will experience will be in the order of $600, not $30,000.
Counsel for NSWA made the following submission
in closing:
“... the design of the proposal is intended so that paramedic specialists
currently in the VCCC will be able to apply for the
clinical team leader
position which is the higher level position paid at very close to the ACCO rate
of pay. ... the present intention
is that paramedic specialists will occupy the
clinical team leader positions.”
HSU referred to evidence given by Mr Asaeli Williams and Mr Alan Bradley, also a
VCCC Triage Clinician, to the effect that the
VCCC has encountered issues in the
recruitment and retention of paramedic staff in the VCCC, such that the proposed
reduction in
remuneration would have the effect of exacerbating these issues.
Factors which were identified by the witnesses contributing to these
(1) that the VCCC has no permanent clinician positions;
(2) the VCCC has a higher workload when compared to on-road paramedics; and
(3) staff in the VCCC are being required to meet KPIs for referring patients
away from departments.
evidence established however, that referral rates were not used as a performance
measure of individual staff members and, as discussed
above, the fact that VCCC
Triage Clinicians attend to more patients in day is merely a factor of the
different method by which they
attend to a patient. NSWA submitted in closing
submissions:
“the high turnover of VCCC triage clinicians reflects the fact that they
have only been on temporary roster by roster appointments
and have retained
their substantive positions. Mr Martin I think said there was - that the
proposal to cut pay, to put it that way,
would have the opposite effect of
supporting recruitment and retention, but, on the contrary, we say that what NSW
Ambulance’s
proposal will do is allow us to establish a permanent set of
VCCC triage clinician positions that are open to paramedics, not just
specialists and that are paid in a sustainable and appropriate way. Those are
things that are consistent with attraction
and retention, in my
submission.”
accept that submission.
Unions submitted that if I was against them, specifically if I find that NSWA
proposal “would reflect better internal
relativities”
do), I should allow the parties to ventilate this issue in bargaining and
specifically allow discussion as to phasing out
the higher classification to the
lower classification over time to mitigate the financial impact on employees.
am not prepared to allow that in circumstances where the parties have been in
consultation over the classification of VCCC Triage
Clinicians since late 2023
and have engaged in extensive conciliations about the issue before me, both
before and after the First
Decision. I consider that it is in the public
interest that permanent VCCC Triage Clinician positions be established without
is one further matter I should address. Pursuant to s 17(3)(c) the Commission
may vary an award during its nominal term if
it considers that it is not
contrary to the public interest (and there is a substantial reason to do so).
While in exercising the
power to vary an award, the Commission will have regard
to the public interest, as it is required to do pursuant to s 146(2) and
Making Principle 2.1.2, strictly the applicant for a variation does not need
establish that it is
the public interest to make the variation, only
that it is not
to the public interest for the variation to be
the HSU posited a basis upon which it could be said that the proposed variation
would be contrary to the public interest. It
contended, in closing oral
submissions that:
“Permitting the implementation of the revised proposal will have the exact
opposite effect of encouraging those particular
strategies to attract and retain
staff and will only exacerbate the recruitment and retention issues that
currently exist. Insofar
as the public interest point is concerned, it’s
in the public interest that employees maintain the real value of their wages
over time, but that proposal actively seeks to reduce those real wages and both
of these outcomes would be contrary to the public
to the HSU’s submissions, I consider that the variation of the Paramedics
Award to re-classify the VCCC Triage Clinicians
will improve the attraction and
retention of paramedics within the VCCC. While at a high level it may be said
that it is in the public
interest that employees maintain the real value of
their wages over time (a phrase usually applied to the need for wages to keep
pace with the cost of living), it may also be said to be in the public interest
that a public sector employer not pay its staff
more than it should, or,
expressed another way, that the remuneration paid to employees from tax payer
funds reflects a proper and
proportionate balance between the entitlements
afforded to employees and the interests of those employing them. I consider that
proposal achieves that balance in the
circumstances.
Conclusion regarding the proposal to re-classify
VCCC Triage Clinicians
the reasons discussed at length above I consider that the re-classification of
the VCCC Triage Clinician role from Paramedic –
Level 3, Band 2 to
Paramedic - Level 1 and Paramedic – Level 2 will set fair and reasonable
conditions of employment; that
NSWA has rebutted the presumption that the
current assignment of the role to Paramedic - Level 3, Band 2, provides for fair
and reasonable
conditions of employment; and that the proposed Award variation
is not contrary to the public interest and that there is a substantial
make the variation, pursuant to the requirements of s
The Proposal to Classify CTLs as Manager – Level
The CTL will fulfil an important clinical support and supervision
submitted that the assignment of the proposed CTL position to Manager –
Level 1 and the payment of the CCA and the SOA,
would provide fair and
reasonable conditions of employment as the position involves leadership and
supervisory work, as well as clinical
relied on the following matters in support of this submission:
(1) CTLs will provide direct clinical supervision, leadership and support to the
VCCC and the wider NSWA workforce (through the Clinical
Advice Line), as well as
performing secondary triage;
(2) replacing the Senior Clinician and some VCCC Triage Clinician roles with CTL
roles will:
(a) provide a greater span of clinical support to the VCCC team, including in
dealing with cases requiring an upgraded response;
(b) allow for a better delineation of tasks, functions and responsibilities
between VCCC Triage Clinicians and CTLs; and
(c) provide a career progression option for VCCC Triage Clinicians.
matters were not directly contested by the Unions.
will not perform an educational role or perform some of the work currently
performed by Senior Clinicians
I discussed at [
above, I understand that the Unions agree that the CTL role is a new position
that NSWA proposes to classify for the first time,
rather than the role being a
re-classification of the VCCC Senior Clinician role. Instead, the Unions
contend that the tasks to
be allocated to the CTL role are sufficiently similar
to those undertaken by VCCC Senior Clinicians, who are assigned to work level
Paramedic – Level 4, Band 2, such that NSWA has not established that the
assignment to work level Manager – Level 1 will
result in fair and
reasonable conditions of employment.
NSWA is not proposing to re-classify VCCC Senior Clinician
would seem clear from the evidence that the inital assignment by NSWA of the
VCCC Senior Clinician role to work level Paramedic
– 4, Band 2, was, like
the assignment of the VCCC Triage Clinician role, ultimately not justified in
light of the nature of
the work, skills and responsibility ultimately undertaken
by VCCC Senior Clinicians. Ms Turner gave evidence that the Senior Clinician
role was initially envisaged to play a larger part in ongoing education delivery
as well as clinical governance, data analysis and
reporting, however according
to Ms Turner, that is not how it has worked out in practice, with those
functions being suitably covered
by other roles within the VCCC. Curiously
however, I note that a position description for the Senior Clinician role dated
2022 tendered in evidence does not include any description of these
asserted functions as key accountabilities. Indeed, there is
no reference in the
position description to the word “education”, let alone a reference
to a requirement to develop,
deliver or manage education programmes.
Unions submitted that the tasks that will be performed by CTLs are substantially
the same as those currently performed by Senior
Clinicians, including:
(1) staffing the clinical advice line;
(2) undertaking triage and interhospital surveillance;
(3) carrying out clinical leadership and supervision, including sometimes
managing performance issues;
(4) doing joint calls with new recruits as part of their training to give them
practical guidance; and
(5) conducting random audits on recorded calls to give feedback to VCCC Triage
Clinicians to help improve their performance.
largely did not cavil with this submission, but instead stressed that:
(1) the nature of interhospital surveillance by CTLs will be reduced from that
which was undertaken by Senior Clinicians;
(2) CTLs will not be required to undertake clinical governance, data analysis
and reporting, whereas Senior Clinicians were (although
as I have noted, this
appears to be contestable);
(3) Senior Clinicians are not, and CTLs will not be required to be, involved in
developing, delivering or managing theoretical and
paramedical competency-based
education and training programs, which is the role of a Paramedic Educator under
the Paramedic Award.
Rather, the Senior Clinician role is primarily one of
clinical support and leadership;
(4) despite having been classified at the work level to which Paramedic
Educators are assigned, Senior Clinicians do not perform
an educational role as
described in the Paramedic Educator classification and CTL’s will not be
required to perform an educational
(5) although CTLs will be expected to act as a preceptor or mentor from time to
time, that expectation is common to on-road paramedics
and part of their role.
seems to me that there is in fact a great deal of similarity between the role of
Senior Clinician as it has been, and is, performed
and the proposed new role of
CTL. Both roles involve clinical support and leadership. The main difference it
seems to me from the
Senior Clinician role description dated 25 March 2022 and
the draft role description of the CTL is that the former had responsibility
“proactively supervise
all clinical roles within the VCCC
that all Triple Zero (000) calls receive an appropriate response classification
and that clinical advice reflect Ambulance
policies and is in accordance with
best practice principles”, whereas the CTL does not expressly have such a
broad responsibility
and instead will “work within a team of CTLs who will
supervise the safe and effective delivery of the [VCCC’s] functions,
providing clinical leadership to other clinicians and on-clinicians performing
their roles.” As counsel for NSWA submitted
in opening, the increase in
numbers of clinical supervisors, will ensure the supervisory load is shared
appropriately.
short, a comparison of the proposed CTL role with the existing Senior Clinician
role, strongly suggests that the roles are indeed
very similar.
the table reproduced at [
] shows there is a difference of over $40,000 between
the remuneration payable to a Senior Clinician and a CTL. There are currently
some 7.39 FTE Senior Clinicians and the evidence does not establish what is
expected to happen to these employees when the position
is abolished. While
there was evidence that Senior Clinicians will be eligible to apply for the CTL
role and there will some 25 FTE
CTLs - more than enough for the current VCCC
Triage Clinicians and current Senior Clinicians to occupy, a Senior Clinician
a CTL role will experience a significant drop in pay.
NSWA did not rely on the significant changes to the structure and operations of
the VCCC since it was first established to
support a reduction in remuneration
to be paid to persons undertaking many, if not all, of the tasks currently
undertaken by Senior
Clinicians, it does seem to me that logically the same
argument as attended the re-classification of VCCC Triage Clinicians must
equally apply to Senior Clinicians and the proposed CTL position. Nevertheless,
there is a real question as to whether, in all the
circumstances, NSWA has
established that the assignment of the role of CTL to Manager – Level 1
will provide fair and reasonable
conditions of employment.
Maintenance of Relativities
submitted that paying CTL’s the same as Paramedic Educator’s would
distort relativities. It relied on the following
facts in support of this
submission:
(1) the total pay for CTLs who are paramedic specialists will be almost
equivalent to an ACCO;
(2) in contrast, Senior Clinicians are presently paid more than:
(a) their direct manager (Duty Manager VCCC);
(b) employees who actually perform the role of Paramedic Educator (having regard
to shift loadings); and
(c) several higher-level managers including (at Year 2) the most senior manager
of the VCCC, noting that those other managers are
paid under a different but
related award; and
(d) the nature of the work to be performed by a CTL, and currently performed by
Senior Clinicians, is comparable in nature, skill
and responsibility to
positions in the Manager – Level 1 work level.
will be observed that the last point relied upon expressly acknowledged that the
work to be performed by a CTL is currently performed
by Senior Clinicians.
in relation to this last point, Station Officer’s are classified at
Manager – Level 1. According to Ms Turner
the CTL role is comparable to
the Station Officer role, albeit with a more clinical focus as opposed to the
logistical and operational
nature of the Station Officer. The Unions took issue
with this assessment. According to Ms Richards the CTL role is different and
significantly more challenging that the roles under the Manager - Level 1 work
level including Station Officers. She explained that:
“... SOs carry out a wide range of administrative tasks and communicate
messages to teams. If a SO and Paramedic Specialist
are on the same job, it is
the Paramedic Specialist who is the clinical lead on the job.”
does seem to me that the internal relativities within the Paramedic Award, are
such that it is untenable for the CTL position to
be classified at Paramedic
– Level 4. It is also clear that the role should be assigned at a work
level within the Manager
Levels given the supervisory and leadership aspect of
the role. However, the role should not be equivalent to the role’s direct
manager, the Duty Manager VCCC, who is assigned Manager – Level 3.
question therefore is, should the CTL be assigned work level Manager –
Level 1 or Level 2, to ensure appropriate relativities?
Constraints
repeated the submissions it made in respect of the proposal to re-classify VCCC
Triage Clinicians in respect of the VCCC’s
funding constraints and that
its effectiveness would be compromised if CTLs were classified as Paramedic
Conclusion regarding the proposal to classify CTL at
Manager – Level 1
found the question of the classification of the proposed position of CTL to
Manager – Level 1 to be a very difficult one.
The parties did not give
this aspect of the matter nearly as much time or attention as they did to the
argument as to whether the
position of VCCC Triage Clinician should be
re-classified. The Unions paid little attention to the actual nature of the
work, skill
and responsibility of the role, as set out in the position
description and how it truly compared to the role of Senior Clinician
moreover, other permanent roles within NSWA; and NSWA largely addressed the
issue at a high level, no doubt because it assumed
and/or hoped that it did not
have to establish the usual matters required for an award variation, in
circumstances where it had created
a new role with “Team Leader” in
its title, and where cl 5(i)((ii)(1) of the Paramedics Award lists “Team
as a Manager – Level 1 position.
balance, and not without some real misgivings, I am satisfied that the nature of
the work, skill and responsibility of the CTL
role as demonstrated by the
differences that were established between the Senior Clinician role and the
proposed CTL role; the substantial
changes that have occurred within the VCCC
since it and the role of Senior Clinician was established; and the
classification relativities
within the Paramedic Award are such that the
assignment of the CTL role to Manger – Level 1, provides for fair and
conditions of employment; and that the proposed Award variation is
not contrary to the public interest. Further, the funding constraints
delay in establishing permanent positions in the VCCC due to the parties being
unable to come to agreement, confirm that
it is in the public interest that the
variation to the Paramedics Award proposed by NSWA in respect of the CTL
position should be
made and that there is a substantial reason for the variation
to be made. To the extent necessary, I consider that these matters
constitute a
special case within the meaning of the Special Case Principle such as to justify
the making of the variation to the
Recommendations and Orders
misgivings expressed in the preceding paragraph, together with the significant
reduction in remuneration persons currently employed
in the VCCC as Senior
Clinicians may experience, have moved me to make the following recommendations
and directions pursuant to s
136(1)(a) of the
(1) I direct New South Wales Ambulance to conduct a review at least three months
before the expiry of the nominal term of the NSW
Ambulance Paramedics (State)
Award 2023, to ascertain whether the assignment of the position of Clinical Team
Leader to work level
Manager - Level 1 continues to deliver fair and reasonable
conditions of employment for that position and to seek input from and
with the Australian Paramedics Association (NSW) and the Health Services Union
NSW with respect to that review.
(2) I recommend that persons employed as Senior Clinicians in the VCCC as at the
date of this decision, and who have been so employed
for a period of at least
six months, continue to be engaged by NSWA in the role of Senior Clinician in
the VCCC, if the employee
so wishes, on the basis that they shall continue to be
paid at the rates paid to a Senior Clinician immediately before the delivery
this decision, until such time as the rates paid to a Clinical Team Leader under
the NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award 2023
or any successor of that award,
exceeds the rates paid to a Senior Clinician immediately before the delivery of
this decision.
make the following further directions:
(1) The parties are to advise the Commission by no later than 4pm on 3 October
2025 whether they consent, in light of this decision,
to the variation of the
NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award 2023 (Paramedics Award) in the form set
out in paragraph [
of this decision and if so, the date upon which the variation shall take
(2) If the parties consent to the variation of the Paramedics Award in the form
set out in paragraph [
] of this decision and the date upon which the
variation shall take effect:
(a) the Paramedics Award will be so varied on 7 October 2025, with effect from
the agreed date and these proceedings will be otherwise
dismissed; and
(b) the Respondent is to file by not later than 4pm on 7 October 2025:
(i) a variation schedule setting out the variations to be made to the Paramedics
(ii) a clean copy of the Paramedics Award.
(3) If the parties do not consent to the variation of the Paramedics Award in
the form set out in paragraph [
] or are not agreed as to the date on which the
variation is to come into effect, the matter will be listed for directions on 8
2025 at 3pm.
Janet McDonald
Commissioner
26 September 2025 - Minor formatting amendment made to coversheet
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
4(20)-(24).
Submissions of APA dated 10 June 2025, fn
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
27(48)-(49).
Tcpt, 7 July 2025,
p 28(35)-(38).
See, eg, Oxford
English Dictionary (online) (required, adj.; requisite, adj.). See also Princes
Linen Services Pty Ltd v United Workers’
[2021] FWCFB 1903
(Catanzariti VP, Saunders DP and Lee
See, eg, Re Pastoral
Industry (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 27
(2001) 104 IR 168
193-94 [114] (Walton VP, Schmidt J, Grayson DP and Connor
See, eg, Re City of Sydney
[2014] NSWIRComm 49
(2014) 247 IR 386
(Walton J, Stanton C and Newall
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
4(31)-(34).
Tcpt, 7 July 2025,
p 3(28)-(30).
Section 136
was amended on 3 July 2025 pursuant to the Industrial Relations and Other
Legislation Amendment (Workplace Protections)
Act 2025 (NSW), Sch 1, [7], and s
136(1)(d) became s
IR Act, Schedule
Tcpt, 7 July 2025,
p 53(38)-(39).
Wales Nurses and Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
Tcpt, 7 July 2025,
p 3(40)-(48).
Tcpt, 7 July
2025, pp 27(50) –
The words in brackets
were contained in a
New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
Princes Linen
Services at [29]
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
29(43)-(44).
Ex NSWA 2, Annexure
Respondent’s
Outline of Submissions in Reply dated 24 June 2025 at
Tcpt, 2 July 2025, pp
31(41)-32(24).
Tcpt, 3 July
2025, p 28(18)-(46).
[26] and [28].
Employees (Police Officers - 2017) Award and Paramedics and Control Centre
Officers (State) Award
[2021] NSWIRComm 1040
(per Constant CC, Murphy C
and Sloan C); Re Crown Employees (Police Officers - 2009) Award at [79] (Walton
P, Staff J and Tabaa
Hospitals Nurses (State) Award (No 4)
(2003) 131 IR 17
Ex NSWA 2, Turner
Tcpt, 2 July 2025, p
50(6)-(16).
Tcpt, 3 July
2025, p 12(26)-(30).
Paramedics registered prior to 2018 may have either an undergraduate degree or
vocational diploma in paramedicine, while paramedics
registered after 2018 are
required to have an undergraduate degree in
paramedicine.
Turner, [18] – [19].
Tcpt, 3 July 2025, p
Tcpt, 7 July 2025,
p 13(20)-(21).
Morrison, [12] – [13].
Tcpt, 2 July 2025, p
11(8)-(17).
Tcpt, 2 July
2025, p 11(26)-(39).
Evidence Summary Tables, Table 1, Row
Ex APA 12, Quigley,
O’Riordan, [53].
7 Jul7 2025, p 15(35)
Tcpt, 7 July
2025, p 18(11)-(12).
July 2025, p 16(49)-(50).
Tcpt, 7 July 2025 p
18(12)-(14).
City of Sydney
Wages/Salary Award 2014
[2014] NSWIRComm 49
; 247 IR 386 at
(Non-Government Pre Schools) (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 335
Schmidt J). See also Re Health and Community Employees Psychologists (State)
(2001) 109 IR 458
at [52] (per Wright P, Hungerford J, Sams DP and McKenna
Ex NSWA 2, Turner
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p
19(28)-(33).
Tcpt, 7 July
2025, p 63(20-(30).
July 2025, p 52(41)-(42).
Tcpt, 7 July 2025, p 52(20)-(27).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (754 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter