URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/286.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Airparts Australia Pty Ltd t/as Airparts Auto Trading Concept v Frontline Smash Repairs Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 286; (11 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Airparts Australia Pty Ltd t/as Airparts Auto Trading Concept v Frontline
Smash Repairs Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 286
Hearing Date(s):
8 July 2025
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Appeal Panel
G K Burton SC, Senior Member
M Tyson, Senior Member
(1) Leave to appeal (to the extent that leave is required)
(2) Appeal dismissed.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW – consumer guarantees – supply of goods –
alleged non-fitting tyre rims not fit for specified purpose
and not matching
description – alleged proxy purchasing service – alleged compliance
in sourcing tyre rims with consumer
instructions – service not supply of
goods – service alleged to have been performed in accordance with
instructions –
Australian Consumer Law (NSW) ss 55, 56, 60
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Carr v Finance Corporation of Australia Ltd [No 1]
[1981] HCA 20
(1981) 147 CLR
CEO of Customs v AMI Toyota Ltd
[2000] FCA 1343
(2000) 102 FCR 578 (Full
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Cominos v Di Rico
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
Damico v Secretary,
Department of Customer Service
[2025] NSWCATAP 109
Ericon Buildings PL v
Owners SP 96597
[2020] NSWCATAP 265
Ferraro v DBN Holdings Aust PL t/as
Sports Auto Group
[2015] FCA 1127
FTB v Children’s Guardian
NSWCATAP 174
Hanave PL v Wine Nomad PL
[2022] NSWCATAP 361
[2023] NSWSC
Health Care Complaints Commission v Robinson
[2022] NSWCA 164
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Palme
[2003] HCA 56
(2003) 216 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
(2013) 249 CLR 332
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 264 CLR
[2018] HCA 30
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
O’Keefe v Integral Corporate Property PL
[2020] NSWCATAP
Orr v Cobar Management PL
[2020] NSWCCA 202
[2017] NSWCATAP
Pholi v Wearne
[2014] NSWCATAP 78
Prakash v Health Care Complaints
[2006] NSWCA 153
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP
Safi v Heartland Motors PL t/as Heartland Chrysler
[2016] NSWCATAP
Sanofi v Parke Davis PL [No 1]
(1982) 149 CLR 147
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) PL
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247 (CA)
Strang v Steiner
[2019] NSWCA
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
(2011) 243 CLR 181
Wilson v Chan & Naylor Parramatta Pty Ltd atf
Chan & Naylor Paramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Airparts Australia Pty Ltd t/as Airparts Auto Trading Concept
(Appellant)
Frontline Smash Repairs Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-Represented)
Respondent (Self-Represented)
File Number(s):
2025/00113036
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal of NSW
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
24 February 2025
S Sutherland, Member
File Number(s):
2024/00358942
REASONS FOR DECISION
Outcome of appeal
have decided, for the reasons below, to refuse leave to appeal (to the extent
that leave is required) and to dismiss the appeal.
leave for legal representation on the appeal appears to have been sought and the
parties represented themselves at the appeal hearing.
We have made no costs
Background, issues, procedure, primary decision
their application filed 27 September 2024 the respondents to the appeal (who
were then the applicants, Mr Zhu and Frontline) (the
consumers) sought from the
appellant (Airparts) a refund of $7,000 paid for tyre rims (interchangeably
called wheels in the parties’
documents) to retrofit to a Porsche 981
Boxster, on the bases that the rims supplied did not match the description on
the invoice
and “The seller misrepresented that the supplier’s goods
(the rims) would fit the car. However, the wheel’s measurements
far out that it would not fit on the vehicle”.
claim was based on alleged breach of the consumer guarantees in the
Australian Consumer Law
(Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth)) that were made part of NSW law by
Fair Trading
(FTA) under the name
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
(ACLNSW). The guarantees invoked were those in respect of supply of goods, being
that the goods supplied did not match the description
given on the invoice and
by the supplier’s representative and were not fit for the disclosed
purpose: ACLNSW ss 55, 56.
the primary decision made on 24 February 2025 the primary member ordered
Airparts, in order 1, to pay $7,000 to Frontline on or
before 3 March 2025 and
in order 2 ordered Mr Zhu, on payment of the $7,000, to return the used rims to
order 1 and with a heading of “Details of the money order”
“1. Refund for incorrect used rims Porsche 981
Carrera S OEM Rims being provided. Not in accordance with contract and not in
compliance with
of [ACLNSW] $7,000.”
3 and 4 read:
“3. The Tribunal is satisfied the parties have
been notified of today’s hearing and had an opportunity to be
“4. [Airparts] did not appear and the Tribunal considers it appropriate
to deal with the matter in the absence of [Airparts]”.
then appeared:
“Reasons for decision:
Oral reasons were given.”
apparently made an unsuccessful application to set aside the primary decision
under para 9(1)(b) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation
(NSW) (NCAT Regulation), which provides as
“In addition to a power that is expressly conferred
on the Tribunal by the Act or enabling legislation to set aside or vary
decisions, the Tribunal may order that a decision it has made that determines
proceedings be set aside or varied if— ...
(b) the decision was made in
the absence of a party and the Tribunal is satisfied that the party’s
absence has resulted in
the party’s case not being adequately put to the
evidence revealed, even if there was no express finding in the materials made
available to us, that the Tribunal had jurisdiction
over what was a consumer
claim in respect of supply of goods (or a service) in NSW (all parties had NSW
addresses) to a person who
acquired the good or service, under monetary limit:
appeal was filed within time on 21 March 2025. The grounds are dealt with
25 March 2025 an interim ex parte stay of the money order pending appeal was
refused since it was only a short time till a contested
hearing on the stay;
preparation directions for that stay hearing were made.
16 April 2025 the stay application was dismissed with oral reasons and
preparation directions were made for documents to be filed
and served for the
appeal hearing. Those directions, as usual, required a party seeking to rely on
what occurred at the primary hearing
to file and serve a recording obtained from
the Tribunal together with extracts of transcript from the recording that were
to be relied upon, or a full transcript. The directions also required a
party to file and serve whatever documents it wished to rely
on at the appeal.
There is no transfer of the primary proceedings file and documents to the Appeal
Panel. There was an extension
of time on 16 June 2025 for compliance with those
directions.
party filed or served the sound recording or any transcript, nor any part of the
primary proceedings file that dealt with
the set-aside application by Airparts.
Accordingly, the reasons for refusing that application are formally not before
us, nor are
the oral reasons beyond those under primary order 1 if they were
party had applied under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) (NCAT Act) for a written version of the oral reasons given as
part of the primary decision.
during the appeal hearing the parties agreed in substance to the following as
relevant to the set-aside decision: Airparts
supplied only the receipt for
emergency treatment at Sydney Adventist Hospital at 9.09am on day of final
hearing of the father-in-law
of Airparts’ sole director Mr Lee; no medical
report was supplied; the hearing was deferred until 10am but no word from
was received. The consumers submitted that Mr Lee had time to ring the
Tribunal and arrange a substitute; Mr Lee said he was the
only one at home when
his father-in-law became ill and that the father-in-law was a priority.
the outset of the appeal hearing we spent some time identifying with the parties
which documents, in the mass of often-repetitive
material, were in the
consumers’ documents before the primary member, which documents were in
Airparts’ documents at
the time of the primary hearing and which documents
were developed or added after the primary hearing.
to the absence of transcript, there was no clear indication the degree to which
the primary member looked at Airparts’
documents despite the party’s
there was significant duplication of important documents between the parties. In
the consumers’ documents which were
also substantially in Airparts’
documents appeared the following which were of central significance:
(1) The Airparts invoice dated 30 May 2024 addressed to the corporate respondent
(Frontline) with a narrative and pricing referring
only to the rims and to tyres
(the latter being supplied and fitted within NSW since the old tyres had been
removed before the rims
were shipped from Hong Kong). The rear tyres were
specified as 295/30/20 sized wheels and the rims as 991 Carrera OEM rims 20x8.5
+51. There was no mention of service fees or of rear wheel spacers or any
requirement for the service of fitting rear wheel spacers.
(2) Communication from Mr Zhu to Mr Lee on 25 May 2024 1.05pm “But fitting
for 981” in response to photographs of rims,
followed by “If you can
source it for us let me know”.
(3) Mr Lee’s response “Yeah possible. The 991 Carrera S OEM rims are
20” and cast though, while it looks good,
they’re much heavier and
you’ll sacrifice quite a lot of comfort over 19””.”After
dialogue that Mr
Lee didn’t have the same style in 19” and OEM, Mr
Zhu said “I’ll take the 20”.
(4) On 9 June 2024 Mr Zhu asked “Hey Eddie u mentioned these are 991
wheels but should fit 981?” and Mr Lee responded
“Yes they’re
from 991 Carrera and will fit 981”.
(5) On 19 June 2024 Mr Lee responded to a query from Mr Zhu that Mr Lee owed Mr
Zhu photos.
(6) On 30 June 2024, in an email announcing the arrival of the shipment,
Airparts referred to the rims as +51 and +52.
(7) On 18 July 2024, after the rims landed, the consumers said this was the
first time that, in a call from Mr Zhu to Mr Lee, Mr
Lee advised that, for the
rims to fit the 981, wheel spacers were required, which had not been part of the
order. In a text exchange
Mr Zhu asked “Hi Eddie, I specifically checked
if those fit the 981 so I don’t think there is an issue right” and
Mr Lee responded “100% guarantee there is no issue to fit on 981 Boxster
Ray we guarantee”.
Principles governing appeals from the Consumer and Commercial
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act)
states, in respect of Division decisions:
“Any internal appeal
may be made:
(a) in the case of an interlocutory decision of the Tribunal
at first instance—with the leave of the Appeal Panel, and
(b) in the case of any other kind of decision (including an
ancillary decision) of the Tribunal at first instance—as of right
question of law, or with the leave of the Appeal Panel, on any other
12 of Schedule 4 to the NCAT Act states:
An Appeal Panel may grant
leave under section 80 (2) (b) of this Act for an internal appeal against a
Division decision only if the
Appeal Panel is satisfied the appellant may have
suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice because:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair
and equitable, or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against
the weight of evidence, or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that
was not reasonably available at the time the proceedings under appeal
dealt with).
Division decision is a primary decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division.
The primary decision here is such a decision.
summary, internal appeals may generally be made as of right on a question of
law, and otherwise with leave (that is, the permission)
of the Appeal
certain decisions require leave for any ground of appeal whether or not it
involves a question of law. Section 4(1) of the
NCAT Act contains the following
relevant definitions to the nature of the decision from which an appeal is
“ancillary decision of the Tribunal means a decision
made by the Tribunal under legislation (other than an interlocutory decision
the Tribunal) that is preliminary to, or consequential on, a decision
determining proceedings, including—
(a) a decision concerning whether the Tribunal has
(b) a decision concerning the awarding of costs in
proceedings.”
“‘interlocutory decision’ of the Tribunal means a decision
made by the Tribunal under legislation concerning any
(a) the granting of a stay or adjournment,
(b) the prohibition or restriction of the disclosure,
broadcast or publication of matters,
(c) the issue of a summons,
(d) the extension of time for any matter (including for the
lodgment of an application or appeal),
(e) an evidential matter,
(f) the disqualification of any member,
(g) the joinder or misjoinder of a party to proceedings,
(h) the summary dismissal of proceedings,
(h1) the granting of leave for a person to represent a party
to proceedings,
(i) any other interlocutory issue before the
Ericon Buildings PL v Owners SP 96597
[2020] NSWCATAP 265
Appeal Panel, in the course of refusing leave to appeal against a procedural
order, focused at [9]-[10] on the required connection
of an ancillary decision
with a decision determining proceedings, not a decision which the party alleged
should have been made, but
was not made, to determine the proceedings. In that
case, the orders under appeal noted a consent to judgment that had not been
by the applicant and set a timetable for a foreshadowed transfer
application on which the transfer could be contested on the basis
there was a
tender of the maximum amount of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Those orders
were found to be interlocutory in character
and therefore to require leave to
appeal under s 80(2)(a) of the NCAT Act. Leave to appeal was refused at
[13]-[18] because no decision
that was said to be in error had actually been
made; “for completeness”, among other matters the Panel expressed
view at [19]-[27] that the Tribunal would be entitled to take into account
the possibility that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
on a work order was not
limited to a value of $500,000 and at [28]-[36] that there was no tender of the
Tribunal’s maximum
characterisation is consistent with the orthodox test, implicit in
the statutory definitions cited above, that an interlocutory decision
finally determine the rights of the parties in respect of the relief claimed in
the proceedings: see, eg,
Sanofi v Parke Davis PL [No 1]
(1982) 149 CLR
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
recently revisited in
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
NSWCATAP 204
esp at [30]-[32], the Appeal Panel set out at [13] a
non-exclusive list of errors of law that can amount to questions of law on the
basis of existing appellate authority:
(1) Whether there has been a failure to provide proper reasons where they are
(2) Whether the Tribunal identified the wrong issue or asked the wrong
(3) Whether a wrong principle of law had been applied;
(4) Whether there was a failure to afford procedural fairness;
(5) Whether the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant (that is,
mandatory) considerations;
(6) Whether the Tribunal took into account an irrelevant consideration;
(7) Whether there was no evidence to support a finding of fact; and
(8) Whether the decision is so unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker
would make it.
failure to take into account a “clearly articulated and substantial
argument” is a constructive failure to exercise
error of law and so constitutes a question of law:
Alexandria Landfill PL v
Transport for
[2020] NSWCA 165
Prakash v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Robinson
[2022] NSWCA 164
into account an irrelevant consideration or not taking into account a relevant
consideration includes not making a finding
on an ingredient or central issue
required to make out a claimed entitlement to relief: see
CEO of Customs v
AMI Toyota Ltd
[2000] FCA 1343
(2000) 102 FCR 578 (Full
[2000] FCA 1343
applying the statement of principle in
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
question of mixed fact and law, such as an alleged error in applying legal
principle to the facts, is not a question of law unless
the relevant facts are
disputed facts relevant to the
matter in dispute, or the question of law does
not depend on facts not found:
FTB v Children’s Guardian
NSWCATAP 174
O’Keefe v Integral Corporate Property PL
[2020] NSWCATAP 76
Wilson v Chan & Naylor Parramatta Pty Ltd atf
Chan & Naylor Paramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
Cobar Management PL
[2020] NSWCCA 202
Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force v White
[2025] NSWCATAP 30
v Secretary, Department of Customer Service
[2025] NSWCATAP 109
authority cited in those decisions. However, as noted by Basten AJ in
v Albulario
[2025] NSWSC 9
, this general requirement for purity does
not stand in the way of an Appeal Panel making necessary findings of fact about
the composition
of the primary tribunal or conduct of the primary hearing when
the question of law concerns a denial of procedural fairness.
of reasons will vary according to the nature of the determination and of the
determining body:
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
[2019] NSWCA 231
, 100 NSWLR 578 at
esp at [77]. In relation to
adequacy of reasons, it is essential to expose the reasons for resolving a point
critical to the contest
between the parties:
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings)
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247 (CA)
at 259, 270-272, 280-281;
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Palme
[2003] HCA 56
216 CLR 212
Wainohu v NSW
(2011) 243 CLR 181
at [58]; NCAT Act s
appellate review of the exercise of a discretion, a reviewing court or tribunal
must be cognisant that reasonable minds may differ
on the correct exercise of
discretion from alternatives all of which are within the range of reason:
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 264 CLR
[2018] HCA 30
, [20], [26], [30]-[32], [43]-[45], [48]-[49],
[55]-[56], [85]-[87], [127]-[128], [153]-[155]. That the reviewing court or
may have exercised the discretion with a different outcome is not
sufficient to upset the exercise of discretion:
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
(2013) 249 CLR 332
[2013] HCA 18
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
at 505 there were
identified errors of law in exercise of the discretion that raise a question of
law in respect of the exercise:
“It must appear that some
error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge acts upon a wrong
principle, if he
allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him,
if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some material
consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court
may exercise its own discretion in substitution
for his if it has the materials
for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has reached the result
embodied in his order,
but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly
unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the court of first
instance. In such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be
discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a
substantial wrong has in fact
Strang v Steiner
[2019] NSWCA 143
, [101], [137]-[145],
[193], the NSW Court of Appeal explained that inadequacy of reasons either
constituted a further distinct error
which vitiated the exercise of discretion
or was within the vitiating errors of the kinds identified - wrong principle
extraneous or irrelevant matters, mistaking the facts and failing to
take into account a material consideration. If these were present,
necessary to show also a manifest error in result where it does not appear how
the result was arrived at, but that was
a separate basis for vitiating the
exercise of discretion.
circumstances in which the Appeal Panel may grant leave to appeal from decisions
made in the Consumer and Commercial Division
are limited by para 12(1) of Sch 4
to the NCAT Act. In such cases, as set out above, the Appeal Panel must be
satisfied that the
appellant may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of
justice on the basis that:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and equitable; or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the weight of
evidence; or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt with).
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
, the Appeal Panel stated at [76] and
[79] that a substantial miscarriage of justice for the purposes of cl 12(1) in
Sch 4 to the
NCAT Act may have been suffered where:
...there was a “significant possibility” or a “chance which
was fairly open” that a different
and more favourable result would have
been achieved for the appellant had the relevant circumstance in para (a) or (b)
not occurred
or if the fresh evidence under para (c) had been before the
Tribunal at first instance. ...
[79] In order to show that a party has been deprived of a
significant possibility
chance which
was fairly open
” of achieving a different and more favourable
result because of one of the circumstances referred to in cl 12(1)(a), (b) or
(c), it will be generally be necessary for the party to explain what its case
would have been and show that it was fairly arguable.
If the party fails to do
this then, even if there has been a denial of procedural fairness, the Appeal
Panel may conclude that it
is not satisfied that any substantial miscarriage of
justice may have occurred - see the general discussion in
[2013] NSWSC 1890
and following concerning the
corresponding provisions of the [statutory predecessor to CATA (s 68 of the
Consumer Trader and Tenancy
Tribunal Act)] and especially at [46] and
if an appellant from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division has
satisfied the requirements of para 12(1) of Sch 4
to the NCAT Act, the Appeal
Panel must still consider whether it should exercise its discretion to grant
leave to appeal under s
Pholi v Wearne
[2014] NSWCATAP
Collins v Urban
, the Appeal Panel stated at [84] that
ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal only in matters that
“(a) issues of principle;
(b) questions of public importance or matters of administration or policy
which might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of going beyond
merely what is arguable, or an error that is plain and readily
apparent which is
central to the Tribunal’s decision and not merely peripheral, so that it
would be unjust to allow the finding
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and clearly mistaken;
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact finding process in such an
unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to produce
result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
to the specific grounds in cl 12(1)(a) and (b) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act, in
the Appeal Panel
“[77] As to the particular grounds in
cl 12(1)(a) and (b), without seeking to be exhaustive in any way, the
authorities establish
1 If there has been a denial of procedural fairness the
decision under appeal can be said to have been “
not fair and
Hutchings v CTTT
[2008] NSWSC 717
Atkinson v Crowley
[2011] NSWCA 194
2 The decision under appeal can be said to be
against the weight of evidence
” (which is an expression also
used to describe a ground upon which a jury verdict can be set aside) where the
evidence in its
totality preponderates so strongly against the conclusion found
by the tribunal at first instance that it can be said that the conclusion
not one that a reasonable tribunal member could reach -
Calin v The
Greater Union Organisation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 23
(1991) 173 CLR 33
Mainteck Services Pty Limited v Stein Heurtey
[2013] NSWSC 266
question of what constitutes significant new evidence not reasonably available
at the time the proceedings under appeal were being
dealt with under the ground
in para 12(1)(c) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act was considered by an Appeal Panel in
[2017] NSWCATAP 26.
There the Appeal Panel stated at
Owners - SP 76269 v
Draybi Bros Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 29
the Appeal Panel stated at [109] in
connection with cl 12(1)(c) of Schedule 4 to the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act
‘In order to fall within this paragraph the appellant must be able to
point to evidence which:
(1) is significant; and
(2) has arisen and is new in the sense that it was not
reasonably available at the time the proceedings below were being
Leisure Brothers Pty Ltd v Smith
NSWCATAP 11
the Appeal Panel stated at [40 ]:
‘The meaning of this clause was considered by the Appeal Panel in
Al-Daouk v Mr Pine Pty Ltd t/as Furnco Bankstown
[2015] NSWCATAP 111.
– [24] the Appeal Panel said:
‘23 Unlike the WIM Act, the expression
“reasonably available” is not qualified by the words “to the
This difference suggests that the test of whether evidence is
reasonably available is not to be considered by reference to any subjective
explanation from the party seeking leave but, rather, by applying an objective
test and considering whether the evidence in question
was unavailable because no
person could have reasonably obtained the evidence. For example, in
76269 v Draybi Bros
[2014] NSWCATAP 20
the Appeal Panel refused
leave because, although the appellant may not have been aware of the evidence
(being an email), it could
have obtained the evidence by summons. In
Auto Centre Pty Ltd v Apurva Mishra
[2014] NSWCATAP 81
Panel granted leave because the respondent to the appeal had fraudulently
altered evidence. The party seeking leave under
cl 12(1)(c) could not reasonably
have had available to them the evidence that the report in question had been
fraudulently altered
at the time the proceedings were being dealt with by the
Tribunal. That fact was not known to the appellant at the time of the hearing
and could not reasonably be known due to fraud.
24 Each of these cases illustrates that something more than
a party’s incapacity to procure evidence is necessary to satisfy
requirements of cl 12(1)(c).’
39 As stated at [27] in
Al-Daouk v Mr Pine Pty Ltd t/as
Furnco Bankstown
“the issue is whether, objectively, the evidence has arisen since the
hearing and was “not reasonably available”
at the time of the
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Panel stated at [10]:
“An appeal does not provide a losing
party with the opportunity to run their case again except in the narrow
circumstances which
we have described. Mr Ryan has not satisfied us that those
circumstances apply to his case and we refuse permission for him to
Grounds of appeal
the Appeal Panel explained in
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
“It may be difficult for self-represented appellants to
clearly express their grounds of appeal. In such circumstances and having
to the guiding principle, it is appropriate for the Appeal Panel to review an
appellant’s stated grounds of appeal,
the material provided, and the
decision of the Tribunal at first instance to examine whether it is possible to
discern grounds that
may either raise a question of law or a basis for leave to
appeal. The Appeal Panel has taken such an approach in a number of cases,
Khan v Kang
[2014] NSWCATAP 48
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP
However, this must be balanced against the obligation to act fairly and
impartially (
Bauskis v Liew
[2013] NSWCA 297
Hamod v State of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 367
). Relevantly, s 38(2) provides that that Tribunal ‘may
inquire into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks
subject to the rules of natural justice’.”
appeal grounds must be reasonably discernible from the material before an Appeal
Panel rather than the result of an artificial
construct imposed on the material
by the Panel:
the notice of appeal we discern the following alleged errors on questions of
(1) The primary member used the wrong legal principle. The real character of the
transaction was a service known as a proxy purchasing
service, not a supply of
goods. The correct consumer guarantee was accordingly ACLNSW s 60.
(2) The primary member did not take into account a relevant consideration, being
that what was supplied was not the rims but, rather,
the service of sourcing
overseas the rims that the consumers instructed that they wanted.
the notice of appeal we discern the following alleged errors on questions of
fact, requiring leave to appeal if made out:
(1) The major failure finding was based on an incorrect application of the test
to the facts. The product was not unsafe, defective
or significantly departing
from what was instructed to be ordered. The fitting issue on the rear wheels was
easily resolved in the
manner that Airparts offered to do, at its cost purely to
resolve the dispute. That offer was made even though the need for spacers
well-recognised and appropriate.
(2) The refund remedy was also disproportionate – any remedy, if granted,
should be limited to a minor partial modification
being the addition of rear
wheel spacers.
(3) The primary decision was against the weight of evidence because it
didn’t take into account, owing to Airparts’ absence,
the evidence
on which it relied.
(4) Airparts sought to rely on new evidence, not prepared at the time of the
primary hearing, of the financial impact of having to
refund for what it said
were rims that could not readily be resold and having incurred wasted import and
transport costs
analogy with the refusal of an application to set aside a default judgment, the
refusal of Airparts’ application to set aside
the primary decision is not
a final determination of the legal rights the subject of the proceedings because
it can be sought again
(with an extension of time to file it likely to be
Accordingly,
the refusal is an interlocutory decision requiring leave to appeal: cp
Finance Corporation of Australia Ltd [No 1]
[1981] HCA 20
(1981) 147 CLR 246
at 248, 256.
This is the case even though the ground of appeal is alleged to be procedural
unfairness in refusing the set-aside application.
Consideration
and conclusion
errors on questions of law alleged
by Airparts centred on the same
matters in substance, which the appellant expressed in its notice of appeal as
“The Tribunal applied s 54 of the ACL, which concerns
the sale of goods, instead of s 60, which applies to services. The transaction
was a proxy purchasing service, not a retail sale. The appellant operates as an
importer and facilitator, not a seller of Porsche
wheels. The appellant
fulfilled its duty by sourcing and delivering exactly what the respondent
requested. The decision failed to
recognise that the appellant does not stock or
sell Porsche wheels as part of its business and has never sold another set of
wheels since incorporation in August 2022.”
consumers in their reply correctly pointed out that the primary decision in fact
focused on lack of fitness for disclosed purpose
and lack of correspondence with
description (ACLNSW ss 55 and 56), not acceptable quality (s 54) and that the
latter reference was
a slip. The slip did not matter because the substance of
the consumers’ argument was dealt with. In the sparse written reasons,
take this to be inferred from the reference to “incorrect” used rims
being provided “[n]ot in accordance with
contract” and “not in
compliance with” the wrongly-named ACLNSW provision.
consumers contended that, even if Airparts’ argument was accepted about
the nature of the service, the same outcome would
occur under ACLNSW s 60 on a
substantially similar basis to the contraventions in ss 55 and 56. The service
and the product resulting
from the supply of the service were not fit for
specified purpose and the service was not supplied with due care and skill. The
specified purpose was confirming that the OEM product supplied – which was
for a different model (a Porsche Carrera 991 S)
– could be retro-fitted to
a Porsche Boxster 981 D without requiring rear wheel spacers (the legality of
which in NSW was questioned).
A partial refund was not proportionate because the
supply was of an entire set of rims.
said earlier, we do not have a clear indication of the degree to which the
primary member looked at Airpart’s documents despite
the party’s
absence from the hearing. Without provision of complete reasons (by separate
record and/or in a transcript) we
do not know the complete basis for the relief
granted. There appears to be an incorrect reference (981) to the rims actually
in the incomplete reasons accompanying the refund order (order 1), but
the balance of the summary is in effect an acceptance of the
case (with the correction to the consumer guarantees relied on that has already
been pointed out) that what was
supplied by way of goods was not what was
contracted for and not fit for purpose as described above.
had the responsibility, by obtaining the transcript or other reproduction of the
primary members’ reasons and the transcript
of hearing, to establish if it
could from those sources the errors it alleged. Its failure to do so is of
itself sufficient to find
that the appeal fails on the grounds that rely on
those sources (which include the alleged errors on questions of law) in order to
be made out.
and in any event, as already said the invoice for supply was in the
consumers’ evidence. There was no reference to the
original overseas
supplier and no reference to a service fee, only to the price of the supplied
goods. GST was charged on the goods
invoiced, not on a service fee for sourcing
a product to be supplied direct by an overseas supplier.
foregoing provided a strong basis for the primary member’s grant of relief
in respect of a contravention of a consumer guarantee
relating to a supply of
goods. We discern, on the material before us, no error of law in the primary
member’s finding that
the correct consumer guarantees to be applied were
those which the primary member chose, being in respect of supply of goods.
alleged errors on questions of fact
, the evidence on which Airparts
relied but was not present to put before the Tribunal, summarised from what was
stated about it in
the notice of appeal, was as follows:
(1) Communications between the parties that were said to show that the consumers
requested a specific set of 20” Porsche 991
Carrera S OEM rims in a
particular spoke pattern and, being a smash repair workshop, were more familiar
with the specifications of
the requested product than Airparts.
(2) Proof of the proxy purchasing service as Airparts’ business model,
showing that Airparts did not stock or sell Porsche
wheels as part of its
regular business and had not sold another set of Porsche wheels since
incorporation in August 2022.
(3) Proof that the wheels were “custom-ordered” for the
(4) A typographical error on the invoice regarding the offset of the rear
wheels, on which the consumers relied, did not affect the
fact that the correct
wheels were supplied.
(5) An offer to supply and install spacers so as to ensure that the rear wheels
fitted properly (there was no fitting issue with
the front wheels) demonstrated
a willingness to resolve without a refund and that was a proportionate
resolution if a breach of consumer
guarantees was established.
new evidence (described in summary at [44(4)] in these reasons) was said not to
be reasonably available at time of hearing because
it was compiled after the
set-aside application was refused.
first with the new evidence, we agree with the consumers’ submission that
the new evidence was irrelevant to the substantive
issues, although it was
relevant to the unsuccessful stay application. Its nature indicated that much of
it would have been reasonably
available at the time of the primary hearing. We
reject the application to rely upon it on appeal.
respect of its other evidence, Airparts said it established that the consumers
specifically requested OEM rims for a Porsche 991
Carrera S which was confirmed
by photographs and communications before the order was placed. Porsche produced
for that model only
one OEM rim rear wheel specification, being a +70 offset,
not a +52 offset. The reference on the invoice to supply of rear rims with
offset was a typographical error later discovered and corrected. Rims with a
+70 offset could be retro-fitted to a 981 model
with spacers, which Airparts
offered as a resolution and which was a recognised resolution in the Porsche
enthusiast community; even
a +52 offset would require spacers (of a lesser
dimension).
it is not possible fully to assess the strength of this ground of appeal without
the primary members’ complete reasons
and a transcript, which it was in
Airparts’ responsibility to provide in the proof of alleged errors.
in our view the facts that emerged from the consumers’ documents put
before the primary member, which we have summarised
earlier, clearly supported a
finding that the consumers were not told, before the arrival of the shipped
rims, anything other than
that the 991 Carrera rims would fit the 981 Boxster
with no reference to any need for spacers to be fitted.
on the face of the Airparts invoice in the consumers’ evidence, what was
supplied was not an OEM rim as requested because
the manufacturer did not make
an OEM +52 for the 991 model and, even if one accepted the +52 reference was an
error, the rims supplied
did not fit the rear wheels of a 981 Boxster without
spacers. Spacers were not part of the requested order.
have no indication, from the absence of transcript and record of primary reasons
to be supplied by Airparts as part of its appeal
documents, that the primary
member looked at the Airparts evidence and submissions that sought to explain
and support its contentions
and explanations to the contrary, let alone what
weight he gave to it compared with the consumers’ evidence.
that situation, we reach the conclusion readily that the weight of the evidence
before the primary member favoured the conclusion
on breach of the consumer
guarantees to which he clearly came, and that such was a fair and equitable
outcome. This is the case even
if the primary member did seek to assess
Airpart’s evidence.
also consider that the primary member was justified in ordering a refund for
what must have been his reasons had they been provided
by Airparts, namely, that
the rims did not fit on the 981 Boxster without further and potentially
controversial spacers was a major
failure entitling the consumers to reject the
goods within the specified period and obtain a refund.
was the clear factual conclusion open on the documents provided to us that
applied the relevant law.
major failure occurs under ACLNSW s 260 if: the goods would not have been
acquired by a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with
the nature and extent of
the failure; or the goods depart in one or more significant respects from the
supply description, sample
or demonstration model; or the goods are
substantially unfit for a purpose for which goods of the same kind are commonly
and they cannot, easily and within a reasonable time, be remedied to
make them fit for such purpose; or the goods are unfit for a
particular purpose
made known to the supplier or person negotiating or arranging the supply and the
goods cannot easily and within
a reasonable time be remedied to make them fit
for such purpose; or the goods are not of acceptable quality because they are
Safi v Heartland Motors PL t/as Heartland Chrysler
[2016] NSWCATAP 80
the Appeal Panel analysed the case law on what constituted a major
failure in respect of a supply of goods, summarising its conclusions
[99]-[102]. Under ACLNSW s 260(a), the test is objective and can be applied by
analogy to services. Overall, the test is whether,
faced with advance knowledge
of the problems and what was needed in terms of time, costs and degree of
difficulty to remedy them,
a reasonable consumer would have acquired the goods
or acquired nothing or something else. Thus, for a major failure constituted
chronic or repetitive defective supply taken as a whole, such a period is likely
to be longer than for a single catastrophic defect.
there is a major failure, the consumer’s entitlement to a refund is not
dependent on proof of loss:
Ferraro v DBN Holdings Aust PL t/as Sports Auto
[2015] FCA 1127.
ACLNSW s 262 a consumer is not entitled to notify rejection under s 259 if the
“rejection period for the goods”
has ended, the goods have been
lost, destroyed or disposed of by the consumer, the goods were damaged after
supply for unrelated
reasons, or the goods cannot be detached from other
property without damage to them. The “rejection period” for goods
from the time of supply to when it would be reasonable to expect the relevant
failure to comply with a guarantee to become apparent
having regard to the type,
likely use, reasonably-expected life, and reasonably-expected usage before a
failure becomes apparent.
Given the short time frame on the documents before us,
rejection occurred clearly within the rejection period.
those circumstances, the significant failure not to supply what was
contractually described without further and intrusive fitting
devices made an
entire refund appropriate where the rims were supplied in set.
procedural unfairness alleged
by Airparts
in respect of the
set-aside application
, this was stated as follows in the notice of
“The appellant missed the hearing due to an
unforeseeable medical emergency, where the appellant’s father-in-law
urgent hospital attention. Multiple follow-ups were made with NCAT via
phone calls and in-person visits, where the appellant was
informed no additional
documentation was required. The Tribunal rejected the set-aside application
without giving the appellant an
opportunity to provide additional evidence of
the medical emergency. The refusal to consider the appellant’s explanation
missing the hearing denied procedural fairness.”
director said that he “was the only person available to provide immediate
assistance, making it impossible to
attend the hearing”.
have in the materials on this topic before us (including the agreed narrative
set out earlier) only a receipted invoice from the
hospital, no record of
Airparts’ attempting to contact the Tribunal on the day of hearing, nor of
what was said if such contact
was made, nor of proof of the medical
circumstances, nor proof of Mr Lee’s claim that he was the only person
available to help
with the medical emergency and to continue to stay, nor of any
attempt once his father-in-law was within the hospital’s care
arrange alternative attendance or other action. There was also no proof of what
Mr Lee was allegedly told by the Registry,
when what was alleged to have been
said would be inconsistent with Registry processes.
also have no record before us of the materials put before the member who
rejected the set-aside application to show the case that
Airparts said that it
was denied in making. Even assuming that those materials were Airparts’
entire evidence that had been
filed for the final hearing, we have no firm basis
in the materials before us of the reasons that the set-aside application was
although one can infer that it was along the lines of an absence of
justifiable explanation for absence and an acceptance that the
evidence was not sufficiently strong for reasons we have already canvassed.
decision on a set-aside application is discretionary in the sense described
earlier in these reasons. Even if we disagreed with
it, and we have no clear
basis in the material before us for that conclusion, we do not have the material
to determine that irrelevant
considerations were taken into account, relevant
considerations not taken into account, or that a wrong principle was acted upon
or that the facts were mistaken. On the evidence that was available from the
consumers to justify the primary decision, there is
clearly no basis for saying
that the refusal was unreasonable or plainly unjust.
Accordingly,
no basis for a grant of leave to appeal against the set-aside decision has been
has not established relevant errors in the primary decision. It has not put
before us, in the mass of material filed, the
real matters that might, or might
not, have assisted in establishing the alleged errors. Leave to appeal (to the
extent that leave
is required) is refused and the appeal must be
We make the following orders:
(1) Leave to appeal (to the extent that leave is required) refused.
(2) Appeal dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter