URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dadisho v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMR 19; (25 June 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Dadisho v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
NSWPICMR 19
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEWER:
Terence O’Riain
DATE OF DECISION:
25 June 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
dispute over weekly statutory benefits payable under Division 3.3; Schedule
2(1)(a); issue concerning calculation
of pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE) and
claimant’s gross contractor earnings; insurer amended PAWE twice in
favour based on updated information, insurer calculated gross
profit after expenses relying on contractor earnings period;
Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Iskander
considered and followed;
insurer’s final reviewable decision affirmed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
reviewable decision is about the amount of weekly payments of statutory benefits
that are payable under Division 3.3 of the Act,
and is therefore a merit review
matter under Schedule 2(1)(a) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
reviewable decision dated 28 February 2025 is
Dadisho (the claimant) was injured in a motor accident on 27 September 2023.
subsequently claimed statutory benefits under Part 3 of the
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) on Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
Insurance (insurer). Liability for the claim has been admitted.
claimant commenced these proceedings on 15 April 2024 to resolve a dispute about
his pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE). PAWE
are used to determine the amount
of weekly payments during the first and second entitlement periods: s 3.6 and s
3.7 MAI Act.
before the accident he had entered into an arrangement with Allied Express to
operate delivery trucks on Allied Express' behalf
guaranteeing a minimum weekly
payment of $1,800 gross including GST. The claimant initially wanted the insurer
to calculate his PAWE
on that gross amount.
dispute arose after the insurer determined on 25 March 2024 that the
claimant’s PAWE was $56.56 based on the total earnings
of the 12 months
before the accident averaged over 52 weeks. The insurer was relying on a report
from PKF forensic accountants dated
20 March 2024.
insurer amended the PAWE to $114.58, which was the minimum amount which could be
awarded; an internal review affirmed that decision
on 11 April 2024. The
insurer’s affirmation was the original decision under review. The dispute
is a merit review matter: Sch
2 cl1(a) MAI Act.
claimant initially submitted he was an earner under cl 2(b)(i) of Schedule 1 on
the basis that he had entered into an agreement
to undertake employment with
Allied Express. If that was the case, then cl 4(2)(c) of Schedule 1 should apply
to calculate the PAWE
on the basis the clause specifically refers to the
earnings under the agreement and does not state the earnings should be averaged
over a 12-month period.
insurer agreed Mr Dadisho was an “earner” under cl 2(a)(ii) of
Schedule 1 but argued that his PAWE should be calculated
under Schedule 1, cl 4
of the MAI Act being the weekly average of the gross earnings Mr Dadisho
received as an earner during the
12 months immediately before the date of the
Statutory framework
the first entitlement period weekly payments of statutory benefits are payable
in accordance with s 3.6. That provision states,
relevantly, as
“3.6 Weekly payments during first entitlement period
(first 13 weeks after motor accident)
(1) An earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident and suffers a
total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the injury
is entitled to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section during the first
entitlement period.
Only a person who was an earner when injured is entitled to statutory
benefits under this section—see Schedule 1.
(2) A weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at
the rate of 95% of the difference between the person’s
pre-accident weekly
earnings and the person’s post-accident earning capacity (if any) or
post-accident earnings, whichever
is the greater, for the first entitlement
s 3.7 uses PAWE to ascertain the amount of payments during the second
entitlement period.
relevant definition of PAWE in this case is in Schedule 1, cl 4 as
“4 Meaning of ‘pre-accident weekly
earnings’—general
(1) Pre-accident weekly earnings, in relation to an earner who is injured as
a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average
of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the 12 months immediately before the
day on which the motor accident
occurred, unless subclause (2) applies.
(2) In the following cases, pre-accident weekly earnings, in relation to an
earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident,
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning
continuously, but had not been earning continuously for at least
months—the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as
an earner during the period from when the earner
started to earn continuously to
immediately before the day of the motor accident,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an
arrangement with an employer or other person to undertake employment
commence business as a self-employed person—the average weekly gross
earnings that the earner could reasonably have been
expected to earn, but for
the injury, in employment under that arrangement...
term “loss of earnings” is defined in Schedule 1 cl 3 as
“3 Meaning of ‘loss of earnings’
Loss of earnings
means a loss incurred or likely to be
incurred in a person’s income from personal exertion.
(2) A person’s
income from personal
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
allowances and
retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or in
partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
(3) A person’s
income from personal exertion
(a) interest, unless the person’s principal business consists of the
lending of money, or unless the interest is received in
respect of a debt due to
the person for goods supplied or services rendered by the person in the course
of the person’s business,
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick, or other leave entitlement.”
Preliminary conferences
proceedings were the subject of two preliminary conferences. At the preliminary
conference on 14 May 2024 the parties sought an
opportunity to obtain further
evidence, make further written submissions, and explore whether the dispute
could be resolved.
insurer's representative submitted that this matter was not ready to proceed,
because the insurer had recalculated the PAWE to
be $712.25, because of new
information.
claimant's lawyer sought time to advise his client and this matter may resolve
between the parties. Philip Ferraro of Turner Freeman
appeared at this
teleconference but subsequently withdrew as the claimant’s lawyer on 15
noted in the submissions that the insurer requested a copy of the contract
between the claimant and Allied Express confirming the
arrangement. This had not
been provided yet, and the claimant sought time to write to that company to
request a copy. This could
result in the insurer recalculating the PAWE.
parties requested directions for a timetable to provide further submissions and
information to allow time to explore settlement.
The parties agreed that I
should decide this matter on the papers.
directed that the claimant was to file further information and submissions via
the portal no later than 4 June 2024, with the insurer
to lodge its reply no
later than 1
8 June 2024.
parties had leave to inform me via the portal if they required an extension of
time or directions for production.
in June 2024 the insurer sought leave to file a direction for production on
Allied Express with a return date on 19 June 2024.
I gave leave.
15 July 2024 I received notice that the parties had progressed in obtaining
information that would comply with the earlier directions.
second teleconference on 22 January 2025 included the claimant's current lawyer
Karen Zhang of Littles Lawyers and the insurer's
representative Ms Vitlina
that occasion the claimant's representative informed me that this matter was not
ready to proceed, because the claimant was not
in a position to provide proper
instructions.
claimant's lawyer sought time to advise his client.
appears that the claimant has not been able to prosecute this application, and I
informed the claimant’s lawyer that it would
be appropriate for the
claimant’s lawyers to advise the claimant that discontinuing this
application would allow the parties
to obtain the outstanding information,
attempt to resolve it informally and file another merit review application to
resolve any
aspect that the parties cannot agree on.
had noted the insurer had recalculated the PAWE, but it would recalculate it
again if it could receive the outstanding information
contract with the head carrier.
stood this matter over for 56 days with a timetable for the production of the
outstanding material. If the matter could not progress
or the claimant did not
discontinue this merit review then I would consider dismissing this application
for want of prosecution under
rule 77 of the Commission’s Rules after 19
March 2025.
Submissions
received further submissions in response to the directions on 22 January
19 February 2025, the claimant submitted that the claimant claimed PAWE in the
amount of $1,774.73, based on a change in circumstances,
i.e. obtaining
contracted work.
the alternative, the claimant submitted based on earnings in the year before the
accident, the claimant only started regular and
continuing employment from
29 May 2023 up until the date of accident being 27 September 2023.
The claimant submitted that the appropriate period of weeks to
divide the total
earnings amount is 17 weeks from 29 May 2023 to 21 September 2023.
total income amount was $14,256.32.
total income amount free of GST was:
($14,256.32 / 11) x 10=
Following cl 4(2)(a) of Schedule 1 of MAI Act, PAWE could be calculated as:
$12,960.29/ 17 weeks = $762.37 nett per week.
insurer submitted on 28 February 2025 that Mr Dadisho’s PAWE, which the
insurer would apply was calculated on his actual
earnings for the period from 6
July 2023 to
27 September 2023 (12 weeks) to be $725.12 per week before tax
($8,701.44 / 12 weeks).
was calculated after deducting fuel expenses and depreciation, based on PKF's
forensic accounting report dated 6 May 2024, which
was included with the updated
submissions. The insurer has confirmed that the insurer applied this revised
PAWE to Mr Dadisho’s
statutory payments since the date he became entitled
to payments.
Consideration
insurer and claimant have made considerable progress to resolve this matter so
that the original reviewable decision has been
reviewed and have substituted
$725.12, which a difference of $37.25 in calculations from the claimant’s
alternative calculation.
do not accept the claimant’s PAWE in the amount of $1,774.73, based on a
change in circumstances, i.e. obtaining contracted
work because it is based on
gross earnings without deductions.
also do not accept the alternative calculation across 17 weeks because it is
also based on gross earnings without deductions.
prefer the insurer’s basis for calculating PAWE because it deducts fuel
expenses and depreciation from the claimant’s
income across the 12 weeks
that he was earning income under the Allied Express contract.
Merit Review Panel recently affirmed this insurer’s approach in
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Iskander
Panel found that Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(b) of the MAI Act should be read together
with Schedule 1, cl 3(1) which refers to loss
of earnings as ‘a loss
incurred or likely to be incurred in a person’s income from personal
Panel interpreted ‘income from personal exertion’ to mean the
claimant’s share of business earnings rather
than total earnings without
deductions. The Panel found this to be consistent with Schedule 1, cl 4 of the
MAI Act, which refers
to the ‘weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner’.
Panel determined that deductions must be made from the total income of the
business as earnings ‘must be received by the
earner as an earner,’
i.e. the untaxed gross profits after expenses have been accounted
PAWE dispute is not a regulated merit review matter as defined under Schedule 1
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
claimant has also not sought costs under s 8.10(4) of the MAI Act permitting
payment of the reasonable and necessary legal costs
he has incurred in
connection this PAWE dispute arising from a claim for statutory benefits.
Commission could only make that order if it were satisfied that exceptional
circumstances existed that justify payment of the
costs he has incurred: s
8.10(4), MAI Act.
“(E)xceptional
circumstances” must be unusual or out of the ordinary, whether as a result
of qualitative or quantitative
factors. The case need not be one that is unique,
unprecedented, or very rare. The question is determined on the basis of the
of the individual case.
Exceptional
circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a combination of
exceptional factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which, although
individually of no particular significance, when taken together are seen as
exceptional.
AAI Ltd trading as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
) it was found
that s 8.10(4) of the MAI Act can be seen as designed to deal with
particular, unusual situations where the maximum
costs fixed by the Regulations
may not be adequate, and that:
“[99] ...other cases can be
envisaged which are exceptional, because they involve an unusual degree of
factual or legal complexity
or for some other reason, and this requires the
incurring of more substantial legal costs by a claimant. These cases fall within
s 8.10(4).”
to this case at [82] of
the judge noted that s 8.10 or any other
provisions of the MAI Act do not suggest that a claimant’s must be
successful to recover
legal costs under s 8.10.
matter involved considerable work including submissions, providing additional
information, reviewing further documentation from
the insurer, and advising the
claimant. The claimant’s lawyers provided substantial material to assist
the insurer and this
merit review.
factual issues in dispute and the claimant’s lawyer legal work are
considerable. These matters satisfy me that if the claimant
had applied for
costs, then it would have been open to me to find exceptional circumstances
existed that would justify payment of
the claimant’s costs limited to the
16 monetary units that would be available in a regulated merit review matter.
decision will make me functus officio and unable to make additional directions.
However, the claimant’s lawyers may rely
on these comments if costs were
sought directly from this insurer after this
DETERMINATION
reviewable decision based on the insurer’s submission on 28 February 2025
San v Rumble
[2007] NSWCA 259
v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (409 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter