URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pham LT [2008] NSWPB 1 (9 January 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 1
KYM AYSCOUGH v LOC TAN PHAM
January 2008
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged the supply, without a
prescription from a medical practitioner, of up to 200 packets
dospan, a prescribed restricted substance and a anorectic agent. The complaint
also alleged the excessive supply of tenuate
dospan on prescriptions over a
period of 2 years to two customers of the pharmacy. The pharmacist was the sole
proprietor and pharmacist
in charge of the pharmacy, where the conduct the
subject of the complaint occurred. It was alleged that this conduct was contrary
to clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
quantity of tenuate dospan supplied was not in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards
It was also alleged that the pharmacist had failed
to record the supply of about 187 packets of tenuate dospan, 30 pack size in
with clause 54 of the Regulation. The pharmacist admitted that he
was the sole proprietor and the pharmacist in charge during the
relevant period
and that at the time of the stock check by officers of the Department of Health
in June 2004 he had in stock at the
pharmacy, two packets of tenuate dospan. He
did not admit the other particulars in the complaint. The pharmacist represented
at the hearing.
Board was not satisfied that particular 2 regarding the pharmacist’s
supply of about 200 packets of tenuate dospan without
a prescription in view of
Mrs Cleary’s inconsistent and uncorroborated evidence. The Board is also
not satisfied that particular
3 has been proven with respect to the alleged
excessive supply of tenuate dospan tablets to Cheryl Cleary on prescription.
the Board is comfortably satisfied that particular 3 regarding
excessive supply is established for Angela Whittington.
pharmacist was unable to account for the supply of 123 packets of tenuate dospan
and there are 187 packets unaccounted for. The
pharmacist was unable to provide
an explanation. The Board finds particular 5 proven.
pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct in that he has demonstrated a
lack of adequate care or judgement in the practice
of pharmacy and he has
engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in relation to the practice of
pharmacist was reprimanded, required to undertaking educative orders and report
to the Board and to maintain professional memberships.
The costs of complying
with these orders is to be borne by the pharmacist.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry (“the Board”) held on 5
December 2006 into a complaint of professional misconduct made
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
, 1964 (“the Act”) by
Kym Ayscough, Nominal Complainant and Registrar, Pharmacy Board of NSW,
against Loc Tan Pham (“the
Respondent”), of Styles
Chemworld Chemist, 38 Queen Street, St Marys 2760, being a pharmacist registered
in NSW under the Act.
The Respondent appeared in person.
THE COMPLAINT
The Complainant alleges that the Respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct within the meaning of section 19A of the Act in that
he engaged in
conduct that demonstrated:
(i) a lack of adequate judgement or care in the practice of pharmacy pursuant to
section 19A(a) of the Act, and/or;
(ii) other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy
pursuant to section 19A (g) of the Act.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
Respondent was at all relevant times the sole proprietor of the pharmacy
business known as Styles Chemworld Chemist, 38 Queen
Street, St Marys in the
said state (“the Pharmacy”) and the pharmacist in charge.
the period 10 June 2002 to 10 June 2004 (the relevant period) the Respondent
supplied Cheryl Cleary with about 200 packets
of a prescribed restricted
substance, namely, Tenuate Dospan 30 tablet pack size without a
prescription from a medical practitioner
contrary to section 10(3) the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
, 1966 (“Poisons Act”).
the relevant period the Respondent’s Pharmacy supplied Cheryl Cleary and
Angela Whittington, with a prescribed restricted
substance, namely Tenuate
Dospan, on the prescription of medical practitioners, which supply:
not in a quantity that accords with recognised therapeutic standards of what is
appropriate in the circumstances, contrary to
Clause 53 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
(“Poisons Regulation”);
excessive and demonstrated a reckless disregard for the welfare of those
customers in circumstances where the Respondent knew
or ought to have known that
Tenuate Dospan was an anorectic agent indicated for use on a short term
at 10 June 2004, the Respondent had in stock at the Pharmacy two packets of
Tenuate Dospan 30 tablet pack size.
the relevant period the Respondent did not record in a manner approved by the
Director General, the supply of 187 packets of
Tenuate Dospan tablets
30’s in accordance with Clause 54 of the Poisons Regulation.
Particulars 1 and 4 of the Complaint were admitted by the
Respondent.
Counsel for the Complainant, by consent, tendered the a tabulated folder of
documents, which included the complaint, stock check of
Tenuate Dospan, a Notice
issued under
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
respondent’s response, supplier invoices, witness statements, a bundle of
empty medication outer packets, a taped record
of interview of the Respondent
and a peer review report .
The Respondent tendered, with the consent of the Complainant, a letter to
Christine Campbell of the Pharmacy Board of NSW dated 4
November 2006,
together with accompanying documents.
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 9
February 1999 after obtaining a Bachelor of Pharmacy degree
from the University
of Sydney in 1998.
Following registration as a pharmacist, the Respondent worked six months as
an employed pharmacist and later that same year purchased
the Pharmacy. The
Pharmacy is a medium sized, suburban pharmacy located in a shopping strip in
Sydney’s western suburbs.
During the relevant period, the Pharmacy traded 7 days per week and the
Respondent worked 70 hours per week over 6.5 days. On the
half day the
Respondent was not working another pharmacist, Ms Kim Bui, worked as pharmacist
in charge. The Pharmacy was also staffed
by two pharmacy assistants, one of
which is a person of senior experience who can assist in the dispensary if
PARTICULAR 2 – ALLEGED SUPPLY OF TENUATE DOSPAN 30 TO
CHERYL CLEARY WITHOUT PRESCRIPTION
Following receipt of a complaint in April 2004 from Peter Cleary, concerning
the alleged supply to his wife, Cheryl Cleary, of Tenuate
Dospan without a
prescription, the Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the New South Wales Health
Department initiated an investigation.
During the course of that investigation,
a Health Department employee obtained statements from Cheryl Cleary and her
daughter, Cherie
Ann Cleary, as well as a large plastic bag containing empty
Tenuate Dospan 30 packets from Cheryl Cleary’s home.
Particular 2 of the Complaint suggests that there were approximately 200
empty Tenuate Dospan 30 packets in the plastic bag, which
is Exhibit 4 in these
proceedings. However, following the hearing the Chairperson of the Board
inspected Exhibit 4 and counted the
empty packets of Tenuate Dospan contained
therein. On the Chairperson’s count there were 43 outer packets and 123
blister packets,
which would suggest a total of no more than 123 packets. A
schedule of the relevant batch numbers and expiry dates as recorded on
packets are listed in Schedule 1.
Martin Power, an officer of the Pharmaceutical Services Branch, was called to
give evidence at the hearing. Mr Power was shown Exhibit
4 and he confirmed that
it was the plastic bag of empty packets of Tenuate Dospan that he obtained from
Cheryl Cleary. He gave evidence
that the plastic bag had been locked in a
cupboard in his office from the time Cheryl Cleary gave it to him. Mr Power
stated that
the cupboard was only unlocked the night prior to the hearing and
that the bag was in his possession until he brought it to the Board.
give any evidence about whether he ever counted the number of empty packets in
the plastic bag. However, the Board finds
that it is highly unlikely in the
circumstances that there was any opportunity for the plastic bag to have been
tampered with by
any person whilst in Mr Power’s possession and therefore
proceeds on the basis that the number of empty packets that were contained
that bag when Cheryl Cleary gave the bag to Mr Power are the same number of
packets that remain in that bag that is now Exhibit
4 in the proceedings.
Both the Complainant and the Respondent were invited to make further
submissions in relation to the issue. Unfortunately, the correspondence
parties about this issue incorrectly referred to the recounted number as being
approximately 143, not 123. However, having
regard to the nature of the
submissions made by the parties on the issue of the number of packets this
further discrepancy would
seem to make no difference. In this regard, the Board
notes that the Respondent submitted that it was immaterial as to whether there
were “approximately 200” as submitted or 143 [or 123 as counted]. In
the Complainant’s submission they were, without
doubt, the packets given
to Cheryl Cleary by the Respondent and go, in part, to explain where the
supplies, unaccounted for in the
Respondent’s records, ended up. The
Respondent strenuously denied that he ever supplied Cheryl Cleary with any
Tenuate Dospan
30 without a prescription or that there was any evidence to
suggest that the empty Tenuate Dospan 30 packets came from his pharmacy.
According to Cheryl Cleary’s statement she started obtaining Tenuate
Dospan tablets as packets of 30 tablets from the Respondent
prescription in 1999 at a rate of either one or two packets each week and she
last obtained Tenuate Dospan tablets from
the Respondent without a prescription
on or about 1 April 2004.
When asked by counsel for the Complainant at the hearing how she came about
obtaining the Tenuate Dospan tablets without a prescription
from the Respondent,
Cheryl Cleary stated:
[getting it with a prescription]
and I would go in to see Loc
[the Respondent]
and say ‘I haven’t got a prescription, can I
please have some tablets’ and he would give them to me and say ‘make
sure that you bring it back in by next week.’”
And on further questioning:
you first started getting the drug without a prescription, did you then later
attempt to supply the prescription to the
pharmacist?”
“Yes, I did.”
“How long did that last?”
“I just can’t remember.”
there then become a time when the pharmacist no longer required you to chase
with that prescription?”
right. How was it then that you were obtaining the Tenuate Dospan without a
prescription? How did you do it? How did you
go about doing it?”
went in and asked Loc, Look, I haven’t got the money and I would come back
in next week and could I have them. Sometimes
he would say yes and sometimes
The Respondent denies that Cheryl Cleary was a customer of
the Pharmacy as at 1999 and says that Cheryl Cleary only became a customer
The Respondent’s prescription details report and patient profile print
out for Cheryl Cleary for the period 10 June 2002 to
10 June 2004 indicate that
Cheryl Cleary purchased 1 packet of Tenuate Dospan 30s from the Pharmacy with a
prescription on 16 occasions
during the period 10 June 2002 to 13 November 2003,
being a period of 17 months.
Below is a schedule of the prescriptions for Tenuate Dospan 30s dispensed by
the Respondent to Cheryl Clearly during the relevant
Prescribing Doctor
Amount Charged
N Kathircana
N Kathircana
T Schindler
N Kathircana
Marie Dimitr
In her statement dated 22 July 2004 Cheryl Cleary states that she had
approximately four prescriptions she obtained from a doctor
for Tenuate Dospan
30 tablets dispensed at the Pharmacy over the last two years. She states that
one was issued by Dr Kathircana
approximately two years ago. After this she had
one prescription issued by Dr Schindler and one issued by Dr Teh. She states
the most recent prescription for Tenuate Dospan 30s tablets was issued by a
doctor at the medical centre next to the Pharmacy, but
she does not recall the
name of that doctor.
At the hearing, Cheryl Cleary gave evidence that she obtained “
” prescriptions from doctors, however, she only mentioned the
names of Dr Schindler and Dr Teh in this regard.
It is clear from the above schedule that Cheryl Cleary obtained 16
prescriptions for Tenuate Dospan from various doctors over the
relevant period
which she had dispensed at the Pharmacy. It is also clear from the above
schedule that Cheryl Cleary only presented
to the Pharmacy with one prescription
from each of Dr Schindler and Dr Teh for Tenuate Dospan 30s, yet there was no
mention in her
evidence of the 7 prescriptions she obtained from Dr Chau or the
3 prescriptions she obtained from Dr Kathircana, being the doctors
she appears
to have been more regularly attending upon for the purpose of obtaining
prescriptions for Tenuate Dospan 30s.
Cheryl Cleary also states in her statement that when she obtained Tenuate
Dospan 30 tablets from the Respondent without a prescription
he charged her
$50.00 for one packet and $90.00 for two packets. She also states that she
always paid the Respondent in cash for
the packets of Tenuate Dospan she
received without a prescription.
At the hearing, Cheryl Cleary gave evidence that with a prescription she paid
$30.00 for one box of Tenuate Dospan 30s. She also gave
evidence that without a
prescription she was paying $90.00 for two boxes and that she would always ask
for two boxes when she had
no prescription. However, at the hearing Cheryl
Cleary also gave evidence that on the day that her daughter is alleged to have
with her she only asked for one box. Notably, there is no mention in
Cheryl Cleary’s original statement dated 22 July 2004
of the purchase on
the day her daughter is alleged to have attended with her at the Pharmacy.
According to the API invoices for September to November 2003, the wholesale
price for Tenuate Dospan 30s was $28.80 and the Selected
Retail Price was
$43.20. It is therefore plausible that the Respondent could have charged Cheryl
Cleary $90.00 for 2 packets.
Cheryl Cleary’s daughter, Cherie Ann Cleary, prepared a statement dated
19 July 2005, almost one year after her mother’s
statement was prepared.
In her statement, Cherie Ann Cleary states:
“7. On or about 20 October 2003, Mum needed money to purchase this
medication. I had money in my Commonwealth Bank debit card
account, so I offered
to drive Mum to St Marys and use my card to purchase the medication.
indicated that she wanted to see the pharmacist. The shop assistant left us and
a male person approached us carrying a paper
bag. I understood from Mum that
this person was Loc Pham, the pharmacist and owner of the pharmacy.
Pham did not speak to me but he did hand Mum a paper bag, which he was holding.
Later when Mum opened the bag, there was one packet
of tenuate dospan inside. I
gave my Commonwealth debit card to the pharmacist and he processed the purchase
and handed me the receipt.”
Attached to Cherie Ann Cleary’s statement is a photocopy of
an extract from her Commonwealth Account listing transactions between
2003 and 1 July 2004. The list contains the following entry:
Date Transaction Debit Credit
20 Oct Styles CHEM PHARM \
St MARYS NSW \AU 45.00
At the hearing Cherie Ann Cleary was referred to the bank statement attached
to her statement dated 19 July 2005 and asked by counsel
Complainant:
do you say that’s the $45.00 that you provided for your mother to obtain
the prescriptions set out in your statement?”
A. “Yes, it is.”
Q. “Have you satisfied yourself it couldn’t be for anything
A. “No, there is nothing else it could be for but
Although not expressly stated in Cherie Ann Cleary’s statement or in
the evidence that she gave at the hearing, the Board infers
that her evidence is
that the Respondent dispensed 1 packet of Tenuate Dospan 30s to Cheryl Cleary on
that occasion without a prescription.
The Board also notes that there is no
record of a prescription for Tenuate Dospan being dispensed by the Respondent to
Cheryl Cleary
on that date.
Cherie Ann Cleary was also asked by counsel for the Complainant why she
offered to provide money for her mother’s mediation
to which she
I said to her no, I’m not giving you the money , she would get angry
towards me and we would have a fight over
it, and I didn’t want to be put
in that situation, so I had no choice but to give her money.”
Cheryl Cleary gave evidence at the hearing that she was prescribed
to take one Tenuate Dospan tablet a day, but she was in fact taking
half tablets a day. That meant that she was running out of the drug before she
was due to go back and get a prescription.
From the schedule above, it can be
seen that the Respondent dispensed 1 packet of Tenuate Dospan 30s to Cheryl
Cleary on 8 September
2003. If Cheryl Cleary’s evidence is accepted that
she was taking 1.5 tablets a day, she still should have had about 2 days’
supply of Tenuate Dospan as at 20 September 2003, when it is alleged that she
attended with her daughter. If Cheryl Cleary had 2
days’ supply of Tenuate
Dospan left, then it casts some doubt upon the reason given by Cherie Ann Cleary
as to why she agreed
to give her mother the money to purchase the Tenuate
Further, on the basis of taking 1.5 tablets per day over a two year period
Cheryl Cleary would have required approximately 36 packets
of Tenuate Dospan.
She had 16 packets dispensed on prescription, which would mean that she would
have only required 20 packets without
a prescription. This sum is significantly
lower than Cheryl Cleary’s claim that the Respondent supplied her with
approximately
200 packets of Tenuate Dospan 30s without a prescription over a
two year period.
The possible conclusions to be drawn here are that Cheryl Cleary was taking
significantly more than 1.5 tablets per day or that she
has significantly
over-stated the number of packets she claims that the Respondent supplied to her
without a prescription.
Notwithstanding the Respondent’s consistent denial of supplying Tenuate
Dospan to Cheryl Cleary without a prescription, the
Respondent did not seek to
cross-examine Cheryl Cleary or Cherie Ann Cleary at the hearing. However, in
fairness to the Respondent,
he was not legally represented and the Board does
not seek to infer anything from his failure to do so.
The Board is of the view that Cheryl Cleary appeared extremely nervous at the
hearing and did not present as being in good health.
She also broke down when
she first came before the Board to give her evidence and it was necessary to
take a short adjournment to
allow her time to compose herself. The Board is
concerned that there was no mention in Cheryl Cleary’s original statement
the purchase of Tenuate Dospan that was apparently paid for by her daughter
on 20 September 2003. The first mention of this incident
is in Cherie Ann
Cleary’s statement, which was provided almost a year after Cheryl Cleary
gave her statement. There is also
nothing on the empty packets in Exhibit 4 to
identify them with the Respondent or his Pharmacy. The Board is also concerned
Cleary’s evidence that she only kept the empty packets without
labels hidden in her wardrobe, so that her husband would only
see the empty
packets with labels that she would throw out. Whilst clearly unwell, Cheryl
Cleary has sought to deceive her family,
doctors and others around her in her
campaign to obtain excessive quantities of Tenuate Dospan with or without a
prescription. The
Board also finds Cheryl Cleary’s evidence to be
inconsistent and flawed in many material respects and that it cannot be relied
upon without independent corroboration by way of evidence of a third party or
contemporaneous documents. In the circumstances, the
Board is not comfortably
satisfied on the Briginshaw test that complaint 2 has been proved.
PARTICULAR 3 – SUPPLY TO CHERYL CLEARY AND ANGELA WHITTINGTON WITH
TENUATE DOSPAN ON THE PRESCRIPTION OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS,
WHICH SUPPLY WAS
CONTRARY TO CLAUSE 53 OF THE POISONS REGULATION AND/OR WAS EXCESSIVE AND
DEMONSTRATED A RECKLESS DISREGARD FOR THE
WELFARE OF THOSE CUSTOMERS
Tenuate Dospan is a Schedule 4 substance, and as such cannot be sold without
a prescription. Under the Poisons Act and Regulations,
a substance specified in
any Schedule may not be supplied for a purpose that is not in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards.
The peer reviewer, Francis Payne, states in his report dated 18 January 2006
that in the case of Tenuate Dospan, the recognised therapeutic
purpose is as an
anorectic to treat obesity. The recommended dose is one tablet daily to be
taken mid-morning (reference Australian
Medicines Handbook, current edition
(“AMH”)). Based upon these facts, it would be normal professional
practice to supply
one pack of 30 tablets each month. However, Mr Payne further
states in his report that this drug is not intended for long term use
be taken for a maximum of 12 weeks followed by a drug free period.
The relevant extract from the AMH states:
“Current medical opinion supports short-term intermittent use of an
appetite suppressant. Courses of Tenuate may be given over
periods of up to
twelve weeks, with intervening periods of one month without
treatment.”
Mr Payne’s peer review report records that Tenuate Dospan tablets
supplied on prescription to Cheryl Cleary by the Respondent
through his pharmacy
as being 16 packets in 17 months, is prima facie in accord with the recognised
therapeutic standards, although
this ignores the premise that the drug is not
intended for long term use and should be taken for a maximum of 12 weeks
followed by
a drug free period. Mr Payne further notes in his report that from 2
April 2003 to 17 June 2003 there were six packets supplied in
a period of three
months and this is not in accordance with the recognised therapeutic standards
and incurs his disapproval. At the
hearing he also gave evidence that it would
incur the disapproval of his colleagues.
However, on another view of the supplies it can be seen that 2 packets were
supplied between June and July 2002, followed by a 1 month
break. This would
appear to be in accordance with the AMH guideline. 3 packets were supplied from
September 2002 to November 2002,
followed by a further 1 month break. This would
also appear to be in accordance with the AMH guideline. 1 packet was supplied on
20 January 2003. Thereafter, 7 packets were supplied from 2 April 2003 to 16
July 2003. Whilst these 7 prescriptions were supplied
over a 4 month period,
they were all supplied on the prescriptions of Dr Chau. The Respondent also gave
evidence at the hearing that
he telephoned Dr Chau about Cheryl Cleary. The
Respondent was unable to recall why and what he and Dr Chau discussed, but he
He must have gave me an explanation and then I’m
happy with the decision, so that’s when I go ahead and dispense
.” The evidence of the Respondent about his telephone call with Dr
Chau was not available to Mr Payne at the time he did his
report or when he gave
evidence at the hearing. However, it is possible that it could have caused Mr
Payne to review his opinion.
Having regard to the above, the Board is not comfortably satisfied on the
Briginshaw test that particular 3 of the complaint insofar
as it relates to the
supply of Tenuate Dospan to Cheryl Cleary has been proven.
However, in relation to the evidence in relation to Angela Whittington, there
seemed to be a frank acceptance by the Respondent at
the hearing that those
supplies took place in circumstances where they were not in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards
and were excessive in the circumstances.
Accordingly, the Board is comfortably satisfied that particular 3 of the
complaint insofar
as it relates to Angela Whittington has been proved.
PARTICULAR 5 – ALLEGED FAILURE TO RECORD THE SUPPLY OF 187 PACKETS
OF TENUATE DOSPAN 30 IN ACCORDANCE WITH CLAUSE 54 OF THE
Employees of the Pharmaceutical Services Branch visited the Pharmacy on 10
June 2004. At that time a dispensing history was obtained
for Cheryl Cleary.
Additionally, a stock counting of existing stocks of Tenuate Dospan at the
Pharmacy was undertaken and the Respondent
was handed a Notice under section
35(1) of the Poisons Act
to account for the receipt and disposition of
this medication for the period from 10 June 2002 to 10 June 2004. The
Respondent responded
to this Notice by letter dated 28 June 2004 and attended an
interview with Pharmaceutical Services Branch officers on 24 September
The PSB obtained copies of tax invoice copies for Tenuate Dospan supplied to
the Pharmacy from Sigma and API. These invoices indicate
that 310 packets of
Tenuate Dospan 30s were supplied to the Respondent during the relevant period.
Sigma and API have confirmed that
the tax invoices were paid in full.
The Respondent has only been able to account for sales and/or stock of 123
packets of Tenuate Dospan. Accordingly, there are 187 packets
of Tenuate Dospan
that are unaccounted for.
The Respondent was unable to provide any reasonable explanation as to how he
failed to account for approximately 187 packets of Tenuate
Dospan 30s. The
Respondent at one stage during cross-examination suggested that they could have
been stolen. However, as the Tenuate
Dospan tablets were kept in the dispensary
at the back of the Pharmacy this seems highly unlikely.
The invoices produced by the Respondent pursuant to the notice clearly
indicate that his staff check each invoice against what has
been supplied and
note any discrepancies. There was also undisputed evidence before the Board that
all relevant invoices had been
paid in full. Surely if the Respondent had
considered that he did not receive the drugs or that they had been stolen he
would taken
further steps to investigate same.
The Board is comfortably satisfied in accordance with the test in Briginshaw
that particular 5 of the complaint has been proved.
Having found particulars 1, 3 (in relation to Angela Whittington), 4 and 5
proved to the requisite standard, the Board finds that
the Respondent is guilty
of professional misconduct in that he has demonstrated a lack of adequate
judgement or care in the practice
of pharmacy, and has engaged in improper
and/or unethical conduct in relation to the practice of pharmacy.
Protection of the public is of paramount importance when considering the
appropriateness of orders pursuant to section 20 of the Act.
As noted above, the Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist on 9
February 1999 and purchased the Pharmacy four months later
on 26 June 1999. The
Respondent has worked solely on his own since that time.
When the Respondent was asked by counsel for the Complainant whether he had
done any further education, he responded: “
I haven’t done
”. On further questioning, the Respondent said that he had
completed some further education, “
frequent, once in a
while.....Once a year
”. However, he could not recall when it was that
he last attended or what it was.
The Respondent gave evidence that he received “Pharmacy Trade”,
“Pharmacy News” and the “Guild Bulletin”
and that he
read these professional journals. He also gave evidence that he was a member of
the Pharmaceutical Society. However,
when questioned at the hearing by one of
the Board Members as to whether he subscribed to the “Australian
Pharmacist”,
he said that he did not think so – although this is the
professional journal that comes with the membership of the Pharmaceutical
The Respondent presented at the hearing as being inexperienced and isolated
from his peers. It was also apparent that he had not,
through his years of
practice, adequately kept himself up to date with continuing education.
In fulfilling its protective function, which includes not only deterring the
Respondent from re-offending, but also deterring others
who may be tempted to
fall short of the high standards required of them, the Board makes the following
Tan Pham is reprimanded.
Tan Pham is to complete at least 30 hours per year, for three years from the
date of these orders, of Board approved Continuing
Professional Education
(“CPE”), at least 10 hours of which per year must be face to face
activity. Loc Tan Pham is to
provide the Board on an annual basis with documents
evidencing completion of the CPE activities no later that 31 December next
completion of the required annual CPE.
Tan Pham is to successfully complete, no later than 30 June 2008, the learning
Drugs of Abuse and Misuse
parts I and II, which are provided and
administered by the Australian College of Pharmacy Practice and Management.
a period of 3 years from the date of these orders, Loc Tan Pham is to do all
things necessary to obtain and maintain membership
of the Pharmaceutical Society
of Australia (NSW Branch). Proof of such membership is to be provided to the
Board by 30 June in each
of the 3 years.
Loc Tan Pham holds a pecuniary interest in the business of a pharmacist,
Loc Tan Pham is to do all things necessary to obtain
and maintain
membership of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Proof of membership is to be
provided to the Board by 30 June in each
of the 3 years from the date of these
Costs of complying with these orders to be borne by Loc Tan
The effective date of these orders will be one month following the day on
which Loc Tan Pham is advised by registered post at his
address as it appears on
the Register.
Batch Number
Expiry Date
September 2003
November 2004
November 2004
November 2004
November 2004
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
September 2005
December 2005
December 2005
December 2005
December 2005
December 2005
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (540 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter