URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Geoff (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 19 (29 November 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Geoff (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 19
Hearing Date(s):
29 November 2024
Date of Orders:
29 November 2024
Decision Date:
29 November 2024
Guardianship Division
A Britton, Deputy President
Associate Professor M C N Cigolini, Senior
Member (Professional)
P A Rutledge AM, General Member (Community)
Guardianship
1. A guardianship order is made for
2. Lisa, of [address removed for publication], is appointed
as the guardian.
3. This is a continuing guardianship order for a
period of 12 months from 29 November 2024.
4. This is a limited
guardianship order giving the guardian(s) custody of Geoff to the extent
necessary to carry out the functions
5. The guardian has the following
a) Accommodation
To decide where Geoff may
b) The guardian may authorise others including members of
NSW Police and the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
i) take Geoff to a
place approved by the guardian.
ii) keep him at that
iii) return him to that place should he leave
c) Health care
To decide what health care Geoff
may receive.
d) Medical/Dental consent
substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment,
where Geoff is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to
6. The condition of this order
a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Geoff to an understanding of
the issues and to obtain
and consider his views before making significant
Financial Management
1. The estate of Geoff
is subject to management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
2. Lisa, of [address removed for publication], is appointed
as the financial manager of the estate.
NOTE: The financial manager
is not authorised to deal with the estate (other than to protect the assets)
until he/she has obtained
all necessary authorities from the NSW Trustee and
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – 87-year-old subject person in hospital awaiting
discharge – subject person assessed to be a hoarder –
application
for a guardianship order – consideration of adjournment – subject
person opposed to the making of a guardianship
order – consideration of
whether separated partner constituted a spouse for the purposes of
14(2)(a)(ii)
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) – whether relationship is
close and continuing – concern that subject person will resist
accommodation decisions
made upon discharge from hospital – authorise
others function granted – private guardian appointed – order made
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – application for a financial
management order – whether subject person is capable of managing their
affairs – allegations of financial exploitation and vulnerability –
subject person unable to manage his own finances
– private manager
appointed – order made
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Guardianship Act 1987
(2)(a)(ii),
Cases Cited:
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2019] NSWCATAP
Principal judgment
001: Guardianship Application
Pseudonym (Geoff) (the
Central Coast Local Health District (applicant)
Pseudonym (Lisa)
(joined party)
Public Guardian
Pseudonym (Marina) (spouse)
Financial Management Application
Geoff (the person)
Central Coast
Local Health District (applicant)
Lisa (joined party, proposed financial
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Marina (spouse)
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00410614
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
person must not without the consent of the Tribunal, publish or broadcast the
name of any person who appears as a witness
in these proceedings, to whom these
proceedings relate, or is mentioned or otherwise involved in the proceedings.
The name of a person
includes a reference to any information, picture or other
material that identifies the person or is likely to lead to the identification
of the person. The provision of these reasons (with persons identified) is not
intended to be a publication or broadcasting of an
official report of the
proceedings.
REASONS FOR DECISION
reasons are about 87-year-old Geoff. Geoff is a fictitious name. In these
reasons to protect his privacy we have not used Geoff’s
was admitted to a Hospital on the Central Coast of NSW on 19 September 2024
after being found lying on the floor of his home,
apparently for a couple of
days. On admission he presented with pneumonia, cellulitis in his left leg
and delirium, most likely due
to infection. Before admission, Geoff had been
living alone in a property on the Central Coast of NSW where he has lived for
past 35 years.
an application made to the Guardianship Division of the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
), an NSW Local Health District (the
Local Health District
) requested the Tribunal to make guardianship and
financial management orders in respect of Geoff (the
Application
strongly opposes the Application and contends that he is capable of making
decisions about his personal and financial affairs.
He said that he would like
to return to live at home and to be cared for by his neighbour, Catherine.
daughter, Lisa
and former wife,
support the Application.
the reasons given below, we made a guardianship and financial management order
in respect of Geoff and appointed Lisa as her father’s
guardian and
financial manager.
Request for an adjournment
day before the hearing, Geoff rang NCAT and requested an adjournment. He said he
had been diagnosed with COVID-19 and was unable
to travel to Sydney to
participate in the hearing.
repeated that request at the commencement of the hearing, where he participated
by audio visual link from hospital. He said
that he was “in the dark about
the application” and wanted to get a qualified person to represent him in
the proceedings.
Balendran has had the care of Geoff for the past month and works with
Dr Mei Teng Toh. She opposed Geoff’s request for an
adjournment. She
contended that it is not in Geoff’s interest that the determination of
the Application be delayed and claimed
that hospital staff reported that
Geoff was being visited by people who were requesting him to sign documents,
which, in her opinion,
he did not have the capacity to understand. According to
Dr Balendran, Geoff is ready for discharge but lacks capacity to make
decisions about his finances and post-hospital accommodation.
Lisa and the Hospital Social Worker also opposed an adjournment being
Consideration
exercising the power to grant an adjournment we must have regard to the guiding
principles of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW). Those
principles require that we facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of
the real issues in the proceedings. In
addition, we must have regard to the
principles in the
Guardianship Act 1987
), which require, among other things, that we give paramount
consideration to Geoff’s welfare and interests and have regard
Undoubtedly,
exercising the discretion to grant an adjournment would not promote the quick
and cheap resolution of the real issues
in the proceedings. However, would it
give effect to the just resolution of those issues? In answering that
question, we considered
the following factors to be relevant.
there was no medical evidence and nothing in his presentation to suggest that
Geoff was unwell, or, that his ability to participate
in the proceedings was
impeded because of COVID-19. Nor did Geoff make that claim. In Dr
Balendran’s opinion, Geoff was asymptomatic
of COVID-19.
while because of COVID-19, Geoff was unable to travel to Sydney to participate
in the hearing in person, nonetheless he was
able to participate in the hearing
remotely by audio visual link. The only person who participated in the hearing
in person was Catherine.
Geoff’s responses to our questions together with
his presentation throughout the hearing, did not tend to suggest that he was
unable to participate in the hearing, or was disadvantaged as a result of
participating remotely. In reaching that conclusion we
note that Geoff is hard
of hearing. Nonetheless, at the commencement of the hearing after adjustments
were made to the sound, it
was apparent that Geoff was able to hear what was
Geoff had adequate notice of the hearing. He was sent a notice of hearing on 11
November 2024. We accept as certified by the
Hospital Social Worker in the
Application, that she gave Geoff a copy of the Application on or before
4 November 2024.
despite saying that one of the reasons he wanted an adjournment was to obtain
legal advice, by the time of the hearing he
had taken no steps to do so and had
no plans to do so. We concluded that if an adjournment was granted it was
unlikely that Geoff
would seek to obtain legal advice.
Geoff did not identify any material he considered relevant that had not been
provided to the Tribunal.
on the available evidence we could not be satisfied as apprehended by Dr
Balendran, that Geoff had been coerced to sign documents
which he does not
understand. Nonetheless, we accept that Geoff’s impaired cognition
together with his confusion surrounding
his financial affairs, favours
the Application being determined expeditiously. We note that the
Guardianship Division’s hearing
schedule indicates that if the hearing
were adjourned, it could not be listed for hearing within the next 28 days.
are not persuaded that if we were to refuse to grant the application for an
adjournment Geoff would be denied a reasonable opportunity
to be heard in these
proceedings. Nor are we persuaded that to proceed to determine the Application
would be unjust.
these reasons we decided to refuse to grant Geoff’s application for an
adjournment.
Guardianship application
Can a guardianship order be made for Geoff?
discretion to make a guardianship order can only be exercised if we are
satisfied that Geoff is a “person in need of a guardian”,
“person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable of
managing his or her person”:
Guardianship Act
person with a disability includes a person who is physically and/or
psychologically disabled and by virtue of that fact is
restricted in one or more
major life activities to such an extent that they require supervision or social
habilitation [support to
live in the community]:
Guardianship Act
Medical evidence
has been under the care of the Hospital’s general registrar, Dr Mei Teng
Toh, since he was admitted to hospital on 19
September 2024. In a report
prepared for these proceedings dated 29 October 2024, Dr Toh wrote that on
8 October 2024 Geoff scored
16/30 on a Montreal Cognitive Assessment
and the results revealed impairment affecting a
majority of domains (visual spatial/executive 2/5; naming 3/3; attention 3/6;
abstraction
2/2; delayed recall 3/5; orientation 3/6). In Dr Toh’s opinion
these results indicated a moderate cognitive impairment.
Toh recorded that the cellulitis and lower leg swelling Geoff presented with on
admission was likely the result of uncontrolled
diabetes, dependent oedema, and
fluid retention.
Toh reported that Geoff’s treating team were concerned about his ability
to function at home alone. While in hospital Geoff’s
mobility improved, in
Dr Toh’s opinion it remains “limited by his cognition”.
Dr Toh noted Geoff had been assessed
by physiotherapists who identified a
“new baseline” which indicated that he required a four-wheel walker
(4WW) and 24-hour
supervision, because he was a high falls risk “secondary
to impaired cognition”.
on the photographs of Geoff’s home tended in these proceedings by Marina,
which showed objects strewn over the floor
and stacked up (the
photographs
), Dr Toh said that the state of the home posed a safety risk to
Toh recorded that an occupational therapy assessment revealed that Geoff failed
to understand his care requirements and how he
would manage at home, including
paying bills, making meals and maintaining his own hygiene and that of his home.
Dr Toh concluded
that Geoff lacks insight into his personal care needs and this
impacts on his capacity to make informed decisions about accommodation,
treatment and finances.
Balendran said that that Geoff appears to have vascular dementia although no
formal diagnosis has been made. Dr Balendran considered
it significant that the
results of testing on MOCA revealed global impairment across all domains. When
questioned about the reliability
of those tests given Geoff’s
co-morbidities, Dr Balendran said that when the initial test was undertaken
Geoff’s pneumonia
and delirium had resolved. The results of a more recent
test were consistent with the results of the initial test.
Geoff’s General Practitioner
Chris Lloyd has been Geoff’s GP since 2013. In a medical certificate dated
28 November 2024 Dr Lloyd said that he had been
approached by Geoff's wife and
friend, Catherine to prepare a report for these proceedings. Dr Lloyd wrote that
despite cognitive
decline and hearing loss before admission to hospital in
September 2024 Geoff functioned “quite independently in the
community”.
He went on to write:
“[C]ertainly he made
some choices regarding how he lived that many of us would not share including
being a hoarder and not choosing
to wash daily. However, he rarely missed
appointments with me, took his medications as prescribed and performed
investigations if
he was asked such as blood pathology.
His social network is a little complex within an estranged wife living
locally (they share a daughter) and a number of friends in
the community whose
opinion on what is best do not always (or currently) align. I am quite sure
[Geoff] [will] choose to continue
to live independently if possible but I'm
unsure of his current capabilities and capacity following this hospital
admission.”
these proceedings in answer to questions from the Tribunal, Geoff said that the
reason he was in hospital was so that he be medically
fit for discharge and in
“a clean frame of mind”. He said he understood that he was admitted
to hospital following a
fall but could not recall the circumstances of the fall.
claimed that before his current hospital admission he was completely independent
but conceded that if he were to return to live
at home, he would need
assistance. According to Geoff, his neighbour, Catherine was willing to provide
that assistance. When asked
to comment on the tendered photographs, Geoff said
that his home, while messy, was not usually that messy. He said that a person
with a key, probably his wife, had entered the house and thrown things around.
said that her father was a lifelong hoarder. She and her mother moved out of the
family home 18 years ago largely because it
had become unliveable. When she
visited her father, she observed clutter inside and outside the house.
said that over the last two years she has observed that her father has become
increasingly confused and aggressive.
agreed with her daughter that Geoff has become increasingly confused and
aggressive over the last couple of years. She said
since they have separated,
they have remained in regular contact. Commenting on the tendered photographs,
she said the home had always
been cluttered, unsafe and messy. In her opinion
“nothing much had changed”. She visited him at home once or twice a
Consideration
uncontroverted evidence is that Geoff has a cognitive impairment, a disability
for the purpose if
Guardianship Act
. Geoff challenges the
opinion of the health practitioners who gave evidence in these proceedings that
as a consequence of that disability
he now needs significant support to live in
the community. However, he does not dispute that he now needs some support. We
because of his disability Geoff is partially incapable of managing his
personal affairs and is “a person in need of a guardian”.
Should a guardianship order be made?
considering whether to exercise the discretion to make, or not to make, a
guardianship order, we must consider the matters listed
Guardianship Act
, relevantly, the views of Geoff and any spouse, the
importance of preserving Geoff’s existing family relationships and the
practicability of services being provided to Geoff without the making of a
guardianship order. In addition, we are required to have
regard to the
principles.
Geoff’s views
a hearing report dated 21 November 2024, an NCAT officer recorded the following
account of their discussion with Geoff about the
Application:
“Views of [Geoff]:
On 21 November 2024 this officer spoke to [Geoff] over the phone. When this
officer explain[ed] the nature of the applications, [Geoff]
expressed that he
could manage his own affairs and disagrees with the recommendation of aged care.
[Geoff] continued to explain that
he would like [Catherine], his carer, to move
in with him to support him at home once the house is fixed up. During the
conversation
[Geoff] was able to express his views and answer this officers
questions adequately. This officer confirmed the hearing date and
advised [Geoff] he could participate via video link from the hospital where he
could provide his views further.”
said that he does not need a guardian to make decisions for him. He said that he
was able to manage his personal and financial
affairs and to care for himself.
He said that when he returned home he would be assisted by Catherine who he
described as his “carer”.
was questioned in these proceedings about the statutory declaration dated 18
October 2024 which he apparently filed in these
proceedings. In that document
Geoff declared and affirmed:
“[Catherine] has permission to
live at my address at [address removed for publication] to clean or maintenance
to my home to
clean inside and outside to be safe for my return [ineligible]
move or sell any cars after discussion with me. Change locks and keys
, myself [Geoff] and
[Catherine] to act on my behalf for all of my affairs. [Catherine] to be my
questioned in these proceedings about that statutory declaration, Geoff
Member: So do you recall preparing a statutory declaration
saying that about a month ago?
[Geoff]: Ah, that’s, yeah, that’s, yeah about a month and a half
ago or something, yeah I did sign something with [Catherine].
That she’ll
be my carer. Yeah, yup.
Member: And why did you sign that document? Why did you prepare this
[Geoff]: Why did I prepare? Well of course that’s the most sensible
thing to do. If you’re in the right frame of mind.
Member: And why was it the most sensible thing to do?
[Geoff]: Well [INAUDIBLE] the right thing and the sensible thing and she
promised to be truthful.
Member: And do you recall where you were when you made this statutory
declaration?
[Geoff]: Where was I?
Member: Yes.
[Geoff]: Yeah. Yeah, I do.
Member: Where were you?
[Geoff]: I was having a coffee and buying dinner, lunch, yes. [INAUDIBLE] to
sign something and do something for your own good because
[INAUDIBLE] down on
Member: And who said to you, you have to sign something for your own good?
[Geoff]: Well that’s what you do. You only sign it for your own good.
Member: But who suggested? You said you had coffee and dinner with someone
and you signed it. Who were you with when you signed it?
[Geoff]: Ah well it would have been with [Catherine] and [Lewis], no doubt.
Member: If you think about it, can you remember or are you just assuming
you’re with [Lewis] and [Catherine]?
[Geoff]: No. I remember everything. And I see her many times a week. I
remember everything, what she does for me because she’s
an honest helper
and good neighbour. And [Lewis] I’ve known him for 40 odd years, 50 years.
And he’s a good man.
explained that she had been Geoff’s neighbour for about eight years. She
said that she was at the hospital when Geoff
prepared the statutory declaration.
She said she understood the reason he prepared that document was so that she
get into trouble with the ex-wife”.
said that she had agreed to act as Geoff’s carer. She described him as a
good friend who had helped her out over the
years. When asked whether in her
opinion Geoff was forgetful, she replied “no ... he is about the
same”. She said that
he was a bit slack around the hygiene. She said the
house was currently unliveable and when it was fixed she was prepared to live
it and to care for Geoff.
Is Marina, Geoff’s spouse?
Guardianship Act
requires that in considering whether or not to exercise
the discretion to make a guardianship order in respect of Geoff, we shall
regard to the views of Geoff’s spouse, if the relationship between Geoff
and the spouse is “close and continuing”.
defines spouse
to include “the person to whom a person is legally married (including the
husband or wife of a person)”.
and Marina separated about 20 years and are not divorced. The house in which
Geoff was living is jointly owned by Geoff and
claims that the reason she and Geoff separated was because Geoff’s
hoarding behaviour impacted on her mental health and
that of her daughter.
Nonetheless she claims that since they separated she and Geoff have had a close
and continuing relationship.
She claims that she visited Geoff at home once or
twice a month and shortly before his fall, they had lunch together. Three years
ago, when Geoff had a stroke she prepared meals for him and laundered his
clothes. She said she and her sister were prepared to care
for him on his
discharge from hospital.
disagrees that his relationship with Marina can be characterised as close and
continuing. He accused Marina of stealing his
bank card after he was admitted to
hospital and “attacking him left right and centre”. He said he has
no relationship
with Marina “she just takes”.
agrees with her mother’s claim that the relationship between her parents
is close and continuing. She said that despite
the challenges in their
relationship, since separating her parents have remained in regular contact and
her mother has supported
her father, citing as an example, the care she provided
after he suffered a stroke a few years ago.
Hospital Social Worker said that Marina and her sister had been regular visitors
since Geoff’s admission.
Consideration
difficulty with assessing whether the relationship between Geoff and Marina is
close and continuing is that each appear to apprehend
that the answer to that
question will be determinative of whether Geoff will be able to return to live
at home and to be cared for
by Catherine. They have opposing views about this
issue. Neither are independent witnesses.
note that the question of whether the relationship between Geoff and Marina is
close and continuing is only relevant because, if
the answer to the question is
yes, we must have regard to the views of Marina:
Guardianship Act
14(2)(a)(ii).
Marina’s views would not be determinative but one of several
matters we must take into account.
find that the relationship between the Geoff and Marina is continuing.
We accept, as claimed by Marina and supported by Lisa, that
Marina have been in reasonably regular contact since they separated 17 years
more difficult question is whether the nature of the relationship can be
characterised as close. Whether a relationship is close
requires an objective
and subjective assessment. Geoff is firm in his view that his relationship with
Marina is not close. Marina
holds the opposite view.
Subjectively
assessed, the relationship appears to be close, evidenced by the care and
support Marina provided her husband after his
stroke, the fact that Geoff and
Marina have remained in reasonably regular contact since their separation and
that Marina has been
a regular visitor throughout Geoff’s current
evidence is finely balanced. Nonetheless we find the relationship between Geoff
and Marina to be close.
follows that we must take Marina’s views about whether a guardianship
order should be made into account.
is of the view that a guardianship order should be made. In her opinion Geoff is
unable to manage his personal affairs and
to make a reasoned decision about
where he is to live on discharge from hospital.
Geoff describes Catherine as his carer, the evidence does not support a finding
that Catherine is a carer within the meaning
Guardianship
, that is, a person who provided Geoff on a regular basis with, domestic
services and support, or arranged for Geoff to be provided
with services and
support before he was admitted to hospital. While it appears that Catherine
provided Geoff with some support before
his admission, the available evidence
does not support a finding that she provided Geoff with domestic services and
support on a
regular basis.
The importance of preserving
Geoff’s existing family relationships
making of a guardianship order is likely to place the relationship between Geoff
and Marina under further strain. This is because
Geoff currently blames his
former wife and daughter for the prospect that a guardianship order might be
made. If that order is made,
Geoff’s feelings of animosity towards his
former wife and daughter are likely to intensify. This consideration weighs
the making of a guardianship order.
The importance of
preserving Geoff’s cultural and linguistic environment
our view exercising the discretion to make or not make a guardianship order is
unlikely to have any material impact on Geoff’s
linguistic and cultural
environments.
Practicalities of services being provided without
a guardianship order
being admitted to hospital Geoff was not receiving any services from external
care providers.
find that given the extent of his cognitive impairment Geoff would be unable to
make and to implement decisions about services.
This consideration favours the
exercise of the discretion to make a guardianship order.
Findings and conclusions
task of deciding whether to exercise the discretion to make, or not to make, a
guardianship order, requires that we balance several
considerations. On the one
hand, we must observe the principle that Geoff must be protected from neglect,
abuse, and exploitation.
On the other hand, we must restrict Geoff’s
freedom of decision-making and action as little as possible and take into
consideration
his views. At all times, the paramount consideration is
Geoff’s welfare and interests.
against the exercise of the discretion to make a guardianship order is
Geoff’s strong opposition to the proposed order,
his firmly held belief
that he is capable of managing his personal affairs together with the fact that
a guardianship order will
undoubtedly operate to restrict Geoff’s freedom
of decision-making and action. The making of a guardianship order, and decisions
made by the guardian with which he disagrees, is likely to cause Geoff
significant distress. These factors weigh heavily against
the making of a
guardianship order.
against those considerations is the evidence that Geoff now lacks capacity to
decide where he is to live on discharge from
hospital, and, if he were to return
reveals that Geoff
lacks insight into the extent of his impaired functional
capacity and current care needs. The objective evidence indicates that
pre-admission and current functional capacity is significantly
lower than his self-assessment. By way of example, the social work
report cites
a report given by Lisa of when her father visited her home several months before
his admission. Geoff was unable to
get off the couch to go to the toilet,
refused her assistance, crawled to the toilet and was incontinent.
assessing the expert evidence about Geoff’s capacity to make decisions
receive on discharge, we
have taken into account, as observed by Dr Lloyd, that Geoff has led an
unorthodox lifestyle and made lifestyle
choices with which many people may
disagree. It is possible that that those choices may have influenced,
consciously or otherwise,
the opinions expressed by those health practitioners
who gave evidence in these proceedings about Geoff’s capacity to make
decisions about his personal affairs.
solution to the difficulties the experts have identified to him returning home
to live is simple. Catherine will move
into his home and care for him.
He has failed to identify what this will entail, for example, whether
Catherine will be required
to be available 24/7, the type of care she will
provide, whether she will be paid for her services. In addition, Geoff appears
to have turned his mind to the possibility that the proposed arrangement
might not work out, and, if so, the available alternatives.
Hospital Social Worker and the hospital team who have been caring for Geoff have
concerns about Catherine’s motivation for
agreeing to act as Geoff’s
carer. That concern is shared by Marina and her daughter. The Hospital
Social Worker reports for
example that Catherine has been squatting in
Geoff’s home and asking for his keycard. She points to the statutory
declaration
made by Geoff as evidence that Catherine has sought to take
advantage of Geoff and to cement her residence in his home. Catherine
other hand gives an innocent account of the circumstances surrounding the
signing of that document and claims it was initiated
by Geoff to protect her
from Marina. She claims that her sole motivation is a genuine desire to assist
an old friend, who has assisted
her in the past. The allegations made about
Catherine are based on untested hearsay accounts. On the available evidence it
possible to make a reliable finding about those allegations. Nonetheless,
it is apparent that Geoff now lacks the capacity to evaluate
any risks posed by
the proposed arrangement and to make and implement decisions if that arrangement
does not work out.
the considerations are finely balanced, we have decided to make a guardianship
order in respect of Geoff. That decision gives
paramount consideration to
Geoff’s welfare and interests.
Term of the guardianship
decided to make a guardianship order for a term of 12
What functions should the guardian be given?
decided to give the guardian the functions of accommodation, services, health
care, and authority to consent to medical and dental
treatment. It is likely
that decisions about each of these matters may be required to be made during the
term of the order.
addition, notwithstanding its coercive nature, we decided to give the guardian
authority to authorise NSW Police, the Ambulance
Service of NSW and others to
take, keep and return Geoff to a place approved by the guardian. In reaching
that decision we took into
account the evidence which tends to suggest that if a
decision is made about his accommodation with which he disagrees, there is
material risk that Geoff will resist that decision being implemented.
Who should be appointed as Geoff's guardian?
nominated herself to be appointed as her father’s guardian. Her mother
supported and her father opposed that nomination.
appoint Lisa as guardian, we must be satisfied that she meets the criteria in
Guardianship Act
17 Guardians
(1) A person shall not be appointed as the guardian of a
person under guardianship unless the Tribunal is satisfied that:
(a) the personality of the proposed guardian is generally
compatible with that of the person under guardianship,
(b) there is no undue conflict between the interests
(particularly, the financial interests) of the proposed guardian and those
the person under guardianship, and
(c) the proposed guardian is both willing and able to
exercise the functions conferred or imposed by the proposed guardianship
guardian must observe the section, which includes to take into account the views
of the subject person in making decisions on behalf
Personality generally compatible
claimed that before his current hospital admission she and her father had a
reasonably good relationship. They were in regular
dispute that claim but it was evident that he now feels aggrieved by his
daughter who he considers is opposed
to his choice to return to live at home
with and be cared for by Catherine.
apparent that Geoff is currently annoyed with his daughter, we are satisfied
nonetheless they have a personality which is generally
compatible. They have
remained in reasonably regular contact since Lisa left the family home in 2011,
which tends to support that
the two “get on”.
conflict of interest
claimed that she does not hold any property, assets or income with her father.
Marina supported that claim. Geoff does not suggest
are satisfied that there is no undue conflict between the interests
(particularly, the financial interests) of Lisa and her father.
Willing and able to exercise to act as guardian
the hearing, Lisa said that she acknowledged that at times it would be difficult
to perform the role of guardian, especially if
she were to make a decision that
her father opposed. Nonetheless, she said she was willing to take on that role.
addition to being satisfied that Lisa is willing to act as guardian, we must be
satisfied that she is “able” to exercise
the functions conferred
under the guardianship order.
Section 17(1)(c)
Guardianship Act
requires us to make an evaluative judgment about whether Lisa is
“able” to exercise the functions conferred under the
guardianship
order. This requires consideration not only of whether she possesses the
necessary skill and experience to be able to
exercise those functions, but also
whether she has the personal attributes, such as judgment and integrity,
required to exercise
those functions. In addition, we must consider whether she
is able to make those decisions in a manner consistent with the
principles:
[2019] NSWCATAP 64
accept Lisa’s claim that she has the technical competence to make and
implement decisions on behalf of her father. She is
employed in the Army and
impressed us as an intelligent young woman who had a genuine concern for her
father’s interests and
considering whether Lisa is able to act as guardian we considered whether as
required by the
principles, she would endeavour to exercise the
functions conferred by the guardianship order in a way that gave effect to her
wishes and impeded his freedom of decision making and action as
little as possible. Her answer to questions in these proceedings
persuaded us
that she understood that as guardian she was obliged to not only make decisions
that promoted her father’s welfare
and interests but was obliged to take
into account his views and, as far as practicable, promote his autonomy.
find that Lisa is willing and able to exercise the functions conferred under the
guardianship order.
Consideration
are satisfied that Lisa meets the criteria in
Guardianship
. We appoint her as guardian for Geoff.
Management application
Guardianship Act
provides that the power to make a financial
management order in respect of Geoff can only be exercised if we have considered
capability to manage his financial affairs and are satisfied of three
(1) that Geoff is not capable of managing his affairs;
(2) that there is a need for a person to manage those affairs on behalf of
(3) that it is in Geoff’s best interests that the order be made.
Is Geoff not capable of managing his affairs?
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
commenting on one of the
preconditions to making a financial management order — that the Tribunal
is satisfied that the person
is not capable of managing their affairs
Guardianship Act
) — Lindsay J said at [307]-[308] that the
question posed was:
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his
or her own affairs in a reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention
a [financial manager] charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and
[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with (making
and implementing decisions about) his or her own affairs
(person and property,
capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with due regard
to his or her present and prospective
wants and needs, and those of family and
friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
Geoff is not capable of managing his finances requires consideration of the
nature of his estate.
available evidence indicates that Geoff receives the Age Pension. He owns his
says that shortly after Geoff was admitted to hospital she visited the home and
found multiple unpaid bills – $2365 (water
rates), hospital$1500
(Council rates), $1082 (gas) — which she has now paid. When
questioned in these proceedings about that
claim Geoff
“My understanding is and I’ve told them that and
I’ve told the authorities, the gas and all that people ... that
you’re over three weeks, they cut everything off, water gas, whatever, and
four days before I came to hospital, I went I
cleared everything and I
didn’t owe everybody a cent. So that’s all ...”
admitted to hospital Geoff had debts totalling about $5000 owed to the Local
Council and utility providers. It is evident given
the size of those debts that
they have been outstanding for some time.
questioned about his income and expenditure Geoff said that he received the
“normal pension” and had sufficient money
to buy “proper
food”. When pressed he was unable to provide further particulars.
said when her father was admitted to hospital and concerns were raised about him
giving his bankcard to other people, at her
request his bank put a 15-day
“duty of care” hold on her father’s account. She claimed that
the bank refused to
extend that claim.
failure to acknowledge the extent of his indebtedness and his inability to
explain how he would deal with his debts,
indicates that notwithstanding the
relatively simple nature of his financial affairs, Geoff is not able to manage
those affairs in
a reasonably prudent fashion.
Is there a need
for a person to manage Geoff’s affairs?
circumstances where Geoff is unable to manage his financial affairs, there is
uncertainty and confusion about whether he has given
his bankcard to others and
who has access to his bank account, we find there is a need for a person to
manage Geoff’s finances.
allegations made by the Hospital Social Worker about Catherine taking
Geoff’s bank card are unproven. Nonetheless because
of his cognitive
impairment Geoff is now unable to access and to monitor his bank account.
Reasonably prudent financial management
requires that a person be able to
monitor their finances, or, have a person who can be entrusted to do so,
irrespective of whether
there is cogent evidence of financial exploitation.
find there is a need for a person to manage Geoff’s financial
Is it in Geoff’s best interests that a financial
management order be made?
circumstances where Geoff is unable to manage his finances and there is a need
for a person to manage his financial affairs, it
is in his best interests that a
financial management order be made notwithstanding his strong opposition to such
order being made.
decided to make a financial management order, because to do so is consistent
with the statutory instruction to give paramount consideration
welfare and interests.
Who should be appointed to manage
Geoff’s estate?
nominated herself to act as manager of Geoff’s estate. We find that Lisa
has the technical skills to manage her father’s
finances and understands
and will comply with the fiduciary obligations of the role of manager. In
addition, we find that Lisa will
endeavour to discharge those obligations in
manner which conforms with the
principles.
find that she is suitable person to appoint as financial manager of her
father’s estate. We decided to appoint Lisa to manage
her father’s
finances despite the fact that he opposed that
appointment.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Catherine is a fictitious name.
In these reasons to protect her privacy we have not used Catherine’s real
Lisa is a fictitious
name. In these reasons to protect her privacy we have not used Lisa’s real
Marina is a fictitious
name. In these reasons to protect her privacy we have not used Marina’s
fictitious name. In these reasons to protect his privacy we have not used
Lewis’ real name.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter