URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Salaried Medical Officers' Federation (New South Wales) v State of New South Wales [2025] NSWIC 9 (22 August 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South Wales) v
State of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 9
Hearing Date(s):
26 February 2025
Date of Orders:
22 August 2025
Decision Date:
22 August 2025
I make the following orders:
(1) Leave to amend refused.
Application dismissed.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Awards and enterprise agreements
– Interpretation – Breach – Remuneration
– Public Sector
– Health Professionals – Recruitment and hiring – Remuneration
and salaries
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) 2009 (NSW), s 3
Health Services Act 1997
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Interpretation Act 1987
Public Sector Management Act
Cases Cited:
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v National Australia
Bank Limited (No 2)
[2023] FCA 1118
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
(2006) 153 IR 426
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR 426
Civil Services Association
of Western Australia Incorporated v Director-General, the Department of Justice
[2019] WAIRC 817
Geo A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW)
George A Bond & Co Ltd (In liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW)
Health Services Union o/b Mr Tony Thomas v Health Secretary in respect of
HealthShare NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm 1065
In re Goodwin (1986) Tas R
K-Generation Pty. Limited v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR
Leotta v Public Transport Commission (NSW)
(1976) 9 ALR 437
Hydro-Electric Commission
[1998] FCA 605
(1998) 85 FCR 170
New South Wales v Stockwell
[2017] NSWCA 30
Public Service Association and Professional Officers
Association Amalgamated Union (NSW) v Secretary of the Treasury
(2014) 87 NSWLR
[2014] NSWIRComm 23
Queensland v JL Holdings Pty Ltd.
(1997) 189 CLR 146
Workpac Pty Ltd v Rossato
(2021) 271 CLR 456
Texts Cited:
Health Industry Status of Employment (State) Award
Health Industry
Status of Employment (State) Award 2018
Health Industry Status of Employment
(State) Award 2019
Health Industry Status of Employment (State) Award
Health Industry Status of Employment (State) Award 2022
Industry Status of Employment (State) Award 2023
Public Hospital Medical
Officers Award 2016
Public Hospital Medical Officers (State) Award
Public Hospital Medical Officers (State) Award 2019
Public Hospital
Medical Officers (State) Award 2021
Public Hospital Medical Officers (State)
Public Hospital Medical Officers (State) Award 2023
Principal judgment
Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South Wales)
(Applicant)
State of New South Wales (Respondent)
Representation:
T Dixon / R Kumar (Applicant)
O Jones / C Beshara
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Hall Payne Lawyers (Applicant)
Minter Ellison
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00045113
Introduction
is an industrial
organisation of employees registered under the
Industrial Relations Act
(NSW) (IR Act). It commenced these proceedings on behalf of its
members seeking declarations and orders as to the respondent’s
failure to comply with the terms of the Health Industry Status of Employment
(State) Award 2012 (the Status Award) and the
Public Hospitals (Medical
Officers) (State) Award (the Medical Officers Award), each as varied from time
to time in the relevant
period. The fundamental question at the heart of the
proceedings turns on the proper construction of clause 1.4 of the Status Award.
claim is directed at the conditions of Doctors in Training (DiTs) about whom
more is said in [
below. The proceedings are representative in that the applicant has nominated
four medical officers: Doctors Andrew Sanderson;
Anna Wells; Benjamin Middleton;
and Serge Geara, referred to in the originating process as the “Specified
Doctors”, who
were employed as DiTs in the period between February 2018
until approximately the end of November 2022. Their circumstances in that
period are considered to be typical of DiTs covered by the Medical Officers
Procedural History
proceedings were commenced by statement of claim filed 31 January 2024 in the
Supreme Court of NSW. That Court made procedural
directions and orders for
discovery during the first half of 2024. On 6 September 2024 the applicant
filed a notice of motion seeking
the transfer of the proceedings to this Court;
the affidavit supporting the motion indicated the defendant agreed to the
Walton J approved the transfer on 9 September 2024.
the time of transfer the evidence in chief of both parties had been filed.
Further directions were made by the President, Taylor
J, on 24 September 2024,
including that:
(1) the matter was to be listed for conciliation;
(2) the applicant was to file and serve particulars of loss and damage by 11
October 2024;
(3) the applicant was to file and serve a document setting out the agreed facts
and a further document setting out the issues of
law and fact in dispute by 4 pm
on 1 November 2024; and
(4) the applicant and respondent were to file and serve written submissions and
a schedule of objections 28 days and 14 days respectively
prior to the hearing.
conciliation before Commissioner McDonald on 5 November 2024 was ultimately
unsuccessful. This matter then proceeded to what
was expected to be a hearing
over three days commencing on 26 February 2025.
Statement of Agreed Facts is annexed as
A (632 KB, pdf)
Statement of Issues of Fact and Law is annexed as
B (399 KB, pdf)
The Parties
The applicant
applicant is an industrial organisation registered under Ch 5 Pt 3 of the IR
Act. It is entitled to enrol and represent the industrial
interests of salaried
medical practitioners working in public and non-government health systems in
NSW. More detailed information
one of Annexure A.
group of members represented by the applicant is the group of interns, residents
and registrars working in the public health system
in NSW. This group is
referred to as DiTs or Junior Medical Officers (JMOs).
applicant obtained eligibility to cover DiTs on 22 November 2012. Prior to that
time the Health Services Union NSW (HSU) had
exclusive coverage of DiTs. The
HSU continues to have coverage of this group of employees.
public health system in NSW is established and regulated under the
Health Services
provides that the public health system consists of: all local health
districts (LHDs);
all statutory
health corporations;
the affiliated
health organisations in respect of their recognised establishments and
recognised services;
and the Health
Secretary in respect of the provision of ambulance services and other
specified services.
staff of the public health system are employed in the NSW Health
by the respondent pursuant
Health Services Act
. Subject to certain exceptions
relating to senior executive staff,
the employer functions of the respondent are exercised on behalf of the
respondent by the Secretary of the Ministry of Health (the
Secretary).
Additional information
will be apparent from the Statement of Issues the overarching issue is whether
the Specified Doctors were employed as “temporary
pursuant to the Status Award. If the answer to that question is yes, are the
Specified Doctors entitled to an allowance
of 10% for the first 13 weeks of each
contract period?
second issue identified in the Statement of Issues is whether the respondent
offered fixed term contracts “in preference
to” ongoing contracts?
third issue was identified in the applicants Submissions in Reply filed on 21
February 2025. Attached to those submissions was
a draft Amended Statement of
Claim. The amendment sought to add a claim for a civil penalty in respect of an
alleged failure to
classify properly the Specified Doctors in breach of clause
2.2 of the Status Award. The amendment was opposed.
are, plainly, as identified in the Statement of Issues, several sub-issues which
may arise depending upon the answers to the
main questions.
Relief Claimed
applicant claimed:
(1) Declarations that the respondent breached various Status Awards by failing
to pay the 10% loading required by cl 3.2 of the Status
(2) Declarations that Doctors Geara and Wells are permanent employees as defined
in cl 1.5 of the Status Award.
(3) Orders for the imposition of civil penalties in respect of the alleged
(4) Orders for the penalties to be paid to the Industrial Registrar for payment
to the applicant.
(5) Orders for the amounts not paid to the Specified Doctors arising from the
failure to pay the 10% loading to be paid to the applicant
together with
The Evidence
applicant, in chief, read the affidavits of:
(1) Andrew Sanderson, Consultant Radiologist (subject to objection as to the
relevance of paragraphs 31 and 52);
(2) Benjamin Middleton, Palliative Care and General Medicine Specialist (subject
to objection as to the relevance of paragraphs 71-73);
(3) Serge Geara, Motor Neurone Disease Fellow and Neurodegenerative Fellow
(subject to objection as to the relevance of paragraphs
22-25, 41-43, 68,
(4) Anna Wells, Paediatric Physician Trainee (subject to objection as to the
relevance of paragraphs 56-58); and
(5) Andrew Holland, Executive Director of the applicant (subject to objection as
to the relevance of paragraphs 36 (third sentence),
45, 60-72, 79 (final
sentence), 85 (final sentence), 92-94 and 95 (second sentence).
reply the applicant read the affidavits of:
(1) Abdul-Hamid Sabih, Advanced Trainee in Addiction Medicine (subject to
objection as to the relevance of paragraphs 12, 22 and
(2) Sarah McCredie, Trainee in Obstetrics and Gynaecology (subject to objection
as to the relevance of paragraphs 9, and the second
sentence in paragraphs 15,
18 and 26).
defendant read the affidavits of:
(1) Elizabeth Mullins, Executive Director of Medical Services for Southern NSW
Local Health District;
(2) Andrew Patrick David Henderson, Network Director of Physician Training,
Westmead Network;
(3) Daniel Gialouris, Manager of the Medical Training and Administration Unit at
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital;
(4) Jaime Frances Berry, Network Manager (Co-lead) – JMO Services, Sydney
Children's Hospitals Network;
(5) Jeanette Chadban, Operations Manager for Medical Administration at Maitland
(6) Justine Harris, Chief Medical Workforce Advisor within the Workforce
Planning and Talent Development Branch of NSW Health;
(7) Nicholas Richards, Manager of Workforce Intelligence for NSW Health;
(8) Nigel Peter Wolfe, Head of the Neurology Department, Blacktown Hospital and
Mount Druitt Hospital;
(9) Preeti Saraswati, Project Officer for Palliative Care, Western Sydney Local
Health District; and
(10) Sandhya Limaye, Staff Specialist, Department of Immunology, and Director of
Wellbeing at Concord Hospital.
reply, the defendant read the further affidavit of Justine Harris.
affidavits, including the documents annexed or exhibited to them, were admitted
into evidence subject to the objections notified
in accordance with the
Directions made by the President. It was agreed by the parties that the
evidence subject to objection should
be attributed such weight as considered
appropriate by the Court.
the witnesses were required for cross-examination.
applicant took objection, on the basis of relevance, to all the witness evidence
led by the respondent except for that of Nicholas
Richards. The essence of the
objection was identified in the submissions of Mr Dixon for the applicant. He
“Your Honour will see that the bulk of the objections, coming from the
applicant at least, are to this effect: the applicant’s
evidence explains
why it considers it to be preferable or necessary at its highest to structure
its employment contracts of a particular
duration. In other words, fixed term,
short term, ranging from a matter of months up to three years, because of the
training requirements
imposed on doctors in training by the various colleges.
And the objections, of course, were, well, that may be so. It may be a
thing, but ultimately this case turns on the proper construction of
the award, and if the award requires that doctors be offered
permanent positions
after ten weeks, then that’s what the Court should operate on,
irrespective of what pragmatic advantages
there might be in structuring
contracts otherwise. That was essentially the debate from the applicant’s
point of view.”
will become apparent I regard the evidence as relevant. It provides the context
of the industry, at least that part of it in which
DiTs are employed, in which
the Awards operate. The witnesses explain the details of the various
institutions having input into
the training programs undertaken by DiTs and the
requirements of those programs. Some information of that kind is contained in
Statement of Agreed Facts at paragraphs 47- 49 and 51. The evidence
supplements that information.
objections taken by the respondent related to generalised statements about the
uncertainty of fixed term as opposed to ongoing
employment. This had various
impacts such as difficulty making life decisions, such as purchasing a property,
planning for a family,
or refraining from complaining or forgoing claims to
overtime out of a concern that the person may be identified as a problem
and jeopardise future employment. Dr Wells also said she lacked a
sense of community because of the need to move around and uncertainty
where work may take her. The evidence of the witnesses suggest that this last
issue is related to the training programs rather
than the status of employment.
the extent it provides some industry context I will have regard to the specified
doctor’s evidence subject to objection,
but I cannot accord it much weight
because of its highly generalised nature.
objections to the evidence of Dr McCredie and Dr Sabih are in a different
category. Each objection relates to a statement that
they were not paid the 10%
allowance payable to temporary employees under the Status Award. They are not
among the Specified Doctors
and no claim is made on their behalf in these
proceedings. The evidence is not relevant and I can give it no weight.
the claim alleges breaches of the Status Awards and the Medical Officers Awards
there is a third award to be considered –
the Health Professionals and
Medical Salaries (State) Award (the Salaries Award) as varied from time to time.
I will refer to the
three awards as the Awards.
was common ground that there was no material difference in the language or
structure of the various iterations of the Awards.
I will therefore use the
singular when referring to one type of Award. This agreed fact suggests that
there is little to be gained
by reviewing the history of the Awards. The
exception to that is in relation to the Status Award.
first Status Award was made by consent by Hungerford J on 14 January 2000 on the
application of the HSU. The application and
transcript of the hearing was
annexed to the affidavit of Mr Holland as part of Annexure AH 5. Several
observations may be made
first is that ASMOF, the applicant in these proceedings, was not a party to the
proceedings. That is explained by Mr Holland’s
evidence as referred to at
second is that the application was for the award to be made by consent.
third is that the application was for an interim award. The reason advanced was
that it was the intention to include the conditions
prescribed in the
“general award” when that award was made. The “general
award” is not named although it
may refer to the Health Employees
Conditions of Employment (State) Award or the Public Hospitals (Professionals
and Associated Staff)
Conditions of Employment (State) Award both of which were
identified in Schedule A to the application. The stated intention has
next observation is that, as described by Mr Hull appearing for the Health and
Research Employees Association (now the HSU):
“The award in its current form does represent an agreement that has been
reached by the parties some weeks ago and in fact
has been applied, as we
understand it, on an administrative basis by the health industry.”
J raised several issues with the parties. The first was the failure of the
proposed award to identify to whom it applied.
Mr Hull referred to the List of
Awards in Schedule A. That prompted some observations from his Honour about
drafting issues. He
then invited submissions from Mr Blair, appearing for the
Health Administration Corporation (HAC), seeking confirmation that the
consented to the application. Mr Blair, submitted:
“BLAIR: Yes your Honour. This has been a matter under negotiation for
issue. It was
intended originally to be a Determination and late in the piece it was switched
from being a determination under the
relevant health legislation to an award of
the Commission. That may account for some of the areas that
your Honour is now bringing
to our attention.”
Blair confirmed that the HAC was committed to the spirit of the document and
that it had been applied administratively. He then
applied to return later in
the day with a revised document “with the intent of making the award
today.” Hungerford J
stood the matter down to 2pm that day. The parties
returned at that time with a revised document which included clauses as required
by the IR Act and the Commission’s wage fixing principles. These
circumstances have relevance to the principles applying to
the construction of
Medical Officers Award
Medical Officers Award prescribes conditions of employment and defines the
classifications of intern, resident, registrar and
senior registrar. The
classifications are defined as
"Intern" means a medical officer serving in a hospital prior to obtaining full
registration with the Medical Board of Australia pursuant
to the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act.
"Registrar" means a medical officer who:
(i) has had at least three years' experience in public hospital
service as defined under this Award or any lesser period acceptable
Ministry of Health, and
(ii) is appointed as a registrar by a hospital, and
(iii) is occupying a position of registrar in an established
position as approved by the employer.
"Resident" means a medical officer who has obtained full registration.
"Senior Registrar" means a registrar holding higher medical qualifications and
occupying a position of senior registrar in an established
position as approved
by the employer.
are the only classifications covered by the Medical Officers Award.
2 of the Medical Officers Award provides that salaries for Medical Officers are
prescribed by the Salaries Award. The Salaries
Award prescribes salaries for an
array of professional and associated classifications listed in Part B of the
Salaries Award. Conditions
of employment for those covered by the Salaries Award
are prescribed either by the Public Hospitals (Professional and Associated
Staff) Conditions of Employment (State) Award or one of the eleven awards listed
in Part C of the Salaries Award. The Medical Officers
Award is one such Award.
Salaries for medical officers are expressed at an annual rate. Part B of the
Salaries Award also specifies
a formula for calculating the hourly and daily
rates to facilitate calculation of additional payments such as overtime or
work as prescribed in, relevantly, the Medical Officers Award.
balance of the Medical Officers Award prescribes the usual range of conditions
of employment found in awards of the Commission.
One clause of note is cl 22
which provides for “Termination of Employment”. The clause is by no
means unusual in that
it provides for termination on notice of four weeks given
in writing by either the employer or the employee. It is, however, significant
in this case because the notion of “permanent employment” is
referred to in the Status Award.
Status Award
Status Award has nine clauses, four of which are or have been standard
inclusions in all awards. The other five clauses are:
(1) Definitions
(2) Principles
(3) Loadings
(4) Arrangements for Existing Part-time Workers, and
(5) Processes for Resolving Inconsistencies
Definitions clause includes the following:
1.2 Employee means a person
who is engaged on either a
full time, part time, temporary, exempt or casual
basis under a contract
of employment in the NSW Health Service under
Services Act
, as amended or varied from time to time.
1.4 Temporary employee means a person
who is engaged as an
employee for a period not exceeding 13 weeks
provided that fixed term
contracts of employment, whether for periods greater or lesser than 13 weeks,
must not be offered in preference
to ongoing contracts
Permanent employee means a person appointed as such
or a person who has worked in the same position, including a permanent relief
position, for a continuous period of 13 weeks other than as an exempt
. Permanency is subject to the outcome of any appeal
Continuous period of employment means an uninterrupted
period of 13 weeks employment involving at least one shift per week in that
but does not refer to exempt employees as defined. (Emphasis added.)
Principles clause includes the following:
2.1 Employees who are
engaged in meaningful work on a
continuing basis are entitled to an expectation of permanency of employment
subject to the provisions of this award.
2.2 It is the
responsibility of the employer to ensure that
all employees
, upon engagement and at all appropriate times,
correctly classified as exempt, casual, temporary, or permanent
according to
the above definitions.
Where a person changes from casual to either temporary
or permanent, the employment status of the person is deemed to have changed
automatically.
During the period of continuing employment the status of
an employee cannot be changed from permanent to temporary or casual
temporary to casual,
without the prior written consent of the employee
2.7 A person who, by definition, is a temporary employee for a
period of less than 13 weeks may be re-engaged by the same Health
Service under
more than one employment contract provided the aggregate period of the
contracts, where consecutive, does not exceed
Where the employee is retained beyond a continuous
period of 13 weeks
in the same position the employee is deemed to be
subject to the outcome of any appeal
. The application
of this sub clause shall not be applied in a manner which is inconsistent with
legislation or Government recruitment
and employment policy, as varied from time
to time. This subclause does not apply to
an exempt employee as
defined. (Emphasis added.)
Loadings clause, apart from a provision for casual employees, includes the
3.2 Temporary Employees -
A temporary employee shall be paid
for the number of hours worked each week on an hourly rate calculated at the
same hourly rate as
prescribed for a full time employee in the same
classification plus 10 per cent loading
. The loading shall cease
to apply if:
(a) the period of employment extends beyond 13 weeks
(b) the employer and the employee agree, during the period of
13 weeks, that the employee will be employed on a permanent basis.
4 preserves the rights of part-time employees in employment as at 1 January 2000
while they remain in the same position. Clause
5 provides that if an
inconsistency arises between the Status Award and the awards listed in Schedule
“A”, the Status
Award is to prevail. In the original Status Award
Schedule “A” included 28 awards. The 2023 Status Award Schedule
included 24 awards. The differences are unexplained but not
considered material. What is clear is that Status Award is not confined
but applies to a wide array of employees engaged in the Health Service.
Factual Background
embarking on a review of the witness evidence it is convenient to identify some
general concepts and some of the institutional
framework regulating the health
profession.
is a distinction between pre-vocational and vocational training. The former
relates to the first two years after graduation
from an Australian university
medical school. Unsurprisingly this period is often referred to as PGY1 and
PGY2. During PGY1 the
doctor has provisional registration and is called an
intern. Thereafter, a doctor in prevocational training is referred to as a
Resident Medical Officer (RMO) or Senior Resident Medical Officer (SRMO); in
vocational training a doctor is referred to as a Registrar
or Trainee.
Medical Board of Australia (AMB) is established under
legislation.
Its functions
include developing registration standards, approving accreditation standards
recommended by an accrediting authority
and approving accredited programs of
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Authority (AHPRA) is established under
the same legislation. It provides administrative
assistance to the AMB and
other National Health Practitioner Boards. It also has responsibility for
maintaining the register of
health practitioners. If the National Board decides
to appoint an external body to perform various aspects of its accreditation
function AHPRA is empowered to enter contracts with that external body for the
performance of that function.
Australian Medical Council (AMC) is the accrediting authority for the AMB. It
has accredited the Health Education and Training
Institute (HETI) as the
pre-vocational training authority for NSW.
Training is supervised by Specialist Medical Colleges, which are accredited by
the AMC for that function. In general,
doctors choose a career path after PGY2
and follow a specialist medical training program developed by one of the
Applicant’s witnesses.
The Specified Doctors
Dr Sanderson
the period 2010 to 2014 Dr Sanderson was employed by Western Health Metropolitan
Health Service in Victoria as an intern, junior
medical officer and surgical
registrar. As at 7 June 2024 he was employed as a consultant radiologist at
Southern Cross Medical
Imaging in Victoria and has held that position since May
2022. Between 2014 and 2016 he undertook a research degree qualifying in
as a Doctor of Medical Science in Radiology.
2015 he applied for, and was successful in obtaining, a position as a Trainee in
Radiology at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital (RPAH)
in Sydney. RPAH is a part of
the Radiology Local Area Network 2. It also includes Concord Repatriation
General Hospital (Concord),
the Canterbury Hospital, Westmead Hospital and
Orange Base Hospital. Each of those hospitals is accredited by the Royal
and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR) to provide training
in radiology. RANZCR is the accredited body responsible for
establishing
training standards and recognising the attainment of specialist qualifications
of radiologists.
the period 1 February 2016 to 14 February 2022 Dr Sanderson was employed on a
series of contracts with the respondent. Most of
the details of those offers
are set out in the Statement of Agreed Facts at paragraphs [35]-[46].
first offer of employment, headed “Offer of Temporary Employment”,
specified it was to commence on 1 February 2016
and end on 4 February 2018,
although the offer noted that “clinical year start and/or end dates may
change from time to time”.
Notwithstanding the heading, the employment
was described in the letter as “fixed term temporary”. The only
Award referred
to was the Medical Officers
Dr Sanderson was employed
as a Registrar at the second-year rate in recognition of his employment as a
Registrar at Western Health
and his qualifications as a Doctor of Medical
subsequent contracts identified in the Statement of Agreed Facts had the usual
characteristics. The exception apparent on the
face of the third contract was
that it referred to the Salaries Award and the Status Award as well as the
Medical Officers Award.
This is the only letter of offer in evidence which
referred to the Status Award.
letter dated 3 June 2020 the RANZCR advised trainees, including Dr Sanderson,
that the final exams would be deferred to a date
to be determined. Dr Sanderson
says that the cause of the deferral was the then current covid pandemic. The
delay meant that Dr
Sanderson would not complete his training in the period
expected and covered by his then contact. The third letter of offer, dated
January 2021, was issued and accepted. It was expressed to be for the period
from 1 February 2021 to 2 May 2021. Dr Sanderson
said in his affidavit that
this was a temporary extension to his contract due to the delayed RANZCR exams.
The agreed facts record
that his period of employment was extended beyond the
specified period to allow Dr Sanderson to sit an exam.
attained his fellowship in the RANZCR on 16 December 2021 and became registered
as a specialist radiologist on 31 December 2021.
Dr Sanderson says that he
worked “the rest of his 2021 contract until 14 February 2022”. From
that date until 13 May
2022, he worked part-time as a Staff Specialist or
consultant radiologist at RPA and Macquarie Health. He then took up his current
appointment in Victoria.
his employment was described as temporary, Dr Sanderson says that he was not at
any time paid a loading of 10% in respect
of his temporary employment. Further,
he said that he did not claim for much of the overtime he worked because he did
not wish to
be seen as causing trouble as that may hinder his job prospects of
obtaining a new contract.
Dr Middleton
Middleton completed his intern and residency years at the Royal Darwin Hospital.
He was employed by the respondent between February
2016 and August 2021. He
returned to Royal Darwin Hospital in August 2021 as an Advanced Trainee in
Palliative Care and General
Medicine. In February 2024 he commenced as a
Palliative Care and General Medicine specialist at the same hospital.
was first employed by the respondent from 1 February 2016 to 5 February 2017 as
a Senior Resident Medical Officer, classified as
a resident second year. He
completed five rotations at different hospitals and in different areas. From 6
February 2017 to 4 February
2018 he was classified at the third-year rate for
residents and completed a further five rotations. These first two contract
are not referred to in the Statement of Agreed Facts presumably because
no claim is made in respect of them.
5 February 2018 to 2 February 2020 he was employed in the position of Basic
Physician Trainee (BPT) in General Medicine and classified
as a registrar first
and then second year.
3 February 2020 to 31 August 2021 he was employed as an Advanced Trainee in
Palliative Medicine. In the first year he was classified
as a registrar third
year. He worked at Concord Hospital completing two terms in each of the
Palliative Care Inpatient Unit and
in Palliative Care Consults. Then, in the
second year, as a registrar fourth year he worked at Prince of Wales Hospital
radiation oncology.
Middleton annexed to his affidavit letters of offer dated. Those relevant to
the claim are:
(1) 3 October 2017 relating to the period 5 February 2018 to 2 February 2020;
(2) 29 November 2019 relating to the period 3 February 2020 to 31 January 2021;
(3) 30 July 2020 relating to the period 3 February 2020 to 1 August 2021.
apparent anomaly between these last two letters of offer is explained by Dr
Middleton as arising from a communication to Advanced
Trainees in Palliative
Medicine from an officer of the respondent advising that Advanced Trainees did
not need to apply for a position
in 2021 because positions had already been
allocated to them. Dr Middleton explained that the training program for
advanced trainees
in palliative care typically requires three years working in
different workplaces and fields of work. When he received this communication,
he contacted the writer to advise he had anticipated moving interstate sometime
in 2021. He later received and accepted the last
of these letters of offer had the usual characteristics. Dr Middleton, like Dr
Sanderson, said he had never received a 10% loading
in respect of his temporary
employment.
Middleton said he found the uncertainty of having to apply and interview for
multiple jobs very stressful. The temporary nature
of the work, he said, made
family planning and making life decisions with his partner very difficult. He
said he and his partner
delayed purchasing a property due to the lack of
certainty about where, and if, he would have work in the future with NSW Health.
His anxiety about ongoing employment caused him to keep a low profile and not
claim all the overtime he worked. He did not wish
to be perceived as
inefficient or costing the system money because he thought it may impact his
future job prospects.
Dr Serge Geara
Geara was employed at the time of affirming his affidavit as a Motor Neurone
Disease Fellow and Neurodegenerative Fellow at Macquarie
University Hospital
(MUH). He notes that Fellows may also be referred to as “Consultants" or
"Staff Specialists".
graduating in medicine and surgery from the University of Sydney in 2015 he
became registered as a medical practitioner on 4
January 2016. The relevant
College for his area of specialty is the Royal Australian College of Physicians
Dr Geara's evidence there are four key requirements to qualify as a Fellow of
the RACP. They are:
(1) passing the divisional clinical examinations;
(2) passing the divisional written examination;
(3) passing annual assessments conducted by their supervisor while a DiT; and
(4) completion of a “fellowship year”.
Geara achieved the first requirement in 2021, the second in February 2019 and he
had passed all annual assessments to the date
of affirming his affidavit. He
was then undertaking his fellowship year at MUH having been unsuccessful in
several applications
to complete his fellowship year in NSW Health. He expected
to complete that element of his qualifications in February 2025.
Health for a position as an intern. On 8 September
2015. He received a letter
of offer; it had the usual characteristics. Employment was to commence on 18
January 2016 and continue
to 5 February 2017. Upon satisfactory performance and
achievement of general registration with the MBA at the end of the first
year he would progress to RMO year 1 for his second clinical year
commencing 6 February 2017 and ending on 4 February 2018. No claim
respect of this contract period.
a letter of offer dated 11 October 2017. The
letter had the usual
characteristics; the position referred to was as a BPT in General Medicine. The
term was from 5 February 2018
to 2 February 2020. He accepted the offer and
commenced in the role at Blacktown Hospital and then at Westmead Hospital. He
classified as an RMO year 2 and then year 3 during the life of this
Geara said that to become an "advanced trainee" it is necessary to pass the
divisional clinical examination which has two parts.
He attempted the exams in
August 2019 but was unsuccessful. He was therefore unable to apply for a
position as an advanced trainee
successfully attempted the exams again in November 2020 with the second part in
April 2021. In about mid to late 2019 Dr Geara
applied for a further BPT
position with NSW Health. He was interviewed in September 2019. He received an
email on 6 September 2019
thanking him for his acceptance of the offer and
noting that formal letters of offer would be issued from mid-October 2019. He
required to complete some further paperwork, which he did, and a letter of
offer dated 1 October 2019 was issued to him. It had
the usual characteristics
and was for the period 3 February 2020 to 31 January 2021. He was to commence
as a Registrar second year.
6 March 2020 a general email was issued to staff relating to leave arrangements
for the six months following 5 March 2020. In
response to the "evolving novel
coronavirus situation". Leave approvals for that period would be limited to
"extenuating or special
circumstances only". Dr Geara wasn't happy about that
because he wanted to take four weeks leave in the year. He was restricted
two weeks leave. However, he did not complain because, like Drs Sanderson and
Middleton, he did not want to appear difficult.
He considered that complaining
may negatively impact his prospects for continuing employment.
dated 4 December 2020 with the usual characteristics.
The period of employment
was from 1 February 2021 to 6 February 2022. He was classified as a Registrar
year 3. In about September
2021 Dr Geara had an interview with the Australian
and New Zealand Association of Neurologists (ANZAN). On 29 September he was
that ANZAN had completed the interview and selection process for
advanced trainees Australian wide for 2022 positions, and that ANZAN
recommended
his appointment to Blacktown Hospital.
22 November he received an email to which was attached a letter of offer dated 9
November 2021 with the usual characteristics.
Employment in the capacity of
Advanced Trainee in Neurology at Blacktown was to commence on 7 February 2022
and end on 4 February
2024 unless he had not passed the divisional clinical
examination by the end of the 2022 clinical year. In that case the employment
would terminate on 5 February 2023.
Geara referred to many applications that he made to NSW Health for positions to
count as a fellowship year for the purpose of his
qualification as a fellow of
the RACP. He was unsuccessful in each of them despite, apparently, interviewing
very well for at least
some of the applications.
12 March 2024. He received an email from NSW Health confirming his separation
date was 4 February 2024 and providing information
take to confirm his address and contact details so that he could receive a final
Geara said that at no stage in any of his contracts did he receive a 10%
allowance in respect of temporary employment.
Wells affirmed her affidavit on 13 June 2024. At that time she was on
secondment to the Canberra Hospital operated by ACT Health.
The secondment was
to continue until at least 4 August 2024.
Wells first trained in nursing, obtaining a degree from the Queensland
University of Technology in 2012 and a graduate certificate
from the University
of Queensland in 2013. She graduated in medicine from the University of
Newcastle in December 2018 and obtained
a Master of Public Health from the
University of New South Wales in 2024. She has been registered as a medical
practitioner since
7 January 2019.
to her secondment she was employed as a Paediatric Physician Trainee at Sydney
Children's Hospital in Paediatrics. As explained
] below, she commenced
in that position on 8 August 2022.
5 January 2022 she was accepted into the Medical Administration training program
with the Royal Australian College of Medical Administrators
(RACMA) effective
from 7 February 2022. At the time of affirming her affidavit she was on leave
from the RACMA program. In August
2022 she commenced the BPT training program
with the RACP.
her final year of university medical studies in about May 2018 Dr Wells applied
for a position as an intern with NSW Health.
On 21 September 2018 She received
a letter of offer for a position within Hunter New England LHD. The letter had
the usual characteristics.
She would be employed as an intern between 21
January 2019 and 2 February 2020 and from 3 February 2020 to 31 January 2021,
conditional
on successfully completing her intern year, she was to continue as a
RMO year 1. About late September 2018 she accepted the contract
and commenced
employment on 21 January 2019 working at John Hunter Hospital and Maitland
mid-2020 Dr Wells applied for further employment with NSW Health in various JMO
positions. She was interviewed for a number of
positions in late September 2020
and received an offer of employment from Illawarra Shoalhaven LHD which she
accepted. The letter
of offer dated 14 October 2020 had the usual
characteristics. The position offered was as a SRMO in Paediatrics and Child
at Shoalhaven Hospital to commence on 1 February 2021 and end on 6
February 2022. Dr Wells accepted the offer.
Administrator and in the NSW Paediatric Network. She
also applied for positions
outside of NSW Health in Queensland and Victoria for paediatric training.
1 September 2021 Dr Wells received notification that she was successful in
obtaining a position in the Southern New South Wales
LHD at the South East
Regional Hospital. She received a letter of offer dated 11 November 2021. The
letter had the usual characteristics.
The position offered was as a Trainee in
Medical Administration. The term of the employment was to be from 7 February
February 2023.
28 January 2022 Dr Wells received an offer of employment as a Paediatric
Physician Basic Trainee for the period 8 August 2022
to 3 August 2025.
Consistent with her acceptance of the position of Trainee in Medical
Administration, she commenced employment
on 7 February 2022 at the South East
Regional Hospital but discussed with her supervisor the offer from the Sydney
Children's Hospital
Network. As a result, she received an amended letter of
offer of employment dated 24 February 2022 varying the term of her employment
end on 7 August 2022 so that she could accept the offer at Sydney Children's
Hospital Network.
letter of offer for that position, dated 9 May 2022, had the usual
characteristics. The term of employment was from 8 August
2022 to 3 August
2025. She was to commence as an RMO year 3 in Paediatrics and Child Health. Dr
Wells accepted that offer.
Wells did not receive at any point a 10% loading in respect of her employment
with NSW health.
said that being employed on temporary contracts resulted in uncertainty in terms
of where she would be working long-term. That
had impacts on other areas of her
life, such as finances, establishing a sense of community and lack of geographic
stability to permit
life decisions such as buying property. She also considered
it challenging to fully engage in the workplace as one is constantly
and must spend a lot of time building rapport with new colleagues. She also
said it could be difficult to speak up about
inappropriate behaviour or complain
the same people
for term reviews, references for future contracts or to get into
training programs.
Other witnesses
Andrew Holland
Holland is the Executive Director of the applicant and has held that position
since 23 November 2015.
described his responsibilities as Executive Director. He also confirmed the
status and coverage of the applicant as an Industrial
Organisation under the IR
Act. He annexed a copy of the applicant's rules to his affidavit.
relation to coverage, he outlined the history of the applicant obtaining
coverage of DiTs on 22 November 2012.
Holland summarised the current instruments prescribing the employment conditions
of DiTs. They Include:
(1) the Medical Officers Award;
(2) the Salaries Award 2023;
(3) the Status Award;
(4) individual contracts of employment;
Health Services Act
and Directives made by the Secretary
of the Ministry of Health under that Act;
(6) provisions of the
Government Sector
Employment Act
Government Sector Employment (General) Rules 2014
, which applied to NSW Health
Service employees; and
(7) policies, procedures and memoranda concerning the employment of DiTs
including “Policy Directive – Employment Arrangements
for Medical
Officers in the NSW Health Service” (the Employment Directive).
Holland annexed to his affidavit copies of the Medical Officers and Salaries
Awards applicable from January 2018 to January 2024.
already indicated at [
] he annexed the original application for a Status
Award and the transcript of the hearing of that application.
Holland also provided a summary description of the employment patterns of DiTs,
outlining the need to apply for positions as interns,
residents, registrars and
trainees, with no guarantee of success. He also said that NSW Health recognises
continuity of service for
DiTs offered new contracts.
contracts refer to the Employment Directive, which he said has been a continuing
source of disputation between the applicant
and NSW Health during his tenure as
Executive Director of the applicant. He did not provide any further detail as to
the subject
matter or matters of those disputes.
annexed to his affidavit each iteration of the Employment Directive since the
original, published in 2000. He noted that the 2010
Employment Directive
mentioned the Status Award and asserted that DiTs were exempt employees.
Holland also provides an overview of the recruitment process that DiTs are
required to undertake.
15 February 2022 the applicant made a request, under the
Information (Public Access) Act 2000
seeking information about
the numbers of medical officers employed in NSW Health. Mr Holland includes a
table of the information
ultimately obtained, showing the numbers as at 30 June
2021. The "Employment Categories" are described in the Table as: Permanent
Time; Permanent Part Time; Fixed Term Full Time; Fixed Term Part Time; and
Casual. In total there were 9,250 DiTs employed
at that time, 8,293 of whom
were said to be employed "Fixed Term Full Time" and 672 "Fixed Term Part Time".
Holland also provided a summary description of the work DiTs undertake in the
NSW Health Service. That includes a broad description
of the increasing
complexity of medical work as DiTs progress in their training.
then provides a description of the detrimental impact of the employment patterns
of JMOs. He instances occasions when the applicant
has represented members:
(1) who have become pregnant and had applications for maternity leave refused
(a) their contract would expire during the period of proposed leave; or
(b) their contract was due to expire shortly before the period they wished to
take leave and NSW Health was refusing to offer a new
(2) who have performance issues raised and deflected because of the contract
expiry, instead of being managed in accordance with
the usual policy;
(3) who have similar issues related to alleged misconduct;
(4) who feel insecure about another contract being offered and where it may be
located, causing uncertainty in family planning; and
(5) have had difficulties obtaining approvals for finance.
Mr Holland annexed correspondence to and from NSW Health about the applicant's
concern that NSW Health was not complying
with the Status Award.
response of NSW Health, dated 20 June 2023, was to the effect that as JMOs are
engaged on contracts, generally, for a minimum
term of 12 months. They were not
therefore "temporary" within the meaning of the Status Award and therefore not
entitled to a 10%
Dr Abdul-Hamud Sabih
Sabih graduated in medicine in 2018. During his employment at NSW Health, he
has observed that JMOs work four or five clinical
terms each year. A term, he
says, is about 10 to 14 weeks. From time to time JMOs work in different
specialties or locations for
each of several terms. He annexed to his affidavit
an extract from the website of NSW Health specifying JMO term dates for the
years 2021 to 2031. The terms for 2021 ranged between 10 and 12 weeks
for a five-term year for interns. The five term year for
other JMOs was either
10 or 11 weeks. Provision is also made for a four-term year with terms lasting
13 or 14 weeks. There are
slight variations to this pattern in other clinical
time to time JMOs receive emails from NSW Health requesting JMO term
preferences, including preferred specialties and locations.
with this, Dr Sabih commenced as an intern in 2019. In 2018 he was invited to
indicate his preferences for specialties
and locations for the 2019 year. He
asked to work one term in a rural location and specified a preference for Dubbo.
He commenced
work at RPAH. Between 3 February 2020 and 29 June 2020 he worked
at Dubbo Base Hospital.
2021 he worked as a locum doctor in various hospitals across Australia. He also
took a three-month holiday. In about November
2021 he signed a contract with
NSW Health as a BPT for the period 7 February 2022 to 4 February 2024. BPT
training is coordinated
28 November 2023 he signed a new contract for the period 5 February 2024 to 2
February 2025 as an Advanced Trainee in Addiction
Medicine, managed by RPAH. He
commenced in February 2024 at RPAH and on 8 May 2024 moved to Concord for terms
two and three of the
clinical year. At the time of affirming his affidavit he
expected to return to RPAH from 4 November 2024.
McCredie graduated in medicine in 2018. At the time of swearing her affidavit
she was employed as a Trainee in Obstetrics and
Gynaecology.
21 January 2019 Dr McCredie commenced as an intern at RPAH. She was advised in
May 2019 that she was to be seconded to Dubbo Base
Hospital for one term,
although that was increased to two terms during her time at Dubbo.
January 2020 she progressed to RMO. From 3 February 2020 to 28 June 2020 she
worked at Dubbo.
January 2021 she accepted a role as an SRMO at Bankstown-Lidcombe Hospital for
one year. On 5 February 2022 she accepted an amended
contract as an SRMO in
Obstetrics and Gynaecology at RNSH on a one-year contract. Between 2 May 2022
and 27 November 2022 Dr McCredie
worked at Northern Beaches Hospital (NBH). It
was communicated to her at the time she accepted the appointment that it was
for her to work as an SRMO for 3 terms at NBH.
13 November 2022 she accepted a new contract as SRMO in Obstetrics and
Gynaecology commencing on 6 February and running until 4
February 2024 at RNSH.
December 2023 Dr McCredie accepted an offer as a Trainee in Obstetrics and
Gynaecology at RNSH from 5 February 2024 until 6 February
2028. She was advised
in June 2024 that she would be seconded to Gosford Hospital for the first six
months of 2025 and Port Macquarie
Hospital for the second six months.
McCredie observed that the various hospitals at which she worked were not always
in the same LHD but she was not required to sign
a new contract on those
occasions on which such a move occurred.
Respondent’s
Dr Elizabeth Mullins
the time of swearing her affidavit, Dr Mullins was the Executive Director of
Medical Services for Southern NSW Local Health District
and had worked in the
role from February 2022. Between September 2018 and February 2022 she was the
Director Medical Services at
South East Regional Hospital. In that role she was
responsible for the management of all medical staff at the hospital.
Mullins confirmed that Dr Wells was employed as a Trainee in Medical
Administration from 7 February 2022 to 7 August 2022. She
agrees that Dr Wells
spoke to her about the offer of a position as a Paediatric Physician Basic
Trainee in Sydney, commencing in
August 2022 and that she agreed to vary the
terms of her employment contract so that Dr Wells could take up that position.
her employment at the hospital Dr Wells assisted Dr Mullins with clinical
governance activities including incident and complaint
review, rostering and
recruitment. Dr Wells also accompanied her to executive meetings, committee
meetings and budget discussions.
Dr Wells acted as a liaison point for other
JMOs and was also required to familiarise herself with the services provided at
the hospital.
Mullins explained that HETI works in partnership with NSW Health and RACMA to
provide a training program for JMOs specialising
in medical administration. She
explained that RACMA is an independent organisation, accredited by the
Australian and New Zealand
Medical Council's to provide training in medical
administration. RACMA sets the curriculum, administers assessments, trains
supervisors
and accredits sites in New South Wales to provide training in
medical administration for those JMOs undertaking their fellowship.
twelve hospitals in New South Wales were accredited by RACMA to provide
supervised medical management experience to JMOs
undertaking their Fellowship.
South Coast Regional Hospital was one of those twelve.
Mullins annexed to her affidavit a copy of the curriculum published by RACMA for
Trainees in Medical Administration. The essential
requirements are:
(a) completion of the RACMA training program consisting of workshops, written
work, assessment reports and an oral examination;
(b) completion of a Masters degree or equivalent containing content specified by
(c) a minimum of three years full-time or equivalent supervised medical
management experience in accredited training positions.
Mullins also explained that the length of the employment contract facilitates
several aspects of the training program.
is usual for trainees to undertake training across several sites in order to
obtain a broad range of experience. She illustrates
that by noting that the
South Coast Regional Hospital can provide training in general and rural medical
administration but does not
provide experience in tertiary-level system
processes; management of academic departments; management of colleges or
research institutions;
management of eHealth; private healthcare; nor specialist
services such as Justice Health or Children's Health Services. Although
are not required to work in each of those areas, RACMA encourages broad
experience and its assessments generally contain
questions about a broad range
of facilities.
number of available positions depends on progress through training. Hospitals
with positions available advise HETI which conducts
the recruitment campaign.
Applicants called for interview are considered by a panel made up of directors
of Medical Services, representatives
from HETI and a representative from RACMA
is only one trainee position at South Coast Regional Hospital. She notes that
there are only two regional hospitals in NSW
accredited to provide training in
Medical Administration. Therefore, it is in the interests of the system as a
whole for trainees
to move to other hospitals to allow other JMOs to obtain
rural experience in medical administration.
Recruitment
to positions of Trainee is very competitive. It is highlighted by the number of
positions available each year, which
is in the range of 10 to 15. Dr Mullins
explained that for the 2022 clinical year there were 45 applications, 24
proceeded to interview
and 14 were offered positions.
the time of swearing his affidavit, Dr Henderson had been employed in the role
of Network Director of Physician Training for the
Westmead Network since 2016.
He is also a specialist neurologist at Westmead Hospital. He was involved in
recruiting Dr Geara to
the Basic Physician Trainee (BPT) positions between 2017
Henderson explained that Basic Physician training is a formal training program
overseen by the RACP. Hospitals are accredited
by the RACP as training
providers and organised into groups or networks. There are four hospitals in
the Westmead Network: Westmead;
Blacktown; Hornsby Ku-ring-gai; and Orange Base.
rotate to a different department every three months. The rotations are referred
to as terms. In the result BPT's may work in
one or more hospitals in their
Network in order to obtain a broad clinical experience in all the
sub-specialties of medicine. The
RACP specifies the parameters for this
purpose of a training position such as BPT is to provide a medical officer with
the necessary training to become a specialist.
While BPTs do provide a clinical
service, the predominant focus of the role is training. There is an expectation
that a BPT will
progress through the training and become an Advanced Trainee,
and then a specialist physician.
trainee roles are more specialised and focus on a particular area of medicine.
Henderson explained that the recruitment process for BPT's involves interested
medical officers applying for positions. The applicants
considered most
suitable are called for interview and invited to list the hospitals and networks
in their order of preference. The
interviewees are then listed by the panel in
order of preference. The two lists are then “electronically matched".
are then offered a position in order of the matched rankings.
Henderson said that when involved in the recruitment process, including making
recommendations, he takes no account of a candidate’s
history of taking
leave, claiming over time, making complaints or raising issues. He is unaware
of any other person on a selection
panel doing so. Such matters are generally
not known to him, and they are not addressed in references. He could not recall
supervisor raising or discussing any of those issues with him.
length of contract issued for BPTs is determined by reference to the individual
candidate. The single biggest influence in Dr
Henderson's consideration is the
length of time likely required to complete the individual's training. In most
cases the initial
period is two years. He estimates 70 to 80% of BPT candidates
pass the exams on the first attempt and therefore will complete the
within two years.
they do not pass, a contract for a further year is issued in the expectation
they will pass on the next occasion. BPTs have a
maximum of four attempts at
the written exam and three of the clinical exam. If the BPT does not pass in
that time RACP exits them
from the training program.
are also granted if a BPT has taken parental leave. Dr Henderson also expressed
the view that, unlike other medical officer
positions such as Career Medical
Officers, BPT positions are not of indefinite duration. BPTs have a limited
time to complete their
training and there are others wanting to undertake such
training. Those who successfully complete their training also want to move
forward to different programs.
Dr Daniel Gialouris
Gialouris is the Manager of the Medical Training and Administration Unit at
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He deposed that Advanced
Training in Palliative
Care is coordinated by the RACP. On his understanding RACP conducts regular
site accreditations to ensure
that each facility is providing the level of
supervision, training and experience to fulfil RACP’s training
requirements.
Eligibility
for admission to the Advanced Trainee in Palliative Care program requires the
applicant to have:
(a) completed RACP Basic Training;
(b) a current medical registration; and
(c) been appointed to an appropriate Advanced Training position.
2017 the Advanced Training in Palliative Care program has been a three-year
program including:
(a) 24 months of core training, which includes:
(i) six months of inpatient unit/hospice;
(ii) 6 months of community setting;
(iii) six months of teaching hospital/consultation;
(iv) six months of cancer care setting.
(b) 12 months of non-core training, which includes:
(i) 6 months of palliative medicine, variable or related specialty;
(ii) 6 months of elective training;
(c) 1 advanced training research project; and
(d) 1 case study.
Dr Gialouris’ opinion, since 2017, due to the RACP requirement of
diversity of different types of care, it is not possible
to complete all
training requirements on one site. The RACP guidelines note that training
should be completed across two or more
sites. Decisions as to which sites a
trainee rotates between are determined with reference to the trainee's
preference, the facilities
preference, the training requirements and the nature
of the training offered at a facility.
Gialouris observed that recruitment for Advanced Training in Palliative Care
occurs as part of the annual NSW Health Medical Recruitment
Campaign. The
number of training positions available at each site Is determined by the number
of positions accredited by RACP and
the number of positions approved for
recruitment, less the number of positions already filled by an existing trainee.
noted that in clinical year 2020, in the first round, there were 70 applications
for Advanced Training in Palliative Care, 49 candidates
interviewed and 38
offers accepted across New South Wales. In the second round, there were 17
candidates interviewed and 14 offers
made. Following two rounds of advertising
there remained a number of vacancies. By comparison the 2024 figures were 69
applications,
50 candidates interviewed and 30 offers made.
his experience, once on the training program, Departments will work with
trainees to extend contracts or re-employ them to make
up for training time lost
due to parental or other leave. The process applicable for such extensions
varies according to the particular
candidate but is aimed to assist the
candidate to fulfill the training requirements.
Jaime Frances
Berry is the Network Manager (Co-Lead) – JMO Services for the Sydney
Children's Hospital Network. That Network includes
Sydney Children's Hospital,
Randwick; the Children's Hospital at Westmead; and the Newborn and Paediatric
Emergency Transport Service
which operates out of Bankstown Aerodrome.
role involves overseeing the activities that relate to attracting, recruiting
and onboarding JMOs, as well as the activities that
occur during and at the end
of their employment.
Berry was in her current role when Dr Wells was recruited as a Paediatric
Physician Basic Trainee (PPBT) in Paediatrics and Child
Health within the
Eastern Paediatric Training Network. Dr Wells was employed under a contract due
to expire on 3 August 2025. It
was extended to 1 February 2026 to accommodate
Dr Wells’ training requirements.
Berry described the recruitment process which largely parallels that described
by Drs Henderson and Gialouris. In the year of
Dr Wells recruitment there were
179 applications for PPBT positions in the NSW Paediatric Training Network 97
doctors were appointed.
The comparative figures for 2022 were 159 applicants
and 85 appointments In 2023 there were 155 applicants with 81 appointments.
Berry states that as the position of PPBT is a three-year training position a
permanent contract is not able to be offered. The
length of the contract
offered aligns with the training requirements. If a doctor requires a longer
period of time to complete their
training they may be offered a contract
Jeanette Chadban
Chadban is employed as Operations Manager for Medical Administration at Maitland
Hospital. She has a total of 32 years experience
working for NSW Health.
Between October 2006 and June 2021, she was Prevocational Network Manager of
Network 12 in Hunter New England
Local Health District. Accordingly, she was in
that position when Dr Wells was recruited as an intern in January 2019.
Chadban explained that all doctors educated in Australia are required to
complete accredited intern training usually over a one
year period to become
eligible for general registration by the AMB.
order to gain general registration, interns must meet the registration standards
set by the AMB and endorsed by AHPRA. When Dr
Wells was an intern the doctor
needed to satisfactorily complete:
(a) at least eight weeks in emergency medical care;
(b) at least 10 weeks in medicine;
(c) at least 10 weeks in surgery: and
(d) a range of other approved terms to make up a minimum of 47 weeks full-time
equivalent service.
Chadban observed that, to provide interns with a diverse range of experience,
Network 12 required trainees to complete at least
one rural or regional term and
one relief term. If the personal circumstances of an intern meant they could
not meet these requirements
they could ask for special consideration. Such
requests were considered by a panel and either supported or declined.
Wells’ rotations were at Calvary Mater Newcastle (2 rotations), John
Hunter Hospital, Maitland Hospital and Belmont Hospital.
attaining general registration trainees ae engaged for a year as a Resident
Medical Officer (RMO). RMOs complete 5 rotations through
different specialty
and sub-specialty departments to further develop their skills and gain
experience in a wide range of specialties.
Dr Wells rotations were:
(a) General Paediatrics at John Hunter;
(b) Radiation Oncology at Calvary Mater;
(c) Relief for John Hunter New England Network;
(d) Orthopaedics at The Maitland Hospital; and
(e) General Medicine Relief at the Maitland Hospital.
to length of contract Ms Chadban said the progressive nature of medical training
means that permanent contracts are not used.
Two year contacts are generally
used for PGY1 and PGY 2.
was Ms Chadban’s experience that if a trainee sought parental leave, that
was granted along with an extension of their contract
to allow completion of
their training requirements. Similarly, if an intern failed a term and repeated
it, a contract extension
would be granted.
Harris is employed as the chief medical workforce advisor within the Workforce
Planning and Talent Development Branch of NSW Health.
Prior to her current
employment she was engaged as the district Director Medical Workforce for
Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health
Harris experience is that it takes on average 10 to 15 years from commencement
of study in the medical school to become a qualified
specialist in Australia.
She identifies three stages of training:
(1) completion of an AMC accredited university program taking 4 to 6 years full
time study;
(2) completion of prevocational training; and
(3) completion of AMC accredited medical college training program leading to
specialist qualifications, which takes a minimum of
3 to 7 years full-time
training depending on the requirements of the College.
is not uncommon for doctors to choose to work as a Senior RMO for a year before
commencing their vocational training program.
Some other doctors choose not to
undertake specialist training or fail to gain entry to a training program. Such
doctors continue
to work for NSW Health as unaccredited trainees, career medical
officers or locums.
the 2024 clinical year 1,641 medical graduates applied for 1,153.5 intern
positions with 1,061 accepting positions. Intern positions
are funded by LHDs
which are required to determine the number of positions they need and can fund.
Graduates indicate their Network
preferences in order as part of their
application. HETI then allocates interns to positions using an algorithm that
matches their
preferences. States and Territories share intern information. If
an intern has been successful in more than one jurisdiction, they
are directed
to withdraw from all save the one in which they intend to intern.
are permitted to work only in positions accredited by HETI. New registration
standards were introduced in 2024 requiring
47 weeks full time equivalent
service including at least 4 rotations of 10 weeks each in different
specialties. The rotations must
include clinical experience in:
(a) patients presenting with undifferentiated illness;
(b) patients with chronic illness;
(c) patients with acute and critical illness; and
(d) peri-procedural patient care.
successful completion of PGY1 DiTs can choose to stay at their current Network
or apply for a position elsewhere as an RMO.
complete their prevocational training RMOs are required to undertake and
complete 5 rotations to the satisfaction of their supervisors
and the local
Director of Prevocational Education and Training.
completion of the RMO year completes the prevocational training program. JMOs
are then eligible to be admitted into a
vocational training program. Dr Harris
notes that some Colleges admit RMOs into their vocational training program
before completion
of their prevocational training, however the number is
diminishing.
Harris says that there are 16 Colleges accredited to deliver specialist
training. Each College has different entry requirements
and accreditation
standards. The Colleges accredit training sites and/or training positions. RMOs
must complete their training at
an accredited site or in an accredited position
in order to qualify as a specialist. While some training programs allow
to complete all their training at one location, others require trainees
to undertake training at multiple sites or locations.
training programs are split into training stages such as basic and advanced
training. Progression requires completion of the
College requirements at each
stage of training.
Harris was the District Director of Medical Workforce at the Illawarra
Shoalhaven LHD when Dr Wells was employed at Shoalhaven
Hospital as an SRMO in
Paediatrics and Child Health. During Dr Wells employment at Shoalhaven
Hospital, she was relocated to Shellharbour
Hospital to reduce her risk of
contracting Covid-19 due to a declared medical condition. The move followed a
risk assessment undertaken
after advice provided by Dr Wells’ respiratory
physician. Further, Dr Wells could not have undertaken all of her vocational
training in Paediatrics and Child Health at Shoalhaven because it would not have
met the requirements of the RACP.
reply affidavit of Dr Harris was the subject of objection at least as recorded
in the index to the Court Book. The basis of the
objection was not specified
but I assume it was because the respondent does not, generally, have a right to
call evidence in reply.
This affidavit responds to the affidavits of Drs Sabih
and McCredie which have been filed in reply. They do not, however, do more
recount the experiences of two more doctors as DiTs. I therefore allow the
affidavit of Dr Harris in reply to be read.
Harris responds to Dr Sabih's statement to the effect that in his PGY 1 and PGY
2 years he worked at RPA and Dubbo Base Hospitals.
She says that those two
hospitals are in Prevocational Training Network One.
Prevocational Training Network is a group of accredited facilities networked to
provide prevocational training to JMOs. There are
15 such networks in New South
Wales. Of those, 10 Networks include facilities in more than one LHD. During
the PGY 1 and PGY 2
years a JMO will generally perform rotations in at least two
facilities within a network.
response to Dr Sabih's evidence as to his BPT Training and the requirement to
work at Port Macquarie Base Hospital, PoW and Shellharbour
Hospital, she says
all of those hospitals are in the East Coast Medical Network which is one of 11
BPT Training Networks in New South
Wales. Each such Network includes
metropolitan, regional and rural sites to provide diversity in training
experiences, meet the
RACP Training Requirements and maximise the number of
accredited training positions available in NSW.
RACP Training Requirements include a requirement that at least twelve months
training be undertaken in a Principal Teaching Hospital
Hospital. The inclusion of smaller metropolitan, regional and rural hospitals
allows NSW Health to distribute the
JMO workforce across the State and offer
larger numbers of training positions than would otherwise be possible. Since
accredits the network rather than individual facilities within it.
relation to his working at RPA and Concord, as an Advanced Trainee in Addiction
Medicine, Dr Harris notes that the two hospitals
are in the same LHD and are
jointly accredited by RACP for Addiction Medicine training.
response to Dr McCredie's evidence as to the locations of her prevocational
training, Dr Harris replies as above at [
connection with her four-year contract as a Trainee in Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Dr Harris says the training program is coordinated
by The Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
(RANZCOG). RANZCOG accredits all sites offering
training. The College
organises a combination of different sites into an Integrated Training Program
(ITP). There are 10 ITPs in
NSW with accredited rotations across major public
teaching hospitals, outer suburban/peripheral hospitals and rural/provincial
Gosford District Hospital and Port Macquarie Base Hospital are all part of the
North Sydney ITP.
basic training program involves Trainees working at two or more different
hospitals with at least:
(a) 46 weeks in a tertiary hospital;
(b) 23 weeks in a rural hospital; and
(c) 46 weeks in a non-base hospital, (which can include rural rotation).
Nicholas Richards
Richards is the Manager of Workforce Intelligence for NSW Health. He produced a
report which analysed the number of health employees
covered by the Status Award
as at June in the years 2020, 2022 and 2024. Excluded from the analysis were:
(a) casual;
(b) agency staff; and
(c) sessional staff (employees employed for a one-off engagement – usually
interpreters).
employees were categorised as:
(1) permanent – an employee with an ongoing contract, that is one which
does not have a set end date; or
(2) temporary – an employee with a contract with a set end date.
numbers were expressed as full-time equivalent (FTE) with percentages based on
the FTE. The report was annexed to his affidavit.
It shows that in 2024, 100%
of Medical Officers, that is, employees engaged under the Medical Officers
award, were temporary. But
of the total employees covered by the Status Award,
75% were permanent. The corresponding figures for 2022 were 100% and 73%, and
in 2020, 100% and 75%.
Nigel Wolfe
Wolfe is, and has been since 2012, the Head of the Department of Neurology at
Blacktown Hospital and Mount Druitt Hospital. He
is also a full-time Staff
Specialist in Neurology at those hospitals. He is a fellow of the RACP and a
member of the Australian
and New Zealand Association of Neurologists (ANZAN).
Wolfe does not recruit trainees for Basic Physician Training but does have
responsibility for the supervision of BPTs when they
rotate through the
Neurology service at Blacktown Hospital. In that way, he supervised Dr Geara as
a BPT for a three month term
Advanced Training Program in Neurology is coordinated by the RACP via the
Advanced Training Committee in Neurology (ATC). Eligibility
for admission to
the program requires successful completion of the Basic Training Program.
RACP, via ANZAN, accredits individual hospitals for a specified number of
positions for Advanced Trainees and determines whether
the training completed by
trainees satisfies the requirements of the program.
Complete the Advanced Training Program, a trainee must:
(a) complete three years of certified training, comprising:
(i) A minimum of two years core training. No more than one year may be
completed in the same location. Practically, this means
Advanced Trainees
complete their training in at least two different hospitals, which may be in two
different LHDs; and
(ii) A maximum of one non-core year training at a hospital or institution of
their choice; and
(b) fulfil the expectations of the position as set by RACP and assessed by the
Advanced Trainee’s two clinical supervisors
in each hospital or
institution. A report is completed for each six months of training by the two
supervisors and the trainee which
is then provided to the RACP.
Wolfe supervised Dr Geara during his training at Blacktown Hospital between
February 2022 and February 2023.
Recruitment
for admission to the program is managed by ANZAN via the Education and Training
Committee (ETC). The ETC has a number
of subcommittees. Dr Wolfe has been a
member of the ETC committee for NSW/ACT since 2012. He described the selection
(a) CVs are submitted by candidates with their online application. They are
reviewed by two independent neurologists from outside
of New South Wales and a
consensus score is given. Some applicants are called for interview.
(b) The ETC subcommittee for NSW/ACT then undertakes the interviews. Dr Wolfe
said that he has never taken into consideration, and
has never observed any
other ETC member take into consideration, matters such as whether the applicant
has made claims for overtime
or taken or requested leave.
(c) A weighted combined score of the CV (35%) and interview (65%) determines
whether the applicant is considered suitable. A score
of 55 out of 100 or
better is regarded as success.
(d) Candidates rank their hospital preferences and the Head of Department for
each hospital will preference all the successful candidates.
(e) Matches are then determined by the RACP algorithm, which prioritises
candidate preferences over hospital preferences.
(f) The ANZAN Match process is initially run State specifically but if positions
remain unfilled, successful candidates from other
States who have not been
matched in their State may be matched to available positions in NSW/ACT.
(g) ANZAN then recommends the appointment of successful candidates at accredited
hospitals according to the results of the matching
Dr Wolfe has no responsibility or role in issuing contracts or determining
contract length for Advanced Trainees, he observes
that it would not be possible
to employ someone permanently as an Advance Trainee, as each position is a
training position to which
a new candidate is nominated each year by ANZAN.
Preeti Saraswati
Saraswati is the Project Officer for Palliative Care at Western Sydney LHD.
Prior to that appointment she was the Education Support
Radiation Oncology (Northern NSW Training Network) between August 2017 and
August 2021(part-time) and the Network
Manager – Radiation Local Training
Network from June 2020 until January 2024 at Westmead Hospital.
these last two roles she interacted with Dr Sanderson. Annexed to her affidavit
was a letter dated 6 October 2021 to Dr Sanderson.
Ms Saraswati was the
nominated contact person.
letter advised Dr Sanderson that he was to have a period of rotation at Orange
Base Hospital from 1 February 2021 to 2 May 2021.
Such a rotation conformed to
the Faculty of Clinical Radiology Network Training Policy. The letter also
"Rotations within the Network are considered a positive contribution to the
educational value of your radiation oncology training
and at the same time,
provide diverse learning experiences encompassing the broader community."
Saraswati was also involved in the contract extension of Dr Sanderson which
allowed him to re-sit an exam.
RANZCR places a limit on the number of times a trainee can sit exams. There is
a maximum of four attempts permitted in each of
phase 1 and phase 2 of the
training. If the trainee fails the fourth attempt, subject to special
consideration, RANZCR removes the
trainee from the program.
are three radiology Local Area Networks (LAN) in NSW. The Networks consist of
several hospitals. Trainees are allocated to
a home hospital, identified in
their contract, where they undertake the majority of their training. Throughout
training, however,
they rotate to other sites in the LAN to provide them with
varied experience, different site exposure and subspecialty and case-mix
experience.
term LAN 2, which was Dr Sanderson's LAN, sends a trainee to Orange Base
Ms Saraswati’s experience there can be anywhere between 2 and 10 positions
available each year, but usually there are 4 or
5. The number varies depending
on how many trainees have successfully completed their training, whether
trainees require a contract
extension because they have failed or taken leave
and whether clinical need and funding allows for a new position to be created.
length of contracts offered to trainees correlates to the RANZCR Training
Requirements. In Ms Saraswati’s opinion correlation
is important because
it ensures that the limited positions available are filled by JMOs who are
actively pursuing radiology training
within the accredited number of positions
approved by RANZCR.
with Dr Sanderson's experience, if a radiology trainee requires more time to
complete a phase of their training, the home
hospital may offer a further
contract to ensure that they have the necessary time to complete the outstanding
components of their
Sandhya Limaye
Limaye is a Staff Specialist in the Department of Immunology and Director of
Wellbeing at Concord Hospital. In his role as Director
of Wellbeing he is
responsible for reviewing and implementing initiatives to optimise physical and
psychological well-being of medical
staff, including JMOs, at Concord Hospital.
has held several other positions including Network Director of Physician
Training for the Concord Basic Physician Training Network
between February 2015
and January 2018. The Concord Network comprises Concord Hospital, Canterbury
Hospital, Blue Mountains Hospital
and Tweed Heads Hospital. Dr Limaye says that
in the Concord Network, the work of BPTs is arranged to align with RACP
requirements.
He summarises those requirements. It is unnecessary to set them
out as they have been identified in the evidence of other witnesses.
nature and qualities of training networks are also described. The evidence of
Dr Harris in her reply affidavit provides similar
Limaye makes the following statement about the length of contracts offered to
“Given there are a limited number of BPT positions, NSW Health requires
BPTs to move onto the next stage of training at the
conclusion of their Basic
Training, so as not to prevent new JMOs being able to commence Basic Training at
Concord Hospital. Progression
to Advanced Training is also required to ensure
that the NSW Health system continues to have doctors becoming
specialists.”
demand for Basic Physician Training is illustrated by some statistics provided
by Dr Limaye. In 2018 Concord Network received
302 applications for positions
as a BPT. Seventy-nine JMOs were interviewed, and 12 offers were made including
the offer to Dr Middleton.
Conclusions from the witness
Nature of the Industry
is defined in the IR Act to
(a) any trade, manufacture, business, project or occupation in
which persons work, or
(b) a part of an industry or a number of industries.
first observation to make is that the industry regulated by the Status Award is
much broader than that regulated by the Medical
Officers Award. The list of
awards in Schedule “A” to the Status Award evidences that there were
more than 20 other
cohorts of workers, not confined to doctors, to whom the
Status Award applies.
focus of the evidence was, of course, on the industry of JMOs. There is no
contest in the evidence that it is a training industry.
It is also an industry
heavily impacted by external forces, beginning with the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
(Health Practitioner Act). The objectives
of that legislation are set out in s 3 which provides:
3 Objectives
(1) The object of this Law is to
establish a national
registration and accreditation scheme
(a) the regulation of health practitioners; and
(b) the registration of students undertaking—
(i) programs of study that provide a qualification for
registration in a health profession; or
(ii) clinical training in a health profession.
objectives of the national registration and
accreditation scheme
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring
that only health practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
practise in a competent and ethical manner are registered; and
(b) to facilitate workforce mobility across Australia by
reducing the administrative burden for health practitioners wishing to
between participating jurisdictions or to practise in more than one
participating jurisdiction; and
(c) to facilitate the provision of high quality education and
training of health practitioners; and
(ca) to build the capacity of the Australian health workforce
to provide culturally safe health services to Aboriginal and Torres
Islander Peoples; and
(d) to facilitate the rigorous and responsive assessment of
overseas-trained health practitioners; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health
practitioners in accordance with the public interest; and
(f) to enable the continuous development of a flexible,
responsive and sustainable Australian health workforce and to enable innovation
in the education of, and service delivery by, health practitioners. (Emphasis
Health Practitioner Act establishes the AMB (by regulation), AHPRA and a
framework for accreditation of education providers such
as the Specialist
effect of this framework is that many decisions, normally the province of
employers, are made by external bodies.
example, during the intern year a JMO must complete specified periods providing
clinical experience in four areas of care. In
the RMO year, JMOs are required
to complete five rotations through different areas of practice.
completion of prevocational training a JMO makes a choice to either remain an
RMO for another year, enter a specialist training
program, seek appointment as a
Career Medical Officer, or perhaps go into private practice as a general
practitioner.
number and location of the specialist training positions is determined by the
external accrediting authorities, usually the Specialist
Colleges. Those
Colleges also prescribe the nature of the work a JMO is to undertake as part of
their training. In many cases,
those prescriptions require the JMO to work in
different locations. An example was provided by Dr Gialouris. The program for
Training in Palliative Care requires trainees to undertake 24 months of
core training in four different settings, as detailed in
] above. A similar
example is provided by Dr Wolfe, at [
are also rotations initiated by NSW Health to maximise the number of accredited
training positions. Dr Mullins, as noted at
] above, explained that rotations for Medical
Administration trainees are designed to provide a diversity of experience which,
not specifically required by the training program, is an area tested in
the College assessments.
as illustrated at [
], given the limited number of regional hospitals
accredited for training in the Administration discipline, and the small number
positions, it is in the interests of the system as a whole for trainees to
move to other hospitals to allow other JMOs to obtain
medical administration
experience in a rural or regional context.
these factors in mind, the concerns expressed by the Specified Doctors about the
uncertainty of where they would be long-term,
"life" decisions, or being always "new" in the workplace are not so much an
impact of the length of
contract, rather it is a product of the training regime
public interest identified in the Health Practitioner Act is well served by
maximising both the diversity of training for the
individual JMO and the number
of positions in which JMOs can be trained.
accept readily that some JMOs would find the requirement to move locations, in
some cases relatively frequently, disruptive. I
expect others would enjoy the
experience. Either way, it is a product of the training regime not the length
of contract.
can accept that some JMOs may feel constrained not to complain for fear that it
may adversely impact their prospects for progression.
The basis of that belief
is not revealed. The evidence of those involved in making such selections
suggests that considerations
of that kind play no part in selecting trainees.
evidence also demonstrates that contract length is overwhelmingly related to the
period expected to be required to complete the
relevant stage of training. It
is also evident that contracts are extended or new contracts made where
circumstances arise to cause
the expected time to be inadequate.
every case the contracts describe the employment as fixed term temporary.
is also no doubt that the Specified Doctors were not paid a 10% allowance in
respect of any of their contracts.
Application to Amend
Submissions
its Outline of Submissions filed on 31 January 2025 the applicant Included a
section headed “Further Contraventions”.
In the first paragraph
under that heading the applicant submitted:
“To the extent the Specified Doctors are determined not to be temporary
employees upon each engagement, the Respondent contravened
clause 2.2 by failing
‘at all appropriate times’ to properly classify them.”
its written submissions, the respondent replied that this complaint had not been
pleaded. The applicant, absent leave to amend,
should not be permitted to rely
applicant, in its Outline of Submissions in Reply filed 21 February 2025
indicated it would, to the extent necessary, seek leave
to amend and annexed a
draft Amended Statement of Claim. The amendment sought the addition of a
paragraph which was in the following
“137A In the alternative, and only to the extent each of
the Specified Doctors is found not to be classified as a “temporary
employee” on each of the occasions alleged above, then the Respondent:
(a) mischaracterised each of the Specified Doctors; and
(b) in the premises, contravened clause 2.2 of the Health
Industry Status Awards.”
was submitted that the contravention was not pleaded as a direct consequence of
the respondent’s “bare” Defence
which did not identify the
classification the respondent contended was correct. It was not until 5
November 2024 that the respondent
“first articulated its position that an
engagement for more than 13 weeks would not be a ‘temporary
employment’”.
it was submitted that no prejudice had been articulated, and there could be
Dixon developed these points in his oral submissions. He referred to the
Employment Directive which described JMOs as “exempt
employees”. He
then referred to correspondence of May 2023 from the applicant to the Health
Secretary and the response from
the Health Secretary. Included in that response
was the contention that as JMOs were engaged for a minimum of 12 months, they
not be temporary employees. He then made the point that, consistent with
that correspondence, the respondent had not pleaded that
JMOs are exempt
Dixon reiterated the criticism of the Defence as “replete with bare
denials”, as there was no positive case advanced.
The positive case only
emerged in the respondent’s written submissions. That case was largely
based on the practicality of
limited term contracts aligned to the various
stages of training of JMOs. No explanation is offered as to why there are no
practical contractual arrangements which could fit within the structure.
contended that no notion of impossibility could arise. There is no such
submission, so it is unnecessary to deal further with
that point.
response to a question from the court, Mr Dixon submitted that
“permanent” on the proper construction of the status
award excluded
fixed term contracts.
referred to the decision of the High Court in
Leotta v Public Transport
Commission (NSW)
(1976) 9 ALR 437
Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR
”). He submitted that the modern approach
has been for the court to ensure that the real issues
between the parties are able to be resolved.
this case the respondent, in its written submissions, contended that the
employment of JMOs was “fixed-term permanent”.
That raised the
issue of “mischaracterisation” in the context of an obligation on
the employer to properly classify
the employees in accordance with the taxonomy
of the Status Award.
for the respondent submitted that the contention that the pleadings did not make
clear the respondent’s position should
not be accepted. He submitted that
the respondent’s case had always been that the Specified Doctors were not
temporary employees
but permanent. By way of example, he referred to paragraph
87 of the Statement of Claim in which it was alleged that Dr Wells was
permanent employee and was deemed to be so by operation of clause 2.8 of the
Status Award. The Defence admits that the doctor
is a permanent employee but
otherwise denies paragraph 87.
relation to the application for leave to amend counsel for the respondent made
five points.
this is a civil penalty case. That being so, the proper pleading and
particularisation of the case is vital. He referred
to the Federal Court
decision in
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v National
Australia Bank Limited (No 2)
[2023] FCA 1118.
there is no proper explanation for why the proposed amendment was not brought
sooner. The respondent’s case had been
clear since the defence was filed
in March 2024, and reinforced at the directions hearing of 24 September 2024.
he referred to the directions hearing before the President in which he responded
to questions from his Honour by confirming
that the respondent’s case is
(a) the employees are not temporary because they are, or were, engaged for more
than 13 weeks; and
(b) they are permanent.
the applicant has not identified what it means in terms of the contravention
that it seeks to allege. The allegation in the
proposed amendment is that the
respondent has “characterised” each of the Specified Doctors. That
term, or its cognates,
is not used in the Status Award. The language used in
the Status Award is “classify”. Even if that be accepted, there
nothing in the proposed amendment to explain what the applicant says constitutes
a “misclassification”.
the respondent is prejudiced because it may have put on evidence addressing
whatever complaints the applicant may have about
classification that it wished
to prosecute. If the allegation is simply about using the word
“temporary” in the employment
contracts, the applicant would need to
show that it constitutes misclassification in and of itself, regardless of how
the employees
are otherwise treated by the employer.
as to the prospective merits, the respondent submits that assuming the
“simple” approach is intended, it is necessary
to determine what
classification means. Counsel cited the decision of the High Court in
K-Generation Pty. Limited v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501.
That case concerned an obligation imposed on the Liquor and Gambling Commission,
the Licensing Court and the Supreme Court to take
steps to maintain the
confidentiality of information classified by the Commissioner of Police as
criminal intelligence. French CJ
observed at [59] - [60]:
“The function conferred on the Commissioner of Police by use of the word
‘classify’ is subject to the minimum constraint
applicable to the
exercise of any statutory power namely that it must be exercised in good faith
and within the scope and for the
purposes of the statute.
If the word ‘classify’ were to be read merely as
‘designate’ it is arguable that there would be little more
minimum constraint upon the Police Commissioner's function. However, its
ordinary meaning is:
‘To arrange or distribute in classes according to a method or
The process of classification is therefore to be informed by some selection
principle. In this case the selection principle is disclosed
by the definition
of ‘criminal intelligence’ in s 4 of the Act.”
“classify” simply refers to the labelling of the contract that would
be at most a “designation”. To show
a misclassification one would
need to show that employees have been arranged or distributed into classes
according to a method or
system inconsistent with the terms of the Status Award.
To the extent they have been put into any classification it is consistent
their permanent status, arising from being full-time employees under the Medical
Officers Award.
those reasons, the respondent says the amendment ought not be permitted.
Consideration of the Amendment
decision in
was in the context of a civil action in negligence
arising out of the death of a man who was attempting to board a moving train.
The trial was heard by a judge and jury. During the hearing evidence emerged
which was not consistent with the case pleaded by
the plaintiff. Counsel for
the defendant, at the close of the evidence, indicated that he wished to move
for a verdict for the defendant
by direction. Before hearing that submission
the trial judge asked counsel for the plaintiff to “formulate the nature
case which he seeks to make on the evidence which has now been
presented”.
oral submissions in reply, counsel referred to the following passage from the
judgment of the plurality, Stephen, Mason, and Jacobs
JJ, (at p 106):
“If in the cause of action upon which the plaintiff sued there had emerged
at the conclusion of the evidence facts which, if
accepted, established that
cause of action, then it was the duty of the trial judge to leave the issue of
negligence to the jury.
The pleadings should have been amended in order to make
the facts alleged and the particulars of negligence precisely conform to
evidence which had emerged.”
CJ would have dismissed the appeal. Murphy J allowed the appeal but was, at
least implicitly critical of the course followed,
although he held it was too
late now for the defendant to complain about unfairness.
accepted that there may be a reason for a stricter approach in a civil penalty
case. A further distinguishing feature of
is that the development
in that case was as to the facts. The cause of action remained negligence. The
case did not involve the
addition of a new cause of action. More importantly,
the approach taken in
has been overtaken by later authority.
decision in
somewhat refined that approach to amendments. The
case concerned an action by the Australian National University (ANU) against
of its insurers and its insurance broker, Aon. The ANU sought an
indemnity for loss and damage arising from a fire at one of its
facilities. On
the third day of a four week trial the ANU reached a settlement with the
insurers. It then applied for an adjournment
to make substantial amendments to
the case pleaded against Aon. The adjournment was granted and the application
to amend was heard
two weeks later. The amendment was allowed. The trial judge
relied upon the decision of the High Court in
Queensland v JL Holdings Pty
(1997) 189 CLR 146
, which stood as authority for the proposition that
“justice is the paramount consideration” in determining the
application
for amendment. It was also important that the amended allegations
raised, in the opinion of the trial judge, real triable issues.
High Court was unanimous in upholding Aon’s appeal. There was also
substantial consistency in the reasons of the three
judgements delivered as to
the need for a more rigorous approach to considering amendments, particularly
those made late, in the
sense of on the eve of or during a trial.
plurality, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ, found that the amendments
were substantial and the explanation for the
need to amend was unconvincing.
The information which prompted the amendment was said to have come from the
insurers during mediation
and was confidential. The information was, however,
available to the ANU in correspondence from the insurers provided years before
the hearing. The insurer’s defences, filed a year before trial, also
should have alerted the ANU to the need to reconsider
its claim against Aon.
Honours also observed that the principles of case management are now an accepted
part of the system of civil justice administration.
In that regard they drew a
distinction between the approach in
JL Holdings
, in which it was said
that principles of case management should not, except in extreme circumstances,
be employed to prevent a party
from litigating an issue which is fairly
plurality concluded at [111] and [112]:
An application for leave to amend a pleading should not be approached
on the basis that a party is entitled to raise an arguable claim,
payment of costs by way of compensation. There is no such entitlement
matters relevant to the exercise of the power to permit amendment should be
weighed. The fact of substantial delay and wasted
costs, the concerns of case
management, will assume importance on an application for leave to amend.
Statements in JL Holdings which
suggest only a limited application for case
management do not rest upon a principle which has been carefully worked out in a
significant
succession of cases. On the contrary, the statements are not
consonant with this Court's earlier recognition of the effects of delay,
only upon the parties to the proceedings in question, but upon the court and
other litigants. Such statements should not be applied
in the future.
A party has the right to bring proceedings. Parties have choices as to what
claims are to be made and how they are to be framed.
But limits will be
placed upon their ability to effect changes to their pleadings, particularly if
litigation is advanced
. That is why, in seeking the just resolution of the
dispute, reference is made to parties having a sufficient opportunity to
the issues they seek to agitate.” (Emphasis added.)
further consideration is that this case, albeit a civil case, is a civil penalty
case and the amendment seeks to add a new allegation
of a contravention. The
respondent referred the Court to the decision of Derrington J in
Securities and Investments Commission v National Australia Bank Ltd
case concerned a claim for civil penalties against the Bank for wrongfully
charging certain fees to its customers. In an earlier
decision the Court had
made a declaration of that wrongful conduct. The decision to which I was
referred concerned the penalty which
should be imposed. The Bank submitted that
ASIC had departed from the approach taken at the liability stage by now alleging
each of 74,593 occasions was a separate contravention.
J considered two questions. The first, to what extent a regulator is to be
constrained, and bound to adhere, to the terms
of its articulated case? The
second, whether ASIC should properly be so restrained in the instant case?
relation to the general principles his Honour traversed the authorities noting
that a civil penalty case is a proceeding of a penal
nature. The prosecutor
must plead with “specificity” and prosecute with “especial
diligence”. His Honour
concluded, at [18]:
It follows that the regulator’s case must ordinarily have some
quality of “rigidity” to it.
The specific terms that it uses to
articulate that case ought to be attributed a degree of significance that is apt
to reflect the
inherent seriousness of a suit for the recovery of a civil
The boundaries that those terms establish for the case may therefore
be policed assiduously by the Court,
such that the regulator might not be
permitted without good reason to stray beyond those boundaries in the absence of
a formal application
for amendment.
Likewise, the Court may be less inclined
to permit a regulator to treat those terms as plastic or open textured so as to
allow a case
that has not been disclosed entirely openly from the outset to be
raised belatedly in a manner prejudicial to the alleged
contravenor.
(Emphasis added.)
Honour cautioned, however, that, at [19]:
“It should nevertheless be borne in mind that the Court is not to approach
these matters dogmatically. As pointed out by Logan
J (with whom Collier J
Heiko Constructions v Tyson
[2020] FCAFC 208
(2020) 282 FCR
, ‘pleadings are but the handmaiden of justice’ and
‘whether or not procedural fairness has been denied by the loss
opportunity to know and meet, by submissions and evidence, an adverse allegation
is always a matter of practical evaluation
in the circumstances of a given
applicant’s explanation for the late application to amend was, in effect,
that the matter only came to their attention when
the respondent filed its
written submissions pointing out that the contravention had not been pleaded.
applicant’s answer to that criticism was to criticise the way the Defence
was pleaded, particularly the absence of a “positive
things may be said about that.
the Defence, on a careful reading, did articulate that the respondent contended
that JMOs were “permanent” employees
for the purposes of the Status
Award as explained at [
it was always pellucidly clear that the respondent contended that the employees
were not temporary within the meaning of the
Status Award notwithstanding its
description of the employment as temporary in the contracts. If the respondent
was correct as to
that, it was open to the applicant to contend that, in so
describing the employment, the respondent had committed the contravention
wishes to allege.
the applicant was aware from at least May 2023 that the respondent did not
regard JMOs as temporary or exempt. That left
only two categories, permanent or
casual. The applicant rejects both as proper classifications.
again, at the directions hearing about four months before the substantive
hearing, the respondent confirmed its position that
the employees were permanent
for the purposes of the Status Award.
of these events would give rise to the applicant being in a position to contend
that the respondent had failed to properly classify
the employees. It chose not
to do so. I infer that was so because the central issue in this case, as
described by counsel for the
applicant in opening, is whether the employees are
temporary for the purposes of the Status Award. That is the substance of the
applicant’s claim. The proposed amendment is an alternative claim. The
alternative was always apparent.
applicant may not readily be described as a regulator, but it is exercising the
powers of a regulator. I see no reason to qualify
the principles enunciated by
Derrington J about the nature of a civil penalty case and the obligations of a
prosecutor to be diligent
and precise in the drafting of its pleadings.
from not pleading the alleged breach either initially or in a timely way before
the hearing, the respondent complains that the
proposed amendment does not
particularise the alleged failure to properly classify the employees. There is
substance in the respondent’s
submission that classification may be more
than mere designation. If so, the question arises as to what the system of
classification
requires and what purpose it serves. How does classification by
the employer find reflection in the conditions of employment of
the employee?
The answers may be found in part in evidence and in part in submissions. The
respondent did not have sufficient opportunity
to consider those alternatives.
raise one further matter related to the drafting of the Status Award. That is
that cl 2.2 is found in the Principles clause. It
states, in that context, that
it is the “responsibility” of the employer to classify properly. It
does not use words
of obligation or duty. I make no final decision on the effect
of the clause but note it is not without doubt that the subclause creates
enforceable obligation.
these reasons leave to amend is refused.
The construction of the
Status Award.
Submissions
was no issue between the parties as to the principles to be applied in
construing the terms of awards.
its written outline of submissions, the applicant referred to
Public Service
Association and Professional Officers Association Amalgamated Union (NSW) v
Secretary of the Treasury
(2014) 87 NSWLR 41
[2014] NSWIRComm 23.
case Walton J said at [115]:
“Putting aside for one moment the refinements applicable to award
interpretation to which Street and French JJ alluded, these
statements of
principle may be synthesised as follows:
(1) The legal meaning of ‘a provision of an award’
is to be ascertained through a process of construction by which
the intention of
the provision is deduced. It is the duty of the court to give the words of the
award a meaning that the authors
of the award are taken to have intended them to
(2) The process of construction must begin with a textual
analysis of the words of the provision, that is, a consideration of the
and grammatical meaning of the words.
(3) Whilst the surest guide to the meaning of an award
provision is language used in a provision of an award, the meaning of the
may require consideration of the context (which includes, inter alia,
consideration being given to the instrument as a whole).
Thus, the initial step
in construction may involve construing the words of an award provision in
(4) The consideration of the words of the provision of an award
in context includes examining the general purposes and the policy
provision derived from a statement of policy in the award or from the terms of
the award. Thus, the legal meaning may be ascertained
by reference to general
purpose, consistency and fairness, although, again, the purpose of a provision
derives from its text and
structure. A relevant consideration in this respect is
the mischief remedied by a provision. (See
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern Territory)
[2009] HCA 41
(5) An examination of the purpose of an instrument is very much
part of the traditional approach to award interpretation. It was
accepted by
Kelleher J in
In re Dispute between Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd and the Federated
Ship Painters and Dockers’ Union of Australia, New South Wales
[1961] AR 312
at 314 that it is proper to pay regard to the
purposes for which the provision was intended (as quoted in
at [63]). An application of this approach may be found in
the judgment of Hill J in
Australian Workers Union (NSW) v Pioneer Concrete
(NSW) Pty Ltd
(1991) 38 IR 365
at 380, where it was stated that
‘provisions in awards must be construed reasonably and realistically,
having regard to their
purposes and objectives’. I will add further to
this consideration when returning to the notion, developed in the dicta of
Street and French JJ, that a generous construction should be adopted in the
interpretation of awards.
(6) The determination of the purpose or intention of a
provision of an award neither permits nor requires a search for what those
drafted or made the award had in mind when the award was made: see
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (NSW Branch) v Delta
Electricity
[2003] NSWIRComm 135
(2003) 146 IR 360
and NSW Fire
Brigades at [47]. Further, it is not for the court to construct its own idea of
a desirable policy, import it to the
award-maker and then characterise it as the
purpose of the provision: see
Rail Corporation of New South Wales v Brown
[2012] NSWCA 296
(2012) 82 NSWLR 318
per Bathurst CJ.”
observations of Street and French JJ referred to by his Honour were quoted at
[102] and [104] of the judgment respectively. The
relevant passages are:
Geo A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
at 503–504, Street J, then a judge of the Industrial Commission of New
South Wales, succinctly stated the principles applicable
to the interpretation
of awards which have been long applied in the industrial jurisprudence of this
state as follows:
‘Now speaking generally, awards are to be interpreted as any other
enactment is interpreted. They lay down the law affecting
employers and
employees in their relations as such, and they have to be obeyed to the same
extent as any other statutory enactment.
But at the same time, it must be
remembered that awards are made for the various industries in the light of the
customs and working
conditions of each industry, and they frequently result, as
this award in fact did, from an agreement between parties, couched in
intelligible to themselves but often framed without that careful attention to
form and draughtsmanship which one expects to
find in an Act of Parliament. I
think, therefore, in construing an award one must always be careful to avoid a
too literal adherence
to the strict technical meaning of words, and must view
the matter broadly, and after giving consideration and weight to every part
the award, endeavour to give it a meaning consistent with the general intention
of the parties to be gathered from the whole award.’”
And per French J in
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR
City of Wanneroo
“[53] The construction of an award, like that of a
statute, begins with a consideration of the ordinary meaning of its words.
with the task of statutory construction regard must be paid to the context and
purpose of the provision or expression being construed.
Context may appear from
the text of the instrument taken as a whole, its arrangement and the place in it
of the provision under construction.
It is not confined to the words of the
relevant Act or instrument surrounding the expression to be construed. It may
extend to ‘...
the entire document of which it is a part or to other
documents with which there is an association’. It may also include
ideas that gave rise to an expression in a document from which it has
been taken’ —
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
(1993) 40 FCR 511 at
518; 46 IR 128 at 134 (Burchett J);
Australian Municipal, Administrative,
Clerical and Services Union v Treasurer of Commonwealth
[1998] FCA 249
(1998) 82 FCR 175
80 IR 345 (Marshall J).
[57] It is of course necessary, in the construction of an
award, to remember, as a contextual consideration, that it is an award
consideration. Its words must not be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from
industrial realities —
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
at 378–379 and cases there cited. There is a long tradition of generous
construction over a strictly literal approach where
industrial awards are
concerned — see eg
George A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
at 503–504 (Street J). It may be that this means no
more than that courts and tribunals will not make too much of infelicitous
expression in the drafting of an award nor be astute to discern absurdity or
illogicality or apparent inconsistencies.”
respondent in its written submissions, in addition to references to the passages
already cited from
Geo A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
Geo. A. Bond
City of Wanneroo,
cited the following passage from
New South Wales v Stockwell
(per McColl JA, with whom Leeming and Simpson JJA agreed):
“When construing an industrial agreement such as the 2006 Award, in
particular the primary requirement and the proviso, the
Court must have regard
to the language of the particular agreement, understood in the light of its
industrial context and purpose
and its operation as a whole as well as the
legislative background against which it was made and in which it was to
applicant submitted in its written outline:
(1) The language of the employment contracts is the best evidence of the intent
of the parties. The employer chose to describe the
employment as
“temporary”. The employer has the responsibility to correctly
classify the employees. In this case it
classified them as temporary.
(2) Fixed term contracts and permanent appointments are mutually exclusive. The
latter contemplates employment for an indefinite
period whereas the former sets
a finite term.
(3) There are only two classes of permanent employees. Those appointed as such
and those deemed to be permanent pursuant to cl 1.5.
(4) The respondent’s submission that the employees could not be temporary
because they were engaged under contracts for a minimum
of 12 months is
misconceived. On that approach the employees would be neither permanent,
temporary, casual, or exempt at the time
of appointment. The language of the
Status Award militates against the existence of an additional implied class
(a) Clauses 1.2 and 2.2 are expressed in exhaustive, closed terms.
(b) There is a “prohibition” in clause 1.4 on fixed term employment.
(c) Clause 2.8 contemplates situations where an employee can be engaged on a
non-permanent basis beyond 13 weeks.
(d) The language in clause 3.2 recognises that the period of employment may
extend beyond 13 weeks for reasons other than an agreement
to convert temporary
employment to permanent and the language is broad enough to encompass a
circumstance where temporary employment
is designated, at the outset, to extend
beyond 13 weeks.
respondent submitted in its written outline:
(1) The express language of the award is that a temporary employee is a person
engaged for 13 weeks or less.
(2) Clause 1.4 of the Status Award prevents the employer from offering fixed
term contracts as a matter of preference. It is not
a prohibition.
(3) The decision to offer JMOs fixed term contracts was motivated by the length
of the various stages of training being undertaken.
(4) The applicant’s submission that the Specified Doctors were temporary
for the first 13 weeks is wrong because it is plainly
contrary to the words of
cl 1.4. The submission that the description given by the employer is
determinative is inconsistent with
the High Court decision in
Workpac Pty Ltd
(2021) 27 CLR 456 (“
”). At [57] their
Honours Keifel CJ, Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, and Gleason JJ said:
“A court can determine the character of a legal relationship between the
only by reference to the legal rights and obligations which
constitute that relationship
.” (Emphasis added.)
(5) The characterisation of the relationship is to be determined at the
commencement of the employment relationship:
(6) The proviso in cl 1.4 confirms that fixed term contracts can be offered
for less than 13 weeks (temporary) or more than 13 weeks
(permanent).
(7) The deeming provision in cl 3.2 is consistent with the concept of
temporary employment being determined at the commencement of
the contract. The
10% loading will cease “if” the employment extends beyond 13 weeks.
(8) The applicant’s submission that cll 2.8 and 3.2 contemplate that a
person may be employed for a period greater than 13 weeks
on a temporary or
non-permanent basis is wrong. Clause 2.7 affirms that a temporary employee (a
person engaged for not more than
13 weeks) may be “re-engaged”
subject to specified conditions.
(9) A common purpose of a loading is to compensate for, amongst other things,
the short-term nature of the employment or the absence
of full entitlements
associated with employment over a longer period. It will be seen that, in oral
submissions, the former purpose
was given most weight. That purpose has no
application to employees such as the Specified Doctors.
(10) The contention, that the description of the employment as temporary is
the best evidence of the classification as temporary,
is inconsistent with
and the terms of the Status Award. The terms of the award are
binding on the parties to the employment, they are not free to contract
those terms.
(11) A commonsense understanding of what it means to be a temporary employee
is someone who does not enjoy security of tenure. That
has no application to
the Specified Doctors.
(12) The respondent does not contend that there is an additional
“implied class”. The correct classification under the
Status Award
is permanent.
(13) Even contracts of indefinite duration are terminable on reasonable
notice or summarily for breach. The Medical Officers Award
cl 22 provides for
termination on 4 weeks notice or such lesser period as the parties may agree.
It also preserves the right to
terminate summarily for ”misconduct or
neglect of duty”.
submissions were developed and supplemented at hearing. What was clear was that
the parties were in agreement that the employees
were not casual or exempt. The
debate centred on whether they were temporary or permanent.
Dixon submitted that much turns on the definition in clause 1.4 of the Status
Award. He said:
“the [award]
requires temporary employment to be limited to a period of
. And if there’s an attempt to engage someone as a
temporary employee for longer than that period, the award deems that person
be a permanent employee.”
(Emphasis added.)
then referred to cl 1.5 which he described as critical because it identifies two
parts to becoming a permanent employee. The first
by appointment as such, the
second, by working for a continuous period of more than 13 weeks.
point is taken that the interpretation advanced by the applicant was
inconsistent with legislation or government recruitment and
employment policy,
so the court need not be troubled by that issue.
provision cl 3.2 (a) is important because:
“what it does is, it again indicates that the terms of the award
contemplate
temporary employment extending beyond 13 weeks
possibility of that happening, because that’s what the clause is directed
to. It’s directed to temporary
employees.”
Jones for the respondent drew attention to the evidence which showed that as the
Specified Doctors’ contracts came to an
end, a new contract commenced
immediately so that employment was continuous. The contracts were designed to
meet the requirements
of their training.
referred to cl 1.2 and the definition of “Employee” emphasising the
categories of employment which, in that definition
he notes are “full
time, part time, temporary, exempt or casual”. He joined in an
observation, made by Mr Dixon, that
the drafters had conflated the first two
categories with permanent employment. He emphasised also the language of
engaged” as supporting the submission that the
characterisation is focused on the commencement of employment.
applicant, Mr Jones submitted, offers no explanation as to how an employee
engaged for more than 13 weeks can be a temporary employee.
Next, in common
with Mr Dixon, he referred to the two paths to permanency. The first by being
“appointed as such”,
which he described as “somewhat
question-begging”.
reference to cl 3.2 (b), he postulated it was intended to mean appointed
“on a permanent basis”.
distinction between the two paths, he submitted, makes clear that a permanent
employee is someone who has been engaged for a
period of more than 13 weeks. I
understood the submission to mean that permanency can be achieved by being
appointed for more than
13 weeks or by working more than 13 weeks.
respondent accepts that the employees fell within the description in cl 2.1 of
“employees engaged in meaningful work”
and therefore they were
“entitled to an expectation of permanency”. Clause 2.2 emphasises
that classification is focused
on the commencement of the employment
relationship.
2.7 provides that a person “who by definition is a temporary employee for
a period of less than 13 weeks” is able
to be re-engaged, provided the
aggregate period of consecutive contracts does not exceed 13 weeks. This clause
again makes the distinction,
based on the 13 week period, between temporary and
permanent employment.
Jones submitted that clause 3.2 does not have any sensible application to a
person employed, from the outset, for a period greater
than 13 weeks. The use
of the word “if” is important because it reflects uncertainty. A
person who, at the time of
engagement, is not expected to be employed for more
than 13 weeks is entitled to a loading. “If” it happens that the
person is retained beyond that period, the person then becomes permanent.
Status Award, he submitted, says that a person engaged for more than 13 weeks is
not a temporary employee. To say that all persons
employed on a fixed term
contract, of whatever duration greater than 13 weeks, are temporary employees
would be to greatly expand
the definition of “temporary employee”.
to the correct classification, the respondent submits these employees are
permanent. The conclusion is reached essentially by
interpreting the Status
Award as a whole. Having regard to the express definition of “temporary
employee” in cl 1.4,
“permanent” must mean a person employed
for a duration greater than 13 weeks. That is what “appointed as
means in cl 1.5.
only ascertainable purpose of the loading is to compensate employees engaged for
less than 13 weeks for employment which is not
secure beyond that timeframe.
That has no sensible application to the Specified Doctors who were offered
contracts of between one
and three years.
“Permanency”
does not require “indefiniteness” in any and all circumstances. In
support of that proposition
In re Goodwin
(1986) Tas R 6. The
employee in question in that case had been engaged as a cadet for a period of
six years. When his cadetship
finished, he was appointed to a position as an
engineer. The question was whether, for the purposes of the Tasmanian
Benefits Act, he was employed in a permanent capacity during his
J held that he was. As to the concept of permanency his Honour said at 18:
“It is difficult to establish the insignia of ‘permanency’. I
use the inverted commas because, as counsel agreed,
there is no employment which
is permanent. Sometimes entry into or the capacity to enter into a
superannuation scheme is regarded
as an indication that employment is
‘permanent’. But that is to put the cart before the horse, because
it is the character
of ‘permanency’ in the employment that gives the
right to enter the scheme.
Indefiniteness is not the same as permanency, nor
is a fixed termination point or a fixed point for the exercise of choice, a sure
indication that the employment is other than permanent
. Nearly all employees
have a fixed retiring age. ‘Permanent’ offices in the Services have
to retire upon reaching a certain
combination of rank and age. To sign up for a
period of years as an ‘other rank’ is to become a
‘permanent’
soldier or sailor. The term ‘cadet’ has, to
my ear, accreditation akin to ‘permanence’ as meaning a junior
member of the workforce training for staff appointment.” (Emphasis added.)
Jones submitted that his Honour’s observations were cited with approval by
Heerey J in
Mulcahy v Hydro-Electric Commission
[1998] FCA 605
(1998) 85 FCR 170
Determination
Status Award provides a quintessential example of an industrial instrument, in
the words of Street J in
Geo. A. Bond,
which results
“from an agreement between the parties, couched in terms intelligible to
themselves but ... framed without that careful attention
to form and
draughtsmanship which one expects to find in an Act of Parliament”.
must be cautious therefore to, as French J warned,
“not make too much of infelicitous expression in the drafting of [the]
award nor be astute to discern illogicality or apparent
inconsistencies.”
Status Award, as I have noted at [
] above, was made in 2000. It was an interim award
made by consent. The document presented to the Commission had several drafting
issues, some of which were drawn to the attention of the parties. An
adjournment was granted to permit the parties to address, at
least, the formal
issues required by the legislation and the Commission’s Award Making
Principles. The form of the award as
made has not changed for more than 20
years, save for amendments to Schedule A.
are numerous inconsistencies in the Status Award. For example, the categories
in cl 1.2 are not coextensive with the classifications
in cl 2.2. The parties
each submitted that the drafters conflated full time and part time with
permanent. While that has some appeal,
it fails to account for the fact that
temporary employees may also be employed either full-time or part-time having
regard to cl
second example is cl 1.7 itself which defines the term “continuous period
of employment” as an uninterrupted period
of 13 weeks with at least one
shift per week in that period. For some reason it is confined to 13 weeks
whereas other provisions
(a) “a period not exceeding 13 weeks” (cl1.4);
(b) “a continuous period of 13 weeks” (cl 1.5);
(c) “a period of less than 13 weeks” (cl 2.7); and
(d) “does not exceed 13 weeks” (cl 2.7).
third example is that the term “continuous period of 13 weeks” is
only otherwise found in cl 2.8. It seems to reflect
there what is already in cl
1.5. It may be that the purpose of the definition is to enable a temporary
employee to be deemed permanent
on either a full time or part time basis
according to the shifts worked (on a regular basis perhaps) in the qualifying
period. Presumably
casual employees are considered ineligible because the
definition of that category limits employment to a period of one week (at
one assumes, in uninterrupted employment), unless the short-term exception
applies. “Short-term employment” is
not defined.
the structure of the Status Award itself raises questions. The definitions
clause contains the proviso about fixed term
contracts. It is unusual to find
an enforceable obligation in a definition. Is it meant to be an enforceable
obligation or merely
an aid to construction? A similar issue arises in the
“Principles” clause. Clause 2.1 may be readily regarded as a
principle. Clauses 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 may also, to varying degrees, be
regarded as principles. Are cll 2.2 and 2.8 principles
or enforceable
obligations?
examples serve to emphasise that, whatever the outcome of these proceedings, the
Status Award is in need of review.
singular objective definition in the Status Award, of relevance in this case, is
that of “temporary employee”. Such
an employee is a person who
for a period not exceeding 13 weeks. I accept the
respondent’s submission that the definition focuses on the point of
engagement.
While the cases referred to:
In re Goodwin
must be seen in the context of the statutory
provisions concerned, they lend weight to the submission that the time for
is at the commencement of employment. It is very much strengthened
by the language of the definition, particularly the words emphasised
reinforced by the deeming provision in cl 2.8, which deals with the eventuality,
unexpected at the point of engagement,
of the employee being
beyond 13 weeks. The language of cl 3.2(a) similarly reinforces that
construction.
my view cl 1.4 does not create a prohibition against fixed term contracts. I
have formed that view, firstly, because the language
used is that of preference
rather than prohibition. Secondly, it is expressed in the context of temporary
employment which the Status
Award contemplates can be for terms up to 13 weeks.
Nothing in that language suggests that such employment could not be for a fixed
term of 13 weeks or less. The construction also accords with the language of cl
2.7 which contemplates more than one contract while
requiring the aggregate not
to exceed 13 weeks of consecutive employment.
is a difficulty with the applicant’s contention that the issue is to be
determined by the language used in the employment
contracts which describes the
employment as “temporary” and “fixed-term temporary”. If
that were the test,
then any description applied by the parties would resolve
the issue. It would mean that cl 2.2 would have no work to do beyond urging
employer to be accurate. That is inconsistent with the applicant’s
contention that it is an enforceable obligation. In
my view the issue is to be
determined by applying the terms of the Status Award to the “rights and
obligations of the parties”.
The labels used may be a factor to be
considered but they are not
it is accepted that the issue is to be resolved by the rights and obligations of
the parties at the commencement of the employment,
the focus must shift to the
terms of the contracts. The contracts in evidence in this case all, with
perhaps one exception, are
for periods of not less than 12 months. The possible
exception is the contract which permitted Dr Sanderson to remain in his training
position until he satisfied the examination requirements which had been delayed
by the covid pandemic. It was a contract of course
which followed upon the
expiration of his earlier contract and might properly be regarded, in that
context, as an extension of that
contract. It follows that none of the
contracts fall within the definition contained within cl 1.4.
is sufficient to permit the conclusion that the Specified Doctors were not
“temporary employees” within the meaning
of the Status Award. It
does not follow that the employees are not within any of the categories of the
Status Award or that they
must be in an additional implied class.
contention underpinning those propositions is that fixed term and permanent
employment are mutually inconsistent. The applicant
relied upon the decision of
the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission in
Civil Services
Association of Western Australia Incorporated v Director-General, the Department
[2019] WAIRC 817.
That case was concerned with employment under
Public Sector Management Act 1994
(WA). The employee had been a
permanent public servant appointed under
of that Act and then accepted
employment under s 64(1)(b). The Commission held that the acceptance of the
latter employment brought
the earlier employment to an end. The former was
indefinite employment the latter was fixed term; the Commission determined that
the two forms of statutory engagement were mutually inconsistent.
contrast the decisions in
In re Goodwin and Mulcahy
stand for the
proposition that permanent employment is to be determined not by reference to
the absence of a fixed termination point
but by the essential relationship
between the parties. That also needs to be determined in the context of the
relevant legislation.
this case the relevant context is the
Health Services Act
, the Status
Award and the Medical Officers Award. In that context, it is clear that even
ongoing employment is not permanent because
the employment may be terminated on
prescribed notice or for cause. There are four options under the Status Award.
Only two of
those options have possible application in respect of the Specified
Doctors. They are either “permanent” or “temporary”.
Given the definition of temporary employment and the effect of cll 2.8 and
3.2(a), permanent employment is defined by engagement
for more than 13 weeks.
The Specified Doctors were engaged, from the outset, for a period longer than 13
is no pleaded allegation that the employer has contravened the Status Award by
preferring fixed term employment to ongoing employment.
Nevertheless, in
deference to the submissions of the parties on this point I will briefly express
my view. I have already noted
that there is not a prohibition on such
contracts. It follows, to my mind, that the issue is to be determined by
reference not to
an individual contract but to a trend.
important point to bear in mind about the construction of the terms of the
Status Award, particularly in this context, is that
it is not confined to the
industry of junior medical officers. That being so, when it comes to assessing
whether a preference has
been given to fixed term employment rather than ongoing
employment, it is appropriate to determine that in the context of the entire
coverage of the award. The evidence in that regard is that in the order of 75%
of persons covered by the award are employed on ongoing
contracts. I would
conclude therefore that the preference is for ongoing contracts.
there is a claim for a declaration that Doctors Wells and Geara are permanent
employees. I note that Dr Geara ceased to
be an employee of NSW Health on 4
February 2024. I have found that they are, or were, permanent employees albeit
under fixed term
contracts. To make the declaration in the terms sought would
not resolve the issues dividing the parties;
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice
Therefore, I
decline to make that declaration.
these reasons were written, but before judgment could be delivered, the decision
of Commissioner Howell in
Health Services Union o/b Mr Tony Thomas v Health
Secretary in respect of HealthShare NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm 1065
case involved an application for interim relief against a threatened dismissal.
The factual circumstances are quite different
from those pertaining to this
case. The employee concerned had been originally employed on a temporary
full-time basis for a period
one day less than 13 weeks. He was subsequently
employed on a second contract for a further six months, followed by a third
of employment purportedly ending on 5 August 2025. All periods of
employment were consecutive. The Commissioner found that the
third contract was
a contract of indefinite duration contrary to the respondent’s submission
that the employee was engaged
on a fixed-term or exempt basis.
Nevertheless,
in the decision the Commissioner expresses some obiter views about the meaning
of permanent employment in the Status
Award. In the Commissioner’s view,
expressed at [77] and [82], a “permanent employee” is one employed
on an “ongoing
contract” rather than for a fixed term or as a
great respect to the Commissioner, I disagree with the implicit suggestion that
fixed term employment is necessarily inconsistent
with permanent employment
under the Status Award.
Conclusion and Orders
summary I make the following findings.
(1) The Specified Doctors were not temporary employees within the meaning of the
Status Award.
(2) The Specified Doctors were permanent employees within the meaning of the
Status Award, albeit with a recognised termination date.
(3) The Specified Doctors were not entitled to the temporary loading.
(4) The Status Award does not prohibit fixed-term contracts.
make the following orders:
(1) Leave to amend refused.
(2) Application dismissed.
will hear the parties on costs.
As the matter commenced in the
Supreme Court the parties are referred to in the pleadings as plaintiff and
defendant. The practice
in the Industrial Court is to refer to the parties as
applicant and respondent. These terms are therefore used throughout this
Health Services Act
Health Services Act
Health Services Act
Health Services Act
Health Services
Health Services Act
, (3A)–(3D).
Health Services Act
Dictionary.
Tcpt, 26 February
2025, p 2 (33 -35).
Public Hospital Medical
Officers (State) Award 2023 cl
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law 2009
For the sake of
brevity, I shall refer to the heading to the letter of offer, the description of
the employment and the Award reference
as the “usual
characteristics”.
Tcpt, 26 February
2025, p 8(37).
February 2025, p 9(49).
Tcpt, 26 February 2025, p
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
582 per Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gordon JJ and at 596 per Brennan J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (586 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter