URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V KELDA BROWN [2013] NSWNMT 8 (20 June 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 048/ 2012
CITATION: HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V KELDA
[2013] NSWNMT 8
(20 JUNE 2013)
INQUIRY INTO A
Complainant
: Health Care Complaints Commission
: Kelda Anne Brown
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM (Chairperson)
Ms Kathleen Dixon (Nurse Member)
Mr Daniel McCluskie (Nurse Member)
Ms Babette Smith (Lay Member)
Date and place of hearing:
April 2013 at Sydney
NON PUBLICATION ORDERS APPLY
Orders and Reasons for Decision
Representation
Complainant: Ms R Graycar of counsel instructed by Ms B Butt, Health Care
Complaints Commission
Respondent: Ms Linda Alexander, New South Wales Nurses and Midwives
Association
Complaint against a nurse of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct. Where particulars and
complaint conceded
by nurse prior to commencement of hearing. Consideration of
appropriate protective orders. Whether suspension of registration or
cancellation of registration for 18 months is an appropriate order. HELD
– Where serious nature of complaints and nurse’s
lack of insight
require nurse’s registration to be cancelled, and nurse precluded from
seeking a review for a period of 12
months from the date of order.
Legislation cited
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Donnelly v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011]NSWSC 705
HCCC v Dinaker
[2009] NSWNMT
HCCC v Engel-Jones
[2011] NSWNMT 23
HCCC v Karja
[2012] NSWNMT 11
HCCC v Shah
[2013]NSWNMT 1
HCCC v Sunjac [2008] NSWNMT
HCCC v Tate
[2009] NSWNMT 29
HCCC v Wardell No 2 [2013] 2
Lee v Health
Care Complaints Commission [2012]NSWCA 80
Lucire v Health Care
Complaints Commission [2011]NSWCA 99
Pillai v Messiter
(1989) 16 NSWLR 19
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided:
21 June 2013 the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal (“the Tribunal”)
made orders cancelling the registration of Ms Kelda
Anne Brown (formerly known
as Kelda Anne Griffiths) as a registered nurse on the register of health
practitioners maintained by the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(“AHPRA”) in conjunction with the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
(“the Board”). The Tribunal further ordered that at
least one year elapse from the date of its order before Ms Brown
may make an
application for review under s163A of the
Heath Practitioner Regulation
National Law 86a (NSW)
(“the National Law”) to the Tribunal to
be again registered as a nurse.
Tribunal also made a non publication order. This order precludes publication of
the name of the patient, and his friend, as well
as a friend of Ms Brown, and
her referees referred to in the material before the Tribunal, other than in
these Reasons for Decision
as provided to the parties to the
proceedings.
costs order was made which requires Ms Brown to pay the costs of the HCCC as
agreed. If agreement as to costs cannot be agreed,
either party has liberty to
re-list the matter before the Tribunal for assessment.
orders were made after a hearing before the Tribunal conducted on 9 April 2013.
Shortly prior the hearing Ms Brown conceded
complaints of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, and a complaint of professional misconduct, brought by the
Health Care Complaints
Commission (“HCCC”) under s139B and and s139E
of the National Law. The Complaint document was lodged with the Tribunal
November 2012. For convenience, a copy of the complaint is annexed to these
reasons and marked Annexure “A”.
The indexes to the documents
relied on by Ms Brown, and those relied on by the HCCC, all of which were
tendered before us, are also
annexed to these reasons and marked respectively as
Annexure “B” and Annexure
Introduction
proceedings arose because Ms Brown, who is a very well qualified and experienced
nurse, engaged in an improper relationship,
including a sexual relationship,
with a vulnerable 19 year old aboriginal inmate of a correctional centre where
she was employed
as a Nurse Unit Manager. The relationship commenced while the
young man was her patient, and continued for a period shortly after
his release
Brown asserts the relationship occurred at a time in her life when she was
vulnerable by reason of her brother’s recent suicide,
death of a friend in
a motor vehicle accident, marital problems, and unhappiness in her employment.
She does not dispute any particular
in the complaints brought by the HCCC. It
is her position that she will not re-offend.
Tribunal’s task in the proceedings was primarily to determine what
protective orders should be made under the National Law
in the light of Ms
Brown’s concessions.
considering the orders to be made the Tribunal was mindful that, not only did
the orders to be made need to ensure, as far as practicable,
that Ms Brown would
not re-offend, but also because the publication of the reasons and orders will
have an educative purpose for
other health professionals, patients and the
public in general.
reasons explain why the Tribunal determined to make the orders summarised at the
commencement of this document.
Structure of these
these reasons the Tribunal refers briefly to the two complaints. Thereafter we
set out some relevant background to Ms Brown’s
education and nursing
experience, and the facts relevant to her relationship with Mr CC
(“Patient A”). Having referred
to the law applicable to these
proceedings, we briefly discuss and make our independent findings about the
conceded complaints.
Thereafter, we refer to the submissions made to us by the
parties’ legal representatives, and set out the factors relied on
support the orders we deemed necessary and appropriate in accordance with the
object and guiding principle of the National
Law found in s3A.
convenience only in these reasons we refer to the persons and entities who
feature in the proceedings as follows:
Ms Kelda Anne
Brown as “the nurse”;
The Health Care
Complaints Commission as “the HCCC”;
The Nursing and
Midwifery Council as “the Council”;
New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives’ Association as “the Association”;
“Patient A”;
Metropolitan Multi Purpose Centre, South Windsor as “OMMPC”;
Ms Christine
Muller, Mental Health Nurse OMMPC as “Nurse M”;
the John Morony
Correctional Centre as “JMCC”;
the Bathurst
Correctional Centre as “the BCC”
Ms BR, a friend
of Ms Brown, whose name she used as an alias or pseudonym, as “Ms
Mr Simon Brown,
Ms Brown’s husband as “Mr Brown”;
the Metropolitan
Reception and Remand Centre as “the MRRC”
Ms L Alexander
of the Association as “Ms Alexander”. Ms Alexander appeared at the
hearing on behalf of the nurse;
Ms R Graycar of
Counsel as “Ms Graycar”. Ms Graycar instructed by Ms B Butt
appeared on behalf of the HCCC.
a statement relied on by the nurse dated 25 February 2013 she conceded the two
complaints brought by the HCCC. Thus, by reason
of s167(2) of the National
Law, it was not necessary for an inquiry to be conducted. Ms Alexander and Ms
Graycar agreed, however,
that it was necessary for the Tribunal to be
independently satisfied to the requisite civil standard the complaints were
and to consider appropriate protective orders to be made by the Tribunal
as a result of the concessions made by the nurse.
summary, the first complaint asserts Ms Brown was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct because her conduct demonstrated
the judgment she
possessed, or care exercised in the practice of nursing was significantly below
the standard expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of standing, and
/or that she engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice
or purported practice of nursing. The particulars of this complaint
include the writing of personal correspondence to Patient A
whilst he was in
custody, initiating contact with him via Facebook when he was released on
parole, and providing her mobile telephone
number to him.
particulars also include the allegation that the nurse provided Patient A with a
pseudonym so that her relationship with him would
not be detected by her
employer, Justice Health, when he called her mobile phone number, receiving
personal calls from him, and providing
him with her home address. The
particulars pleaded assert:
improperly accessed information personal to Patient A and provided information
sourced to one of his friends;
collected him from BCC on the day of his release from that Centre;
engaged in sexual intercourse with Patient A on the day of his release, and
continued the
relationship in a social setting in December 2010.
second complaint asserts the nurse is guilty of professional misconduct because
the unsatisfactory professional conduct is of
a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the nurse’s registration, or the
incidents of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, when considered together,
amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation
of the nurse’s registration.
the conclusion of the evidence, at the request of Ms Graycar, and after
deliberation, the Tribunal advised the parties it had determined
complaints were proved to the satisfaction of the Tribunal to the
standard (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.)
indicated we would provide our reasons for that decision in these
nurse was born on 28 July 1970. She is married and has four children aged
between 12 years and 4 years as at November 2010.
1992 the nurse was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of Science at Macquarie
University. In 1998 she completed the degree of Bachelor
Nursing at the
University of Sydney. In 2002 she successfully completed a Graduate Certificate
in Emergency Nursing at the NSW College
of Nursing. In 2008 she obtained a
Graduate Certificate in Health Service Management from the University of Sydney.
In 2013 she
completed a Certificate of Registration Property Services, Real
Estate at TAFE Western NSW.
nurse was first registered on 26 February 1997. She was initially employed as a
registered nurse in the new graduate program
at Royal North Shore Hospital. She
thereafter worked in that hospital as a registered nurse and between 2003 and
2007 she held the
position of Clinical Nurse Specialist in the Emergency
Department.
June 2007 and June 2008 the nurse was employed as a registered nurse in the
Emergency Department, Nepean Hospital. Thereafter,
for the next 9 months, she
was employed as Clinical Nursing Unit Manager, Emergency Department, Mt Druitt
Hospital. She resigned
from that position, and in March 2010 until December
2010, was employed by Justice Health as the Nurse Unit Manager Level 2, JMCC
OMMPC. She was suspended from this position on 17 November 2010 and resigned on
24 December 2010.
commencing her employment with Justice Health the nurse underwent a five day
training course at the Justice Health Administration
Centre. The training
included the maintenance of proper boundaries with inmates, their friends and
family, and managing potential
manipulation by them.
May 2011and thereafter up to the date of the hearing the nurse was engaged in
casual employment as a Registered Nurse in the
Emergency Department, in a rural
district hospital. From July 2012 the nurse has primarily engaged in employment
as a Sales Support
Officer for a real estate agency in a country town.
A, who was born in May 1991, was incarcerated at OMMPC from 26 March 2010 to 21
July 2010 when he was paroled. During these
periods Patient A was seen by the
nurse as a patient on about 6 occasions.
A has been diagnosed as suffering paranoid schizophrenia. He has a long history
of self harm, suicide attempts including
attempted hanging in April 2009. He
had been detained in the juvenile justice system for offences prior to his
incarceration in
OMMPC. His records also indicate he had a history of violence
and inappropriate predatory sexual behaviour. His medication at
that time of
his admission to OMMPC included the antipsychotic, Quetiapine.
nurse reported, in a recorded interview, to the HCCC that Patient A had
indicated to her that he wanted to self harm, and she
reported his conversation
with her to Nurse M. The nurse also reported telling Nurse M that Patient A said
he wanted to write to
the nurse. She asserts Nurse M said “and you said
No”. The nurse also reported Patient A had asked her to have lunch
him on his release, but she had not accepted his invitation telling him she was
Patient A’s release from OMMPC in July 2010 the nurse stated she gave him
a hug, and made arrangements for him to receive
his medication.
nurse admits phone contact with Patient A commenced in August 2010 during the
period he was released from OMMPC on parole after
the nurse made contact with
him by accessing his Facebook account and they exchanged telephone numbers. The
nurse also admits she
gave Patient A the name of her friend, Ms BR with advice
to use Ms BR’s name when telephoning her to avoid the authorities
aware of their relationship.
A was returned to custody at Penrith on 15 August 2010 and transferred to MRRC
on that day, and subsequently transferred to
BCC shortly prior to his release.
He was not seen on a professional basis by the nurse during his following period
of incarceration.
7 November 2010, and again on 11 November 2010, Patient A wrote to the nurse at
her home address. The nurse asserts she did not
receive these letters.
However, she concedes she gave Patient A her home address while he was
incarcerated at the MRRC. She also
concedes she wrote a letter to Patient A
whilst he was incarcerated at BCC.
13 November, 2010 the nurse, contrary to procedure, accessed Justice Health
records to ascertain the whereabouts of Patient A.
She provided this
information to a friend of Patient A, Mr JD, who advised her he already knew of
Patient A’s whereabouts.
13 November 2010 Patient A was transferred from MRRC to BCC and paroled from
this Centre on 17 November 2010. Patient A was collected
on his release from
BCC by the nurse and taken by her to Mr JD’s home. Arrangements were made
by the nurse to met Patient
A later that evening. The nurse said when she met
Patient A that evening he had been drinking, they went to a hotel, and the nurse
and Patient A engaged in sexual intercourse.
nurse’s husband opened letters addressed to her from Patient A on 16
November 2010 and contacted Justice Health. This resulted
in the nurse being
stood down. The nurse and her husband separated, and she moved out of the
former matrimonial home.
19 November 2010 the nurse saw her general practitioner, Dr E Rust, and arranged
a voluntary admission to St John of God Hospital,
Grose Vale. The nurse’s
diagnosis at St John of God included chronic alcohol dependence. The nurse
asserts she self discharged
from St John of God without completing the program
because of financial constraints. On her self discharge from St God of John
the nurse asserts she had a final meeting with Patient A in December 2010 when
she met him at the Blacktown Workers Club for dinner.
She disputes any sexual
intercourse occurred on this occasion.
nurse asserts, since 2010, she has attended counselling provided as part of her
husband’s employee assistance program on
two occasions at an outer Sydney
suburb for individual and couple counselling, and subsequently for individual
and couple counselling
at a country town. The primary focus of the counselling
has been marriage relationship counselling.
nurse admits she has used illict drugs recreationally in the past.
On 26 November 2011 the Association advised the nurse had a history of
recreational drug use “such as amphetamines and ecstacy
form [sic] age 18
until her late 20’s”. This drug use is asserted to have occurred
Association’s letter also discloses the nurse used intravenous heroin in
her late 20’s from 1998 until 2000, and was
successfully treated with
methadone. The letter goes on to note “[the nurse] again used intravenous
heroin on a regular basis
in 2003 until January 2006 when she was treated with
buperenorphine and methadone”. It is asserted the nurse has not used
opiates for “the past six years”. The nurse’s alcohol intake
is noted to have been “previously 3-4 glasses
of wine approximately 5 to 6
times per week.” At the date of the Association’s letter it is
asserted the nurse’s
alcohol intake is “now 2-3 glasses 3 or 4 times
per week”. It is also asserted “that she no longer takes
recreational/illicit
drugs and is not on any prescription
medication”.
her admission to St John of God Hospital on 25 November 2011 the nurse’s
clinical notes disclose use of “Ecstacy/cocaine
2tab/I gram cocaine last
used a month ago”. She is also recorded as using “a joint of
cannabis a month ago”.
some time following the nurse’s discharge from St John of God Hospital the
nurse and her husband reconciled and moved to
Mudgee where they presently
have already noted that, during the hearing, we decided we were satisfied that
the two complaints were proven. In these reasons,
apart from recording our
findings about the complaints, we address the following issues:
whether or not
suspension is an appropriate protective order or whether, given the nature of
the complaints, nurse’s registration
should be cancelled. In the latter
event, it is necessary to determine the period before Ms Brown may again apply
for re-instatement
of her registration under s163A of the National Law from the
date of the Tribunal’s order; and
should an order
be made that Ms Brown pay the HCCC’s costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
Relevant Law – unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct
now propose to refer relevant provisions of the National Law, and a number of
decided cases, both under the National Law, or its
predecessor laws.
earlier noted, this matter was initially an inquiry under s 167(1) of the
National Law. But as a result of the concessions by
the nurse, which we have
noted above, by reason of s167 (2), it is not necessary that the Tribunal
conduct an inquiry. It is however
useful we record that the practice in similar
situations has been that the Tribunal has considered it is appropriate to
independently
examine the conduct underlying the conceded complaint or
complaints. (see
[2011] NSWNMT 29
(15 November 2011;
v Shah [2013]NSWNMT 1
(12 March 2013)). As the Tribunal in
explained “[t]his is so the Tribunal can assess whether the concessions
are appropriately made, and properly inform itself
before making protective
at [42] the Tribunal also explained:
The Tribunal notes
that s149 (b) of the National Law authorises the Tribunal, in its discretion, to
exercise any power under Subdivision
6 of the National Law if the practitioner
admits it in writing to the Tribunal. The National Law empowers the Tribunal,
under s149C
(1) (a) and (b), if it is satisfied a practitioner is not competent
to practise the practitioner’s profession, or the nurse
is guilty of
professional misconduct, to suspend or cancel the nurse’s
registration.
is also appropriate at this point in the Tribunal’s reasons we set out the
statutory definitions of unsatisfactory professional
conduct (s 139B (a) and
(l)) and professional misconduct which is found in s 139E.
139B (1) (a) and (l) of the National Law provide as follows:
Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct" of registered health
practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following--
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner's profession.
139E is in the following terms:
139E Meaning of "professional misconduct" [NSW]
For the purposes of this Law,
"professional misconduct"
registered health practitioner means--
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
to the introduction of the National Law the concept of professional misconduct
was discussed and its ramifications explained
by Kirby P (as his Honour then
Pillai v Messiter
1989 16 NSWLR 197.
In that case the NSW
Court of Appeal was dealing with an appeal from a decision of the Medical
Tribunal of NSW. The Medical Tribunal
had found a medical practitioner should
be removed from the register for “misconduct in a professional
sense” (the then
relevant statutory provision). At the time of the
hearing of the appeal against the Medical Tribunal’s decision a new
legislative
provision had been enacted dealing with “professional
misconduct”. The new provision was inapplicable to the appeal.
Honour explained, without deciding, that then new statutory test for
“professional misconduct” “may introduce
a wider class of
conduct than has hitherto been regarded as relevant”. However, Kirby P
went on to explain that the concept
of “misconduct” may include:
“gross negligence ....particularly if accompanied by indifference to, or
lack of concern
for, the welfare of the patient”.
Honour further explained at 200:
Departures from elementary and
generally accepted standards, of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be
heard to say that he
or she was ignorant could amount to professional
misconduct. But the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more is
required. It includes a deliberate departure from accepted
standards or such
serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an
abuse of the privileges which accompany
registration as a medical practitioner
[citations omitted]
recent cases discussing unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct focus on the wording of the relevant statute
and have moved away from
“the language of moral obloquy” referred to in earlier decisions
with peers expressing their
views “in terms of strong criticism rather
than ‘strong reprobation’”. (see
Lucire v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
; Donnelly v Health Care Complaints
Commission (NSW)
[2011] NSWSC 70
(i) the nurse’s statement and oral evidence
nurse provided a signed statement dated 25 February 2013 the contents of which
she swore to be the truth. In her statement the
nurse conceded the two
complaints, and the particulars set out in support of both
complaints.
nurse explained:
from June 2008
to March 2010 she worked as the Clinical Nursing Unit Manager at the Mt Druitt
Emergency Department. Her role was busy
one involving shift work included nights
and weekends;
in February 2009
her younger brother committed suicide;
in April 2009 a
good friend was killed in a car accident;
by reason of her
grief, and busy lifestyle, which included her work responsibilities and care of
her four children, the nurse sought
a career change in early 2010;
in March 2010
the nurse obtained the position of Nurse Unit Manager with Justice Health. The
position involved regular hours but
the nurse regretted her decision to leave Mt
Druitt hospital particularly as she perceived she was not receiving assistance
her line manager;
the nurse and
her husband had to sell their house, and take up rented accommodation. They had
significant periods of living apart
because of Mr Brown’s employment in
the mining industry; and
after detailing
her relationship and contact with Patient A, said that she knew her contact with
Patient A “was breaching the
NSW Health, Justice Health and Forensic
Mental Health Network Code of Conduct”.
paragraph 30 of her statement the nurse said:
I have no explanation
why, when knowing my behaviour was wrong, I continued in this relationship. On
one level I was flattered by
the attention he was paying me, and on another I
was misguided in thinking I could assist Patient A become a better
nurse also candidly explained, at paragraph 43 of her statement, that in
September 2010 she considered returning to the hospital
where she had previously
worked and had an interview for a position. She said to return to this position
would have meant a significant
drop in income, and return to rotating rosters.
This, she said, “in hindsight was a very selfish reason for staying with
Health for which I am ashamed as staying meant I continued to breach the
Code of Conduct”.
paragraph 56 of her statement the nurse explained that she knew “the
relationship was wrong” and that looking back
on the relationship “I
now realise just how wrong my behaviour was”. She went on to
In my attempt initially to help Patient A it is more than
likely I did not help him at all. I continued in the relationship for my
selfish reasons and in doing so I caused almost irreparable damage to my husband
and family, not to mention Patient A and the
nursing profession.
nurse concluded her statement with an “unreserved apology”.
nurse gave oral evidence before us, and was cross examined by Ms Graycar, and
answered questions posed by members of the Tribunal.
Graycar questioned the nurse about her understanding of consequences of
breaching the code of conduct as follows:
say at paragraph 49 you hadn't' considered such grave consequences for your
behaviour, and I'm still a little unclear of what
did you think were
consequences of breaching codes of ethics or codes of conduct?
obviously when you're in the midst of something that was so emotional and so
caught up in it, I didn't I didn't give it the
full thought process,
you know, I didn't think it through, I didn't think what it would mean, I
didn't you know, I didn't consider
it, I can honestly say that, so
obviously looking back now you can, but at the time when you're caught up in it,
it's hard to think
of, "Oh my God, what could happen?" you know, it's more or
less unfolded and that's that's when, yeah, everything fell
one of the reasons that you didn't tell your employer that you feared that you
might lose your job your line manager I mean?
I well, I didn't think when I read the code of conduct, it said, "You
should just inform if any person", and I thought, "Oh
okay if I just inform
them", I didn't realise it was such a security breach as well and I probably
would've lost my job anyway, but
in the end I did resign after
they cause I wasn't allowed to work within in as far as
the security side, I wasn't allowed to work,
enter any prison, I didn't have the
security clearance anymore.
(transcript 9 April, 2013 p22-23)
her oral evidence the nurse conceded she knew there was a problem in having a
relationship with Patient A notwithstanding he was
no longer an inmate OMMPC,
but she rationalised her behaviour saying, as a consequence of Justice Health
becoming aware of her relationship
with Patient A, she had been
“effectively sacked”, that her marriage had broken down, and her
husband was refusing to
let her see their children. She said “I was at a
fairly low point thinking, “Well what have I got to lose now? I
have anything?” (transcript 9 April 2013 at p27)
asked if she had undertaken any continuing education relative to her breach of
the relevant codes of conduct, the nurse said:
been liaising with Ms Alexander, I've enrolled in an ethics and nursing
course, it's only just a brand new course, online, a
distance education course,
run through the ACU, so prior to that you had to do more of a part of a post
graduate thing, so it was
more but this is just a one off
30 hour course that you can do, so we've enrolled in that.
was at the suggestion of your representative?
well, we were looking for something suitable, but there wasn't anything
available up until now, so that starts next month.
Graycar, having obtained a concession from the nurse that, at the time of her
relationship with Patient A, she well knew she was
in breach of her professional
obligations, asked the nurse why the Tribunal could expect she would behave
differently in the future.
The nurse responded as follows:
I think I've learned you know, a whole lot about respecting the profession, you
know, I felt I haven't been working permanently
as a nurse now since
last July and I miss it terribly and there's many opportunities in Mudgee, even
though it's a small town, that
I have missed out on, feeling that I can't give
myself to the positions. There's, you know, nursing unit manager and a nurse
position that I've had to, you know, let go in effect because I felt
like I couldn't awaiting these proceedings, I couldn't give
whole heart, but getting back to your question, you know, the fallout from this
has been huge and I never ever want to go through
it again, not just for me
professionally but for my family, for my friends, you know, I think I've
realised a lot of things that
I took for granted, and the profession being one
of them, so I would never ever put myself in that situation again, and you
Chairperson asked the nurse a number of questions, directed to her disclosed
history of illicit drug use, and asked whether or
not she perceived herself as
vulnerable in terms of stress. The nurse denied her drug involvement had been
precipitated by stress,
and explained that her drug involvement was “a
long time ago”.
Dixon also asked questions of the nurse about her drug history, including her
recorded use of cocaine and ecstacy approximately
one month before her admission
to St John of God. The nurse replied:
was just a one off occasion, yeah, with my husband.
do you understand about using illicit drugs and your professional
obligations?
understand that it's you know, illegal and absolutely shouldn't be tolerated as
a registered nurse, I understand that, but
do you think that would be the case?
don't understand your question.
would it be that it would not be tolerated by the profession?
it's yeah, because it's illegal, because
Tribunal afforded Ms Alexander an opportunity to clarify with the nurse anything
arising from the Tribunal’s questions by
way of re-examination. The
transcript, at pages 44-45, reveals the following evidence of the nurse in
response to Ms Alexander’s
questioning:
were asked a question by Ms Dixon, Ms Brown, about your use of cocaine
and ecstasy, and your professional obligation in relation
to using illicit
drugs. And it shouldn't be tolerated and you were asked why it shouldn't be
tolerated. Your answer at the time
was "Because it's illegal", can you expand
you know, and that would breach the code of conduct as well, as well as you know
your professional responsibilities as a nurse.
can't think of anything else.
what you're saying is that to use cocaine and ecstasy and any illicit drug, the
fact that it's illegal, it shouldn't be tolerated
because it would breach the
standards of the profession?
Patient A’s records
is not necessary we refer extensively to Patient A’s records. The nurse
explained that Patient A’s medical records
whilst in juvenile detention
were maintained in sealed records, and she did not have access to them. The
Tribunal accepts her explanation.
As a consequence, she said she was unaware
that Patient A had a history of being non compliant with medication. However,
the records
to which the nurse had access disclose Patient A had a long history
of self harm including an attempt to hang himself, and that
he had bitten his
wrist rupturing a blood vessel causing a large blood loss. His condition was
such that he was assessed as requiring
a “risk intervention tool”
although such a tool was not implemented due to lack of appropriate facilities
His mental health diagnosis was that he suffered schizophrenia. In
short, his records disclose he was a vulnerable young adult with
(d) The Peer Reviewer’s report
Andrea Jordan (“Ms Jordan”) was retained by the HCCC to provide an
expert report. Ms Jordan is the Clinical Nurse
Consultant of the Aged Services
Emergency Team at a rural hospital. Ms Jordan is completing Master of Health
Science degree at a
Victorian university. She has extensive nursing experience
obtained during her career spanning over twenty-five years.
Jordan reviewed the nurse’s conduct whilst Patient A was incarcerated at
OMMPC and was cared for by her and opined it “fell
significantly below the
standards reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience”.
She concluded “[t]his departure invites my
strong criticism”. Ms Jordan made similar findings about the
action in collecting Patient A from BCC in November 2010.
reference to the ANMC Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia,
(Conduct Statement 8) Ms Jordan noted the “inherent
power imbalance”
which exists between a patient receiving care and nurse. She extracted a number
of explanations from the
Code including the explanation that “[t]his
vulnerability creates a power differential in the relationship between nurses
patients in their care that must be recognised and managed”, and that
“vulnerable people, including ... people with mental
illness ... must be
protected from sexual exploitation and physical harm.”
Jordan also referred to the Australian Nursing Council Code of Ethics for Nurses
in Australia, and the ANMC Nurses Guide to Professional
Boundaries, and the
Justice Health Code of Conduct.
Jordan found that the nurse’s violation of Justice Health’s policy
in accessing Patient A’s records and conveying
information to Mr JD
“fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience” and
“invited her strong criticism”. She expressed a similar opinion
in sexual relationship with Patient A almost
immediately upon his release from custody noting such sexual misconduct
extreme form of boundary violation”.
her general criticisms of the nurse’s conduct, Ms Jordan pointed out the
significant age difference between the nurse and
Patient A and opined “ A
significant age difference for any couple may be cause for concern but when the
younger party is
vulnerable by age as well as circumstance that concern must be
amplified”.
considering the question whether there is ever an “acceptable
period” for a nurse to engage in a relationship with
a former patient, Ms
Jordan expressed her opinion that, in the instant case, “the answer would
categorically exclude the immediate
period following [Patient A’s] release
from jail”.
(e) the nurse’s referees.
Tribunal received, without objection, references provided by Ms AM and her
husband, Dr L dated respectively 15 February 2013
and 18 February 2013 as well
as a reference from Ms AS dated 16 February 2013. None of the referees were
required for cross-examination,
and in those circumstances, we accept their
evidence is unchallenged.
her reference Ms AM, who is a registered nurse and former colleague of the
nurse, explained that over time she had developed a
personal friendship with the
nurse. Ms AM noted she had read the complaint lodged by the HCCC. Ms AM said,
in her view, the nurse
“is a loving mother and wife, and an excellent and
professional registered nurse”.
AM went on to record:
I believe that the events outlined in the
Complaint were unique and out of character for [the nurse]. She understands the
implications
and regrets the events terribly. She has rebuilt her family life,
has the support of [Mr Brown] and has strong emotional resilience
AM concluded her reference explaining she felt the nurse “is a fit and
proper person to be held out to patients and the community
as a person worthy of
their confidence”. She also said “Moreover, I believe that it
would be detrimental for [a country
town], as a growing rural community, to lose
the acute-care skills and experience that [the nurse] possesses”.
L explained how he first met the nurse at Royal North Shore Hospital in 2002
when he was working as a Resident Medical Officer
in the Emergency Department.
He said that he had also worked with the nurse whilst undertaking his training
as a specialist anaesthetist
between 2003 and 2009 when he was called to the
Emergency Department. During this time he said the nurse was working as a
Nurse Manager. Dr L explained the nurse was always
“approachable, professional, knowledgeable, supportive and a pleasure to
work with”.
L also referred to the personal friendship which developed between himself and
his wife and the nurse, her husband and their children.
Dr L expressed the
following opinion:
I believe that [the nurse] is a fit and proper
person to be held out to patients and the whole community as a person worthy of
confidence. I believe that the events outline [sic] in the complaint
reflect a time when [the nurse] and [her husband’s] marriage
extreme pressure. ......In my dealings with [the nurse] professionally, in a
hospital setting, I have the highest regard.
I believe she is an excellent nurse
with a wealth of experience and an asset to any hospital.
AS also explained she had received and read a copy of the complaint. She
advised she had known the nurse for approximately three
years and had worked
with her at OMMPC where she was, at the time, an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse. She
pointed out that, as a young
nurse developing her skills, she had benefitted
from the nurse’s knowledge, and that the nurse had been very willing to
her learn. Ms AS expressed the view that she found the nurse’s
actions “to be out of character”.
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
have already set out the relevant statutory provisions which define
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct,
and referred to
Kirby P explanation of the gravity of the type of conduct which falls within the
concept of “professional misconduct”
Tribunal found all the relevant particulars, being the particulars conceded by
the nurse, were established to the requisite civil
standard in the evidence
adduced by the HCCC. The Tribunal had no hesitation in adopting as our findings
the opinions expressed
by Ms Jordan. That is, we found the evidence
demonstrated the nurse’s conduct fell below the standard expected of a
practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or experience, and that the
nurse engaged in improper or unethical conduct related to the practice
nursing. Thus, the Tribunal was independently satisfied the complaint of
unsatisfactory conduct as defined in s139B of the National
Law was established.
We also found that the nurse’s conduct to be sufficiently serious to
justify suspension or cancellation
of her registration, and that the particulars
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct, when considered together,
to professional misconduct for the purposes of s139E of the National
The HCCC’s submissions
Graycar submitted that the Tribunal, having found the complaints proved, should
make an order cancelling the nurse’s registration,
and imposing a
requirement that she be precluded from applying for re-instatement of her
registration for a period of 18 months.
Graycar submitted that such an order would protect the public, have a deterrent
but not punitive effect, and uphold the standards
of the profession.
dealing with the risk of the nurse re-offending, Ms Graycar submitted the
nurse’s oral evidence demonstrated a lack of insight
into the effect of
her conduct on Patient A. She also drew our attention to the nurse’s lack
of understanding that her drug
taking was unacceptable not only because it was
illegal, but more importantly, because, she submitted, nurse failed to
the risk to a patient if treated by a drug affected nurse. She
further submitted that the nurse had failed to independently seek
out suitable
training or a course such as an ethics course, and that the course she proposed
to undertake at Australian Catholic
University had been arranged in
collaboration with the Association rather than independently sourced.
Graycar also pointed out that the nurse’s counselling was not specifically
directed to addressing her underlying vulnerabilities
resulting from her
brother’s tragic death, and that of a friend, or her previous drug use and
alcohol dependence. Rather,
she submitted, her counselling was directed to
improving her relationship with her husband.
Graycar asserted each of these matters discussed above raised concerns that the
nurse may re-offend.
balance of Ms Graycar’s submissions, by reference to authority, were
directed to the need to ensure the Tribunal’s
orders reflected the gravity
of the offences by conveying a strong message to the profession that departure
from the relevant codes
of conduct in respect of an inappropriate relationship
with a patient will result in consequences for the offending
practitioner.
Ms Alexander’s submissions on behalf of
her opening Ms Alexander submitted an appropriate outcome would be for the
nurse’s registration to be suspended for a period
of time. In her
concluding submissions Ms Alexander reiterated the steps the nurse had
undertaken to overcome her emotional difficulties,
and submitted that she was
unlikely to reoffend. In responding to Ms Graycar’s submissions, Ms
Alexander focused, not on the
issue of suspension as against cancellation of the
nurses registration, but on Ms Graycar’s position that the nurse should
not be permitted to re-apply for registration for a period of eighteen
Alexander sought to distinguish the facts relevant to the nurse in this case and
HCCC v Engel-Jones
[2011] NSWNMT 23
HCCC v Sunjac
She submitted that, in each of the former cases, the sexual
relationship between the respective nurses and their patients was a long
ongoing relationship. Ms Alexander suggested that the closest factual situation
to that of the present case is found in
HCCC v Karja
[2012] NSWNMT 11.
Thus, she submitted for this Tribunal to make an order that the nurse’s
registration be cancelled, and for her to be precluded
from seeking
re-instatement for a period of eighteen months, would be punitive of the nurse
and not justified on the basis it was
protective of the
Protective orders
is appropriate at this point we note that the objective and guiding principle
when exercising a function
under a NSW provision
of the National Law
(see s3A) is that the “protection of the health and safety of the public
must be the paramount consideration”.
National Law provides, in s149, the Tribunal may, on being satisfied a complaint
is proved, or the complaint is admitted by the
practitioner, exercise any power
under Subdivision 6 of Part 8 of the National Law. The powers under the
sub-division include,
those in found in s149A, s149B and s149C. The latter
provision enables a Tribunal to suspend or to cancel a practitioner’s
registration. A practitioner’s registration may be suspended or cancelled
if, amongst other matters, the practitioner is not
competent to practise his or
her profession, or the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct.
Section 149C (7) enables
a Tribunal to provide the review of an order may not be
made until after a specified period of time. Section 149 (7) is in the
An order may also provide that an application for
review of the order under Division 8 may not be made until after a specified
Tribunal in
HCCC v Wardell No 2 [2013] 2
, a decision on which the HCCC
placed heavy reliance, referred at [46] to [56] to the principles, supported by
authority, relevant
to the making of protective orders. It is unnecessary we
refer individually to each of the authorities cited in
conscious of the dangers of generalisation, but for the benefit particularly of
the nurse the subject of these proceedings,
we now refer to the predominant or
primary applicable principles. Those principles are not in doubt, and may be
summarised as follows:
the decision as
to the nature of the protective order to be imposed is, in most cases, a
discretionary
one: the National Law provides a
range of powers
including the power to caution, reprimand, impose conditions on registration, to
fine, or subject to satisfaction of certain findings,
to suspend or cancel a
practitioner’s registration (or if the practitioner is no longer
registered, decide if the person was
registered the Tribunal would have suspend
or cancelled the practitioner’s registration);
practitioner has contravened a critical compliance condition cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration is
while a finding
of professional misconduct will not result in automatic cancellation of
registration, in a case involving serious
professional misconduct, it may do
the jurisdiction
exercised by the Tribunal is protective, not punitive, albeit the order may
indirectly have adverse consequences
for the practitioner;
there are two
predominant aspects to the protection to be afforded to the public by the order
minimisation of recurrence of the risk; and
deterrence of similar conduct by other professionals which, if repeated, could
lead to harm of the public;
the deterrent
effect of the order also serves to maintain the high standards of a profession
in which the public can have confidence;
the decision
requires due regard to be given to consideration of the loss to the public of
the practitioner’s skills and expertise
if the practitioner is unable to
practise his or her profession.
applying these relevant principles the Tribunal found that the nurse was genuine
in her desire to return to nursing, and that she
was sincere in making her
statement that she would not re-offend in the future. The Tribunal also took
into account the nurse’s
candour in her interview with the HCCC, and
significantly, that before us she conceded both complaints and the particulars
in the complaints in their entirety.
Tribunal had no hesitation in finding that the nurse is a highly qualified, and
experienced health professional. We also had no
hesitation in accepting that she
loves nursing, and wishes to take up a senior position at her local hospital
when such a position
is available. The Tribunal accepts Dr L’s
unchallenged evidence that the nurse was a highly skilled member of a
professional
team in the emergency department at Royal North Shore when employed
at that hospital.
Tribunal also accepts that the nurse:
experienced a
very difficult period in her person life in about 2009 and 2010 as a result of
the tragic deaths of her brother and
a close personal friend;
suffered grief
which was exacerbated by her marriage problems, stress of rostered work and
substantial periods of almost sole parenting
of her four relatively young
children during her husband’s absences due to his work shifts in the
mining industry; and
did not derive
the same level of satisfaction from her work at Justice Health to that which she
experienced in an emergency department.
as the nurse herself has accepted, her improper conduct in respect of Patient A
was serious. It involved a particularly
vulnerable patient who has a
significant history of mental illness, suicide attempts and other self-harming
behaviour. Further,
there was a significant age difference between the nurse
and the patient which magnified the power imbalance between them. It was
nurse who instigated contact between herself and Patient A, not Patient A.
nurse has conceded she knowingly breached fundamental rules applicable to
Justice Health employees and the relevant codes of conduct.
She deliberately
sought to conceal her identity from her employer by giving Patient A a false
name to use to contact her, and improperly
accessed Justice Health records.
Further, when on her own evidence, Patient A was drunk on his release from BCC,
she went to a hotel
with him and engaged in sexual intercourse. Each of these
matters reveal serious, deliberate and knowing conduct by this highly
experienced nurse. The Tribunal finds the conduct, notwithstanding the
mitigating factors we have recorded above, constitutes
professional misconduct
of a most serious nature.
such conduct does not
automatically
lead to a finding that the
appropriate protective order is cancellation of the nurse’s registration,
the Tribunal considers
the matters we have identified as supporting cancellation
are weighty ones. In reaching this conclusion we took into account the
set out below.
whilst the nurse expressed remorse before us in respect of her conduct, we found
that her oral evidence disclosed her remorse
was directed principally to the
devastation the revelation of her conduct wrought on her, and her family with
the temporary breakdown
of her marriage, and the loss of her job rather than any
deeply considered remorse for the effect her conduct had on Patient A, his
health and well-being. The Tribunal found a lack of any real insight by the
nurse into the affect of her conduct on Patient A.
while the nurse had engaged in some counselling it was principally directed to
issues relating to her marriage, rather than
addressing her emotional
vulnerabilities. The nurse’s prior history of drug dependence, and her
alcohol consumption at the
time of her admission to St John of God Hospital,
revealed her inability to cope with stress. This reliance raises a cause for
that the nurse may relapse into inappropriate conduct unless her
emotional vulnerability is properly addressed. This comment is
construed as critical of the nurse, but rather is directed to an element of risk
to be balanced by the Tribunal in its
task of protecting the public.
the nurse’s response to why use of illicit drugs by a nurse was improper
was, in our view, less than satisfactory. Whilst
she was able to quickly
identify the criminality of such behaviour, her generalised response about
“breach of professional
responsibility” in re-examination by Ms
Alexander did not convince the Tribunal that she fully appreciated the potential
seriousness
of a drug affected professional caring for a patient.
the Tribunal was not satisfied that the nurse had taken any independent steps to
address her breaches of the codes of conduct
by sourcing or endeavouring to
source an appropriate ethics course. Rather, her use of the personal pronoun
been looking for a course, indicated the impetus for
seeking the course was not her independent action, but rather that of the
Association.
each of the matters we have identified above led to a conclusion that suspension
would not be an appropriate order. Given
the seriousness of the conduct we have
identified, it is appropriate in the public interest that nurse’s
registration be cancelled.
In reaching that conclusion the Tribunal took into
account that any order for suspension would result in an automatic revival of
the nurse’s registration. This could, even with the imposition of
conditions, led to the nurse resuming practice without the
matters we have
identified of concern being critically examined to ensure they have been
rectified. A further hearing before a Tribunal,
will afford the nurse the
opportunity to demonstrate she has addressed the issues identified in these
reasons if the nurse applies
for a review under s163A.
Tribunal also took into account such a conclusion conforms with other Tribunal
decisions involving inappropriate conduct with
a mentally ill patient (see
HCCC v Tate
[2009] NSWNMT 29
, Sunjac and Wardell (No 2)
conformity, or consistency of decision making, whilst always permitting
consideration to be given to unique or relevant matters,
sends an unequivocal
message to the profession and the public about the likely outcome of
disciplinary matters of a similar nature
The appropriate
period before the nurse can seek a review under s163A
earlier noted, Ms Graycar sought a period of at least eighteen months should
elapse before the nurse may reapply under s163A of
the National Law for review
of the cancellation of her registration.
Graycar referred to a number of decisions of the Tribunal including the decision
Engel-Jones.
She also, most appropriately, drew our attention to the
decision of the Tribunal in
notwithstanding she sought both
cancellation of the nurse’s registration, as distinct from suspension, and
the imposition of
a greater period of time before the nurse could re-apply than
the Tribunal imposed in that case.
Engel Jones
the practitioner conceded complaints of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct, such that it was appropriate
to remove his name from the register. The Tribunal found the practitioner did
not demonstrate remorse or contrition for his actions,
and that he lacked
insight. The nurse was found to have breached his ethical responsibilities in
2004, again in 2005, and that he
continued his relationship with his former
patient in 2008. These additional factors, when taken in combination with the
findings of lack of remorse and insight, led to an imposition
of a period of two years before the practitioner could seek a review.
the practitioner admitted a number of particulars set out in the
Complaint brought against her. The practitioner was employed in
a senior role
as Coordinator/Senior Nurse Manage of the Drug Court programme. She was
extensively involved in the area of drug and
alcohol services and had published
articles relevant to this area. The nurse had a sexual relationship with a
client of the Drug
Court with a significant history of drug use and
incarceration. Their relationship was not revealed to her employer. The nurse
commenced a sexual relationship with the client, whom she had visited in gaol on
release from gaol.
The nurse and the client had a child in 2004. Notwithstanding eminent referees
spoke highly of the nurse, she
was found to lack real insight into boundary
issues with the client who suffered mental ill health and who was very
vulnerable, and
failed to recognise the power imbalance between them. The
Tribunal ordered the nurse’s registration should be cancelled and
of one year elapse before the nurse could apply for re-registration.
also involved a nurse, with her own psychological problems, employed by
Justice Health, engaging in an inappropriate actions and a
sexual relationship
with an inmate with a mental health diagnosis. The Tribunal received expert
evidence from a number of psychiatrists
fragility prior to, and at the time, of her inappropriate conduct. The Tribunal
nurse demonstrated insight and remorse. The experts who gave evidence
before the Tribunal found the nurse was unlikely to engage
in boundary
violations in the future, and the risk to the public if she engaged in practice
in the future was minimal. Having reached
these conclusions, the Tribunal found
the practitioner’s registration should be suspended for a period of six
months, that
she should be reprimanded, and imposed conditions on her future
registration restricting her from working in correctional services
or juvenile
justice, and that she practise under supervision for a period of two
the reasons enunciated by us above, we do not find, as Ms Alexander submitted we
should, that the situation in this case is on
all fours with the facts as found
by the Tribunal in
Nor, however, do we find that the imposition
of an eighteen month restriction as submitted by Ms Graycar is appropriate.
must be determined on its own particular facts and circumstances. The
weight to be afforded to factors will often very according
to the particular
circumstances.
in any way wishing to constrain another Tribunal hearing a review, this Tribunal
is of the view that a period of twelve months
will enable the nurse to complete
an ethics course, obtain appropriate assistance for her own emotional problems,
as distinct from
problems with her marital relationship, and to reflect on these
reasons. This Tribunal does not, by its findings, “rule out”
forever a return of this obviously talented nurse, with well recognised
emergency room skills, to practice in the future if the matters
identified are addressed.
Non publication order
noted at the commencement of these reasons, on the application of Ms Graycar, we
found it was appropriate to made an order under
Schedule 5D cl 7 (1) of the
National Law to protect the privacy of Patient A, and his friend, as well as the
friend of the nurse
and her referees.
Graycar referred the Tribunal to a number of authorities in support of her
application that the Tribunal should make an order that
the nurse pay the
HCCC’s costs of and incidental to the proceedings including
[2009] NSWNMT 8.
Alexander sought that we make an order that each party pay their own costs of
the proceedings noting that the nurse had conceded
the complaints.
we have taken into account the nurse’s concession, the Tribunal found the
proceedings were conducted on behalf of the
HCCC in a timely and efficient
manner. This minimised costs incurred to both parties.
imposition of a costs order is not a punitive one. Rather the award of costs is
a compensatory order made in favour of a successful
party. Other than the
nurse’s concession of the complaints, there was no distinguishing matter
relevant to the exercise of
our discretion, to award costs “following the
event”. In all the circumstances of this matter consider that it is
appropriate
to make a costs order in favour of the
registration of Ms Kelda Brown (“the practitioner) as a Nurse-General on
the National Register of Health Practitioners maintained
by the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (“the Register”) is cancelled
under s149C (1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National Law”).
period of not less than 12 months shall elapse from the date of these orders
until the practitioner may apply under s163A of the
National Law to the Nursing
and Midwifery Tribunal of New South Wales (“the Tribunal”) to be
registered on the Register.
practitioner shall pay the Health Care Complaints Commission’s costs as
agreed or failing agreement liberty to either apply
to the Tribunal for
assessment.
Schedule 5D Cl.7 of the National Law publication of the name of Patient A, his
friend, the practitioner’s friend, the
nurse’s friend and her
referees is prohibited.
Dated 20 June 2013
Jennifer Boland AM
Chairperson
Nurse Member
ANNEXURE “A”
Insert a scanned copy of the complaint.
ANNEXURE “B”
Insert a scanned copy of index of HCCC’s and nurse’s
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (353 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter