URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/122.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Evolve Housing v Winter [2025] NSWCATCD 122; (28 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Evolve Housing v Winter
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 122
Hearing Date(s):
Date of Orders:
28 August 2025
Decision Date:
28 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
E Bateman, General Member
The Tribunal orders:
(1) The tenant must comply
with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement by not causing or permitting
a nuisance or interference
with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of any
neighbour of the tenant.
(2) The tenant must comply
with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement by not creating any noise in
the flat or on the common
area likely to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment
of the tenant of another flat or any other person lawfully using the common
(3) The tenant must comply with the terms of the
residential tenancy agreement by not marking, painting, driving nails or screws
or the like into, or otherwise damaging or defacing, any structure that forms
part of the common area without the approval in writing
of the landlord or an
order of the Tribunal.
(4) The tenant must comply with
the terms of the residential tenancy agreement by not using language or behaving
in a manner likely
to cause offence or embarrassment to the tenant of another
flat or to any person lawfully using the common area.
The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by taking all reasonable steps to ensure that invitees
of the tenant do not
behave in a manner likely to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the tenant
of another flat or any person
lawfully using the common area.
Catchwords:
Residential tenancy agreement – termination – breach of tenancy
Legislation Cited:
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Principal judgment
Evolve Housing (applicants)
Kristy Winter (respondent)
Representation:
Applicant -self-represented Konispoliatis
Respondent –
self-represented and accompanied by Mr John Robertson
File Number(s):
2024/00469984
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an application by Evolve Housing Limited (the landlords) for orders pursuant
sections 87(1)
(1)(i) of the
Residential Tenancies
) (the Act) that would terminate a residential
tenancy agreement that subsists between them and Ms Kristy Winter (the tenant)
return possession of the premises to them on the ground that the tenant has
breached the residential tenancy agreement in a number
of respects. This
application was made to the Tribunal on 18 December 2024.
issue in dispute in this matter is whether the residential tenancy agreement
between the parties should be terminated.
tenancy only terminates in the circumstances set out in the
Residential
Tenancies Act 2010
section 81.
The Tribunal may terminate a residential
tenancy agreement for breach if it is satisfied of the matters set out in
section 87(4)
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
(as it was at the relevant
time of making this application), and in considering the circumstances of the
case may have regard to
the matters set out in
section 87(5)
of that Act.
in determining whether to terminate a social housing tenancy the Tribunal must
have regard to the matters set out in
section 154B
Residential
Tenancies Act 2010
the hearing, the landlords attended in person represented by Ms Chloe
Konispoliatis with authority. The tenant appeared in person
and was represented
by Mr John Robertson.
landlord relied on a 61 page bundle of documents comprised of hearing notes, an
authority to act, a copy of the residential tenancy
agreement, a notice of
termination, statement of facts, a statement of Ms Konsipoliatis with
attachments, a
section 154F
neighbourhood impact statement, written submissions
and a tenant ledger.
Konsipoliatis gave evidence under oath and was cross examined.
tenant relied on a bundle of documents being seven photographs of depicting her
daughter and screen shots of mobile phone messages.
parties made extensive oral submissions.
Material facts
on the evidence the Tribunal makes the following findings of fact.
social housing residential tenancy agreement subsists between the parties in
relation to premises at [address], being an apartment
within an apartment block
of 43 units managed by the landlord housing single males, females and elderly
and small families. The tenant
has resided at apartment 108 along with her
daughter in the apartment block since May 2022. Apartment 109 is in the same
block and is adjacent to apartment 108.
is significant police involvement in the neighbourhood due to drug consumption,
domestic violence and other matters. The tenant
has not been involved in these
activities.
tenancy agreement incorporates standard clauses 16.2, 16.3, 17.3, 27.3 and 63.3
that in summary require that the tenant not interfere
with neighbours, not cause
any damage to the residential premises, be responsible to the landlord for
actions of invitees and comply
with applicable By-Laws. Relevant By-laws 1, 5, 6
and 8 in summary forbid excessive noise, damage to common areas, regulate
on common property and otherwise require reasonable steps to be taken
by the tenant so as to not interfere with neighbours.
landlord properly served a termination notice on 2 December 2024 seeking vacant
possession. The termination notice identifies
breaches of the residential
tenancy agreement which are reflected in the findings of material facts set out
below at paragraphs 15
tenant breached the residential tenancy agreement on 5 November 2024 as follows.
1:10pm, on 5 November 2024, whilst holding a bottle and whilst accompanied by
three other persons (two females one male) all of
whom were yelling, the tenant
kicked the front door of apartment 109 twice, drank from the bottle, then kicked
the door a further
accompanying female (the tenant’s daughter) was bleeding from the face and
spat in the hallway, being a common area of the
building. The daughter then
removed a Christmas wreath from the front door of apartment 109 so that it fell
to the ground.
tenant returned to apartment 108. The tenant subsequently exited apartment 108
and stomped on the Christmas wreath on the ground
at the front of apartment
4:17pm on 5 November 2024, the tenant used a cricket bat to forcefully strike
the front door of apartment 109 once, damaging the
front door.
10:11pm the tenant, accompanied by a male and two females, exited apartment 108
and approached the front door of apartment 109.
The tenant repositioned a
security camera so that it no longer captured images of the door of apartment
the events the tenant and the persons accompanying her were yelling.
tenant conducted themselves in the manner set out above based on her belief that
person’s associated with apartment 109
had assaulted her daughter earlier
on 5 November 2024 and presented an ongoing threat to her daughter.
persons accompanying the tenant during the above events were her daughter and
other persons who resided at the apartment block.
following has previously occurred during the tenant’s residency at the
premises prior to 5 November 2024.
July 2022, a guest of the tenant created graffiti in an elevator at the
apartment block. There is no evidence the tenant had control
over this person at
the time of the conduct.
October 2022, a guest of the tenant stole a fire extinguisher affixed to common
property at the apartment block. There is no evidence
the tenant had control
over this person at the time of the conduct.
November 2022, the Tribunal made orders for specific performance in relation to
impacts on neighbours.
November 2022, a guest of the tenant damaged a fire exit sign on common property
in the apartment block. The tenant disputes this
occurred. There is no evidence
that the tenant had control over this guest at the time of the conduct.
December 2022, a guest of the tenant urinated in an elevator at the apartment
block. There is no evidence that the tenant had control
over this guest at the
time of the conduct.
July 2023, the tenant’s daughter vomited in the common area hallway at the
apartment block. There is no evidence that the
tenant had control over her
daughter at the time of the conduct. The tenant made efforts to clean up the
March 2024, the tenant’s daughter was heard by a neighbour to be yelling
across to persons located across the street. The
tenant disputes that this
occurred. The Tribunal finds that it occurred.
May 2024, guests of the tenant marked the walls of the apartment block with
drawings. There is no evidence that the tenant had
control over these persons at
the time of the conduct. The tenant offered to clean the markings and
alternatively pay for the cleaning.
has been no other conduct of similar nature in relation to this tenancy since 5
November 2024.
than the matters set out above there is no evidence that the tenancy has had a
negative effect on neighbouring tenants.
other events occurring prior to 5 November 2024 capable of disclosing a breach
of the residential tenancy agreement were proven
by the landlord to have
occurred. There was evidence of conduct by the tenant and persons associated
with the tenant occurring in
public areas outside of the apartment block. The
tenant disputes this conduct occurred. This evidence does not establish a breach
of the residential tenancy agreement.
landlord alleged that the tenant had unauthorised occupants in residence in May
2024. The Tribunal accepts the tenant’s
denial of this allegation as
credible including her denial in relation to an occupant who is the subject of
an apprehended violence
order at present.
is no evidence that neighbouring tenants will suffer serious adverse effects if
the tenancy continues in the future.
were made by the Tribunal for specific performance in relation to payment of
rent on 19 August 2024. Those orders were complied
with by the tenant.
is no evidence that the tenant is wilfully or otherwise in breach of Tribunal
Consideration
Tribunal had regard to the oral submissions of the parties. The submissions of
the parties may be summarised as follows. The landlord
submitted that it had a
responsibility to other tenants to bring the application, that the conduct was
sufficient to warrant termination
of the tenancy and that there was a future
risk of adverse impacts on other tenants based on the
section 154F
neighbourhood
impact statement. The landlord also submitted that the tenant’s daughter
had further breached the residential
tenancy agreement by altering the position
of security cameras on one occasion after 5 November 2024 but there were
otherwise no
other breaches that had occurred between that time and the
tenant made submissions as follows. The tenant submitted that she had previously
been assaulted by the occupant of apartment 109
and that person was
significantly pressuring her daughter to engage in illegal activities. The
tenant submitted that it was in that
context, with tensions running high, she
engaged in the acts on 5 November 2024 set out in paragraphs 15 to 21 of this
The tenant expressed remorse for having done so. The tenant also
submitted that all events of concern occurred on that single day
in November
2024 and that she was not a bad tenant.
tenant made further submissions, unsupported by evidence, as follows. The tenant
submitted that she was the victim of domestic
violence, The tenant expressed a
desire to leave the residential tenancy eventually but submitted that she could
not afford to move,
had no other alternative arrangements in place, did not know
when she might be in a position to do so, and was of limited financial
being in receipt of government benefits as her income. The tenant denied that
her daughter had interfered with a security camera
after 5 November 2024 on the
basis that she and her daughter were not at the apartment block at that
submissions it appeared to be agreed between the parties that prior to the 5
November 2024 incident the landlord offered the
tenant alternative
accommodation. The tenant submits that she refused the offer on the basis that
the alternative was too small and
a short term tenancy only.
Tribunal considers that the termination notice issued by the landlord is a valid
termination notice in that it complies with the
technical requirements of a
termination notice under the
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Tribunal considers that the conduct of the tenant on 5 November 2024 was in
breach of the residential tenancy agreement.
Tribunal has considered the circumstances of the case including the
circumstances set out in
section 87(4)
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Tribunal considers that the breach of the residential tenancy agreement on 5
November 2024 was serious and substantial. The Tribunal
has also taken into
consideration the circumstances in which the breach occurred. Those
circumstances explain the reasons why the
tenant acted as they did on 5 November
2024 but do not in any way excuse that action.
Tribunal considers that there is no evidence of any breach of the tenancy
agreement, including any breach involving aggression
and property damage,
engaged in by the tenant since 5 November 2024. The tenancy has been uneventful
since 5 November 2024 to the
date of the hearing on 8 May 2025, a period of 6
months. The Tribunal gives substantial weight to this in determining whether to
terminate the tenancy.
Tribunal has also considered the previous history of the tenancy. The tenancy
has been in place for three years at the time of
the hearing. In the context set
out in paragraphs 11 and 12 of this decision, the tenancy has been relatively
uneventful save for
the intermittent matters set out in paragraphs 22 to 32 of
this decision. The evidence has not demonstrated the tenant’s role
conduct other than in attempting to mitigate the impacts of the conduct. Some of
the conduct occurred in the context of Tribunal
orders for specific performance
made in October 2022 by consent.
these reasons, the Tribunal considers that the breach, albeit serious, was
isolated, not characteristic of the tenancy when considered
as a whole and not
reflective of the current position of the tenancy.
Tribunal has also considered the mandatory matters as required by
sections 154B
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
the above reasons, and in the exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal considers
that the tenancy should not be terminated. It
is, however, appropriate to make
orders for specific performance as breaches of the tenancy agreement did
the foregoing reasons I make the following orders:
(1) The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by not causing or permitting a nuisance or interference
with the reasonable
peace, comfort or privacy of any neighbour of the tenant.
(2) The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by not creating any noise in the flat or on the common
area likely to interfere
with the peaceful enjoyment of the tenant of another flat or any other person
lawfully using the common
(3) The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by not marking, painting, driving nails or screws
or the like into, or otherwise
damaging or defacing, any structure that forms part of the common area without
the approval in writing
of the landlord or an order of the Tribunal.
(4) The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by not using language or behaving in a manner likely
to cause offence or
embarrassment to the tenant of another flat or to any person lawfully using the
common area.
(5) The tenant must comply with the terms of the residential tenancy agreement
by taking all reasonable steps to ensure that invitees
of the tenant do not
behave in a manner likely to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the tenant
of another flat or any person
lawfully using the common area.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (243 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter