URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/81.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stephen James Vardy v Active Management (Australia) Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 81 (19 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Applicant: Stephen James
Defendant: Active Management (Australia) Pty Ltd
Number: 124523/05
Hearing Dates:
Date of Decision:
Magistrate:
Legislation:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Representation:
Solicitors for Applicant: Taylor &
Counsel for Applicant: Mr J Pierce
Counsel for Respondent : Mr M
The applicant claims
an order under
sections 365
Industrial Relations
that the respondent Active Management (Aust ) Pty Ltd is liable to pay
the applicant $ 5,257.36 under the provisions of the
Clerical and
Administrative Employees (State) Consolidated Award
( the Award) for the
period 10 September 2005 to 11 November 2005 in respect of outstanding annual
leave loading (Cl 20). The respondent
denies the claim. Attempts to bring the
parties to a settlement were unsuccessful. As well, an offer to hear a related
local court
proceeding set down for hearing in August relating to termination
pay with these proceedings was declined by the respondent.
The principal
submission of the respondent is that there is no valid claim before the court as
the applicant was not an employee whose
duties were covered by the provisions of
the Award. The respondent submitted that the applicant may in his capacity as
the respondent’s
asbestos manager done some work of a clerical nature but
he was not employed in a clerical capacity.
Clause 43. Area, Incidence
and Duration of the Award states the Award
“shall apply to all persons
employed in any clerical capacity whatsoever”
. There are listed in
the clause certain exemptions that are not relevant here.
in any clerical capacity whatsoever”
has been judicially
considered on many occasions. The leading decision in this Jurisdiction is the
decision of a Full Bench of the
Industrial Relations Commission of New South
Kingmill Australia Pty Ltd T/as Thrifty Car Rental v Federated
Clerks Union Of Australia, New South Wales Branch
[2001] NSWIRComm 141.
At para 49 of the decision the Full Bench adopted Sheldon J ‘s
approach to the interpretation of the phrase as set out in para
46 and 47 as
This phrase, in my view, must be read against the background of the
way industry has developed and is now conducted. Clerical work
in industry has
long since moved from the Dickensian era of the high stool and the quill pen.
The voice and the mind are now part
of clerical stock-in-trade. So is the
acceptance of responsibility and the exercise of discretion. The conception is
fluid and progressive
and recourse to a dictionary gives only partial help. It
is impossible, and in any event it would be undesirable, to attempt to devise
code as to what in the setting of industry today can fairly be regarded as
clerical work. But too fine a toothcomb should not be
used in solving this
question in particular cases. Obviously all employees in an office are not
engaged in a clerical capacity. It
is clear that professional employees are not
nor are those who are truly and basically executive officers. But an employee
cease to be employed in a clerical capacity merely because his work
includes many administrative and non-recording functions. No
doubt there are
cases near the border which would be difficult to determine but
in general,
and subject to some special categories, those who are in a subordinate position
but are engaged in the ordinary work of
office administration
prima facie
covered by this constitution rule.
His Honour continued (at 421 - 422):
it is not decisive, it would be unreal to ignore the categories of work which
for many years have been covered by the many
awards relating to clerks. These
categories are very varied indeed and have been described in a number of
judgments. I will quote
as an example the general nature of the work on which
the wage rates in the Clerks (State) Award were fixed by a Full Bench of the
Commission as far back as 1949
(In re Clerks (State) Award (No. 2)
AR (NSW) at pp. 456-457).
The work involved was:
a) Providing the basic records of production, stock,
b) Computing orders, quantity and quality of production.
c) Arranging and supervising despatch and receipt of commodities.
d) Recording, calculating and analysing labour times, preparing and paying wages
and bonuses.
e) Costing production - analysing successive operations.
f) Buying, selling and programming company’s products.
g) Attending to shipping, traffic insurance, compensation, etc.
h) Preparing accounts and financial statements of the company’s
operations.
i) General clerical recording and computations.
This list of course was not exhaustive and no doubt the passage of a further 20
years has wrought many changes. But the salient point
is that for years clerical
work has been regarded for industrial purposes as including more than mere
recording and covers work of
different kinds which no doubt leads to or results
from recording but in fact is part of the general office administration system.
That is why I deprecate dividing officer functions too strictly by attempting to
quantify the recording done by different members
of the team and using this as
the test. There are also a number of specialist awards covering clerks which
again deal with a varied
range of work. The matter, however, is a question of
fact to be decided in each case and having examined the work done by these
officers, I am satisfied that they are employed "in a clerical
capacity" as that phrase is to be understood in 1971.
The Full Bench in
noted at Para 50:
It should be noted that
commented on the undesirability of attempts to codify any fixed description of
clerical work and that it must be judged in the context
of contemporary
industrial conditions. His Honour noted also that there had been many changes in
the nature of clerical work in the
twenty years preceding his decision. Finally,
his Honour emphasised that the question was always one of fact to be determined
an examination of the work performed in each case. With these qualifications
in mind, his Honour's analysis represents an appropriate
starting point for the
consideration of whether the employees in this case were employed "in any
clerical capacity whatsoever".
The Full Bench then reviewed a number of
decisions applying the principles of interpretation including the major and
substantial employment
test and the principle purpose test and stated at paras
Those principles apply to a clause which establishes the coverage
of an award in the same way as they do to other clauses in the award.
appropriate to consider the scope clause of the award in the context in which it
appears and, in particular, by reference
to the other
provisions of the
It should be noted that the application of aids to construction,
such as the "major and substantial" or "principal purpose" tests,
approached with caution. The automatic adoption of such an approach may,
depending on the terms of the award, have the
potential for awards to be
interpreted inconsistently with their plain words and, therefore, unnecessarily
restrictively. This potential
may be greatest when the scope of the award's
coverage clause is expressed in broad and inclusive terms.
Consideration
The respondent carries out business in the demolition industry, the
treatment and disposal of hazardous building material such as
asbestos. The
applicant was employed by the respondent in various capacities from 26 August
1998 to 11 November 2005.For the relevant
period he was employed by the
respondent under the tile “Asbestos Manager”.
“C’ to the applicant’s statement sets out the position
overview as follows:
Description Overview
1. Control of Leading Hands,
Labour and Subcontractors on site.
2. Co-ordination of plant, Equipment and
consumable deliveries with the store.
3. Input into Document development
including but not limited to Work method Statements, Risk Analysis, Programmes,
Quality Assurance
and Inspection and Test Plans and
implementation.
4. Co-ordination and communication with
5. Identifying any efficiency practices, and
implementation.
6. Assisting with tender submissions where required,
including estimating.
7. Developing a client base for maintenance
8. Tendering and estimating in accordance with company review
procedures.
9. Building relationships and maintaining contacts with all
asbestos consultancy bodies to ensure inclusion on tender lists.
in the best interests of Cardinal at all times.
11. Completion of a
supervisor activity schedule weekly.
12. Acting as a mentor to ensure a
candidate ids identified/employed to train as asbestos Manager designate in your
absence and incorporating
a succession management plan.
13. Delegation to
appropriate personnel of all operational duties, including record keeping and
site communication.
14. Implementation of company
Responsibility
The position is directly responsible to the
Operations Manager; this may be amended at any time with appropriate
notification.
The applicant at para 5 of his statement gave an
overview of his responsibilities as follows:
During my period of employment
with the respondent I was responsible for the day to day running of the
respondent’ asbestos
division, responsible to the operations manager and
ultimately to senior managers including the respondent’s General Manager,
Mr Travers. My responsibilities include estimating, payroll, invoicing, hiring
of labour ensuring compliance with occupational health
and safety, dealing with
the union (CMFEU) in relation to its members working for the respondent and
preparing and providing records
to the union and meeting the respondent’s
WorkCover responsibilities. As I have noted I was also involved in document
development,
tender submissions and tendering and being responsible for the
planning and management of the work of other employees.
Travers, managing director of the respondent stated the chief purpose of the
applicant’s employment was to manage projects
undertaken by the asbestos
division of the respondent and supervise its workforce on and off sites, a
position of considerable responsibility
within the construction and demolition
Rod Dalton General manager of the respondent since 1 August
2005 described the main purpose of the applicant’s employment was
manage the day to day activities of the respondent’s asbestos
The applicant told the Court 2 supervisors responsible for a
number of individual sites reported directly to him. As well as 6 to
hands at sites also reported to him. During peak times he stated up to 80 people
on site reported to him. The applicant
stated he visited work sites from time to
time and estimated he spent 70 to 80% of his time in the office, a figure
disputed by Mr
Travers (10 to 15%) and by Mr Dalton (35 to 40%). The applicant
stated that 75% of his time was spent preparing work method statements
proposed jobs in conjunction with preparing the tender for the particular
The applicant presented himself to others as the respondent’s
“Asbestos Manager”. He received a base weekly salary
of $1339 plus
$300 living away from home allowance per week, $300 weekly car lease payments
and the provision of a company utility.
An amount well in excess of the Award
rate for the highest paid classification (Grade 5).
In cross-examination
the applicant admitted that he used his experience and expertise in the
preparation of the work method statements
and in the preparation of the tender
documents. He agreed that clerical staff employed by the respondent typed such
documents. The
respondent employed a group of 6 clerical and administrative
personnel purely for the purpose of assisting and/or carrying out the
clerical tasks for management. This pool of trained clerical and administrative
personnel was at the applicant’s
disposal at all times. Whereas the
applicant’s supervisory role included the power to hire and fire those
engaged within his
workforce, however, this did not extend to the clerical
The authorities set out in the Full Bench decision in
(1998) 82 IR 448
considered the circumstances in which it may be
appropriate to apply the award-maker's intentions to the circumstances
award was made and to the practical effects of a particular construction.
The decision in
Perisher Blue v Australian Workers Union
(1999) 91 IR 274
indicated the desirability of considering the terms of an
award in the context in which they appeared and emerged. Those principles
with equal force to the circumstances in which it may be appropriate to have
regard to other aids of construction such as the
"major and substantial" or
"principal purpose" tests:
at para 68.
However, unlike
these tests provide a difficulty in the present matter. In
the Full Bench were satisfied that no appellable error has been
demonstrated in relation to her Honour's conclusion that the employees
question were
"employed in any clerical capacity whatsoever"
Commission stated that conclusion may be reached comfortably whether the
question be approached upon ordinary and general rules
of interpretation or by
relying upon other approaches to the construction of an instrument, such as the
"major and substantial" test
or the “principle purpose
Furthermore, in
there was no dispute between
the parties that the subject employees were engaged in what may be described as
clerical or administrative
duties. In that respect, it followed they were
engaged in a clerical capacity. That is not the case here.
The Award here
applies to any person employed “
in any clerical capacity
”. So expressed, its scope is directed to a wider class of
employee than persons engaged as a "clerk"
. This much is
reasonably clear from the form of the words used in cl 43 (ii) of the Award and
amply supported by the current form
of the classification structure of the Award
(see cl 5) which gives a very broad description of the classes of employees
As stated in
at para 73:
We note too that the
description of the work of employees under the Award, which is provided by the
description for each classification
of employee (and the description of their
duties and skills), has undergone significant changes from the work described in
the version
of the award considered by
Federated Clerks'
Union v Australian Workers' Union
. The classification structure now is
considerably more expansive in the work covered. This consideration has
significance for the
scope of the Award and tends to indicate a wider and more
diverse coverage, albeit still within the phrase "clerical
Overwhelmingly, the chief purpose of the applicant’s
employment I gained from the witnesses and their statements before me was
he was employed to manage projects undertaken by the asbestos division of the
respondent and to supervise its workforce on and
off sites, an executive
position of considerable responsibility within the demolition operation. The
applicant in the witness box
did not resile from this primary purpose of his
employment, particularly volunteering that he was the “competent
in the eyes of WorkCover in respect of asbestos removal. See
Occupational Health and Safety Regulation 2001
the same decision I reached in regard to the major and substantial duties test.
The applicant’s duties in regard to asbestos
manager far outweighing any
ancillary clerical duties performed by him in fulfilling his major role. The
applicant limited clerical
duties performed in fulfilling his major role do not
easily fit within the classifications found in cl 5 of the Award, “not
immaterial matter in the consideration of the scope of the Award” (para 78
For the above reasons, I am not satisfied that the
applicant’s employment was bound by the provisions of the Award as
Accordingly, the Application must fail.
Application
Acting Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter