URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Donolato v Denarval Pty Ltd Anors [2003] NSWCC 5 (6 May 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Donolato v Denarval Pty
[2003] NSWCC 5
Denarval Pty Ltd
Kintail Intail (NSW) Pty Ltd
Workcover Authority of New South Wales
Lube Mobile Pty
CASE NUMBER: 57395 of 99 of 2003.00
CATCH WORDS:
Miscellaneous Matters
LEGISLATION CITED:
S 156A WORKERS'
COMPENSATION ACT
CORAM: Geraghty J
HEARING: 05/05/03, 06/05/03
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
Applicant in Notice of
Motion: Mr Taperell
Mr Gow appeared for the third
1. By Notice of Motion, Denarval Pty Ltd, the third party, seeks an order
that the third party notice be struck out. This is a notice
filed on behalf of
the first respondent, Kintail (NSW) Pty Ltd, trading as Jax Tyres.
2. The Application for Determination seeks compensation in respect to an
injury to Donolato's right shoulder - the injury occurring
on 25 May 1998. His
solicitors joined Kintail Pty Ltd as the first respondent, and, as the third
respondent, WorkCover Authority
of New South Wales, since Kintail Pty Ltd
alleges, on the advice of WorkCover Authority, that it was uninsured at all
material times.
3. Kintail Pty Ltd then joined Denarval Pty Ltd, insurance brokers, alleging
that it had made an arrangement that Denarval would take
out a business
insurance package, including workers' compensation insurance, and that the
brokers failed to do so. The allegations
are set out in the amended notice of
the first respondent to the third party, filed on 1 May 2003, to which the third
party has pleaded
by way of an answer filed on 2 May 2003.
4. In par 4 of the answer, Denarval pleaded that, in answer to the whole of
the third party notice, the Compensation Court does not
have jurisdiction to
consider and determine the issues raised, that the issues do not arise under the
Compensation Court Act 1984
, or the Workers’ Compensation Act of 1987, or
Workplace Injury Management and Workers' Compensation Act 1998
5. Mr Gow, counsel for the third party (the insurance brokers) submitted that
the Compensation Court has no jurisdiction since its
statute. He said that the dispute between the broker and Kintail is between an
employer and its insurer,
and therefore not one which is judiciable in this
court. Consequently this dispute should be litigated elsewhere. Mr Gow referred
Ato v George and Diana Goorkiz,
22 NSW CCR at 122, the decision of
Neilson J. He also referred to the High Court decision in
Brakespeare v
Northern Insurance Company Ltd,
[1959] HCA 31
1959, 101 CLR 661.
6. Mr Taperell, for Kintail, the employer of the worker and uninsured,
submitted that the jurisdiction of this court is contained
in the provisions of
156A of the Workers’ Compensation Act (the Act) and further provided
written submissions to address the
decision of Neilson J in
was distinguishable; that the determination of this application
would necessarily involve the determination of matters of fact which
left to the trial judge, should not be addressed on an interlocutory
application; and that in any event, it could be argued
wrongly decided. These submissions are contained in par 7 and par 8 of his
written submissions.
7. It seems to me that the solution to this complex question is contained in
the legislation.
8. S 156A is a provision in Pt V11 of the Act, which deals with insurance.
Div 1 addresses insurance policies, and within this division,
s 155 deals with
compulsory insurance for employers; s 156 with the recovery of double premiums
for employers not obtaining policy
of insurance; and s 156A with misleading
conduct by insurers and insurance intermediaries, such as insurance brokers. S
156B provides
a means of recovery from directors of corporations which have not
obtained a policy of insurance; and s 157 forbids insurers refusing
These are some of the provisions contained in Pt V11, Div 1 of the Act.
9. S 156A, in (1), defines what is meant by an insurance intermediary and by
an insurer.
10. Sub-s (2) provides for a prohibition concerning representations as to
comprehensive insurance. It states that an insurer or
insurance intermediary
must not make a representation with respect to any insurance that could be
reasonably expected to cause an
employer to believe that the insurance was
comprehensive for business needs, unless the insurance included the insurance
by the Act, or the 1998 Act, or the representation included a clear
statement to the effect that the insurance did not include workers'
compensation
insurance and that this insurance was compulsory for employers.
11. S 156A (3) then imposes a penalty for insurers or insurance
intermediaries who offend against the provisions of (2) and provides
12. Sub - s (4) deals with actions which are taken under s 144, s 145, s 145A
In any action under s 144, s145, s 145A or s 156 in respect of a failure
by an employer to obtain or maintain enforce a policy of
insurance, the court
hearing the action may order that a specified insurer or insurance intermediary
be joined as a party in the
proceedings if the court thinks that the insurer or
insurance intermediary may be culpable in the matter.
13. Sub - s (5) deals with the circumstances in which an insurer or insurance
intermediary may be culpable in a matter and provides:
An insurer or insurance intermediary is culpable in a matter if it appears
that the insurer or insurance intermediary has engaged
in conduct that
constitutes a contravention of this section . . . and that conduct caused or
contributed significantly to the failure
by the employer to obtain or maintain
the insurance concerned.
14. And finally, s 156A (6) is in these terms:
In any proceedings in which an insurer or insurance intermediary is joined
as a party under this section the court hearing the proceedings
satisfied that the insurer or insurance intermediary is culpable in the matter,
order that the insurer or insurance intermediary
is to be jointly and severally
liable with any other party in respect of any amount ordered to be paid by that
other party in the
proceedings or is to be separately liable, in place of that
other party, as to the whole or a specified part of any amount that the
party might be ordered to pay in the proceedings.
15. In order to understand how s 156A functions, and particularly how sub - s
(4) functions, one has to examine the provisions of
s 144, s 145 and to a lesser
extent s 145A and s146.
16. S 144 is in Pt 1V, dealing with Compensation - Claims and Proceedings.
It is found in Div V1 dealing with the uninsured liability
and indemnity fund,
supervised by WorkCover Authority.
17. S 144 deals with an appeal against the Authority's decision on a claim.
18. S 140 sets out the persons who are eligible to make a claim.
19. S 141 deals with making claims under the scheme as defined in s 139.
20. S 143 deals with the determination of claims by the Authority, and then s
144 deals with an appeal against the Authority's decision
in respect to a claim.
21. S 144 (1) provides that a claimant under the scheme who is dissatisfied
with a decision of the Authority in respect of a claim
for compensation, may
apply to the Commission (or to this court) for a determination of the claim.
Subs- s (2) then provides that,
if such an application is made, the applicant
should nominate as respondents to the proceedings both the employer by whom, the
alleges, compensation is payable, and the Authority. So two parties
must be nominated, the uninsured employer and the Authority.
22. Subs - s (2) provides that the Authority may, by service of a notice on
any person who, in the opinion of the Authority, may be
liable to pay the
applicant compensation under the Act (or may have insured that liability), join
that person as a party to the proceedings.
So, when a claimant is dissatisfied,
he joins two parties, his employer and the Authority. Then, if the Authority is
of the opinion
that some other body might be liable to pay the compensation, the
Authority is empowered by s 144 to join that other person or that
other body.
23. According to s 144 (3), the Commission may hear and determine any such
application and may make such orders in relation to the
application as the
Commission (or the court) thinks fit.
24. S 144 therefore gives jurisdiction to this court to hear such a claim as
one finds in these present proceedings, but only, according
to s 144, if the
Authority joins the additional party. In this case the Authority has not joined
that party: it is the first respondent
who has joined the party. Consequently,
this has not been done in accordance with s 144.
25. However, s 145 deals with the situation where an employer who is
uninsured (or an insurer) is required to reimburse the Authority.
An award is
made in proceedings where an uninsured employer and the Authority have been
joined in accordance with s 144 (2)(a),
an award is entered against the
Authority, and the Authority seeks to claim reimbursement from the employer or
from an insurer.
26. S 145 (1) provides that the Authority may serve on a person who, in the
opinion of the Authority, was -
27. (a) in respect of an injured worker to or in respect of whom a payment
has been made under the scheme, an employer at the relevant
28. (b) an insurer under the Act of such an employer,
29. A notice requiring that person, within a period specified in the notice,
to reimburse the WorkCover Authority Fund an amount specified
in the notice.
30. So, after the court makes an award in favour of the worker and against
the Authority, the Authority may serve a notice on the
employer or on an insurer
requiring the employer or insurer to pay an amount.
31. Sub - s (2) provides the circumstances in which the Authority may waive
the liability of the employer. It does not need to be
32. Sub - s (3) is in the following terms:
A person on whom a notice has been served under subsection (1) in respect
of an injured worker may, within the period specified in
the notice, apply to
the Compensation Court for a determination as to the person's liability under
33. Some consideration has been given to the concept of
the person's
, which I will come to in a moment.
34. Sub - s (4) provides that the Compensation Court may hear any such
application and may make such determination in relation to
the application, and
may make such award or orders as to the payment of compensation under the Act to
or in respect of the injured
worker concerned as the Court thinks fit. So this
court has the power to hear these questions or reimbursement and about who
be reimbursing the Authority.
Nohil Pty Ltd v GRE Workers' Compensation Insurance (NSW) Ltd
1995 11 NSW CCR at 69, Manser J considered a situation where an employer,
upon whom had been served a notice under s 145 (1), applied
under s 145 (3) for
determination of its liability to the worker and for declarations as to its
entitlement to an indemnity from
the insurer. The insurer argued that the court
had no jurisdiction to determine any issue between it and the employer regarding
the construction of the contract of insurance between them. Similarly, the
insurance broker seeks to argue the same point before
Nohil Pty Ltd,
Manser J held that an application under s 145
(3) invoked the exclusive jurisdiction of this court, and that, since the issue
the construction of the contract of insurance arose pursuant to an
application under s 145 (3), this court had jurisdiction to determine
In coming to his conclusion, the judge applied
Liverpool & London &
Globe Insurance Company Ltd v JW Deaves Pty Ltd
1971 WCR (NSW) 172.
37. Manser J determined that once the jurisdiction of this court had been
invoked by a person on whom a notice had been served under
s 145(1) of the Act,
the court was free to make such awards or orders in relation to the application
as it thought fit.
38. That matter was taken on appeal by GRE Insurance to the Court of Appeal.
The decision can be seen in
GRE Workers' Compensation Insurance (NSW) Ltd v
Nohil Pty Ltd
1976 13 NSWCCR at 74.
39. The court unanimously held that s 145(4)(b) of the Act, which states that
the court may make such awards or orders (as to the
payment of compensation to
or in respect of the injured worker concerned) as it thought fit, is a plenary
power permitting the court
to make appropriate orders adjusting the rights of
all persons or bodies who may have an existing or potential liability (or
entitlement
to be relieved of liability) because of insurance in respect of a
compensation claim by or awarded to an injured worker.
40. The Compensation Court was found to have jurisdiction in the
circumstances to determine whether the employer was entitled to indemnity
any compensation which it was liable to pay to the worker.
41. It was of significance that the employer only, and not the insurer, had
been served by the WorkCover Authority with a notice under
s 145(1). Cole JA,
with whom Clarke JA agreed, held that the words
the person's liability
sub - s (3) included not only any obligation to pay compensation but also the
right to any indemnity in respect of that compensation,
for instance, from the
insurer, or (in this case) from the broker.
Subsection (3) permits determination as to 'the person's liability'. A
person's liability includes not only any obligation to pay
compensation, but
also that person's right to any indemnity in respect of that compensation, for
instance, from its insurer. Subsection(4)
confers a power on the hearing of
such an application to make 'orders as to the payment of compensation . . . in
respect of the injured
workers concerned'. That is a plenary power permitting
the court to make appropriate orders adjusting the rights of all persons
bodies who may have an existing or potential liability or entitlement to be
relieved of liability because of insurance in respect
of the compensation
claimed by or awarded to the injured worker. (P 81)
42. Such is the functioning of s 144 and s 145. Pursuant to s 144, a worker
makes a claim and joins the uninsured employer and the
WorkCover, and WorkCover
then has the discretion to issue a notice joining any other party to those
proceedings.
43. According to s 145, the procedure is that the applicant makes a claim
against the uninsured employer and the WorkCover Authority.
When that claim is
determined, and only after the claim is determined, the WorkCover Authority then
issues a notice against the
employer for recovery or reimbursement, and it is at
this stage that the court has the power and the parties have the right to join
those persons or bodies which might be liable to provide indemnity.
44. The employer can join an insurer or an insurance broker, but only in
accordance with s 145, that is after the determination of
the worker's
45. I have concluded that this court does have the jurisdiction to determine
this matter, but the statutory process must be followed,
either through the
discretionary exercise of power of WorkCover under s 144, or after the
determination of the worker's claim pursuant
46. The power is contained in s 156A. Mr Taperell was quite right. In
sub-sect (4), it says:
In any action under s 144 or s 145 in respect of a failure of an employer
to obtain or maintain enforce a policy of insurance, the
court hearing the
action......
47. In this particular case, in s 144 and s 145, it is this Compensation
Court which hears the action. In s 156, it is the Industrial
Court. So this
provision does not determine the identity of the court hearing the action
because it varies:
- the court hearing the action may order that a specified insurer or
insurance intermediary be joined as a party in the proceedings
if the court
thinks that the insurer or the insurance intermediary may be culpable in the
48. It seems to me that the court may think in the circumstances that this
insurance broker may be
culpable in the matter
, but only in accordance
with s 145. This third party notice is premature. It will be issued
undoubtedly when WorkCover is found
liable to pay an award and when it seeks
reimbursement from the uninsured employer. It is at that stage that a third
party notice
can be issued.
49. I return to the decision of Neilson J in
What was really
critical in
was the fact that the first respondent as the uninsured
employers, and the second respondent WorkCover Authority as administrators
the uninsured liability and indemnity scheme, settled the compensation claim
between them; because there was a settlement, the
WorkCover Authority did not
have a right to issue a notice of reimbursement in accordance with 145; and not
having the right to issue
a notice of reimbursement, this court did not have the
power to determine liability for indemnity against an insurer or an insurance
50. The jurisdiction to hear such claims, in my estimation, is not as limited
as Neilson J would have us believe, or as Mr Gow submitted.
s 145, s 156A(4) and (6). The mistake
was that the parties
settled the claim so that WorkCover could not, would not, issue a notice of
reimbursement
51. It seems to me therefore that in the matter of
Neilson J was
correct, but for the wrong reasons. He said that the Compensation Court had a
very limited jurisdiction in matters
concerning insurance. That is true, but it
is not as limited as his Honour seemed to think. He went on to say that the
between an employer and its insurer, for example about negligence or
breach of contract, are not judiciable in this court. I find
that they are, in
certain circumstances.
52. The appropriate remedy, he thought, would be obtained in courts
exercising general jurisdiction. I have concluded that according
legislation, this court has the power to determine these issues, because of the
way s 144 or s 145 and s 156A function.
53. I therefore strike out the third party notice. However, because of the
need to litigate and determine this question, I believe
that in the
circumstances, the most appropriate course is to make costs of this Notice of
Motion, including counsel fees, costs in
Mr Taperell instructed
by Turnbull Hill Lawyers appeared for the first respondent
Mr Gow instructed
by Phillips Fox appeared for the third party
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (25.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter