URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mattiussi v Owners Corporation 53945 [2001] NSWSSB 5 (6 June 2001)
Mattiussi v Owners Corporation 53945
[2001] NSWSSB 5
(6 June 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT 1996
APPLICATION NO : SB00/00820
SCHEME : SP53945
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME Warriewood NSW
APPELLANT : A Mattiussi
RESPONDENT : Owners Corporation
Strata Plan 53945
HEARING : 5 March 2001 at Sydney
The appeal is upheld. An order is made revoking special by-law 30 made
pursuant to a special resolution of the owners corporation
passed on 30 June
REASONS FOR DECISION
By an appeal lodged with the Registrar on 21 December 2000 the appellant
sought an order challenging the decision of the Adjudicator
made in file number
SA00/00459 on 28 November 2000. The grounds on which the appeal was made
1. I was not provided with a copy of the submissions made on behalf of the
Respondents.
2. As a consequence there were certain matters raised by the Respondents to
which I was not afforded the opportunity to respond.
3. In the premises the Adjudicator placed too much weight upon those submissions
and I was denied the opportunity of answering them.
matter was originally listed for hearing on Monday 12 February 2001 but was
adjourned by consent. The matter was then listed
before me on 5 March
An application was made by facsimile dated 1 March 2001 from the Managing Agent
of the Strata Scheme for adjournment of the hearing.
The application was made by
the Strata Managing Agents on the basis that they had only been advised that
morning of the hearing and
that Mr J Lynch who had dealt with all previous
matters and Ms Lees were unable to attend on short notice.
At the hearing Mr Hay solicitor represented Mr Mattiussi and the adjournment
application was opposed. It was submitted that the
strata managing agents were
aware of the hearing as of 1 March 2001 some days prior to the hearing date.
The file shows that notices of hearing were sent to the owners corporation and
to the secretary of the owners corporation at the
premises. The application for
adjournment was refused by me as I was not satisfied that there was sufficient
reason to grant the
adjournment. There was no explanation by or on behalf of
those representing the owners corporation in particular the secretary or
persons who had received the notice why they had instructed their managing
agents so late or why those from the office of the
Managing Agent were unable to
attend on behalf of the owners corporation.
The new material before me was a submission of some eleven pages which was
handed up by Mr Hay on behalf of Mr Mattiussi. Mr Hay
also indicated that the
appellant relied on the documents before the Adjudicator.
SUBMISSIONS
The submissions before me were essentially based on Section157 and 159 of the
Act which gives an Adjudicator and its place the Board
power to make orders with
respect to by-laws. I will deal with each of the sections separately.
SECTION 159
Section 159
provides as follows:
159 Order invalidating
(1) An Adjudicator may make an order declaring a by-law to be invalid if the
Adjudicator considers that an owners corporation did
not have the power to make
the by-law.
(2) An order under this section, when recorded under section 209, has effect as
if its terms were a by-law repealing the by-law declared
invalid by the order
(but subject to any relevant order of a superior court).
(3) An order under this section operates on and from the date on which it is so
recorded or from an earlier date specified in the
(4) An application for an order under this section may be made only by a person
entitled to vote on the motion to make the by-law
or the lessor of a leasehold
strata scheme.
It was submitted that the owners corporation lacks the power to effect changes
to the by-law due to the operation of the
Environmental Planning and
Assessment (Amendment) Act
and specifically the conditions of the
development consent imposed by Pittwater Council.
Attached to the submission was a copy of consent number 94/65 by which Pittwater
Council granted consent to the development application
for the premises. The
development application is subject to a particular condition, condition 8 which
provides as follows:
"The visitors car parking and access aisle being kept permanently available for
such use and not being allocated to any one person
or persons. Visitors parking
to be marked as such."
Condition 9 provides:
"All parking areas on plans granted consent herein being solely used for this
Condition 44 provides:
"Car parking space number one is to be dedicated as a designated loading
It was submitted that these conditions were validly imposed.
An annexure to this submission was a letter from Pittwater Council dated 16
March 1999 to the appellant’s solicitor. That
letter noted the
"I refer to your previous correspondence in regard to breach of development
Consent 94/65 whereby condition 8 (which relates to
visitor carparking spaces)
of the above consent appears not to be complied with.
Council received a request that the condition of the consent be modified, this
request referred to Councils Development Officers
who have advised that a formal
application to modify the consent was required. No application has been
received by Council and the
breach appears to be continuing. In this regard the
owners of the property (Proprietors of SP 53945) have been issued with an order
under Section 121B of the
Environment Planning and Assessment (Amendment)
directing that the relevant condition of consent is to complied with.
It is to be noted that if compliance is not achieved within
28 days the matter
will be referred to Council’s solicitors for the commencement of the
appropriate legal action for a breach
Environmental Planning and
Assessment (Amendment) Act."
The submission also attaches prior correspondence to the solicitor requiring
compliance with the development consent in relation
to visitor car parking.
It was submitted that the owners corporation knew or ought to have known of the
restrictions imposed on the development consent and
that it openly breached them
for the benefit of individual members. To make such a by-law the owners
corporation acted
ultra vires
as contemplated by s159 of the Act.
In my view the doctrine of ultra vires is relevant to the assessment of the
conduct of the owners corporation generally and in particular
under s159 of the
Act. Section 159 is directed to the power and competency of the owners
corporation to do make by-laws. The owners
corporation has the power to make
by-laws with respect to parking and to make by-laws conferring exclusive use on
common property
on certain lot owners.
While the development consent proscribes the allocation of visitors car parking
to particular lot owners I am not satisfied that
it affects the owners
corporations power to make such a by-law, and therefore the by-law is not
invalid as contemplated by s159 of
the Act. Accordingly I am not satisfied that
this ground has been made out.
SECTION 157
The appellant also relied on s157 of the Act as a basis on which the Board
should make an order revoking the by-law. It was submitted
by the appellant
that the Adjudicator erred in her interpretation of Section 157 in that the
interpretation relied on suggestions
that section is concerned with the
accumulative aggregate of "quiet enjoyment" of owners. The decision of the
Adjudicator was wrong
when commenting on the making of the by-law as
"In the face of such a vote the applicant is hard pressed to prove that the
by-law should not have been made having regard to the
interests of all the
It was submitted that s157 of the Act is clearly intended to ensure the
consideration of each of the individual interests of lot
The appellant submitted that it cannot be said that no owner is disadvantaged in
any way. When he purchased his lot there was a common
understanding that two
places were reserved for visitor parking. This provides an advantage to all
owners and occupiers of the scheme.
It was submitted that registration of such
a by-law with the "Lands Titles Office" as it then was known has disadvantaged
the appellant
as it affects the potential sale price. No evidence was provided
in this regard.
It was submitted that the appellant has a direct pecuniary interest in having
access to the visitor parking and that that interest
should be acknowledged. He
suffers a disadvantage as those spaces are no longer available. The presence of
on street parking is
irrelevant as in summer it is difficult to secure one of
those places.
Further any indication from Council that they do not consider taking remedial
action is not a matter that the Adjudicator should
have considered as this does
not change the appellant’s interests. The Tribunal should decide on the
matter not on whether
the Council takes action but whether they can or are
entitled to take such action. To do so would expose the applicant and other
owners to a liability for fines and costs. The relevance of the sign is only a
minor element but some weight should be given
Further it was submitted that little weight should be placed on the expressed
view of the Council having regard to the fact that
the conclusion is reached
from consideration of the notation but not on the terms of the by-law which has
been registered.
In seeking an order for the revocation of the by-law no prejudice flows to the
owners corporation or to the lot owners. There have
been no conveyances of any
of the original lots and if there is sale of a lot the purchaser should rely on
the fact that the by-laws
have been changed.
It was submitted that if the Board proposes to exercise its discretion to
dismiss the application then reasons should be given.
Without anything from the
respondents the applicant should be granted the benefit of the orders.
In respect of the levies, it was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the
application should be dismissed as the applicant
has failed to pay his levies.
The matter is dealt with under s163(4)(d) of the Act which provides:
163 Dismissal of application on certain grounds
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3), an Adjudicator may, by
order, dismiss an application for an order under this
(a) the Adjudicator believes that the application is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance, or
(b) the Adjudicator believes that a decision in favour of the applicant is not
within the jurisdiction of the Adjudicator, or
(c) the Adjudicator believes that the applicant has unreasonably delayed the
provision of information required by the Adjudicator,
(d) in the case of an application made by an owner of a lot in the trata scheme
concerned, the applicant has not paid all contributions
levied and payable in
relation to the lot under this Act.
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that failure to pay levies arises
out of litigation between the appellant and the owners
corporation. A costs
order has been made for him to pay those costs. A special levy has been raised
by the owners corporation to
cover the legal fees. The owners
corporation’s liability to pay the fees is acknowledged however Mr
Mattiussi has an order
against him to pay the fees and the fees are currently
the subject of negotiation. It was submitted that there is no reason to
the discretion not to hear and determine the application.
Section 157 of the Act provides as follows:
157 Order revoking amendment of by-law or reviving repealed
(1) An Adjudicator may make one of the following orders if the Adjudicator
considers that, having regard to the interest of all owners
of lots in a strata
scheme in the use and enjoyment of their lots or the common property, an
amendment or repeal of a by-law or addition
of a new by-law should not have been
made or effected by the owners
corporation:
(a) an order that the amendment be revoked,
(b) an order that the repealed by-law be revived,
(c) an order that the additional by-law be
(2) An order under this section, when recorded under section 209, has effect as
if its terms were a by-law (but subject to any relevant
order made by a superior
(3) When making an order under this section in relation to a by-law referred to
in section 51, an Adjudicator may direct the payment
by the owners corporation
of compensation to the owner of the lot, or owners of the lots, referred to in
the by-law.
(4) A payment ordered to be made in accordance with subsection (3) is
recoverable by the owner or owners as a debt.
(5) An application for an order under this section may be made only by a person
entitled to vote on the motion to amend or repeal
the by-law, or make the
additional by-law, that is the subject of the application or the lessor of a
leasehold strata scheme.
In considering whether to make an order repealing by-law 30 it is necessary to
consider the interests of all owners of lots in the
strata scheme and their use
and enjoyment of their lot or the common property. That use and enjoyment go
beyond considerations of
"quiet enjoyment".
The by-law gives four lot owners rights to park on the common property to the
exclusion of other lot owners.
I note the submission of the respondent that the two visitor parking spaces at
the rear of the property were almost never used however,
I consider that the
right for visitors to the scheme to park in that place is a valuable right and
may be more so in circumstances
where there are a number of visitors to the
scheme as the appellant submits over the summer. The by-law has the effect of
the common property from the other lot owners. In the absence of the
provision of some compensation or other mutual arrangements
it is difficult to
see how the alienation of that property when it is property able to be used by
the appellant and his visitors
can be said to be in the interests of all lot
In finding that it is a valuable right I am not making a finding that a "value"
in money terms should be attributed to that right.
There was no evidence before
me of the monetary value of the parking space and the extent to which its
alienation would affect the
value of the appellant’s lot.
I also consider that the by-law sanctions a breach of the development consent,
and could expose the owners corporation to enforcement
proceeding brought by the
local council. The correspondence from Pittwater Council records the breach and
raises earlier on possible
referral for commencement of proceedings.
The decision by the Council not to take the matter further appears to be
recorded as a handwritten note of 29 April 1999 which reads:
"Inspection on 29 April 1999 indicates signs stating "Unit visitors parking
only". It is determined that spaces are not allocated
to individual units and
no further action is required."
It is difficult to see how that conclusion was reached. It appears to be
arrived at by reference to the signs attached to the common
property only.
These signs are contrary to the terms of the by-law which confer "exclusive use
and enjoyment..." on certain lot
owners of parts of the common property
including the spaces allocated for visitor parking.
Little reliance should be place on the current decision of the Council having
regard the reasons on which it appears to be based.
The appropriate
interpretation of the events is that the Council have no current intention of
pursuing the matter with the Owners
Corporation, but there appears to be nothing
to prevent a change of view. In the circumstances this provides another reason
the by-law cannot be said to be in the interests of all lot owners.
The next issue is whether I should exercise my discretion to refuse to make an
order on the basis of the unpaid levies. A submission
has been made as to the
context of the levies and an explanation put forward for the late payment. The
owners corporation does not
point to any particular consequence for it in
respect of the late payment, thought no doubt it has an impact on its ability to
for and meet the obligations of the scheme. In the absence of anything
further I do not consider that the failure to pay the levy
is a sufficient
reason to refuse to make orders in the appellant’s favour when weighed
against the merits of the application.
In the circumstances I consider that the appeal should be upheld and orders
special by-law 30 should be revoked.
6 June 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (31.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter