URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/117.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bavcangiovski v Kwan [2025] NSWCATCD 117; (20 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Bavcangiovski v Kwan
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 117
Hearing Date(s):
24 July 2025
Date of Orders:
20 August 2025
Decision Date:
20 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
K Merrick, Senior Member
(1) The portion of the current dividing fence (marked with an
arrow on the annexed survey) that is situated wholly or predominantly
applicant’s property and sits behind the respondents’ outdoor
storage area (marked with an ‘X’ on
the annexed survey) is to be
demolished and removed, with care being taken to ensure that the adjoining side
fence is supported and
not destabilised in the process.
In place of the portion of the current dividing fence that is demolished,
a new section of fence is to be constructed, in a
style and to a height that
matches the remainder of the current dividing fence. The new section of fence is
to be centred on the
boundary line between the two
properties.
(3) The new section of fence is to be built
so as to connect to and provide the appropriate support for the remainder of the
dividing fence and the side fence where it meets the new section of
(4) The applicant may engage a suitable fence
builder to undertake the work referred to in orders 1 to 3 (the fencing work).
fence builder, having the suitable expertise, is to identify the extent to
which the section of the current dividing fence that sits
respondents’ outdoor storage area will need to be demolished and replaced
in order to achieve a functional quality
end product. The applicant will provide
a copy of the description of the job and the quote received for the fencing work
to the respondents
at least 2 weeks before commencement of the
(5) The fencing work is to be carried out in a
good and workmanlike manner, and (except in so far as the parties agree to the
of bricks from the section of the current dividing fence that is
demolished), using new materials.
(6) The fencing work
is to be paid for by the applicant.
Following completion of the fencing work, the applicant is to send to
the respondents a copy of the tax invoices for the fencing
(8) Within 14 days of receipt of the relevant tax
invoices, the respondents are to pay the applicant 50% of the cost of the
Catchwords:
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING — Fences and boundaries —
“Dividing fence”
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING — Fences and
boundaries — Contribution to costs
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Dividing Fences Act
Cases Cited:
Alwiah v Watts & Anor
[2004] NSWSC 948
Elwell v Chav
[2024] NSWCATAP
Larney v Johannson
[2013] NSWCA 409
Nicholls v Fortmann
NSWCATAP 52
Purcell v Chadwick
[2018] NSWCATAP 250
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Suzana Bavcangionvski (Applicant)
Wing Poon Kwan and Wai Mun Cheng
(Respondents)
Representation:
Applicant – self represented
Respondents – self
represented
File Number(s):
2025/00100861
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
application concerns a dividing fences dispute. The boundary along which the
subject dividing fence runs forms part of the side
boundary of the
applicant’s property and the back boundary of the respondents’
property. For the purposes of this decision
the fence that currently divides the
properties will be referred to as ‘the current dividing fence’.
current dividing fence is a 1.6m high brick fence, 11cm deep, approximately
10.4m long and supported at approximately 2m intervals
by engaged brick piers
and at each end by a corner support pier that is 24cm deep. The piers are flush
with the face of the current
dividing fence that runs along the side of the
applicant’s property so that the applicant’s ‘side’ of
current dividing fence is flat. The piers jut into the respondents’
property. The side fences of the respondents’ property
are similarly
constructed. It would appear that where the side fences join the current
dividing fence, the corner piers may provide
support for both structures.
current dividing fence follows the boundary between the two properties
reasonably closely, although it is apparent from surveys
obtained by both
parties that the current dividing fence is not centred precisely on the
boundary. At some point the centre line
of the current dividing fence crosses
the boundary line at a slight angle. The result is that the northeastern end of
the current
dividing fence, including the relevant corner support pier, falls
entirely on the respondents’ property, while the southeastern
current dividing fence falls entirely within the applicant’s property,
although the relevant corner support pier
straddles the boundary.
copy of a survey of the respondents’ property is annexed to these reasons,
for convenient reference. The respondents’
property is marked
‘B’, the applicant’s property is marked ‘3’, the
neighbouring property to the north
of the respondents’ property is marked
‘A’, and an outdoor storage area in the southeastern corner of the
respondents’
property is marked ‘X’.
applicant served a fencing notice in accordance with
Fences Act 1991
) on the respondents on or about
28 July 2023.
notice proposes the demolition of the entire length of the current dividing
fence, installation of a new Colourbond panel fence
in the colour
‘monument’ on pine timber sleepers between 1.8 metres and 2.4 metres
above existing ground level stepped
to grade, with the fencing work to be
carried out on the boundary line as shown in a boundary survey report prepared
by Barry James
Inwood, with the cost of demolition of the current dividing fence
and erection of the replacement Colourbond boundary fence to be
paid in equal
proportions and the respondents to pay the cost of replacement of any supporting
structures attached to the current
dividing fence.
reasons given by the applicant for proposing the demolition of the current
dividing fence and construction of a new Colourbond
(1) the current dividing fence is approximately 18 centimetres over the boundary
at the furthest (southeastern) point;
(2) the current dividing fence is more than 20 years old;
(3) over time the current dividing fence has become cracked and unstable and
does not comply with safety regulations;
(4) the current dividing fence does not comply with height requirements. The
minimum height requirement is 1.8 metres.
the hearing the applicant expanded on these reasons as follows:
(1) the point at which the current dividing fence falls 18cm into the
applicant’s property (being the maximum point of encroachment
southeastern end of the boundary fence) is in close proximity to the end of the
side wall of a newly constructed outbuilding
at the back of the
applicant’s property. The wall of the outbuilding has been constructed
90cm from the surveyed boundary,
but because the current dividing fence
encroaches by up to 18cm, the space between the wall of the outbuilding and the
current dividing
fence at this point is only 72cm.The applicant wants the fence
‘moved back to the boundary’ as per the surveyor’s
(2) the balance of the applicant’s side fence is or will be Colourbond and
the applicant would like a fence that is consistent
in style for the whole of
its length;
(3) the applicant has constructed a pool in the garden between the house and the
outbuilding. The newly constructed ground level
around the pool is 0.6m above
natural ground level. It is a council requirement where there is a pool in the
garden for any external
fence to be at least 1.8m above the ground level of the
pool (which in the present case will mean a fence that is 2.4m about natural
ground level, in the vicinity of the pool);
(4) the applicant would like a fence of at least 1.8m height for privacy
(5) the applicant initially offered to pay the costs of removing and replacing
the current dividing fence, but the respondents did
not agree. This has led to
delay. On that basis the applicant considers that it would be reasonable for the
Tribunal to order the
respondents to remove the current dividing fence and pay
100% of the costs of removal, and to instal a Colourbond fence within the
boundary of their property and pay 50% of the costs of a new Colourbond fence.
The applicant also requests orders for the respondents
to pay the costs of the
applicant’s expert’s report and 50% of the applicant’s legal
(6) if the current dividing fence is not replaced with a Colourbond fence that
is 2.4m high at the ‘pool end’ (the northeastern
end) the applicants
will construct a Colourbond fence 2.4m high inside their boundary and abutting
the current dividing fence at
the northeastern end. This is what they have done
in respect of the adjoining neighbour’s back fence (being the neighbouring
property marked ‘A’ on the survey).
applicant filed an application on 11 March 2025 seeking the following
(1) An order determining the boundary or line on which the fencing work is to be
carried out;
(2) An order determining the fencing work to be carried out including the kind
of dividing fence involved (the applicant’s
proposal is for a 1.8m high
Colourbond fence in ‘monument’ colour);
(3) An order determining the manner in which contributions for the fencing work
are to be apportioned or re-apportioned between the
parties or the amount that
each adjoining owner is liable to pay for that work;
(4) An order determining which portion of the dividing fence is to be
constructed or repaired by either owner;
(5) An order determining the time within which the fencing work is to be carried
(6) An order that the respondents pay in full the cost of removing the current
‘unsafe and non compliant’ fence and half
the cost of installation
of the new fence;
(7) An order that the respondents pay for the ‘unnecessary legal fees and
subsequent reports’ requested by the applicants
‘incurred as a
result of their refusal to come to an agreement without proceedings with lawyers
is noted that although the notice proposed shared costs for demolishing the
existing fence and constructing the new fence, the
application seeks orders that
the respondents pay the whole of the costs of demolition of the existing
orders sought by the applicant were opposed by the respondent.
respondents’ position may be summarised as follows:
(1) The boundary fence is a sufficient dividing fence:
(a) It is at least 26 years old and has been in place and served as a sufficient
and undisputed dividing fence throughout that period.
(b) While the boundary fence deviates slightly from the boundary along its 10.4m
length the boundary fence is largely on the boundary
and the deviation is not
entirely to the applicant’s disadvantage. The boundary fence falls
entirely within the respondents’
property at the northeastern end, and at
the southeastern end where the boundary fence falls entirely within the
applicant’s
property, when measured from the centre line the deviation is
only 12.5cm, not 18cm. The corner pier at the southeastern end that
of the fence straddles the boundary.
(2) The boundary fence can be repaired in so far as that may be necessary and
does not need replacing:
(a) The boundary fence is not a load bearing fence, and with the exception of
minor cracking identified at the southeastern end,
which the respondents contend
can be repaired, it remains solid and does not need replacing. The respondents
have offered to contribute
to the cost of repair. This is a more cost effective
and less disruptive solution.
(b) There have been no reported safety concerns in respect of the fence,
including throughout the 10 years during which the applicant
has owned the
adjoining property. The reported cracks (which can only be seen from the
applicant’s side) have apparently been
there since at least 2021 (based on
photos provided by the applicant) and yet no concerns have been raised.
(3) The alternative fence that has been proposed is unsuitable:
(a) The side fences of the respondents’ property are built of the same
material and in the same style as the current dividing
fence. The respondents
wish to retain the brick style and height of the current dividing fence, which
is consistent with the rest
of their yard fencing. The respondents are not
interested in a higher Colourbond fence, which will not be in keeping with their
(b) Further, the corners where the side fences and boundary fence meet provide
structural support for the respective fences. The
respondents also have an
outdoor storage area built against the boundary fence (marked ‘X’ on
the annexed survey). The
respondents are concerned that demolition of the
current dividing fence and construction of a Colourbond fence in its place will
impact the stability of the side fences and outdoor storage area.
(c) There is no Council requirement for the fence to be at least 1.8m high. The
only minimum height requirement is the 1.8m requirement
for an external fence in
the immediate vicinity of the new pool. The applicant can instal a fence of the
requisite height and position
it against the current dividing fence, (which it
is noted is wholly within the respondents property at that point). In fact this
is exactly what the applicant has done in relation to the neighbour’s
fence (neighbouring property marked ‘A’).
(4) It is unreasonable for the applicant to expect the respondents to pay the
costs sought by the application:
(a) the current dividing fence is the joint responsibility of the parties. There
is no reason why the respondents should pay 100%
of the demolition costs of the
current dividing fence.
(b) The current dividing fence performs a support function for the side fences
and outdoor storage area. The consequential costs
of stabilising the side fences
and outdoor storage area if the boundary fence is demolished should form part of
the shared costs
of the project, and not fall solely on the respondents, who are
content to retain the current dividing fence.
(c) The respondents are a retired couple who are seeking to preserve a
functional long standing boundary fence without being forced
unnecessary and costly demolition. They have offered to share in the costs of
(d) The respondents have sought to engage and come up with a reasonable
solution. When they asked questions (through their son) in
September 2023
regarding the need for replacement, the applicant simply ceased to communicate
and brought this application some 18
months later.
(5) The applicant’s desire for a new, higher fence in a different material
follows the applicants’ decision to subdivide
and construct duplex
dwellings on the property, including a pool that is partly raised above the
natural ground level, and outbuildings
at the back of the property. These are
not matters for which the respondents are responsible.
matter was heard on 27 July 2025 in
was no dispute by the parties that this is a claim which the Tribunal has
the Tribunal
was satisfied that a fencing
notice was served, and that the application was lodged at least a
month after the notice
was served.
Evidence and
applicant appeared at the hearing and relied on a 26 page bundle of documents
(marked #1) which included a boundary survey, structural
report, photos, and correspondence including the 28 July 2023 Notice. The
applicant’s husband Costa Hatzis
spoke on behalf of the applicant at the
hearing with her agreement. The applicant also made submissions.
respondents appeared at the hearing and relied on a 10 page bundle (marked #2)
which included a statement, a survey (a copy of
which is annexed to this
decision) and communications with the surveyor, and photos. The respondents were
accompanied by their son
Aaron Kwan who with their agreement spoke on their
interpreter had been booked for the respondents, but the interpreter was not
present for the start of the hearing The respondents
indicated that they were
content to proceed, with their son speaking for them and seeking their
instructions in the course of the
hearing, until the interpreter arrived.
parties were each given the opportunity to respond to the evidence and
submissions of the other and to ask questions of each other.
Tribunal heard the evidence and reserved its decision.
Tribunal has read and considered all of the oral and documentary evidence of the
Relevant Legislation
fencing work
” is defined in
of the DFA as follows:
fencing work
(a) the design, construction, replacement, repair or maintenance of
the whole or part of a dividing fence, and
(b) the surveying or preparation of land (including the trimming, lopping or
removal of vegetation) along or on either side of the
common boundary of
adjoining lands for such a purpose,
of the DFA provides,
relevantly:
4 Determination as
to “sufficient dividing fence”
In any proceedings under this Act, the Local Court or the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal is to consider all the circumstances of
the case when
determining the standard for a sufficient dividing fence for the purposes of
this Act, including the following:
(a) the existing dividing fence (if any),
(b) the purposes for which the adjoining lands are used or
intended to be used,
(c) the privacy or other concerns of the adjoining land
(d) the kind of dividing fence usual in the locality,
(e) any policy or code relating to dividing fences adopted by the
council of the local government area in which the adjoining lands
(f) any relevant environmental planning instrument relating to the
adjoining lands or to the locality in which they are situated,
of the Act provides:
6 General principle—liability for
fencing work
(1) An adjoining owner is liable, in respect of adjoining lands where there
is no sufficient dividing fence, to contribute to the
carrying out of fencing
work that results or would result in the provision of a dividing fence of a
standard not greater than the
standard for a sufficient dividing fence.
(2) This section applies whether or not a dividing fence already
separates the adjoining lands.
of the Act is in the following
Contribution as between adjoining
owners—generally
(1) Adjoining owners are liable to contribute in equal proportions to
the carrying out of fencing work in respect of a dividing fence
of a standard
not greater than the standard for a sufficient dividing fence.
(2) An adjoining owner who desires to carry out fencing work involving
a dividing fence of a standard greater than the standard for
a sufficient
dividing fence is liable for the fencing work to the extent to which it exceeds
the standard for a sufficient dividing
(3) An adjoining owner who desires to carry out the trimming, lopping
or removal of vegetation (as referred to in paragraph (b) of
the definition
of fencing work in
for a purpose other than the provision
of a sufficient dividing fence is liable for the expenses of carrying out the
work to the
extent to which those expenses are attributable to work done for
that other purpose.
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make orders in relation to fencing work is set
of the Act:
14 Orders as to
fencing work
(1) The Local Court or the Civil and Administrative Tribunal may, in
respect of an application under this Act, make an order determining
more of the following:
(a) the boundary or line on which the fencing work is to be
carried out, whether or not that boundary or line is on the common boundary
the adjoining lands,
(b) the fencing work to be carried out (including the kind of
dividing fence involved),
(c) the manner in which contributions for the fencing work are to
be apportioned or re-apportioned or the amount that each adjoining
liable to pay for that work,
(d) which portion of the dividing fence is to be constructed or
repaired by either owner,
(e) the time within which the fencing work is to be carried
(f) the amount of any compensation (in the form of an annual
payment to either of the adjoining owners) in consideration of loss
occupation of any land,
(g) that, in the circumstances, no dividing fence is required in
respect of all or part of the boundary of the adjoining lands.
Issues for determination
was no dispute between the parties as to the location of the true boundary
between the properties. Each party obtained a survey.
Those surveys were
consistent.
evidence and submissions of the parties reveal three broad issues requiring
determination.
(1) First, whether there is a sufficient dividing fence.
(2) Second, if there is no sufficient dividing fence, whether the Tribunal
should exercise its discretion to order fencing work and
the nature of the
fencing work that would be the subject of orders, including but not limited
to the contribution of the parties
to the cost of that work.
(3) Third, whether the applicants are entitled to the further costs which they
Is there currently a sufficient dividing fence?
Tribunal finds that there is no sufficient dividing
fence. see DFA
Alwiah v Watts & Anor
[2004] NSWSC 948
approved in
Larney v Johannson
[2013] NSWCA 409
Elwell v Chav
[2024] NSWCATAP 172
. A finding as to whether there
is a sufficient dividing fence is therefore fundamental to the making of orders
of the DFA.
or not there is currently a sufficient dividing fence is a matter of degree
involving consideration of all relevant circumstances,
including the
circumstances set out in
of the DFA: see
[2018] NSWCATAP 250
. What weight, if any, is given to
the matters set out in
(a)-(g) of the Act (and any other relevant
circumstances) is a matter for the Tribunal to determine based on the evidence
Nicholls v Fortmann
[2020] NSWCATAP 52
. There is nothing in
to mandate the weight to be given to the various
-(g) or any other relevant circumstance or that stipulates that
one factor is to be given greater weight than any other factor.
is apparent from DFA
, which contemplates the Tribunal making orders in
respect of ‘portions’ of a dividing fence being replaced or
that in determining whether a dividing fence is sufficient, it may be
viewed in portions or sections.
the present case the Tribunal has considered all of the circumstances including
the criteria set out in
of the DFA and the orders that may be made under
current dividing fence consists of a brick fence that has served the purpose of
a dividing fence between the two properties for
more than 26 years. While it is
not centred precisely on the boundary, save for a section at the southeastern
end, it touches or
sits on the boundary between the two properties for the
entirety of its length. At the northeastern end it sits within the
respondent’s
property and touches the boundary. At the southeastern end it
sits entirely on the applicant’s property.
fact that a fence is not centred precisely on the boundary is not determinative
of whether the fence may constitute a sufficient
dividing fence.
at [36] the Appeal Panel said:
36 Whether a particular encroachment is such as to render the fence
insufficient, within the meaning of the Act, requires a consideration
nature and extent of any encroachment. In this regard, it seems to us that some
deviations from the boundary line are permissible
and would not justify a
conclusion that any existing fence, in a good state of repair, was otherwise
insufficient. For example, it
is self-evident that minor deviations from the
boundary line or deviations from the boundary line due to the varying width of
materials would not usually render a fence insufficient.
that basis the Appeal Panel in
found (at [59]) that
While there might be an encroachment, in our opinion the evidence does not
establish that the position of the fence off the boundary
meant the fence
was not a sufficient dividing fence. The fence had been in its current
position (save for the section at the front
which had been replaced by the
respondents) for a period in excess of 10 years. It operated
satisfactorily as a dividing fence, a
matter which the appellant did not
seek to challenge at any time from when the fence was built up until
she found that the fence
was not on the boundary line.
the present case the current dividing fence has been in place for at least 26
years and has satisfactorily served the purpose of
a boundary fence. The
Tribunal does not consider that as a factor taken on its own, the position of
the current dividing fence off
the boundary means that the fence is not a
sufficient dividing fence.
report from MBC Engineering states ‘the existing fence significant cracked
(ref to attached picture below)’. The report
also states ‘the
existing fence has not been designed and built as per AS 3700.2018 Masonry
Structure Ch 4.6 Design for robustness’
and ‘cannot withstand min.
0.5Kpa out of plan load.’ The report concludes ‘In my opinion the
existing fence was
not structurally adequate and this brick fence could collapse
at any time especially under big wind pressure. Our office recommend
fence need to be demolished as soon as possible.’
respondents reject the suggestion that the current dividing fence is unsound.
The author of the MBC Engineering report was not
made available for cross
examination and the report has not addressed the questions whether the whole of
the fence is ‘not
structurally adequate’ or only the part where the
cracks are apparent as indicated in the photos attached to the report, and
not address the question whether the fence can be made safe through repairs.
photographic evidence to which the report refers shows that at the southeastern
end of the current dividing fence (being the section
that sits predominantly on
the applicant’s property, and is marked with an arrow on the attached
survey) the brick wall is
starting to crack. This is the section that sits
directly behind the Respondents’ outdoor storage area (marked
on the survey). The balance of the boundary fence, from the
vicinity of the pier at the northeast corner of the respondent’s
storage area to the corner that adjoins the neighbouring property marked
‘A’ on the survey, appears to be in
reasonable to good repair. It
has been in place for at least 26 years and does not look like it is liable to
collapse. It certainly
does not look like it couldn’t be made good through
the southeastern section of the boundary fence that sits directly behind the
Respondents’ outdoor storage area, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that the
current dividing fence is insufficient.
southeastern section of the fence that sits predominantly or entirely on the
respondents property, behind the respondents’
outdoor storage area (and
marked with an arrow on the survey annexed), presents a different story. Cracks
are apparent and will presumably
get worse without attention. Further, the
Tribunal notes that this section of the fence is not centred on the boundary and
into the applicant’s pathway down the side of the new
outbuilding such that it may impede their use of that pathway.
In Purcell,
at [25]-[27], the Appeal Panel said of
25 The section provides a list of factors as part of an inclusive
definition, and otherwise requires the Tribunal “to consider
circumstances of the case when determining the standard for a sufficient
dividing fence for the purposes of [the Act]”.
It is inappropriate to
attempt to prescribe all the circumstances which might be relevant.
26 However, as is evident from the list of factors in the Act, they include
a consideration of the existing fence, the purposes for
adjoining lands are used or intended to be used”, and the “privacy
or other concerns of the adjoining
landowners”.
27 Taken together, it is clear that the nature of the adjoining land,
and how a landowner wishes to use and enjoy their land, are
relevant factors in
determining the sufficiency of a fence.
circumstances in the present case when taken together lead the Tribunal to
conclude that the southeastern section of the current
dividing fence is not
sufficient. In particular, this section of the current dividing fence is showing
clear signs of cracking and
loss of structural integrity. Additionally, in its
present position it will likely impact the applicant’s use of the pathway
down the side of the new outbuilding. It is reasonable for the applicant to wish
to use this path and not have the fence encroach
into the path more than is
inevitable by virtue of the width of fencing materials.
as to fencing work which the Tribunal may make include orders for the design,
construction, replacement, repair or maintenance
of the whole or part of a
dividing fence.
the present case the Tribunal must consider whether the southeastern section of
the boundary fence should be repaired or replaced,
and if replaced, what kind of
fence it should be replaced with.
noted earlier, the southeastern section of the current dividing fence encroaches
to an extent onto the applicants’ land with
the result that the start of
the pathway down the side of the outbuilding is restricted. For that reason, the
Tribunal considers
that this section of the current dividing fence should be
demolished and replaced. The new section of fence should be built so that
centred on the true boundary line as determined by the parties’ survey
the applicant would prefer a Colourbond fence to match the rest of the fence
that they have installed or propose installing,
the respondents want to retain
the style of fence that is already there, and do not want a Colourbond
that the balance of the current dividing fence will not be demolished, and that
the respondents side fences are in the same
style as the current dividing fence
and have been in place for more than 26 years, the new fence should be built in
brick, in a style
and to a height that matches the remainder of the current
dividing fence, and in such a way that the south end corner provides the
appropriate support for the side fence where it meets the boundary fence. If the
builders can conveniently and safely reuse the existing
bricks to assist with
matching, and if both the applicant and the respondents agree, the builder
should be instructed to do so.
applicant has stated that she will construct a Colourbond fence on her side of
the boundary if the Tribunal does not order that
a new dividing fence be
installed in Colourbond. That is a decision open to the applicant. She has
already done just that in relation
to the section of her boundary fence
adjoining the neighbouring property marked ‘A’ on the survey.
of the DFA allows the Tribunal to make orders regarding the contributions
to the costs of fencing work. The Tribunal considers that
the cost of demolition
of the section of the current dividing fence indicated with an arow on the
annexed survey should be borne
by the parties in equal shares of 50% each, and
the costs of construction of a new brick fence centred on the true boundary
similarly be borne by the parties in equal shares of 50% each.
Tribunal may also make orders about the time for the work to take place, and
which owner will be responsible for ensuring that
the work occurs.
parties have an interest in ensuring the work is carried out. The applicant is
keen for the work to be undertaken promptly, and
for the fence to be centred on
the true boundary line. The applicant has also been working with builders and
other tradespeople in
the course of building on her property and seems to be
best placed to identify a suitable fence builder to undertake the task. The
respondents are keen to ensure the work is undertaken properly, including so
that the new fence continues to provide the necessary
support where it connects
with the side fence.
Tribunal considers that the most practical resolution is for the applicant to
engage a suitable fence builder to undertake the
fencing work. The fence
builder, having the suitable expertise, is to identify the extent to which the
section of the current dividing
fence that sits behind the respondents’
outdoor storage area will need to be demolished and replaced in order to achieve
functional quality end product. The applicant will provide a copy of the
description of the job and the quote received for the work
to the respondents at
least 2 weeks before commencement of the fencing work. The fence builder is also
to answer any questions the
respondents may have about the work, before the work
fencing work is to be carried out in a good and workmanlike manner. The new
section of fence is to be constructed in such a way
as to neatly continue on
from the remaining section of the current boundary fence and to continue to
provide support to the adjoining
side fence where the two fences meet.
respondent is to pay their contribution being 50% of the fencing work direct
to the applicant after completion of the work.
applicant’s costs
applicant seeks her costs of engaging an expert and 50% of her legal costs.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) each party is to
pay its own costs of proceedings unless the Tribunal is satisfied that
there are special circumstances warranting
an award of costs.
Tribunal does not consider that there are special circumstances warranting an
award of costs. Each party has had some degree of
success. Both parties have
incurred costs. Neither party has acted unreasonably.
the reasons set out above the Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The portion of the current dividing fence (marked with an arrow on the
annexed survey) that is situated wholly or predominantly
applicant’s property and sits behind the respondents’ outdoor
storage area (marked with an ‘X’ on
the annexed survey) is to be
demolished and removed, with care being taken to ensure that the adjoining side
fence is supported and
not destabilised in the process.
(2) In place of the portion of the current dividing fence that is demolished, a
new section of fence is to be constructed, in a style
and to a height that
matches the remainder of the current dividing fence. The new section of fence is
to be centred on the boundary
line between the two properties.
(3) The new section of fence is to be built so as to connect to and provide the
appropriate support for the remainder of the current
dividing fence and the side
fence where it meets the new section of fence.
(4) The applicant may engage a suitable fence builder to undertake the work
referred to in orders (1) to (3) (the fencing work).
The fence builder, having
the suitable expertise, is to identify the extent to which the section of the
current dividing fence that
sits behind the respondents’ outdoor storage
area will need to be demolished and replaced in order to achieve a functional
quality end product. The applicant will provide a copy of the description of the
job and the quote received for the fencing work
to the respondents at least 2
weeks before commencement of the fencing work.
(5) The fencing work is to be carried out in a good and workmanlike manner, and
(except in so far as the parties agree to the reuse
of bricks from the section
of the current dividing fence that is demolished), using new materials.
(6) The fencing work is to be paid for by the applicant.
(7) Following completion of the fencing work, the applicant is to send to
the respondents a copy of the tax invoices for the fencing
(8) Within 14 days of receipt of the relevant tax invoices, the respondents are
to pay the applicant 50% of the cost of the fencing
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter