URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v HOLBROOK [2010] NSWPST 5 (13 July 2010)
PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
MATTER NUMBER: PST 006/2009
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 109
Psychologists Act 2001
IN THE MATTER OF
GRAHAM PATRICK HOLBROOK
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
__________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Holbrook [2010]
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Mr A Britt of Counsel, instructed by Ms P Hook,
Graham Holbrook
(Respondent)
unrepresented,
participated by telephone for part of the Inquiry, did not appear in person at
the Inquiry.
FILE NUMBER: 006/2009
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Ms Hilary Tupling (Psychologist
Mr John Haigh (Psychologist Member)
Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: 18 May 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 13 July 2010
DATE OF ORDERS: 13 July 2010
The Tribunal orders that the Respondent’s
registration is cancelled, that he is not entitled to apply for review of this
for a period of 3 years. Prohibition Order made. Costs in favour of the
Complainant.
CATCHWORDS: psychologist – school counsellor - unsatisfactory
professional conduct – professional misconduct – inappropriate
conduct with school students during school counselling sessions –
inappropriate comments - not of good character – impairment.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Psychologists Act 2001
of Schedule 5,
Health Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No
- Schedule 4.
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Parte Tziniolis: Re The Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR(NSW) 448
Bannister v Walton
(NSWCA, unreported, 30 April 1992);
Commission v Vuletic and others
[2005] NSWSC 614
Clyne v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Health Care Complaint
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
R v Hawkins
(2001) NSWSC 420.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tribunal convened at the Health Professionals Registration Board’s Hearing
Room on 18 May 2010 to conduct an Inquiry into
complaints made by Ms Karen
Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC), dated
23 October 2009 in relation
to a registered psychologist, Graham Holbrook (the
Respondent).
Complaint alleges unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct in relation to the conduct of the Respondent
with several children
who came under his care in his role as a School Counsellor during the period of
2002 - 2006. It is further
alleged that the Respondent is not of good
character and suffers from an impairment, namely a personality disorder.
The Complaint
Complaint alleged that Mr Graham Patrick Holbrook, being a person registered as
a psychologist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
The psychologist has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of section 25 of the Act, in that the psychologist:
demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience, and/or
in other improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the psychologist was employed by the Department of
Education as a school counsellor at schools in New South
approximately July 2002 during an interview/counselling session with Child A, a
student in Year 6 at Primary School A, NSW, the
psychologist asked questions of
Child A, which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely words to the
you masturbate?”;
you ever masturbate in front of anyone?”.
approximately 2002 or 2003 during an interview/counselling session with Child B,
a student in Year 10 at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist made comments or
suggestions to Child B which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely
words to the effect of:
“Why don’t you go out and get drunk and have a good
time with your friends?”
approximately 9.30am on 23 February 2004 during an interview/counselling session
with Child C, a student in Year 9 at High School
C, NSW the psychologist:
the chair on which Child C was sitting towards him;
his hands on Child C’s thighs;
his hands up Child C’s thighs, moving the hemline of her skirt up her
Child C pushed herself away from him, said words to the effect of:
“Sorry, you’re just such a tease”.
25 August 2006 at a meeting of integration students convened by Anne Kafer of
the Department of Education, at Primary School D
and attended by Anne Kafer,
Annette Fairhall (Assistant Principal, Kindergarten, Primary School D), Judith
Turquelson (Early Intervention
Coordinator) and the psychologist, the
psychologist made comments which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely
that he recommended
that Child D not be accepted at Primary School D if an
application were made because Child D’s mother suffered with depression,
anxiety attacks and was “a nutter”.
approximately 18 March 2004 during an interview/counselling session with Child
E, a Year 10 student at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist conducted himself
inappropriately in that he locked the door to the counselling room.
various occasions in 2006, whilst conducting interviews/counselling sessions at
Primary School D, NSW, the psychologist failed
to ensure, without reasonable
excuse, that the door to the interview room was open sufficiently for both the
psychologist and the
child to be seen by someone passing by the door in
contravention of the directions of the School Principal and/or the
approximately May 2002 at a meeting at Primary School E, NSW, the psychologist
made comments which were inappropriate in the circumstances,
namely words to the
“I like to ogle the High School girls in their gym
approximately 2002, at a District Guidance Officer meeting at High School B,
NSW, the psychologist made comments which were inappropriate
circumstances, namely words to the effect of:
“Gee, I love my job. All those young girls in gym
approximately 2002 and 2003, whilst a counsellor at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist conducted group counselling sessions
in a manner which was
inappropriate in the circumstances in that he caused or permitted groups of
female students to discuss sexual
and drug-related matters.
COMPLAINT TWO
The psychologist has been guilty of professional
misconduct within the meaning of section 24 of the Act, in that the
psychologist:
demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience, and/or
in other improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
Particulars
1-9 as set out above at Complaint 1 are repeated and adopted.
COMPLAINT THREE
The psychologist is not of good character.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
Particulars
1- 9 as set out above at Complaint 1 are repeated and adopted.
the psychologist was employed by the Department of Education as a school
counsellor at schools in New South Wales between 24
July and 28 July 2006, Child
F was a high school student aged 16 and undertaking work experience at Primary
School D, NSW.
morning of 24 July or 25 July 2006 in the psychologist’s office at Primary
School D, NSW, the psychologist asked
for and obtained from Child F her personal
mobile telephone number;
approximately midday on 28 July 2006 in the psychologist’s office at
Primary School D, NSW, the psychologist made comments
to Child F which were
inappropriate in the circumstances, namely he spoke words to the effect of:
you free on the weekend?”
thought maybe we could catch up?”
guess I’d better give back your number then?”
approximately 3.40pm on 28 July 2006, the psychologist telephoned Child F on her
mobile telephone and made comments which were
inappropriate in the
circumstances, namely he spoke words to the effect of:
you still okay to talk to me?” and
tell anyone about this because I could lose my job or worse.”
approximately December 2006, the psychologist attended the Local Hairdressing
Salon and whilst at the salon the psychologist made
comments to and/or asked
questions of the staff members at the salon which were inappropriate in the
circumstances, namely he spoke
words to the effect of:
am a psychologist and I work in local schools, but the money is terrible. I am
thinking about taking photos of young girls
for extra money.”
it bother you if I took photos of your daughter for the internet ... photos for
dirty old men?”
you know of any young girls who I could photograph for men to look
COMPLAINT FOUR
The psychologist suffers from an impairment which detrimentally affects or is
likely to detrimentally affect his mental capacity to
practise psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
psychologist has been diagnosed as suffering from a personality disorder.
personality disorder detrimentally affects the psychologist’s mental
capacity to practise psychology.
reason of his personality disorder, the psychologist currently poses a risk to
children and young persons.
Appearances
per headnote. The Respondent participated by telephone in several Directions
Hearings held prior to the commencement of the Inquiry.
The Respondent indicated
that he would not attend the Inquiry but would provide written submissions and
evidence to be considered
by the Tribunal.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 6 of Schedule 5 of the
Psychologists Act 2001
(Act), that the name and any details that tend to
identify Child A, Child B, Child C, Child D, Child E and Child F are not to be
published. The schools attended by these children have also been de-identified.
A Schedule marked ‘Annexure E’ containing
names suppressed will be
attached only to the original Decision and the copies that are forwarded to the
parties. This Schedule should
not be reproduced if copies of the Decision are
made for any purpose other than to provide it to an appeals court. The parties
directed to take care to ensure that the Schedule is not copied. If the
transcript of the proceedings is legally provided to any
entity, the Registry
must ensure that it is appropriately de-identified in accordance with the
annexed Schedule.
witnesses were called during the Inquiry.
Documentation
HCCC tendered documents which came into evidence as exhibits Volume 1.1 –
1.52, exhibits volume 2.1 – 2.29 and exhibit
volume 3.A – E. The
Respondent tendered one folder of documents which came into evidence as exhibits
R1 – R11. All exhibits
are itemised in annexure ‘A’
Relevant Law
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the Particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362–363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of the Act is as follows:
Meaning of ‘unsatisfactory professional
For the purposes of this Act, unsatisfactory professional conduct, in
relation to a registered psychologist, includes any of the following:
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the psychologist in the practice
of psychology
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the psychologist of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the psychologist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the psychologist to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the psychologist,
(d) a failure by the psychologist to comply with an order made or a direction
given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the psychologist of section 34A (4)
(Power of Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a psychologist in the course
of the practice or purported practice of
psychology.
definition of ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ was amended by
Health Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1),
which commenced on 1 March 2005. The amendment, in summary, added the reference
to the standard reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience. Some of the Particulars of Complaint One relate to a
time before 1 March 2005; however, pursuant to the transitional
provisions of the
Statute Law
(Miscellaneous Provisions)
(No. 2) (Schedule 4)
the relevant law to be applied by
this Tribunal is that which was in force at the time these Complaints were
filed. The Complaint
currently before the Tribunal is dated 10 October
2008. Consequently, the definition of ‘unsatisfactory professional
applicable in these proceedings is the definition contained in
the current legislation.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one
of the deficiencies or inadequacies that
are set out in section 25. The Complaint currently before the Tribunal alleges
conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of this section – specifically sub-section
Psychologists Registration Board (Board) published a Code of Conduct dated 1 May
1990. This was superseded by the Code of Ethical
Conduct dated 3 November 1997,
which in turn was superseded by the Code dated 1 November 2004 (which was
provided to all registered
psychologists in June 2005). It is this most recent
Code that applies to the conduct alleged in this matter.
Professional Misconduct
24 meaning of ‘professional misconduct’:
For the purposes of this Act, ‘professional
misconduct’, in relation to a registered psychologist, means
unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
making findings in relation to the Particulars and the Complaints the Tribunal
then needs to consider the appropriate Order(s)
to be made in the circumstances.
Not of Good Character
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
at 475-476, Holmes JA said:
The Act provides for the circumstances in which the name of a
registered medical practitioner may be removed from the register and
expression 'infamous conduct in a professional respect' has been used to define
such conduct. 'Good character' is not a summation
of acts alone, but relates
rather to the quality of a person. The quality is to be judged by acts and
motives, that is to say, behaviour
and the mental and emotional situations
accompanying that behaviour. However, character cannot always be estimated by
one class of act. As much about a person as is known will form the
evidence from which the inference of good character or not of
good character is
Bannister v Walton
(30 April 1992 – Court of Appeal –
unreported) Mahoney JA said:
The right to practice [medicine] affords to a practitioner
privileges and opportunities which are not available to others. He is expected
to maintain a relationship with patients who are affected by his character. The
relationship is one which touches matters such as
trust, confidence,
confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no means the only
consideration to which regard is
to be had in determining whether a person is
appropriate to practice medicine. It is necessary that the public be protected
those who, through having the appropriate skills do not have the
character for the opportunities and privileges which the right to
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 53,
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act
on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under
subsection (2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses
a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”) do any one or more of the following:
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal thinks appropriate
on the provision of health services or specified health services by the
for the period specified in the order or permanently.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as
an employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
de-registered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Background material
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1964. He was born and grew up in England, attending a
private primary school in Surrey and a grammar school
in Kingston where he
completed his A-levels. The Respondent then studied for an Arts based degree at
Durham University. The Respondent
has given differing accounts of the subjects
studied for this degree. He advised Dr Diamond that he had majored in English,
and Russian studies and had undertaken extra studies in Psychology.
He told Dr Diamond that he had initially commenced studying Geography
‘almost kicked off’
the course because of his attitude to the
subject which was a result of the fact that he had not wanted to study that
the first place. The Respondent is recorded as informing Dr Lucire
that in his undergraduate degree at Durham University he studied
Visual Arts, English, Psychology and Russian (page 5 exhibit 3.E1).
Respondent’s CV records that he worked as a Camp Counsellor in the United
States in 1986.
Respondent told Dr Diamond that after he graduated he was not allowed to work as
a counsellor as he was deemed too young to do
‘psychology’. The
Respondent then decided to undertake a postgraduate Certificate in Education to
pursue teaching as
a career. Thereafter he taught English, Drama and Psychology
at high school level for five years. In the CV provided to the HCCC
Respondent listed work as a ‘Senior Pastoral Tutor’ at one school in
addition to these teaching duties.
a CV provided to the HCCC (exhibit 2.5) the Respondent records that he was
granted Graduate Membership of the British Psychological
Society in 1987 and
that he undertook the Post Graduate Certificate in Education in 1987 to 1988.
CV records the Respondent undertaking a ‘Foundation Course in
Psychoanalytic Group Counselling’ in 1992 to 1993, working
for the next
year as a ‘Drugline Counsellor’, then the following year as a
‘Rehabilitation Technician’ in
the Transitional Living Unit of the
Royal Hospital for Neuro-Disability in England followed by a further year of
teaching in 1994
1995 - 1996 the Respondent commenced a Masters in Educational Psychology at
Birmingham University. In his CV he noted that he had
not completed this
qualification. When he was interviewed by Dr Diamond the Respondent advised that
he was asked to leave the course
when it became apparent that his repeated
failure of academic assignments left him with no chance of passing the course.
records the Respondent as stating that he was incompatible with the
requirements of the course because he did not have the social
skills to do the
organisational psychology role, but that he had enjoyed the clinical and case
management components of the course.
1996 to 1997 the Respondent worked as an Educational Psychologist for the Surrey
Educational Psychology Service prior to migrating
to Australia. The Respondent
informed Dr Diamond that he had seen an advertisement in the United Kingdom for
school counsellors and
had thought this was a role that was more in keeping with
his skills. The NSW Department of Education and Training (Department of
Education) had funded a postgraduate Diploma in Counselling.
Respondent was first registered as a psychologist on 2 May 2000 and is currently
registered until 30 June 2010. On 23 June 2008
the Board imposed a condition on
the Respondent’s registration. The condition so imposed was that the
Respondent was
‘Not to provide professional psychological services to
Respondent’s CV records work as a School Counsellor for the Department of
Education from 1997 to 2007. It records work in
private practice from March 2007
until 24 September 2007 and unemployment thereafter.
few certificates and records of attendance were provided by the Respondent with
his CV. These include 19 hours of study of Eye Movement
Desensitisation and
Reprocessing’ in 2007 and an online Conflict Resolution course.
in the documentation provided by the Respondent are letters from each school at
which he worked in England. The letters vary
in their content but one contains
positive comments regarding the Respondent’s abilities and dedication as a
teacher. Also
provided in the bundle of letters were two letters written on
letterhead from schools within Australia. One dated 28 August 2000
Principal of a small country primary school reports the excellent service of the
Respondent to the District Office. Another
dated 20 September 2002 contains
positive remarks from the Principal of another primary school.
respect to his work history the Respondent provided the following information to
Dr Diamond (page 4, exhibit 2.17):
During the course of his work Mr Holbrook has experienced
repeated clashes with his employers. He describes himself candidly as someone
who liked to do things his own way. He said he was a stubborn individual who
liked to keep going until he "hit a wall". He said
he liked to push the
boundaries and he would ignore the building resentment of those around him until
they confronted him forcefully.
He acknowledged that this was a repeating
pattern and said that despite these chronic conflicts, he did his work quite
he did it his way. He felt that there was enough scope for him to do
what he was good at and to let other people fill in the gaps
and do what they
were good at and in this way they could complement each other.
He said he was not particularly keen on the academic component to his
training and to his work but rather preferred to interact with
the pupils in a
constructive manner. He said he enjoyed the process of "self actualisation" and
embodied this in his clinical work.
Mr Holbrook described his experiences at schools in Australia,
particularly in New South Wales.
At his first posting in Bourke he had conflict with the school principal.
He said "efficiency issues" were raised. He explained
that it was a technique
used by the school principal to intimidate staff who would not comply with
unreasonable demands. It resulted
in him having a term of supervision.
Thereafter he has experienced repeated conflict with authority figures.
He has taught in primary and secondary schools but prefers
to work with younger
children. He likes the floating positions where he moves from school to school
because he says this enables
him to see a number of different people and to
become familiar with a number of schools in the district. He said it gave him a
sense of the local region and he met many people.
On the other hand he did not like the insecurity of a non-permanent
position and when he was offered a permanent position he took
it. It was in a
high school known as a tough school. When complaints were made about him he
said it was by a principal with whom
he had had a "history". He said the
principal did not like him as a counsellor. His style was not appreciated. He
explained that
he had a "limited niche – no complaint with protocols
– feel better when left to do things my way". He explained that
the complaints made about him resulted from a clash of styles, his philosophies
and his intrinsic personality which was not
to accept authority, to be stubborn
and to pursue his own ideas regardless of what was expected of him.
Respondent was placed under monitoring conditions by the Department of Education
from 19 November 2004 until 21 December 2005
as a result of the investigation of
the allegation made regarding Child B.
appears the Respondent was notified of a transfer to the [Regional] Office by
letter dated 28 September 2006 for alternative duties
(exhibit 1.45) after the
incident involving Child F.
Background to the Complaint
Department of Education wrote to the Board on 7 March 2007 advising that the
Respondent had been medically retired from the Department
from 14 March 2007,
having been the subject of a disciplinary investigation. The letter reported
that the investigation related to
allegations of misconduct relating to a number
of inappropriate conversations with a work experience student, obtaining her
number under a false pretext. The letter also recorded that the
Respondent had previously been placed on a monitoring program following
of allegations about inappropriate comments to female students and the touching
of a student’s legs during a session.
The letter noted that the
Respondent’s name had been placed on the list of people never to be
employed again by the Department
of Education.
Board referred this matter as a complaint to the HCCC for investigation and also
made a further complaint of impairment subsequent
to the obtaining of the report
from Dr Diamond dated 18 August 2008.
Tribunal notes that on 23 February 2004 the Respondent was directed to undertake
non-teaching alternative duties at the Regional
Office (exhibit 1.15). He was
directed not to make contact with the students from High School C. The details
of the complaint that
precipitated this action is set out in a letter dated 24
March 2004 from the Department of Education. Essentially the complaint made
the Department is covered by the Particular in this matter relating to Child C.
After allowing the Respondent to respond to this
allegation the Department
decided not to charge the Respondent with a breach of discipline but to impose a
period of monitoring.
The Respondent was allowed to return to school based
duties on 22 November 2004 (exhibit 1.18), although he was allocated to two
primary schools rather than a high school. Supervision for the balance of 2004
was undertaken on behalf of the Department of Education
by Mr Lindsay Crisp and
in 2005 by Ms Dianne Butler. On 10 January 2006 the Department of Education
wrote to the Respondent advising
him of receipt of reports from Ms Butler that
demonstrate that he had successfully completed the Department’s
requirements
and stating that they considered the matter was now finalised
(exhibit 1.20).
20 June 2005, the NSW Police Service wrote to the Department of Education
seeking information regarding the assault of Child C
(exhibit 1.21). The
Department of Education supplied documents in response with a covering letter
dated 15 September 2005 (exhibit
Tribunal further notes that on 3 August 2006 (exhibit 1.43) the Respondent was
advised that allegations regarding further conduct
had been referred to the
Employee Performance and Conduct Unit (EPAC). The letter noted further details
would be provided as soon
as possible. On 19 September 2006 EPAC again wrote to
the Respondent (exhibit 1.43) and he was directed to attend alternative duties
(non-teaching and non-counselling) at the Regional Office pending the outcome of
a HealthQuest Assessment. The letter confirms that
the Respondent would be
provided with details of the allegation and provided with an opportunity to
respond as soon as possible.
29 November 2006 the Department of Education wrote to the Respondent and
provided details of the alleged misconduct with respect
to Child F (exhibit
an aside, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent wrote to HealthQuest on 4
October 2006 enclosing a copy of a letter he had sent
to various senior staff
within the Department of Education. The letter informed HealthQuest that the
enclosed letter
‘asserts that your proposed involvement contravenes
procedural fairness or natural justice whilst perpetuating systemic bias
’. The Respondent requests that he have the opportunity to
opportunity to respond to the current allegations before undertaking a
HealthQuest examination (exhibit 1.45).
3 March 2008 the NSW Police Service wrote to the HCCC advising of the
investigation it was undertaking in relation to the Respondent’s
with Child C (exhibit 1.22).
Evidence - The Department of Education
Investigations
of the detail of the investigations undertaken by the Department of Education is
detailed above.
Respondent was interviewed on a number of occasions and records of these
interviews are in evidence. He also wrote numerous letters
to various agencies
which came into evidence.
Letter from the Respondent dated 31 March 2004 to Chief
Investigator – Child Protection Investigation Branch – Department
Education and Training
Respondent replied to a letter from the Chief Investigator – Child
Protection Investigation Branch – Department of
Education and Training on
31 March 2004 (exhibit volume 1.17). The letter from the Chief Investigator
– Child Protection Investigation
Branch – Department of Education
and Training dated 24 March 2004 (exhibit volume 1.16) detailed allegations of
the misconduct
of the Respondent towards Child C. These allegations included the
A.1. at about 9.20 am on Monday 23 February 2004 you had a
counselling interview with her in the counsellor's office;
gave her some paper and pencils and asked her to draw what she felt
she finished the drawing you pulled the chair (red office chair with castors)
she was sitting on towards you;
put both hands on her legs near the hem of her skirt about ten centimeters above
moved your fingers of both hands up her legs in a creeping action lifting the
hem of her skirt;
she pushed her chair back away from you, you said words to the effect, "I
apologise, you are such a tease".
B.1. On an occasion in early 2003 whilst counselling a group of
Year 9 female students at High School B you:
and condoned them to shout each other down, trying to shock with details of a
sexual nature and drug related nature as
to what they had been doing on the
one female student pulled down the skirt of another for modesty reasons you said
words to the effect, "you didn’t have
to do that" and "I like it when you
skirt is where it is".
response to these allegations the Respondent made the following statements:
A.1. Yes, I saw Child C in the counsellor's office at High
School C for a counselling session on Monday, 23/02/04, at about 9.20am.
I gave her some paper and pencils and asked her to draw her "anger" (copy of her
drawing enclosed).
deny this allegation.
deny this allegation.
deny this allegation.
deny this allegation.
B.1. Based on the information you have provided I am unable to
remember this counselling session.
a. I am unable to remember.
b. I am unable to remember.
wrote to the Respondent in response to his letter dated 4 October 2006 advising
him that appointments had been made for him with
HealthQuest for 10 November
2006. The letter also stated that the information that had been provided to
HealthQuest was to assist
with the assessment process and
‘has nothing
to do with the investigation into specific allegations about your
(exhibit 1.46).
HealthQuest Report
Respondent provided an additional two page letter to HealthQuest subsequent to
his assessment (exhibit 1.47). Exhibit 1.48 is
a 7 page report from HealthQuest.
The Respondent was reviewed by a medical practitioner and a senior clinical
psychologist. The recommendation
made by HealthQuest was that the Respondent was
‘not psychologically fit for his substantive position for the
foreseeable future’
(exhibit 1.48).
Letter re Appeal re HealthQuest Recommendation
detailed below the Respondent lodged an appeal against the HealthQuest findings
and wrote to the HealthQuest Appeals Coordinator
on 1 February 2007 providing
further information to support his appeal. The letter includes the following
comment (exhibit 1.49):
As the HealthQuest report (12/12/06) of Mark Milic and Dr
Michael Stewart observed: "Mr Holbrook's anxiety problems, as indicated
documentation provided by the employer, may be amenable to treatment and he is
therefore likely to benefit from further psychological
and psychiatric
intervention."
Recognising this I believe it was remiss of HealthQuest to make their
recommendations as to my fitness for my substantive position
without consulting
the psychologists responsible for my existing psychological treatment,
concurrent with some of the workplace transgressions,
and in place at the time
of the HealthQuest assessment (10/11/06).
I enclose 4 additional relevant pages from those psychologists.
There are two pages of case notes from my EAP Psychologist, John Kotroni.
One from my first appointment (17/10/05) detailing my anxiety
issues, the
limitations of Zoloft as a solution with its impairing of my social judgement
leading to workplace boundary transgressions
and my first contact with EMDR as a
medication free anxiety management intervention. The second a more recent EAP
session (22/08/06)
which I enclose as it details the alternative anxiolytic
medication (Diazepam) I was weening myself off, (down to one tablet from
from the time of the most recent work place complication 28/07//06.
There is also a two page report from my Clinical Psychologist, CBT
Therapist, Sandra Masih, dated the 21/10/07 detailing my treatment
16/10/06 to the current time, which indicates that I have accepted
responsibility for my work place transgressions, precipitated
prescription Zoloft and Diazepam medications, and that I have made substantial
progress managing my anxiety issues without
utilizing anxiolytics based on John
Omaha's extension of the EMDR process phobia protocol, such that with normal
supervision I am
fit to return to my substantive position. Ms Masih supports
this stance and is available to further clarify any queries you may
have on Ph:
0755231711.
As EPAC have already attested during a period of additional monitoring,
instigated by EPAC between 19 November 2004 and the 21 December
2005 there were
workplace complications during this time. This was due to my
abstinence from anxiolytic medication rather than any increase in supervision.
During my career without the use of anxiolytics there have been
workplace transgressions, ever!
My use of prescription Diazepam in 2006 was a relapse to self-medication
and simply an error in that at that time I believed that
the complications I had
experienced with anxiolytics were specific to Zoloft.
I continue to be free of all anxiolytic medications since the end of
September 2006 and see no need to revert to them as I am now
able to efficiently
and consistently manage my anxiety through EMDR based protocols. Consequently
there are no complications to
my return to my substantive position.
report of Mr Kotroni referred to by the Respondent is found at exhibit volume
2.23. This document is a Client Assessment Form
and appears to be the intake
form which records the issues and problems reported to him by the Respondent. At
this point the Tribunal
notes that the clinical records made on 9 January 2007
by Mr Kotroni stated that the Respondent appeared to be coping well with the
stress of the situation.
report from Dr Masih referred to by the Respondent is found at exhibit volume
2.24. On the Tribunal’s reading of this report
it does not contain any
mention that the Respondent had indicated to Dr Masih that he had accepted
responsibility for his work place
transgressions, the report does not make any
‘John Omaha’s extension of the EMDR process phobia
, and does not express the view that the Respondent is fit to
Letter from the Respondent dated 1 February 2007 to Employee
Performance and Conduct Unit (EPAC) – Department of Education and
(exhibit volume 1.37)
Respondent wrote to EPAC in response to its letter dated 29 November 2006
(exhibit volume 1.36). The letter informs EPAC that
he assumes they are not
aware that there are two investigations currently under way (relating to issues
from 2004 and other issues
in 2006) and that they may not be
conversant with my medical history and use of anxiolytic
medication’
. The Respondent notes that HealthQuest had found him not
psychologically fit for his substantive position and that he was appealing
decision. The Respondent’s letter included the following:
The HealthQuest appeal information is from my treating
psychologists noting my transition from managing anxiety issues with
prescription
medication and its associated workplace complications of impaired
social judgement and resultant boundary transgressions to complication
psycho pharmalogical strategies based on EMDR protocols.
In response to the current allegations I confirm that 1) a, b, and c is an
accurate account of my behaviour whilst under the influence
of too much of the
psycho-active medication, Diazepam. However, this EPAC account of events omits
my subsequent apology to Child
F for my inappropriate behaviour, after the
effects of the medication wore off.
In response to the current allegations I disagree with 2) in that I did
not knowingly disobeying a lawful direction given to me by
Jane Thorpe and EPAC
as, at the time, I was under the influence of a psycho-active prescription
medication which had a significant
disinhibitory and desensitizing effect,
altering cognitions and precipitating the workplace transgressions.
As I state in my HealthQuest appeal, and reiterate here, during my career
when I have not used prescription anxiolytics there have
workplace transgressions, period!
EPAC itself can attest that between the 19 November 2004 and the 21
December 2005, when I was being monitored, that there were no
transgressions. This was because of my abstinence from anxiolytic medication
rather than any increase in supervision.
Given the mitigating circumstance, of anxiolytic medication being involved
in all my workplace transgressions and my subsequent abstinence
psycho-active medications since the end of September 2006 and the subsequent
successful alternative management of my anxiety
by EMDR based protocols I assert
that I am fit for school counselor duties and no risk to anyone. My treating
psychologist, Sandra
Masih, is available to clarify any queries (ph: 0755231711)
and supports this assertion (see her enclosed two page report).
Even if HealthQuest's current determination is sustained on technical
grounds and EPAC feel compelled to observe their original recommendation
am not psychologically fit for my substantive position EPAC may, if they give
credence to my (and my therapists' account of
events), demote me to the position
of mobile school counselor, i.e. not a substantive position; as an appropriate
sanction for my
transgressions without totally forfeiting my career.
I hope you are sympathetic to my circumstances, and recognize that in good
health I am an experienced, efficient and competent counselor
and no threat to
school students or the Department of Education's values and reputation.
The Respondent’s Appeal to HealthQuest
noted above the Respondent lodged an Appeal with HealthQuest on 4 October 2006
(exhibit 1.45). The Respondent makes an assertion
that the process that
HealthQuest was undertaking
‘contravenes procedural fairness or natural
justice whilst also perpetuating systemic bias against myself’.
Respondent requests that he be returned to his usual duties, have an opportunity
to respond to the EPAC allegations before
‘any countenance of a
HealthQuest assessment’
of the Appeal bundle of documents included a letter written by the Respondent to
an Investigator from EPAC dated 4 October 2006.
In this letter the Respondent
complains that natural justice had been breached by the allegation regarding
Child F being presented
to HealthQuest as established. He stated that
I contend that the information submitted to HealthQuest, is likely to
perpetuate the existing systemic failing of bias that I have
been subject to the
since the investigation of the current EPAC enquiry, 04/08/06...’.
letter makes allegations of bias against one of his supervisors (a District
Guidance Officer). The letter repeatedly provides
details of the manner in which
he sees the investigation process as being unfair.
Respondent refers to a ‘letter’ from EPAC dated 21 September 2006
and then claims that EPAC had
‘no significant risk to those in the schools to which [he] was
currently allocated as a school counsellor’
. The Tribunal notes at
this point that the EPAC report dated 21 September 2006 (exhibit 1.44) actually
comes to the following conclusion:
The current allegations, the recent completion of the period of
formal monitoring, the previous reports of inappropriate comments
ongoing information received from his current supervisors expressing concerns
Mr Holbrook may be vocationally
unsuitable for the role of school counselor. The Department therefore seeks a
vocational and psychological
assessment of Mr Holbrook in order to inform the
Department of Mr Holbrook's suitability to remain in this role.
Mr Holbrook has been placed on alternative non counselling/non teaching
duties at the [Regional] Area Office until the Department
can assess Mr
Holbrook's suitability for his current substantive position.
letter also details the Respondent’s view that there had been an
‘improvement’ in the Principal’s management
style (being a
reference to the Principal of the school in which he had been working) since he
had formalised a complaint with respect
to her. The Respondent encloses a copy
of the complaint letter. The complaint made by the Respondent is essentially one
of bullying,
poor management, no attempts to provide him with positive feedback,
the recording of
‘minor transgressions’.
The Respondent
concluded that the Principal’s conduct demonstrated a bias against him.
The Respondent stated that he had considered
taking sick leave after discussing
the situation with his DGO, his EAP psychologist and his general practitioner
(GP) but was dissuaded
from taking the leave by his GP. The Tribunal notes at
this point that the clinical notes of the GP were more indicative of reluctance
on the GP’s part to provide a medical certificate in the circumstances.
letter goes on to state:
I have outlined specific examples of where I believe my
entitlement to natural justice is being compromised by the current processes
politely request that I be placed back into my substantive school counselor
position for the start of Term 4, 2006, whilst receiving
alternative,
disinterested DGO supervision. I request that I subsequently be allowed to
respond to the current EPAC enquiry allegations
of misconduct. Pending EPAC's
findings; then and only then would it seem to be appropriate for the Department
to possibly request
a HealthQuest assessment.
Furthermore it seems a misrepresentation to suggest that HealthQuest can
assess my suitability to continue in the role of school counselor
if I am not
actually in the role of school counselor at the time of the assessment. Being
placed on alternative duties at [Regional]
office in an administrative role I
find unfulfilling, isolated from my usual colleagues and prevented from
exercising the counselling
skills I find rewarding and satisfying exacerbates
the stress I am under from the current EPAC enquiry and is deleterious to my
Any current HealthQuest assessment would be distorted by these
I have not made any overtures for a Workers Compensation claim against my
submission of potential psychological injury related to
sustained unreasonable
criticism going beyond disciplinary protocol (appendix a) nor against the
deleterious effects (outlined above)
of my redirection to alternative duties. A
HealthQuest assessment is not therefore pertinent on these grounds
I believe EPAC, the Department, the OH & S Directorate, and
HealthQuest are vulnerable to the assertion that they are misusing
HealthQuest assessment process in an attempt to dismiss an employee against whom
they are prejudiced as they are unable to demonstrate
sufficient grounds through
the normal EPAC and TARS evaluation procedures. Again this seems to me to
contravene the concept of procedural
fairness or natural justice (4.2 in the
Guidelines for the Management of Conduct and Performance).
20 September 2006 the Respondent wrote to a senior staff member within the
student counselling section of the Department of Education,
stating that he
thought it would be ‘prudent’ for the Department of Education to
allow him to continue to work at his
existing schools as a counsellor, being
supervised by another DGO (other than Ms Anderson given her
’ with the ‘
EPAC enquiry’
7 March 2007 the Respondent was advised that there had been a finding of
misconduct made against him and that he had been medically
retired by the
Department of Education (exhibit 1.51). He was further advised that his name had
been placed on a list of people who
were not to be employed by the Department in
any capacity without reference to the Director of Staffing Services. Further he
advised that his name had been forwarded to the Commissioner for Children
and Young People for inclusion on a Category 1 list.
Tribunal notes documents in evidence record that in 2004 the Respondent made a
Employee’s Compensation Claim under the provisions
of Workers’
Compensation Legislation as a result of being directed to undertake alternative
duties during the 2004 EPAC investigation
(exhibit 1.44).
Respondent’s letter dated 10 November 2006
Respondent wrote to HealthQuest on 10 November 2006 (exhibit 1.47) in response
to the invitation to provide further information
relevant to the Assessment
being undertaken by HealthQuest. The Respondent states that his letter of 4
October 2006 (detailed above)
should also be considered as relevant. The letter
of 10 November 2006 reads as follows:
I have been invited to provide further information in relation
to today's health assessment. The enclosed material supplements my
correspondence dated the 04/10/06.
EPAC sees a distinction between the allegations of misconduct which they
are investigating and their concerns over my health. Unfortunately
the two are
partially linked. The following paragraph provides a brief summary of the
situation which I will expand later.
I suffer from Social Phobia. I feel insecure and
where the agenda is primarily social. By contrast when I am in role, working as
a school counselor, I feel useful and
secure and I have little anxiety. In
certain school based
contexts I am perceived as uncommunicative
and evasive eg. informal chat with teachers at morning recess time etc. –
the EPAC query of me as having Aspergers
. However, if and
when I attempt to use medication to manage this anxiety I quell my normal social
inhibitions as well as the target
anxiety and I end up transgressing appropriate
work boundaries...
...Around 1998/1999 I first started on Zoloft. It quelled my anxiety and
raised my mood immediately. From day one, 25 mg of Zoloft
heightened my
self-esteem, quashed the ability to access negative thoughts, and made me more
loquacious and extrovert. These positive
effects lasted about two weeks before
tolerance began to develop and the medication changed in its effect. It still
worked as a
de-sensitiser, quelled anxiety but it also began to numb pleasurable
experiences and the early euphoric component dissipated. I
tried short periods
off the medication and then returning to the original dose in an attempt to
obtain the initial positive effects
but without success....
Report from Diane Butler dated 18 August 2006
documents included a report written by Diane Butler, a District School
Counsellor. In her role as a Relieving District Guidance
Officer during 2005 she
had undertaken the formal supervision of the Respondent. The report states
(exhibit 1.44):
In my role as Relieving district Guidance Officer during 2005 I
was responsible for the supervision of Graham Holbrook in general
as well as in
regard to the specific monitoring arising from an EPAC request.
During this time issues addressed included communicating more effectively
and appropriately with both adults and students, (both verbally
and written)
professional boundaries, social awkwardness, listening skills, self protective
behaviours and appropriate professional
processes both personal and
environmental.
Over the 12 months whilst under the monitoring process his behaviours were
deemed satisfactory although my observations of Graham
Holbrook over time
indicate to me that in general he does have difficulties with communication and
social scenarios requiring ongoing
Report from Jane Anderson dated 19 September 2006
the conclusion to her report Ms Anderson, another District School Counsellor
Graham really likes his job, and yet despite some good skills,
he has a personal style that I believe will continue to give him difficulties
and work against him in his role as SC. When you get to know him he has some
endearing qualities and a nice sense of humour, and
I have found even his
stubbornness and inflexibility can be accommodated and embraced, because in part
they are consistent and predictable.
Setting aside the outcome of any matters
that might be under investigation, I think it would be unfair to leave Graham
for that matter) in a role that he is seen as unsuitable for and thus
leave him under the constant threat of complaint, dissatisfaction,
monitoring or
discipline action.
The HCCC Investigation
Letter dated 29 May 2007 from the Respondent
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 29 May 2007 (exhibit volume 2.2) in response to
its letter dated 21 May 2007 (exhibit 2.1) stating
that he had never been found
psychologically unfit to work as a psychologist. The Tribunal notes the
conclusion of the HealthQuest
report dated 11 December 2006 with respect to the
Respondent’s capacity to work as a school counsellor which states:
...unless he [the Respondent] achieves further progress in the
treatment and management of his anxiety condition, he will continue
risk of misusing his professional role in counselling situations for the
gratification of emotional and social needs.
Because of Mr Holbrook’s
anxiety condition he is not psychologically fit for the full requirements of his
substantive role.
Mr Holbrook’s condition is amenable to treatment and
he would do well to consult both a psychiatrist and a psychologist for
purpose. He may also benefit from a review of his plans to abstain from
psychotropic medication and for an assessment of the
potential role of such
medication in the future, given the adverse reactions he has reported. Mr
Holbrook’s own proposed strategies
to manage his condition, consisting of
socially oriented personal development courses are sound and may warrant support
Department.
(Emphasis added by Tribunal)
letter from the Respondent dated 29 May 2007 then continued as follows:
I used to be employed by the NSW Department of Education as a
School Counsellor. School Counsellors with the NSW Dept. of Ed. are
employed as
"teachers", and although they have postgraduate qualifications in psychology
they are not obliged to be Registered Psychologists.
The process that I was put
through at HealthQuest at the instigation of the Employment Performance and
Conduct Unit (EPAC), of the
NSW Dept. of Education was to evaluate my fitness
for my role as a School Counsellor and "teacher" not as a psychologist. No one
at HealthQuest or EPAC was aware that I was a Registered Psychologist when the
medical retirement determination was made.
I reiterate, my medical retirement is specific to my teacher/school
counselor role at the NSW Dept. of Ed. and the NSW Dept. of Ed.
has no authority
to use this as grounds to make inferences upon my status as a Registered
Psychologist or indeed about my status
to work as a "teacher" with an
alternative employer.
I do accept that my service delivery as a School Counsellor with the NSW
Dept. of Education was adversely effected by my medical history.
temperament an introvert and susceptible to anxiety in certain social contexts
(see enclosed Health Care report). My attempts
in the past to manage this
anxiety with the prescription anxiolytic medications, Zoloft and later Diazepam,
caused complications
to my service delivery.
These medications are relatively blunt instruments for managing anxiety,
and prolonged use at modest to high doses had an all or nothing
effect causing
me impairments in social judgement and behavioural disinhibition. It was whilst
under the influence of a 10 mg dose
of Diazepam that I contravened the Teacher
Code of Conduct, which prohibits personal relationships between teachers and
I asked a student out. She sensibly declined my invitation. Please
note that there was no school counselor/client relationship,
between this
student and myself. Parallels with the prohibition on relationships between a
psychologist and their client therefore
do not apply.
For EPAC to classify this incident as "sexual" misconduct, as they did,
seems to me to be stretching what actually occurred. It would
be analogous to
me asking you out, you declining, and me subsequently claiming that what we had
constituted a sexual relationship.
It is absurd.
I do not agree with the decisions to medically retire me, that I am unfit
to be a school counsellor, or that I am a risk to the public.
In my opinion,
these determinations occurred because of a bias in EPAC's processes that
accentuate and perpetuate the negative appraisal
of employees. If the Health
Care Complaints Commission believes that the shortcomings of EPAC's modus
operandi is pertinent to this
current inquiry I will happily elaborate and
provide specific examples in future correspondence.
I am a registered Medicare Allied Health professional but due to EPAC's
influence I have received no referrals from local GP's. I
have applied to
various agencies where my skills and experience as a qualified teacher and
psychologist would make me a viable employee,
but I have had no success with any
of these positions to date. I have tried advertising privately my services as a
Psychologist
but again have had no referrals. Consequently I have not had any
clients for psychological services in 2007.
Although I am no longer employed by the NSW Dept. of Education I am
disheartened that EPAC continues to have a negative influence
on my ability to
work as a teacher and psychologist.
I no longer use anxiolytic medication and have not used any for over six
months. I now effectively manage anxiety with a combination
of CBT and EMDR
I still see Dr. Masih every few months for monitoring. My next
appointment is on the 14 June 2007. After this appointment I am sure
will be happy to provide a disinterested health update.
I look forward to further correspondence if the Health Care Complaints
Commission complaint proceeds.
Respondent’s letter dated 15 August 2007
HCCC provided further details to the Respondent with respect to the nature of
the allegation by way of a letter dated 6 August
2007 (exhibit 2.3). The
Respondent addressed the allegations raised by the HCCC in his letter dated 15
August 2007 (exhibit 2.4).
letter from the HCCC seeks comments from the Respondent with respect to the
substance of Particulars 1, 2, 4 and 5 – 9.
The Respondent provided
various responses to these Particulars which are set out in the relevant
sections dealing with the Particulars
Section 40 Response (re conduct)
HCCC wrote a ‘section 40’ letter to the Respondent on 17 April 2008
(exhibit 2.6). The Respondent replied on 22 April
2008 (exhibit 2.7) as follows:
Thank you for the copy of the peer review that concerns my HCCC
case and the invitation to respond.
Let me first address the big picture. My complaint of systemic bias in
the existing DET/EPAC management set up leading to the
“construction”
of deviant employees, voiced both at an internal
level whilst I was still at DET, and subsequently with the Office of the NSW
has fallen on deaf ears. The Office of the NSW Ombudsman, who has
responsibility for auditing such NSW approved risk assessment
agencies, has
declined to investigate my concern even though I have tabled a specific
complaint. Consequently both the HealthQuest
and now the HCCC inquiries are to
my mind flawed. The computer analogy “garbage in – garbage
out”, springs to
mind. Attempts at impartial and objective evaluation are
difficult when there is a surfeit of negative opinion and innuendo presented
evidence. There have been numerous ambiguous scenarios spun into examples of
misconduct which has allowed EPAC to get away with
murder – i.e. the
assignation of my character.
Consequently I do not anticipate any joy in documenting my concerns;
however the following are some of my specific queries.
Kieran Pehm refers to the peer reviewer as an “expert”
reviewer. I can accept that the enclosed report is written by
a peer reviewer
but to claim that they are an “expert reviewer” is questionable.
For example the peer reviewer acknowledges
that they have no knowledge of the
HEADSS protocol, and to claim that they are an expert psychologist in working
with children and
adolescents without being familiar with this contemporary
protocol for this population is strange.
To elaborate with this incident 1; the peer reviewer states that the
mother initiated the referral because “she was worried
that Child A may be
depressed and suicidal after a recent assault by a group of boys”. The
mother declined to provide
referral information to myself about the
context of the suicide risk assessment or the nature of the family’s
referral to the
Child & Family Team for services.
The suicide risk assessment referral came to me, from the Child &
Family worker, and subsequently confirmed by me with the mother,
contextual information available to me was from that on the
student’s School Counsellor/Guidance File. Hence my utilisation
HEADSS assessment protocol to provide a context to the standard suicide risk
assessment inquiries around ideation, plans,
previous attempts, familiarity with
others who have taken their own life etc.
I find it unprofessional of the peer reviewer to offer their inadequately
informed opinion of the validity of the question about masturbation
acknowledge that they are not familiar with the HEADSS protocol. Contrary to
the peer reviewer’s belief that a direct
question about masturbation is
unlikely to be relevant in assessing suicide risk with a child or adolescent I
beg to differ. It
was a lead in question to the area of sexuality (aimed at a
child too young to legally be having intercourse) to be supported with
inquiries to explore the student’s sexual orientation and the emotional
legacy of the sexual assault. Both these
factors would have impact as a suicide
risk factors and require inquiry if my suicide risks assessment was not to be
superficial
and possibly negligent.
I believe it was a neutral, factual, question. It was a
“boo-hoo” to the extent that it precipitated an unanticipated
emotional arousal in the student. I believe I correctly managed this arousal in
the situation as Child A was fine at the end
of the interview. Child A’s
strong emotional reaction to this question was the only evidence in the whole
interview to suggest
any suicide risk at all for the student and elevated the
final risk rating from Nil to Low. In other words this question indicated
the effects of the sexual assault were still latent. Sometimes you have to
inquire into sensitive areas. I do not believe that
I should be maligned for
fulfilling my brief of an accurate suicide risk assessment. The fact that my
actions in this incident invite
the strong criticism of the peer reviewer is a
reflection of the shortcomings of this HCCC review process and third party
evaluations
where inadequate information is available to reviewers, and a
reflection on how willing the peer reviewer is to align their opinions
pervading negative tone of the complainant’s (EPAC) perspective and the
opinions of previous “expert assessors”
i.e. (HealthQuest) who have
also been biased by prior EPAC submissions.
The HCCC peer reviewer goes on to state at different points in their
report that it was the
not the father who committed suicide. This
indicates one
confused peer reviewer
. It was the father who had
committed suicide but Child A was not aware that his father had ended his own
life. As you may have
previously intimated I find the peer reviewer’s
“expert” remarks about this particular incident to be both
and ill-judged.
A related anomaly I noticed is that that the peer reviewer was provided
with a copy of the letter from the mother of Child A to DET
dated the 25/07/02.
Presumably this was the mother’s letter of complaint. This material I
have never been allowed to see.
At the time of the incident I was debriefed by
my two immediate line supervisors and cleared of any significant wrong doing by
two Registered Psychologists. The fact that EPAC choose to later recycle
this “Child A” incident despite my being cleared
of significant
wrongdoing by the line managers illustrates the way in which EPAC operates in
“constructing” negative
evaluations of employees. Any information
that may be interpreted in a bad light may be used to construct an overwhelming
to a third party, of “inappropriate behavior” against an
employee deemed by the EPC to be a risk to the corporate goals
of the Department
of Education.
There is also other information that I take issue with. There is
“evidentiary material” provided to the peer reviewer
that I was not
previously presented with, and able to respond to, prior to the peer reviewer
drawing their conclusions. For example
there is a letter from Dave Harvey,
Education Officer, dated 07/03/08. I have had no opportunity to know its
content or even comment
on it. I have had previous contact with Mr. Harvey in
his capacity as a former school Principal who wrote a letter attributing all
ills of his school upon myself – a visiting school counselor who visited
his school for a maximum of one day a week. Such
actions I am afraid are quite
typical of ambitious DET managerial staff concerned to remain
“Teflon” with the department
and to attribute dissatisfied customers
to the shortcomings of more junior employees.
Other evidentiary material raises a concern for its veracity. On the
final page of the report under the heading of
“Conclusions”
the peer reviewer talks about an incident when I allegedly bit the buttocks of a
female staff member, and another when I visited
the local hairdresser. Neither
of these incidents is accurate as reported by the reviewer, but appears to be
have been specifically
worded/slanted by EPAC sources to create the impression
that I am a sexual deviant and as the peer reviewer opines “suggest
Mr Holbrook may be an impaired practitioner”. I find it procedurally
unfair that this material has been presented to
the peer reviewer without prior
opportunity for me to comment. The fact that it has been interpreted as valid
by the peer reviewer
is a further example of the bias that is inherent in the
EPAC investigatory process and the follow up complaint/assessment procedures
through HealthQuest and the HCCC, which allows EPAC to submit innuendo and
assertion as evidence and to overwhelm third party reviewers
with the sheer bulk
of their submission.
It was inaccurate and prejudicial information, not dissimilar to this
material, that EPAC first submitted to HealthQuest to prompt
them to draw their
medical and psychological conclusions. Conclusions that I find your HCCC peer
reviewer echoing without having
even met me. It was for this very reason I
declined to give permission for sharing my HealthQuest information with the HCCC
did not want the HCC process merely to rubber stamp the HealthQuest
conclusions. Yet I find that the peer reviewer still attributes
credence to the HealthQuest information than they do to my evidence and the
opinion of my treating Clinical Psychologist.
A Clinical Psychologist who saw
me over the course of a whole year as opposed to the one off, hour and a half
assessment of HealthQuest,
preceded by all the prejudicial information received
from EPAC. I know which assessment I regard as more reliable and suggest that
disinterested member of the public would similarly find the ongoing contact as a
more convincing source of accurate appraisal information.
There seems to be a
tendency in the HCCC peer review to attribute greater credence to government
bodies / representatives at the
expense of an individual’s and an
independent psychologist’s account as though the government agencies are
somehow disinterested
or neutral. Perhaps it is simply deference to
“government authority”.
I’d like to address the 1.3 incident that the peer reviewer
evaluates. I did not specifically encourage the girls to
sexual activities but they became boisterous in the way that adolescent girls do
when they are disputing with each other.
The shortcomings of the soundproofing
of the School Counsellor Interview room was a Department of Education plant
failing, nothing
to do with the Counsellor as normal speaking conversations in
resonant voices could be heard in the neighbouring rooms. The girls’
vulnerability was not being exploited. Like I’ve said before the peer
reviewer wasn’t there and because the complaint
is worded negatively from
EPAC they assume that this description is accurate. EPAC specifically solicits
negative reviews from colleagues
and supervisors; and as their overarching line
manager has little difficulty eliciting such sentiments.
Furthermore I suggest that for the peer reviewer to infer that this
incident indicates some “psychological disturbance on the
part of Mr.
Holbrook” is an inappropriate comment for any responsible psychologists to
make based on this scenario, and indicates
that the peer reviewer is unduly
influenced by the HealthQuest information. I also have a problem with the HCCC
3 page summary letter
in reference to this incident, in which it alleges I
allowed students to talk about sexual activities, drinking and drug taking
. This is simply not accurate; counseling conversations on these
topics would take place in the School Counsellor Interview room,
classroom routinely accessible to other eavesdropping students.
I find it hypocritical in that, on the one hand, I am criticised for not
being sensitive to the vulnerabilities of my client group
of children and
adolescents by protecting the privacy and confidentiality of their counselling
conversations and the next minute
I am accused of ignoring a Dept of Education
directive which stated that I should see clients with the door wide open and
in plain view. A directive insensitive to the client group
vulnerabilities and likely to violate the students’ privacy and
confidentiality needs. I did not ignore the Dept of Education directive but in
consultation with my District Guidance Officer/Supervisor
came to the working
arrangement of routinely leaving the counselling room door ajar, so that it was
not closed but afforded some
occasions when client vulnerabilities (great distress) or rapport needs dictated
operate with a closed door. This is yet another example of EPAC
soliciting ambiguous breaches of protocol from colleagues and supervisors
out their complaint of misconduct.
I’d like to address 1.4 Incident 5. As I have previously indicated
Child B presented as being socially isolated from her peers.
She did not stay
long enough with me to raise concerns for her mother. She stated that her peer
group frequently indulged in drinking.
She expressed a desire to inculcate
herself with this peer group. One floated option that we explored would be to
join them in
this activity in a context that Child B felt as comfortable with as
possible, i.e. at an adult supervised birthday party for example.
Child B was
of an age where she was legally old enough to drink and I was not trying to
encourage her use of alcohol as I made it
clear that I commended her on her
distaste for the activity. Child B evaluated this option and dismissed it. She
elected, as she
was perfectly free to do, to receive further counselling from
the other school counselor available in the school. I believe that
she accessed
a friendship / peer group through that counsellor’s daughter who was a
similar age to Child B and also attended
the school. This was an asset I did
not have to offer to Child B in addressing the peer issue. I can see that I may
have left myself
vulnerable to being accused of condoning drinking in school
students in this situation but I hope that it is apparent that alcohol
the main issue or my focus but successful peer integration for Child B. Again,
this incident, is one of those grey areas
beloved of EPAC for maligning their
“black listed” employees.
In 1.5 Incident 6 the peer reviewer addresses my behavior without
factoring in the medication. Clearly if you simply dismiss the
medication in this scenario my behavior would be grossly inappropriate and
culpable. The peer reviewer acknowledges some
examples of sexual disinhibition
with the use of Zoloft by geriatric patients but I confess I do not consider
myself to be that old.
However, I am aware of a massive group settlement in the
USA by this drug’s manufacturer to patients and their families in
where patients have self harmed / suicided whilst receiving the medication for
the treatment of depression. The HCCC peer
reviewer also cites examples of
disinhibition of aggressive and violent impulse linked to the use of Zoloft.
From these examples
and my own experience from the use of Zoloft for dysthymia
and social anxiety I hypothesise that the mechanism of action is similar
cases. Zoloft raises mood but it also insulates the individual from negative
and critical thinking and distorts the ability
to accurately evaluate
one’s own behavior, and impedes the ability to empathise with others. In
individuals pre-disposed to
depression you may well precipitate self-harming, in
individuals with anger and aggression issues you may well precipitate violence,
with an individual such as myself who actually likes and enjoys working with my
client cohort it definitely did precipitate inappropriate
cognitions and
boundary transgression. Unmedicated I am quite capable of exercising normal
self control in both professional and
social contexts and HealthQuest’s
suggestion of individual deviant pathology is insulting and abusive.
The whole structure of EPAC, HealthQuest and the HCCC appears to reflect a
system premised on attributing behavior to internal pathology
traditional “medical model” rather than a recognition of the greater
impact of contextual factors on behavior
than personality factors to allow
issues of misconduct to be reduced to the simplistic concept of “impaired
practitioners”
who can simply be deleted from the system. Problem solved.
A simple quick fix for public relations purposes and which has limited
psychological validity given it’s (sic) reluctance to consider medication
issues on behavior and systemic issues in systemic
bias in information
collection by complaining agencies.
Related to my dissatisfaction with the zero credence given to the effects
of medication on my misconduct the peer reviewer also states
that my use of
Zoloft involved the “
of prescription medication for
depression.” I did not abuse any medication. I obtained a prescription
for Zoloft for the
treatment of dysthymia – there is a great overlap
between many of the symptoms of social anxiety and low level depression eg.
avoidance of social situations etc. At no times did I exceed the prescribed
dosage. I did vary the dosage and frequency to
obtain the best symptom relief
with minimal side effects. However I had settled on a stable dose for an
extended period before the
incident of misconduct and it stopped using the
medication immediately after the Child C incident, when it had clearly
compromised
my service delivery.
At the time I assumed the problem was specific to Zoloft, and was simply
solved by abstaining from the use of sertaline. Consequently
I went unmedicated
for a period of approximately 18 months which coincided with a year long period
of extra supervision arranged
by EPAC when there were no examples of misconduct.
I simultaneously successfully accessed an Employee Assistance Program
Psychologist
to acquire non-pharmalogical strategies for managing anxiety,
notably EMDR. However, I also obtained a prescription for Diazepam
as a back up
in case I felt under severe stress. As previously mentioned I did not seek
recourse to this prescription until 18 months
later when I tried out the
effectiveness of the Diazepam for managing anxiety. It was effective but had
its own complications –
it is addictive and I was quickly getting to using
two tablets a day (10mg) in the week ending with the incident with the work
student “Child F”. When I obtained her phone number, at
the beginning of that week, I was aware that I had a similar
disinhibition /
impaired social judgement problem with the Diazepam to the Zoloft and contacted
the EAP psychologist for an appointment
to detox off the Diazepam.
Unfortunately the EAP provider was only able to offer me an appointment 2 weeks
later and by the end
of that week the incident of misconduct with
“Child F” had occurred.
In hindsight, it is easy to recognise that I should have taken time off
work as unfit for duty but these medications, by inhibiting
anxiety, negative
and critical thoughts distort one’s social reasoning and ability to make
sound judgements. I am genuinely
sorry for the distress, shock and indignation
that my behaviour caused both Child C and Child F, but I believe that they
effectively
disarmed my inappropriate conduct and will not be adversely affected
in the long term by the incidents.
The other incident where I do feel remorse about is 1.8 Incident 9 where I
referred to Child D’s mother as a “nutter”.
I have previously
submitted my explanation about my frustration in dealings with this family.
This family being out of zone (i.e.
not in the standard enrolment catchment,
there (sic) submission to my other school the previous year and their decision
not to take
up this place etc) The other mitigating factor that I can articulate
is that I was under incredible stress at this time as EPAC had
initiated its
strategy to Medically Retire me and to “construct” me as a deviant
employee which also compromised my normal
supervision channels. This led to a
letter of complaint of bullying from me against my base school Principal as well
as a request
or an alternative District Guidance Officer supervisor which was
declined by the line managers after consultation with EPAC. My
Registered Psychologist, DGO, apparently was happy to prejudge my misconduct
culpability based merely on the number of complaints
that had been received. I
have always believed that complaints need to be found to have substance before
they are held against colleagues.
Consequently at this time I was stressed and
intolerant of individual difference and dumped on a vulnerable client in a
way that I felt put upon. I am ashamed of my comment. I have a family
member with multiple disabilities and have worked for most
of my professional
life with such clients and it was a lapse into stigmatising vocabulary.
I am currently medication free and have provisionally been offered
(subject to appropriate referees) psychological positions ranging
Mental Health to the Acute Care Team. Previous lapses in service delivery are
Respondent’s letter dated 11 December 2008 to HCCC re Dr
Diamond’s report
HCCC wrote to the Respondent on 28 November 2008 referring to the report of Dr
Michael Diamond dated 25 August 2008, noting that
the Respondent had been
provided with a copy of same. The HCCC letter indicated that a complaint of
impairment had been referred
by the Board and advised that the HCCC was
investigating this complaint. The HCCC sought information and documentation from
the Respondent
regarding matters such as the names and contact details of his
treating medical practitioners, psychologists and psychologists. The
replied on 11 December 2008 (exhibit 2.9) as follows:
In response to your recent letter dated 18/11/08 but which
arrived some week or two later I enclose my response at the present
I do not agree with Dr Diamond’s opinions or diagnosis. I believe
Dr Diamond underestimates my degree of self awareness and
the effects of
psychoactive mediations and overstates my personal pathology. I have no global
antagonism to authority but have some
specific legitimate differences of
opinion. I will expand my concerns with this report in addressing whether I am
an impaired practitioner
in sections 3 and 5 combined below. Please read the
material below in conjunction with the previously submitted material.
In specific response to your requests:
I enclose my list of treating Doctors, Psychiatrists and Psychologists since
have initiated treatment via a Psychatrist; not because I believe that I have a
Personality Disorder (Not Otherwise Specified),
but because your letter implies
that I am expected to comply with the report’s recommendations by the
HCCC. I am scheduled
to see Dr. Steven Huntsman of
[address and telephone
number omitted]
, starting on the 24/12/08.
I am currently not seeing any clients for psychological services. I have
applied for many jobs for which my background as a teacher
and psychologists
(sic) would provide the requisite experience and qualifications but without
success. I am not making any requests
for client referrals until my
creditability is re-validated by the HCCC amongst other supervisory
organisations.
3.&5.) I have previously indicated that EPAC, has as its
priority child protection matters and the reputation of the NSW Department
Education. Consequently EPAC has little interest in mitigating or precipitating
factors for employees but only observable and
reported conduct. Fair enough for
EPAC’s brief but I also contend that this focus together with the
EPAC’s overarching
supervisory role in the NSW Department of
Education’s management structure prejudices sources i.e. Principals,
supervisors,
teachers etc. and the collation of evidence in child protection
cases. This undermines the ability to come to “reasonable”
decisions as required in employment proceedings. EPAC is only interested in
soliciting and collating negative information. They
certainly took no interest
in my medication. Hence I am unhappy that what I believe to be biased and
prejudicial information, collated
by the complaining agency EPAC, has been
perpetuated through the system from HealthQuest, to the NSW Psychologists
Registration Board
and the Health Care Complaints Commission and ultimately to
Dr Diamond as he consulted / conferred in writing his recent report.
Ombudsman declined to investigate the systemic bias in EPAC’s processes so
this information continues to go unchallenged.
(see the communication to the Hon
Julia Gillard MP and response letter enclosed)
Due to the inevitable process of selective editing in any report I wish to
correct some anomalies and inaccuracies in Dr Diamond’s
report. On page 4
he states that I was incompatible with my Masters course due to a lack of the
prerequisite social skills –
this is incorrect. It was only the failure
at an academic assignment that compromised my Masters qualification. Once in a
as an Educational Psychologist with Surrey Education Authority in the U.K I
did not find that I preferred the direct student contact
– assessment,
counselling etc. to the consultancy model of indirect service provision which is
the favoured template in the
U.K. However, the Organisational Psychology
training component of my Masters course is what has allowed me to be aware of
the systemic
biases in EPAC and the NSW Department of Education
What Dr Diamond refers to as someone who liked to do things his own way
merely reflects my preference for direct work, supporting
clients. I admit I do
try to negotiate to do those aspects of the role that I find most rewarding in
each system that I find myself
employed. Eventually at some point this tends to
precipitate some conflict if supervisors / stakeholders have different
expectations
but I do not seek to deliberately cause friction and am happy to
follow mandatory requirements. To claim repeated conflict with
figures is unspecific and misleading. Self-actualisation is a term coined to
describe a person who has found their niche
that is both intrinsically rewarding
to them as an individual and also beneficial to the community and society and I
have never attempted
to offer it as a rationalisation for obnoxious behaviour.
Many of the examples of less than immaculate professional behaviour, which
themselves do not constitute misconduct, cited against myself may relate to
lower levels of cognitive impairment precipitated
by the medication
Dr Diamond suggests that my practice has been suspect in a number of
cases. With the client feeling socially isolated, where the
circumspect use of alcohol was floated as an entrée to her peers, I was
modeling Structured Problem Solving, and
her decision to reject this option was
simply a valid part of this process. I was not advocating / pushing this
option. With the
client with the heightened emotional arousal to an interview
question from a recognised protocol, administered as part of a suicide
assessment, I ensured the client returned to normal levels of arousal and acted
ethically by not attempting to practice in areas
beyond my brief and expertise
as his sexual assault counselor. Dr Diamond criticises me for not following up
this client’s
reaction but at the subsequent interview with the mother she
made it clear that she wanted the area left alone and would not appreciate
further counselling involvement or input from myself with regard to her son. I
respected her rights as the parent and there
was no significant indication of
risk of self harm for her son.
Contrary to the overwhelming depiction of myself provided by EPAC and Dr
Diamond I am a competent counselling psychologist. I enjoy
direct service
counselling provision to children and young people, not for the opportunity that
it provides to exploit the vulnerabilities
of these clients but for the pleasure
of nurturing. If there is a vicarious reward that I derive from counselling it
is more a substitute
for the paternal role not sexual relationships.
As a teenager being shy and retiring was not an asset. My social life at
this age could have been better but to claim that overall
it was unsuccessful
creates the wrong impression. After all I had no significant school academic or
extra-curricular difficulties
and went on to higher education, a good job and
until recently a career. Dr Diamond puts the emphasis / punctuation in the
place. Where he reports in relation to attending parties, “Despite
being invited sometimes, he would not go.” More
accurately it should
read, “Despite being invited, sometimes he would not go.”
The difference may be subtle but Dr Diamond is trying to establish /
construct a personal pathology to undermine the creditability
of my claim that
Zoloft was the significant factor in my situation. He concedes that,
“Developmentally he identifies no overt
difficulties. There is no history
of abuse or violence.” Yet later he claims that, “He has deficient
personal and family
role modeling to draw on in relation to the ordinary
developmental issues of children and young people.” Far fetched to my
mind; does Dr Diamond think that I have lived in a vacuum for the last 40
He states, “He seeks emotional connection but is unable to tolerate
intimacy.” Not true, there are a great variety of
intimate relationships
that I have enjoyed from relatives, to neighbours, work colleagues to friends
– I merely recognise that
my introverted temperament is unsuited to
sustaining the intimate romantic relationship that women would like in a
boy-friend, husband,
partner and parent. I am happy with my own company and
being single, and whilst I am not as gregarious as others I can meet my social
needs through the myriad of relationships that exist, and I am not dependent on
the counsellor / client dynamic.
Dr Diamond claims that I lack insight, self reflection and self-awareness
and that the inappropriate behaviours in role as a counsellor
stem from a
Personality Disorder (Not Otherwise Specified) traceable to my “shyness in
childhood and inability to interact
with his adolescent peers thereafter”.
Yet as a 33 year old, mature adult male, I passed the health and character tests
migration to Australia from the U.K. where applicants can fail if
“they have a criminal background, there is a risk that they
engage in criminal conduct, - harass, molest, intimidate or stalk another
person, - endanger the community by involvement
in violent activities, and
something about their past or present general conduct should be taken into
account as reflecting on their
character.”
I submit that Dr Diamond is merely trying to find an alternative
explanation for a prescription drug induced problem. The “Not
Specified” label is just one indication of how weak and vague his
diagnosis is. In his defence he has probably not
seen a letter I obtained
through the Freedom of
Information Act
from the Principal of High School C to
the head of EPAC or CPID as it was then known, after a boundary transgression in
letter (15 September 2004) was written, not to support myself, but
to try to ensure child protection factors took priority.
Amongst her 12 points Ms Mayberry States “10.) On the Monday morning
of the week the allegation was made (Monday 21 February)
my two Deputies and I
discussed Graham Holbrook at our weekly planning meeting. I indicated I had
spoken to him about his dress
and his reaction. We discussed that in 2003, when
he came as a casual that he was
effective, efficient and highly
.” Obviously my Personality Disorder (NOS) hadn’t
kicked in yet? She goes on to say, “Ïn 2004, he had seemed
within himself and rarely spoke to other staff. We shared the view that there
was something not quite right...” This
competency to questionable performance reflects medication issue not an
ingrained personality flaw.
Social Psychology posits the fundamental attribution error – the
tendency for people to incorrectly over-emphasize dispositional
personality-based factors to explain behaviour observed in others and to
under-estimate situational explanations. We are all
biased in this aspect.
However, medical professionals have further reason to be reluctant to
countenance situational explanations.
Pharmacology is a billion dollar business. The medical profession is
dependent on the medications developed by the pharmaceutical
industry. Doctors
are rewarded for the number of patients that they treat, which is aided by a
rapid throughput, prescription medication
culture. Doctors, Psychiatrists (like
Dr Diamond), Clinical Psychologists, Psychiatric Nurses are all complicit in the
authorising the use of these medications by patients / consumers. It
is distressing (and potentially financially culpable) for these
prescribers to
acknowledge that they may have been advocating a medication that has
precipitated harm to a patient – it goes
against the fundamental ethic of
health professionals to do no harm. Hence there is a great cognitive dissonance
in accepting these
adverse drug reactions and the medical professionals,
retained by HealthQuest and the NSW Psychologists Registration Board, are so
loath to accept that Zoloft can cause adverse reactions and particularly in this
practitioner.
The information on the adverse reactions is out there but has not been
formally recognised and promoted in Australia.
The South Australian Acute Mental Health Risk Assessment Tool, “Risk
of self-harm to self or to others” acknowledges that
the evidence for risk
of harm to self and to others are virtually identical by combining these risk
factors into a one page assessment
tool. It is recognised that Zoloft, and
other SSRIs, can increase the risk of suicide in children and young people.
Pfizer, the
manufacturer of Zoloft does not recommend the use of this medication
in those patients under 24. Yet the Australian Therapeutic
Goods Administration
has been tardy in recognising this as GPs have been prescribing Zoloft to such
patients in Australia and only
recently has the TGA begun to review this
As Peter Breggin, in his paper
“Suicidality, violence and mania
caused by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): A review and
published in the International Journal of Risk & Safety
in Medicine 16 (2003/2004) 31-49 IOS Press, notes; “Adverse behavioural
effects tend to show up more frequently and severely in children, providing a
magnified view of the same or similar effects that
the drugs are causing on
adults.” Breggin states in his abstract, “These adverse drug
reactions include...a stimulant
profile that ranges from mild agitation to manic
psychoses...uncharacteristic of the individual...” He goes on,
reactions can worsen the individual’s mental condition and
can result in...violence and other extreme abnormal behaviour...in
children and
” “These findings also have forensic applications in
criminal, malpractice, and product liability cases.”
Later in the body of the paper Breggin states, “based on the
literature and my clinical experience, the syndrome of SSRI-induced...violence
includes...a relatively sudden onset and rapid escalation of the compulsive
aggression against self and/or others.” Breggin
goes on to examine the DSM
IV’s content on the matter and states the, “DSM IV makes multiple
references to the fact that
antidepressants can cause mania or manic-like
behaviour.” And “Aggression is specifically mentioned as a feature
manic behaviour.” And “Ethical concerns may be disregarded even
by those who are typically very conscientious.”
“The person may
become hostile and physically threatening to others” and “physically
assaultive.” In relation
to the malpractice, forensic, criminal arena
Breggin states that if, “an individual takes an antidepressant without
that it can cause mania, he or she may be exonerated from the
consequences of manic-like behaviour.”
This is the crux of the matter. No one is seriously disputing that I was
using Zoloft at the time of my boundary transgressions,
under review for
misconduct, and during the time of many other myriad less significant
complaints. The exact legal distribution
of responsibility between me and the
medication for the inappropriate behaviour may be immaterial – I contend
that it is inappropriate
for the supervisory authorities such as the HCCC to
find me culpable for misconduct when I was using a medication for which I was
unable to provide informed consent to treatment.
The Law Handbook
, Health Consumers’ Rights, Free and
informed consent, page 300 states: “To consent to something, a person has
to understand
what it is. People need to be aware of all the facts that might
influence their decision about whether to consent to a procedure
or not. This
means that they must be given as much information as possible about: possible
adverse effects or complications.”
No prescribing Doctor, and/or product
information from Pfizer accompanying the medication, or warning from the
Therapeutic Goods
Administration of Australia provided adequate notice that
Zoloft might precipitate adverse behaviour that would be of severity to
constitute misconduct or criminal matters.
In their discussions Healy, Herxheimer, Menkes make mention of a
particular case history of homicide/manslaughter in 1999 with a 74
year old NSW
man strangling his wife whilst under the influence of Zoloft. The judge in the
case in his summing up is quoted as
saying, “I am satisfied that but for
the Zoloft he had taken he would not have strangled his wife.” However,
the defence
in this case were arguing involuntary intoxication or non-insane
automatism, which led to a negotiated guilty verdict and the medication
considered only as a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Such legal cases, to me are folly, as they perpetuate the concept of the
impaired individual and let the suspect medication disappear
into the background
so that Doctors, Pfizer, and the TGA may defer implementing adequate controls
and warnings at the point of sale
/ prescription.
Healy, Herxheimer, Menkes’ paper
“Antidepressants and
Violence: Problems at the Interface of Medicine and Law”
Medicine, September 2006, Volume3, Issue 9, e372 states, “The regulator of
medications in Canada specify that SSRIs increase
risk of violence in addition
to suicide, and “treatment-induced activation leading to both self-harm
and harm to others.”
No such explicit warning apparently appears in
When I first started on Zoloft it came with a product information leaflet
in the packet. However, this did not list possible misconduct
and criminal
matters as possible adverse effects. This information leaflet even disappeared
from later packets of the product.
I obtained the latest MIMS, April 2008,
Consumer Medicine Information for sertraline hydrochloride from my local
pharmacist. It
mentions “thoughts of harming yourself or others’
and increase in aggressive behaviour” but does not allude to
constituting possible culpable misconduct or criminal behaviour for the
If, the Zoloft I was prescribed had come with a suitable warning such as
“this medication may impair mental judgement –
you will be culpable
for any misconduct or criminal behaviour that occurs.” I would have been
able to make an informed decision
and to provide informed consent to treatment.
Not so hard and the only people who could really find fault with such a warning
be the pharmaceutical companies worried by a possible drop in
I believe a finding from the HCCC that I am not an impaired practitioner
for the reasons given above would oblige the regulatory authorities
up controls on prescribing medications with adequate informed consent
information. Such an outcome would benefit not
just myself but would help
protect further clients from future practitioners who may be compromised by
medications taken without
adequate informed consent.
A finding of impairment against me on the other hand, however convenient
and attractive it may be to the supervisory authorities for
public relations
purposes, does little to protect future clients of counselling services and the
ongoing consumers of prescription
medications through the health
I await your findings.
letter (re impairment)
HCCC wrote a
letter with respect to impairment on 11 May 2009
(exhibit 2.10). The Respondent replied by way of a letter dated 3 June 2009
2.11). This letter stated:
In response to your recent letter dated 11/05/09 concerning my
case before the HCCC I enclose my response below.
I have previously sent in some of my concerns in my letter of the 11/12/08
to Julie Smith so I will not repeat those here. Instead
I’ll bring you up
to date with developments.
At the end of 2008, I approached my local Psychiatrist, Dr. Steven
Huntsman, for treatment as it was implied that I should comply
conclusions of Dr Diamond’s report. However, due to the legal proceedings
paralleling at the HCCC inquiry Dr. Huntsman
was reluctant to become involved
and declined to provide patient services. Therefore, I am maintaining my NSW
Psychologists Board
Registration without practicing as a Psychologist, whilst
the relevant authorities each work through their determinations. I am
undertaking continuing professional development and have not been hampered by
social anxiety issues, and neither have there been
any child protection
concerns. The only medication I take is a daily 2 mg dose of a generic brand of
Perinropril for hypertension,
- without complication.
In my 20 year career as a Teacher and Psychologist there have been no
professional boundary transgressions / child protection concerns,
either prior
to taking, or after ceasing to take psychoactive prescription medications. The
transgressions you allude to all occurred
whilst involuntary intoxicated. In
the current health care environment, with the growing acknowledgement of the
undue influence
of the major pharmaceutical companies upon the remuneration,
opinions and prescribing habits of health professionals the impartiality
therefore the validity of Dr Diamond’s report is compromised.
What am I referring to?
A recent broadcast on SBS’s, “Insight”; (Tuesday the
26/05/09), exploring the Relationship between Doctors and the
Drug Companies
encapsulated many of the health professional and consumer concerns about the
undue influence of the pharmaceutical
In this broadcast, Pfizer Australia admitted that, in 2008, that they were
fined the maximum permissible sanction ($200 thousand dollars)
by Medicines
Australia as a result of Pfizer’s drug representatives misleading doctors
claimed that this showed that the industry
regulatory body (Medicines Australia) had teeth and could effectively address
However, in the same breath Pfizer Australia acknowledged that in 2008
they spent $6 million dollars on “educational”
events for doctors in
Australia. Clearly, $200 thousand dollars is chicken feed to Pfizer and the
fine merely an occupational hazard
in “marketing” their
Simultaneously, the chair of Medicines Australian, Will Delaat, was busy
defending the ethics of Merck for whom he used to work; whilst
currently in court over the Vioxx case for allegedly utilising marketing
practices which included neutralising or discrediting
doctors who didn’t
support their products. For the chair of Medicines Australia’s
credentials to lack disinterest, is
a discouraging sign for the neutrality of
Medicines Australia as the supposed industry watchdog.
Professor, Paul Komesaroff, (responsible for the ethical guidelines of the
Royal Australian College of Physicians), was unequivocal
evidence indicates that the advertising and marketing by the pharmaceutical
companies sells drugs, influences the
prescribing habits of clinicians and
contaminates the relationship between doctors and their patients. He went on to
say, that he
agreed with the UK recommendations to wean doctors off all
education, payments and financial support from pharmaceutical companies
the next 5 years.
Sadly Pfizer Australia was luke warm in its enthusiasm to follow the
proposal by its US counterpart to disclose all payments to doctors
starting in
Consequently, in Australia, neither I, nor the HCCC, are in a position to
know the possible financial payments that Dr Diamond may,
or may not, receive
from Pfizer or other drug companies. Yet, as a member of the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
(RANZP) Dr Diamond’s report is
already tainted by the decision of RANZP’s members in 2008 to reject a
resolution to cease
drug company sponsorship of this professional organisation.
I respect the intentions of the HCCC to safe guard and improve the health
outcomes of consumers; by ensuring the appropriate ethical
and practice
standards of registered health professionals. However, the HCCC’s
determinations carry reduced authority when
what is cited as evidence is
questionable “expert opinion”.
Conversely, in the US evidence indicating the adverse drug reactions
associated with SSRI’s has passed 7 Daubert hearings in
the US courts as
well as commanding support expert opinion, e.g. Dr. Peter Breggin.
Psychiatric Assessment – Dr Michael Diamond
Respondent was requested to undertake a psychiatric assessment by Dr Diamond. Dr
Diamond provided a report dated 18 August 2008
(exhibit 2.17) which was provided
to the Respondent by letter dated 28 November 2008.
Diamond recorded the history he took from the Respondent during the 2 hour 15
minute consultation. Much of this history is detailed
Diamond recorded that the Respondent stated during the consultation that he felt
persecuted and described himself as a ‘
’ (page 9).
Dr Diamond further recorded that the Respondent expressed and acknowledged his
contrary and wilful demeanor about
his own views, and maintained an
anti-authoritarian stance throughout the consultation with a reluctance to
acknowledge any of the
criticism made of him.
out in the evidence with respect to each of the Particulars and with respect to
the Complaint of impairment (see below) are further
comments made by Dr Diamond
in this report.
Tribunal has given close regard to Dr Diamond’s report and accepts the
observations and comments made therein, noting that
they are consistent with the
other independent evidence before the Tribunal (i.e. evidence other than the
self-reports made by the
Respondent or based on the self-reports of the
Respondent.)
Diamond found that the Respondent was impaired in accordance with the Act, on
the basis that he had a personality disorder with
some features of an anxiety
disorder. He expressed the view that the Respondent had over emphasized the
blunting effect of Zoloft.
Dr Diamond stated:
To put it simply, it is not the medication that has caused the
problems but the personality of the individual that may have been,
to some mild
degree, affected by the medication, in my view.
Diamond stated that he was of the view that the Respondent had very limited
insight and understanding of how his underlying personality
and propensity for
anxiety had impacted upon his behaviour over such a long period of time. The
Tribunal also notes that Dr Diamond
was of the view that the Respondent
continues to pose a risk to children and young people substantially due to
‘his present level of insight and understanding into his personality
and its vulnerabilities’
Diamond lists the documents (at page 2 of his report) that he was provided prior
to writing his report. The Tribunal had had regard
to the additional documents
in the evidence before the Tribunal when considering the views expressed by Dr
Peer Review Reports
Dr Timothy Keogh
Keogh provided a report dated 8 April 2008 (exhibit 2.13).
Tribunal has taken care with the opinions expressed in this report as Dr Keogh
has not always referred to the Code that was in
force at the relevant time. This
does not totally undermine the opinions he has expressed as the Code is based on
what has been generally
accepted in the profession since its inception. Further,
all of the standards set out in the 1997 Code are repeated in the 2004 Code
refinement.
Keogh commented, as requested, on nine incidents involving the Respondent. He
concluded that when taken together they demonstrate
the Respondent’s
consistent incapacity to conduct himself in accordance with ‘DET’
(Department of Education and
Training) policies and relevant professional
Keogh expressed the view that he considered there was a risk that the Respondent
would conduct himself in a similar manner in the
future if working with a
similar population.
Professor David Bennett AO
Bennett was asked by the HCCC to provide a report with respect to Particular 1.
Prof. Bennett was asked to particularly
comment upon the Respondent’s
claim with respect to the HEADSS protocol.
evidence of Prof. Bennett is substantially set out under the headings of
‘Tribunals findings regarding Particular 1’.
Bennett opines that the conduct of the Respondent (i.e. asking the question
‘Do you masturbate?
’ of Child A) fell significantly below the
standard expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training and
and attracted his strong criticism.
Evidence – the Respondent
noted above, the Respondent chose not to attend before the Tribunal in person
and made a breif ‘appearance’ by telephone.
He did however provide
detailed responses to both the Department of Education and the HCCC in addition
to the detailed written submission
received into evidence as exhibit R1. The
substantial parts of the Respondent’s responses to the Department and the
been set out or detailed above. Further parts of these documents as
well as the written submission document are included below under
the relevant
Particular.
submission made by the Respondent specified for the Tribunal Inquiry is annexed
hereto and marked with the letter D.
Report of Dr Yolande Lucire
Yolande Lucire, psychiatrist, was consulted by the Respondent. The Respondent
had found Dr Lucire via her website.
Respondent consulted Dr Lucire on 20 April 2009 and a report was written on 24
April 2009 and provided to the Respondent’s
legal adviser in the Local
Court, Mr Cameron Bell. The report was written for the purpose of tendering to
the Local Court when the
Respondent faced charges of aggravated sexual assault
(essentially relating to the incident with Child C set out in Particular 3).
consultation between Dr Lucire and the Respondent lasted about two hours.
second report was provided to Mr Bell on 10 December 2009. Both reports were
carefully considered by the Tribunal. The reports enclosed
other documents
including an article from the International Journal of Risk and Safety in
Medicine 2003-4 titled ‘
Suicidality, violence and mania caused by
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): A review and analysis’
by Peter R Breggin, another article by Peter R Breggin titled
‘Intoxication and Anosognosia: The Spellbinding Effect of Psychiatric
published in the Fall 2006 edition of Ethical Human Psychology
and Psychiatry, ‘Mayo Reference Services Publication’ including
article titled
‘Cytochrome P450 enzyme Genotyping: Optimizing Patient
Care through Pharmacogenetics’
, an article from the 2007 edition of
the Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology titled
‘The Crucial Role of
the Therapeutic Window in Understanding the Clinical Relevance of the Poor
Versus the Ultrarapid Metabolizer
Phenotypes in Subjects Taking Drugs
Metabolized by CYP2D6 or CYP2C19’
. The Bundle also includes a copy of
the decision of the United States Supreme Court in the matter of
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc
[1993] USSC 99
(1993) 509 US 579.
The Tribunal notes at
this point that this case comments upon the US Rule 702 – the General
Acceptance Test, regarding expert
evidence. The product information published by
the manufacturer of Zoloft and copy of the New York Review of Books regarding
‘Talking Back to Prozac’
, and a copy of
[2001] NSWSC 420
are also included in the bundle.
Lucire expressed the opinion that the Respondent was afflicted with a genetic
variation which predisposed him to increased sensitivity
to certain medications.
Therefore, while under the influence of Zoloft the Respondent became
‘insensitive, sexually disturbed and behaviorally
dyscontrolled’
. Dr Lucire reports that as the Respondent had ceased
taking this medication his condition no longer exists and his prognosis was
good. Dr Lucire expressed the view that this altered state that the Respondent
found himself in while taking Zoloft was
the period of time between the two reports written by Dr Lucire, she ordered
blood testing for the Respondent. Dr Lucire reported
that the results of the
test indicate that the Respondent was a
‘poor metabolizer’
based on his particular genotype/phenotype with respect to alleles responsible
for certain enzymes.
Lucire opines that the Respondent’s reaction to Zoloft was
documented’
. The report continues:
He appears to have had a paradoxically reaction to Valium
(diazepam) as well, later.
Lucire concluded that the Respondent concluded that the Respondent had been
suffering from a mental condition,
‘being a toxic brain state with
mental manifestations’
the report uses terms such as
‘psychic numbing’
‘manic shifts’
‘intoxication anosognosia
(medication spellbinding)’
which are not in common usage within the
professions of psychology or psychiatry, the Tribunal is confident that the
opinions expressed
by Dr Lucire were generally understood by the Tribunal. In
one of the articles provided by Dr Lucire anosognosia is defined as the
‘capacity of brain damage to cause denial of lost function’
Other evidence of the Respondent
Tribunal notes at this point that a number of articles of a scientific nature
were provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent.
The participation of the Respondent in the Inquiry
Respondent indicated during Directions Hearings prior to the Inquiry that he was
not inclined to attend the Tribunal Inquiry.
He provided several explanations
for his intention to not attend. These included the cost of traveling to Sydney,
his pessimistic
view of the outcome of the Inquiry, the demands placed upon his
time by both the massage course he was undertaking at the TAFE and
the criminal
proceedings in which he was involved.
Respondent was contacted by telephone at the commencement of the Inquiry. He
participated in the Inquiry for a short time and
then indicated he did not wish
to further participate. While he was on the telephone before the Tribunal he
stated that he had been
informed by his TAFE tutor that if he were prohibited
from massaging females as a result of the orders of the Tribunal, he would
be able to complete his massage course as there could not be an assessment of
his work made.
During the part of the Inquiry in which the Respondent participated in he
acknowledged that he had been provided with assistance
as to nature of the
weight that could be given to evidence placed before the Tribunal. The
information so provided would accord with
the rule in
Brown v Dunn
he left the telephone, the Respondent request the Tribunal to give special
consideration to the transcript of the Local Court
proceedings that were in
evidence before the Tribunal. The transcript of forms Annexure B hereto. The
Respondent was awaiting the
hearing of the appeal from the Local Court
proceedings (set to be heard in the District Court)
Summary of the Evidence, Submissions and findings with
respect to each Particular of Complaints One, Two and Three
set out above, there are a large number of Particulars of Complaint in this
matter. It is convenient to deal with the evidence,
the submissions and the
Tribunal’s findings with respect to each Particular
noted above no witnesses were called to give evidence before the Tribunal. The
Respondent had indicated that he did not require
any witnesses for
cross-examination nor did he wish to call any witnesses.
are a number of areas in the evidence relevant to the Particulars where the
evidence of the Respondent differs from the evidence
of one or more witnesses.
As noted above, the Tribunal did not have the benefit of assessing the demeanour
of the Respondent and
his evidence was not exposed to testing by way of
cross-examination. However, the evidence contains numerous documents authored by
the Respondent wherein he provides details relevant to the Particulars. There is
additional evidence found in documents such as the
records of the
Respondent’s treating doctors and psychologist. After careful
consideration of the evidence in this matter on
each occasion where the evidence
of the Respondent differs from that of another witness, the Tribunal has
accepted the evidence of
the other witness. The Tribunal has taken care to
consider each conflict on an individual basis.
each Particular the Tribunal repeats the substance of the Particular, sets out
the HCCC evidence/submissions, followed by the
Respondent’s
evidence/submissions and then the Tribunal’s findings.
Particular 1
approximately July 2002 during an interview/counselling session with Child A, a
student in Year 6 at [Primary School A], NSW, the
psychologist asked questions
of Child A, which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely words to the
you masturbate?”;
you ever masturbate in front of anyone?”.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 1
HCCC substantially relied upon the evidence contained in exhibits 1.4 and 1.5,
and the admissions made by the Respondent in his
letter dated 15 August 2007
(exhibit 2.4), his letter of 22 April 2008 (exhibit 2.7) and pages 9,11 and 30
of the Respondent’s
submission (exhibit R1 – Annexure D).
statement of Child A details the events as they are set out in this Particular.
He made complaint about the incident to his mother
on the same day.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 1
respect to this Particular the Respondent stated that he had asked the first
question as it was listed on the HEADSS (Home, Education,
Activities, Drugs,
Sexuality and Suicide) protocol.
exhibit 2.4 the Respondent gives the following account of his behaviour with
A colleague from the local Child and Family Team contacted me
Family Team Counsellor was going away for 6 weeks and asked me to undertake a
suicide risk assessment of the student at
the mother's behest. I contacted the
mother to confirm permission and, utilising the HEADSS protocol as a framework
for the assessment,
interviewed the student. HEADSS stands for Home, Education,
Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, and Suicide and represents the areas of
and format for structuring interviews recommended to NSW School Counsellors by
Westmead Royal Children's Hospital Sydney
. The specimen example,
of an appropriate probe in the area of Sexuality, on the handout provided to the
School Counsellors was "Do
you masturbate?” I asked this question and the
student's reaction was very unusual. His eyes immediately dilated and, whilst
not in distress, he appeared to experience some sort of disassociation from the
present and to be experiencing unusually high emotional
arousal. His School
Counsellor file had documented in it a previous incident of sexual interference
by a group of boys to which
I attributed the current emotional arousal as a
flash back / emotional re-experiencing of a previous event. I thought this too
territory to explore further within my interview remit and backed off
inquiry in this area and completed the suicide assessment.
The boy returned to
normal levels of arousal and interaction by the end of the interview and
subsequent follow up with his teachers
confirmed that he was fine. The suicide
risk was determined as Low. This was reported to his mother who subsequently
took exception
to the area of enquiry "Do you masturbate?" and made a complaint.
However, I maintain that there was nothing inappropriate in my
conduct of the
interview, nor any nefarious or gratuitous purpose behind this specific
interview question.
Respondent stated that he was using Zoloft at this time. At page 30 of his
submission the Respondent stated (exhibit R1):
....I chose to lead into the area of Sexuality on the HEADSS
protocol with this question. To me ‘Do you masturbate?’ was
straight forward, neutral, factual question about an activity and an aspect of
sexuality, that a 12 year old boy would be familiar.
By being direct, and asking
this question in a matter of fact style, I was modelling that aspects of
sexuality could be discussed
without embarrassment or coyness.
Respondent denied he asked the second question particularised.
Tribunal’s findings re Particular 1
Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts that it was a mistake to ask the
first question particularised ‘
as it precipitated an unanticipated high
emotional arousal in the student’.
The Tribunal accepts the evidence
of Child A that both questions were asked by the Respondent. Child A made a
report of the conduct
to his mother as soon as school ended on that day. The
questions made a significant impact on Child A, as noted by the Respondent.
Tribunal notes that Child A had been referred to the Respondent for a HEADSS
assessment by another counsellor who had been caring
for Child A but was due to
go on holidays. The Respondent was aware that Child A had been previously
sexually assaulted and that
his father was recently deceased. There are other
aspects of the child’s history that indicate that Child A was particularly
vulnerable at this time.
Tribunal accepts the criticism of Professor Bennett (exhibit 2.15) that asking
the question
‘Do you masturbate’
question to the area of sexuality’
‘blunt, insensitive and inappropriately confronting
especially when asked of a presumably troubled 12 year old boy with a known
history of at least one instance of sexual molestation. The question would never
be recommended as a ‘lead-in question’.
Bennett is critical of this question being asked at all when a clear
professional boundary and rapport had not been established
that such the
question could not be misinterpreted as a personal rather than professional
interest in the student.
Tribunal accepts the view of Prof Bennett that the conduct of the Respondent in
asking the first question particularised in the
circumstances fell significantly
below the standard expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training
or experience in
that it demonstrates a lack of skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology.
the Tribunal accepts the opinion of Dr Diamond that regardless of whether such a
question is included in an inventory of
questions on a particular protocol,
asking that question in the circumstances of this matter demonstrates a lack of
understanding
of the significance and depth of the responsibility carried by a
psychologist working with young people.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed, and care exercised
in the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and that he
engaged in improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The
conduct is found
by the Tribunal to be unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 2
approximately 2002 or 2003 during an interview/counselling session with Child B,
a student in Year 10 at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist made comments or
suggestions to Child B which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely
words to the effect of:
“Why don’t you go out and get drunk and have a good
time with your friends?”
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 2
HCCC relied upon exhibits 1.7 and 1.8. It also relied upon the admission made by
the Respondent in exhibits 2.4 and 2.7 and in
his written submission (at pages
9, 11, and 30).
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 2
Tribunal notes the objection made by the Respondent to exhibit 1.8 on the basis
that the statement was not signed. The Tribunal
notes however the admission
made by the Respondent in exhibit 2.4, as follows:
During an individual counselling session with this student, (I
never saw her in any group context), she presented with a concern over
socially isolated from her peer group. She complained that the majority of her
peers liked to go out and get drunk and that
she did not like this activity. I
commended her on her maturity but as one of several options that we discussed I
suggested that
indulging in
occasion of going out and getting
drunk with her peers might help to dispel the perception that she was setting
herself apart from
her peers. It was not advocated as a regular lifestyle
choice but as a one off strategy to socially break the ice with the peers
were avoiding her. This floated option subsequently became misreported.
exhibit 2.7 the Respondent adds further details to this admission. He stated
that he had suggested that the drinking of alcohol
may occur at an
‘adult supervised birthday party’
and that Child B was
legally old enough to drink.
Tribunal notes that
section 114
Liquor Act 1982
(throughout the relevant
or supply of liquor to a minor
(1) A person shall not, in any place whether or not licensed
premises, sell or supply liquor to a person under the age of 18 years.
Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units or, if circumstances of aggravation
exist in relation to the offence, 100 penalty units or 12 months
imprisonment
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular
Tribunal accepts the admissions made by the Respondent with respect to the
advice he provided Child B in accordance with the statement
as set out in
Particular 2. Although it is unlikely that a student in Year 10 or Year 11 would
be over the age of 18 years, the Tribunal
is of the view that even raising this
option when discussing Child B’s situation is inappropriate in the course
of the Respondent’s
practice. Child B was experiencing significant
difficulties both within the school setting (as detailed by the Respondent
and at home, with her mother suffering from cancer her death being
Tribunal accepts the opinion of Dr Keogh which is as follows:
It is hard to imagine any set of circumstances that could
justify a psychologist suggesting to a person of school age, that she should
out and get drunk with her peers in order to dispel a perception that she might
be setting herself apart from her peers.
The apparent lack of consideration of her difficulties at home, especially
the impending death of her mother and its most likely significance
interpersonal difficulties, suggests that the recommendation made by Mr.
Holbrook was not only inappropriate, but is perhaps
indicative of a lack of
knowledge, judgement and skill and may raise the whole question of his
suitability to be undertaking the
serious responsibilities that his role
demanded of him.
To suggest, under any circumstances, that a school age person should go
out and get drunk is a manifestly inappropriate direction
or piece of
professional advice from a psychologist or anyone in a position of trust with
school age children.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed, and care exercised
in the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and that he
engaged in improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The
conduct is found
by the Tribunal to be unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 3
approximately 9.30am on 23 February 2004 during an interview/counselling session
with Child C, a student in Year 9 at High School
C, NSW the psychologist:
the chair on which Child C was sitting towards him;
his hands on Child C’s thighs;
his hands up Child C’s thighs, moving the hemline of her skirt up her
Child C pushed herself away from him, said words to the effect of:
“Sorry, you’re just such a tease”.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 3
HCCC relied upon the statement of Child C (exhibit 1.9), exhibits 1.10
(including Annexure A), 1.12, the transcript of the proceedings
Ballina Local Court and the admissions made by the Respondent in exhibits 3.A,
2.7, and pages 9, 11, 25 and 26 of the
Respondent’s submissions (exhibit
R1 – Annexure D hereto).
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 3
noted above the Respondent has made a number of statements with respect to this
allegation, including evidence under oath in the
Local Court.
Tribunal’s findings with respect to Particular 3
Tribunal has had regard to all of the evidence in this matter and in particular
notes the evidence given by the Respondent before
the Local Court (exhibit 3A
and Annexure B hereto). The Respondent gave the following evidence regarding
this allegation (T9.25 –
A. She had interesting legs. She had muscular legs. I mean
she’s not Polynesian but in the way the Polynesian women are
big boned and
have muscular legs, she had muscular legs and I wanted to put my hands on them
and feel what they were like.
Q. So you’re in a position where you’re a school
counsellor.
Q. Why did you do that?
A. Because it seemed like it was a good idea at the time. Because I
didn’t, I wasn’t thinking that she was a minor,
thinking it was inappropriate because I was counselling her, I was just thinking
she’s got interesting legs.
What would it be like to run my hands up the
Q. And that’s all you were thinking?
A. Basically yeah.
Q. That’s what you can recall, that’s all you are thinking so
was there any level of actual critical judgment or thought.
A. No only when she kind of - she was on a chair with wheels and I pulled
it towards me and I started running my hands up her legs
and then she pushed
back with her legs so that she wheeled backwards away from me and it was only
when she sort of did that, that
I was aware that she obviously wasn’t
happy with what I was doing.
Q. You then apologised, said ”I’m sorry” why did you do
A. I felt obviously what I’d done wasn’t what she wanted, no
or appropriate.
Q. Say that again sorry?
A. What I’d done wasn’t - you know she wasn’t happy
with it so it wasn’t appropriate.
HIS HONOUR: I couldn’t hear that.
Q. That what she did--
A. What I’d done.
Q. What you had done she wasn’t happy with it.
Q. So you apologised because she wasn’t happy with what you had
Q. But how did you feel yourself about what had happened.
A. Well I was a bit nonplussed and also a bit, I suppose, embarrassed as
Q. I think you said before you felt, well you thought she had interesting
legs and you just wanted to touch them and that there was
no critical thought
preventing you from doing that. I think you said you didn’t think that
she was a minor or that thought
never entered your head.
A. Well I mean normally obviously talking now I’m obviously aware
that she was 14 turning 15 and that would make it totally
inappropriate but at
the time it was not, you know, ..(not transcribable).. that was kind of in that
anaesthetised part of your brain.
Q. So that’s what you’re saying that those critical thoughts
would have been anaesthetised--
A. By the medication.
Q. --by the medication at the time.
Q. If I can just summarise and my friend will tell me if I’m
overstepping. Effectively you are saying that your thoughts
- there was no
critical faculties there to prevent you basically acting on your thoughts at the
time which were related to the fact
that this person in front of you had
interesting legs.
Q. Now you’re saying that that was because of the
medication?
SANDERSON: I hesitate to interrupt but I’m just not sure about the
witness giving expert evidence as to what the medication
was, other than from
what the psychiatrist says.
HIS HONOUR: Yes it’s pretty hard for him to express a medical
opinion Mr Bell.
BELL: It is hard. I’m trying to get it back to what he was feeling
HIS HONOUR: I think he’ll have to come to that conclusion without
you telling him what the conclusion is.
BELL: I don’t disagree with your Honour
SANDERSON: Even further though your Honour it’s asking him whether
it was the Zoloft that caused this, that’s for perhaps
a pharmacologist or
someone, not this man.
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
WITNESS: May I say something your Honour?
Q. No that’s okay. So when did you stop using the Zoloft?
A. After that incident I thought it - there was no way that I could carry
on using it. They put me on alternative duties as a child
protection measure so
they put me off out of schools into district office, shuffling bits of
Q. I’m having trouble understanding you sir. The answer to the
question was when did you stop using it?
A. Yeah after this incident.
Q. That could mean a lot of things, how long after this incident?
A. Immediately. So immediately because I was aware that obviously
I’d broken a boundary that was unaccepted.
Q. So immediately after this incident you stopped using the
A. Yes they put me in a district office which I didn’t like because
I was away from counselling students which was what I enjoyed
doing but it was
useful in some ways because coming off cold so to speak without any rundown was
quite difficult so I got a kind
of rebound effect and I felt very emotionally
fragile. So I was able to do that, I still kept getting the script filled in at
pharmacy so I was accumulating these packets of Zoloft--
Q. Why were you doing that?
A. Because it was reassuring to feel that I had them there and it’s
kind of like when you go to the doctor and you get a script,
if you don’t
use it you feel you kind of wasted it so I just wanted to keep, I had about half
a dozen allocations so I accumulated
Q. What did you end up doing with those.
A. Later on when the Department of Education sent me to Health quest I
took them down there.
Q. You went on to Valium for a while?
Q. What were the effects of Valium? Sorry I withdraw that. Once you
went onto the Valium what did you feel?
A. Okay I got a script for Valium as like a substitute for using the
Zoloft in that I determined that after this incident I couldn’t
consciously you know - it wasn’t appropriate for me to carry on using it
because I had such a bad reaction so I got the Valium
as an alternative. I
didn’t use it for a long, long time and then I was flying overseas and I
was a bit nervous about flying
and that prompted me to use it and then I found
it made me feel relaxed so it had positive benefit in the way I saw it and then
on I took I guess too much at one go and it again had slightly
disinhibiting effect, a bit like being drunk on alcohol.
Q. So you stopped using the Valium at that time?
Q. You said you’re a qualified or registered psychologist. Are you
actually able to prescribe Zoloft yourself.
A. No the only sort of psychologist who can do that is a clinical
psychologist, they have additional training and authority to prescribe
they’re similar to a doctor or a psychiatric nurse but I can’t do
Q. So you can’t prescribe to anyone or yourself.
Q. Just given your profession, are you aware whether it’s possible
to obtain that medication outside a prescription.
A. Well it would be illegal and I wouldn’t know how to do
Q. You said that basically immediately after the incident with
you went off the medication.
Q. Once you went off the medication what were the changes that you
experienced in terms of your own feelings and thought processes.
A. As I said, immediately you get a kind of rebound effect because
it’s been elevating your mood artificially so I felt incredibly
and fragile so I didn’t want to really interact with anybody, that was
quite - so it’s like you’ve got
a massive hangover from alcohol,
it’s having that all the time and you just feel like, “just
don’t talk to me I
Q. I asked you about your thought processes, obviously you said that at
the time of the incident with
that you felt that your critical
faculties or critical thoughts were inhibited.
Q. After you went off the Zoloft did you notice any changes in terms of
the way you thought and the way you perceived your thought
processes--
A. Yeah I mean as critical thinking comes back, I don’t think the
Zoloft has permanently changed me. Sometimes I think about
it but I don’t
Q. So what you’re saying is that you noticed a distinct difference
when you were off Zoloft to when you were on Zoloft.
<CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR SANDERSON
Q. Sir you’re aware that the statement by the young lady involved
in this incident has been tendered and you would know that
she says this about
the incident, that you pulled her chair over towards her, touched her
Q. Over towards you, touched her legs, she then pushed her chair away and
you say that’s when you realised that she wasn’t
comfortable?
Q. And you said “Sorry?
Q. But after you said sorry, you said “Sorry you’re such a
A. Yeah I said that as part of the same sentence.
Q. So you came to the realisation that you were doing the wrong thing and
that you were sorry for it, but you added “You’re
A. Yeah I was kind of embarrassed and it was a way of putting it on her,
as though blaming her but it was unfair.
Tribunal further notes the Respondent’s initial response to this
allegation. As set out above in a letter from the Department
of education dated
24 March 2004 (exhibit 1.16) these allegation were put to the Respondent and he
denied them in his letter dated
31 March 2004 (exhibit 1.17). In the report of
Dr Lucire dated 24 April 2009 (exhibit 3.E1) she gives the following account of
Respondent’s initial denial (page 3):
However, Mr Holbrook was also aware that many of these cases
were simply not believed by the authorities so he made, again an irrational
decision, probably, in an abnormal state to go into denial. That is, he did not
admit the allegations until he put forward the adverse
effects of the drugs
Tribunal does not find there is any sound basis to accept the speculative
evidence of Dr Lucire. It is not supported by other
evidence in this matter. In
any case, the Tribunal relies substantially on the admissions made by the
Respondent to the Local Court
to establish this Particular.
Tribunal accepts the admission made by the Respondent and is reasonably
satisfied that the evidence supports a finding with respect
Particular.
Tribunal notes the opinion expressed by Dr Keogh. Dr Keogh notes that the
Respondent stated in his letter dated 15 August 2007
that he attributed this
incident to Zoloft and that he immediately ceased taking the Zoloft after this
incident and had not used
it since that time. At this point the Tribunal notes a
letter dated 30 August 2006 (exhibit 2.21) from the Respondent to Dr Panda
produced under summons by Dr Panda. This letter includes the following:
...I have decided not to take time off work but to continue
working at all my schools whilst taking Zoloft which makes me more resilient
better able to handle the stresses I am under.
Tribunal also notes a report from Dr Dunn dated 22 March 2004 (exhibit 2.18)
which records a consultation with the Respondent
on 5 March 2004. Dr Dunn notes
that the Respondent’s dose of Zoloft may have needed to be increased. This
appears to be inconsistent
with the Respondent’s claim that he immediately
ceased Zoloft after the incident on 23 February 2004.
Tribunal also notes the clinical records of Dr Masih indicate that the
Respondent had informed her as at 2007 that he had been
using Zoloft for the
past eight years to try to manage his social phobia. In the HealthQuest report
the Respondent is recorded as
informing the medical practitioner who interviewed
him that he had taken Zoloft from 1999 to 2004 and then recommenced the
in September 2006 but for the period of one month only.
page 15 of the Respondent’s submission he states that he had been
persuaded by Dr Panda to keep working and
‘address my
rather than attempting to avoid this issue by taking sick
leave. The Respondent goes on to say that he then decided to recommence
Zoloft. He had held back some unopened packets of Zoloft when he had handed in
this medication to HealthQuest. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent attended
HealthQuest in December 2006 and supposedly had handed over all of his Zoloft.
Keogh (exhibit 2.13 at page 14) notes that the Respondent claimed that his
conduct was influenced by the medication he was taking.
Leaving that issue to
one side, Dr Keogh comments that the conduct is a boundary violation and is a
significant departure from the
standard expected a registered psychologist. Dr
Keogh is strongly critical of the behaviour of the Respondent given the age and
history of Child C.
Tribunal notes that Child C’s mother was murdered a number of years
earlier and at the time she came under the care of the
Respondent that the
sister of her carer had recently died. This was the very reason for her referral
to the Respondent.
Diamond (exhibit 2.17 pages 7 & 8) recorded that the Respondent reported
at the time this incident occurred was
determined by the medication’
. He told Dr Diamond that
during the session with Child C he was thinking to himself that she was a good
looking young girl. The Tribunal
notes that Child C informed investigators from
the Department that the Respondent had said to her ‘
Do you realise that
you are very attractive’
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed, and care exercised
in the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and that he
engaged in unethical and improper conduct in the course of the practice of
psychology. The conduct
is found by the Tribunal to be unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Further, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of
Respondent is of such a serious nature that it would warrant the suspension
or removal of the Respondent’s name from the Register.
The Tribunal
therefore finds the conduct constitutes professional misconduct
an aside, the Tribunal notes that there was documentation before the Tribunal
that indicated the Respondent faced a criminal charge
of aggravated indecent
assault arising out of this incident (exhibit 1.23). The Respondent was
convicted in the Local Court on 12
February 2010 and given a 12 month good
behaviour bond. The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent has appealed this
and the matter is due to go before the District Court at Lismore later
this year. The Tribunal has had no regard to these matters
in reaching the
findings made herein.
Particular 4
25 August 2006 at a meeting of integration students convened by Anne Kafer of
the Department of Education, at Primary School D
and attended by Anne Kafer,
Annette Fairhall (Assistant Principal, Kindergarten, Primary School D), Judith
Turquelson (Early Intervention
Coordinator) and the psychologist, the
psychologist made comments which were inappropriate in the circumstances, namely
that he recommended
that Child D not be accepted at Primary School D if an
application were made because Child D’s mother suffered with depression,
anxiety attacks and was “a nutter”.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 4
HCCC relied upon the statement of the Assistant Principal, of the Kindergarten
at Primary School D (exhibit 1.25 (at paragraph
6)) and the admissions made by
the Respondent at exhibits 2.4, 2.7 and pages 9,11 and 14 of his written
submission (exhibit R1).
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 4
his letter dated 15 August 2007 (exhibit 2.4) the Respondent stated that his
choice of vernacular was not meant as an accurate diagnostic
assessment but to convey the frustration that the other school and myself
experienced in dealings with this mother [on a previous occasion]. I regret this
exhibit 2.7 the Respondent stated that he feels remorse with respect to this
incident and again offers his frustration with the
situation as an explanation.
The Respondent’s comments regarding this Particular included the
I am ashamed of my comment. I have a family member with multiple
disabilities and have worked for most of my professional life with
such clients
and it was a lapse into stigmatising vocabulary.
page 14 of his submissions the Respondent stated
‘I acknowledge that my
behaviour was unprofessional and inappropriate’
. The Respondent also
stated that he was not using Zoloft or Valium at the time this comment was
Tribunal’s findings re Particular 4
Tribunal notes that the statement of the Assistant Principal describes the
events as per this Particular. The Tribunal also notes
that admissions made by
the Respondent. The Tribunal is satisfied that the conduct particular is
established.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the judgment
possessed, and care exercised in the practice
of psychology is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience,
and that he engaged in improper conduct in the course
of the practice of psychology. The conduct is found by the Tribunal to be
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 5
approximately 18 March 2004 during an interview/counselling session with Child
E, a Year 10 student at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist conducted himself
inappropriately in that he locked the door to the counselling room.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 5
HCCC relied upon the statement of Jane Anderson at paragraphs 6 to 8 of exhibit
1.26 and the annexure to that statement.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 5
does not appear that the Respondent has addressed this Particular directly. He
makes a number of statements about generally keeping
the door ajar while at two
particular primary schools but makes no direct comment regarding his practise at
High School B.
Findings with respect to Particular 5
Anderson’s record of her conversation with Child E accords with the
Particular.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms Anderson and it is the locking of the door
that is of concern to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
has regard to the statement of
Ms Anderson that the door automatically locked when closed. Although it would be
extremely unwise
for the Respondent to work in a room with such a locking
mechanism the Tribunal is not reasonably satisfied that the conduct is
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected. It is however conduct that
is below the standard expected.
Particular 6
various occasions in 2006, whilst conducting interviews/counselling sessions at
Primary School D, NSW, the psychologist failed
to ensure, without reasonable
excuse, that the door to the interview room was open sufficiently for both the
psychologist and the
child to be seen by someone passing by the door in
contravention of the directions of the School Principal and/or the
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 6
HCCC relied upon exhibits 1.27, 1.28 and 2.27. The HCCC noted that the
Respondent denied that that he had held counselling sessions
behind a closed
door at Primary School A in his letter dated 15 August 2007 (exhibits 2.4) and
in his submission claimed to have
permission to have the door closed.
paragraph 9 the Principal of Primary School A stated that in June or July 2006
she had noticed that the Respondent’s office
door was completely closed
while he was testing or interviewing a student. She reports that her clerical
assistant had also made
this observation. The clerical assistant made a
statement at exhibit 1.28 which confirms that she had made the observations
the closed door in the first half of 2006, probably Term 2.
paragraph 10 of the statement of the Principal of Primary School A (exhibit
1.27) it is recorded that concerns regarding the practise
of the Respondent
closing his door while conducting counselling sessions had been raised with the
Respondent. A written direction
was given to the Respondent by the Principal on
7 August 2006. This direction was in the following terms:
As of today I am directing you to ensure that whenever you are
testing or interviewing a child that the door to your room remains
paragraph 11 the Principal stated that when she discussed this directive with
the Respondent he made it clear he did not accept
her directive and stated he
did not see any problem with the door being closed or almost closed when he was
alone with a student.
further letter was sent to the Respondent by the Principal. This letter dated 21
August 2006 stated:
I am confirming my previous directive that the door is not to be
closed or “ajar” when you are testing a child.
third letter was sent to the Respondent by the Principal on 28 August 2006. The
letter informs the Respondent that her concerns
relate to his lack of
professional conduct which go beyond the closing of his door and advises that
future matters of concern will
be relayed to him in writing.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 6
page 17 of his submission the Respondent wrote:
I discussed
my open/closed door protocol
with my line
manager, my DGO, Jane Anderson and she was happy enough with my solution of
keeping the door ajar for the majority of
sessions, maintaining a degree of
potential impropriety might
be interrupted.
(Emphasis added by Tribunal)
the second page of his letter dated 15 August 2007 the Respondent stated that
the allegation that he repeatedly ignored policy
regarding child protection when
he conducted individual counselling sessions with the door closed was
‘simply inaccurate’
. The letter continued:
For two years I conducted interviews at this school with the
door to the room ajar. On no occasion did it cause anyone to raise a
However, subsequent to the initiation of the EPAC investigation I was accused of
regularly conducting interviews with the
door closed – this was simply not
the case. I do recall one occasion when I was assessing a rather sweet student
who proceeded
to close the door that I had specifically left ajar. I assumed
that they had been brought up
to believe that it was bad manners to
leave doors open and on this occasion I left it closed. No impropriety took
2.7 the Respondent made the following statement:
I find it hypocritical in that, on the one hand, I am criticised
for not being sensitive to the vulnerabilities of my client group
of children
and adolescence by protecting the privacy and confidentiality of their
counselling conversations and the next minute
I am accused of ignoring a Dept of
Education directive which stated that I should see clients with the door wide
open and clients
in plain view. If a directive insensitive to the client group
vulnerabilities and likely to violate the students’ privacy and
confidentiality needs. I did not ignore the Dept of Education directive but in
consultation with the District Guidance Officer/Supervisor
came to the working
arrangement of routinely leaving the counselling room door ajar, so that it was
not closed but afforded some
when client vulnerabilities (and great distress) or rapport needs dictated did
operate with a closed door. This is yet another example of EPAC soliciting
ambiguus breaches of protocol from colleague and supervisors
to pad out their
complaint of misconduct.
Tribunal’s findings regarding Particular 6
Tribunal notes that Ms Jane Anderson made a report to the Child Protection
Investigating Directorate of the Department in 2004
in relation to the incident
set out in Particular 5. This is contrary to the allegation made by the
Respondent that there had been
no issue raised with respect to him closing his
door prior to the incident with Child F.
Tribunal notes the comments made by the Respondent regarding ‘his’
practise (rather than the Department of Education
policy or the directive that
had been issued to the Respondent) with respect to the door of his counselling
room. The Tribunal is
unaware of any complaints regarding the Respondent’s
lack of concern for privacy or confidentiality that would support the
adopting a policy contrary to the workplace policy.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct is established. The Tribunal
notes and accepts the opinion of Dr Keogh with
respect to this Particular.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the
knowledge and judgment possessed, and care exercised in
the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training
or experience, and that he
engaged in improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The
conduct is found by the Tribunal
to be unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 7
approximately May 2002 at a meeting at Primary School E, NSW, the psychologist
made comments which were inappropriate in the circumstances,
namely words to the
“I like to ogle the High School girls in their
gym skirts”.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 7
HCCC relied upon statements made by witnesses to the conversation recorded in
exhibit 1.29 (paragraph 7), 1.30 (paragraph 7) and
a report made to the District
Officer on 3 June 2002 (exhibit 1.31). The HCCC also relied upon the admission
made by the Respondent
in exhibit 2.4. The HCCC also relied upon exhibit
1.29, 1.30 and 1.31 record a conversation that occurred in the playground of
Primary School E between the Respondent and
a number of male members of staff.
The statements support the allegation contained in this Particular. They
describe the conversation
occurring in the playground of Primary School E during
the morning or lunch recess. The staff members were sitting outside as it
sunny day. Although this appears to be an informal setting the evidence is that
it occurred on school premises during school
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 7
his letter dated 15 August 2007 (exhibit 2.4) the Respondent makes the following
statement regarding the comments set out in Particulars
7 and 8 as follows:
The following two politically incorrect remarks are taken out of
context from informal social situations and were tongue in cheek
designed to bait the more earnest of my colleagues. The fact that they were ever
reported to EPAC is a reflection of just
how over-earnest those colleagues were.
Tribunal’s Findings regarding Particular 7
Tribunal does not rely upon the evidence contained in exhibit 1.32 with respect
to this Particular. The balance of the evidence
relied upon supports a finding
with respect to this Particular.
Keogh (exhibit 2.13) deals with this matter at pages 10 and 11 of his report. As
noted above it appears that he refers to the 2004
version of the Code and this
event predates the introduction of this version of the Code. However, he makes
the following general
In particular, to be making sexualised comments about children
for whom one has a professional responsibility suggests a serious psychological
impairment.
Diamond makes comments about the nature of the Respondent’s statement
regarding this issue. The Respondent’s claim
that his colleagues were just
overly earnest’
regarding his
‘politically
comments demonstrates to Dr Diamond that the Respondent
does not appreciate the responsibility he carries in his professional role.
Describing the comments as
‘tongue in cheek’
, Dr Diamond sees
as inappropriate and indicative of a lack of appreciation of his professional
responsibility. The report continues
as follows:
When taking into account only the descriptions given by Mr
Holbrook for his conduct it still falls short of the insightful, professional
and responsible conduct one would expect from a suitably trained and experienced
practitioner as a school counsellor.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent made the statement as
particularised.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the judgment
possessed in the practice of psychology is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience, and that he engaged in
improper conduct in the course of the
practice of psychology. The conduct is found by the Tribunal to be
unsatisfactory professional
Particular 8
approximately 2002, at a District Guidance Officer meeting at High School B,
NSW, the psychologist made comments which were inappropriate
circumstances, namely words to the effect of:
“Gee, I love my job. All those young girls in gym
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 8
HCCC relied upon exhibit 1.7, and the possible admission by the Respondent in
exhibit 2.4.
1.7 is a statement from a female District School Counsellor (DSC). The DSC
states that the Respondent had made a number of
comments during the fortnightly
meetings of the local DSCs with the DGO. The purpose of the meeting was to
discus the sharing of
resources and information and to debrief. The DSC recalled
that during one meeting the Respondent
‘suddenly said words to the
“Gee I love my job. All those young girls in gym
. All the school counsellors jumped on him but he did not accept
that this was an inappropriate comment.’
The Tribunal further notes
that the DSC also recorded that she and other counsellors had cautioned the
Respondent about the inappropriateness
of his comments and how they could
jeopardise his job.
admission relied upon by the HCCC is reproduced above under the heading
Respondent’s evidence re Particular 7.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 8
his submission (R1) the Respondent indicates he was taking Zoloft at the time he
made this comment (page 9 and 16). The Respondent
stated that his conduct with
respect to Particulars 2, 3, 7, 8 and 9 was under the influence of Zoloft and
that he experienced:
...blunted interpersonal sensitivity, disinterested, and
impaired social judgment; and in addition was perceived by others as creepy
sleazy. This occurred both, in the school setting with various teachers and
students, (Complaint One: 2, 3, 7, 8 and 9), and
out of school with the
hairdresser; but at the time whilst under the influence of the medication, I was
oblivious to this perception.
Tribunal’s Finding’s regarding Particular 8
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the DSC and notes it is supported by the
admission of the Respondent. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the
Particular has been made out.
report of Dr Keogh includes the following statement:
Mr Holbrook ....was making remarks about his client base which
did not respect the dignity and welfare of the group with whom he had
professional contact.
Keogh stated that this type of conduct attracts his strong criticism. The
Tribunal accepts the above comment made by Dr Keogh.
opinion of Dr Diamond with respect to the Respondent’s approach to
comments of this nature is recorded above under the heading
Findings regarding Particular 7.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the judgment
possessed in the practice of psychology is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience, and that he engaged in
improper conduct in the course of the
practice of psychology. The conduct is found by the Tribunal to be
unsatisfactory professional
Particular 9
approximately 2002 and 2003, whilst a counsellor at High School B, NSW, the
psychologist conducted group counselling sessions
in a manner which was
inappropriate in the circumstances in that he caused or permitted groups of
female students to discuss sexual
and drug-related matters.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 9
HCCC relied upon the statement in exhibit 1.7 and what appears to be an
admission in part by the Respondent at exhibit 2.7.
the statement at exhibit 1.7, the female DSC describes the layout of the
counselling room at High School B. She states that there
was a brick wall
between the two counselling rooms but that the ceiling was made from light
weight recycled material which resulted
in sound from one room being easily
heard in the other room.
paragraph 7 of exhibit 1.7 the DSC states as follows:
One thing which concerned me was the content of groups sessions
run by Graham. He ran a number of group sessions with female students.
happened a couple of times that the sessions became very loud, with girls trying
to shout each other down, calling out details
of their sexual encounters and
their alcohol and drug use. The girls seemed to be trying to outdo each other
and there was no indication
to me that Graham tried to take any control of the
situation. It is completely inappropriate for a school counsellor to allow young
people to discuss their level of sexual activity and drug or alcohol use in an
uncontrolled group setting. If these issues arise
in a group situation, a school
counsellor should arrange to see the child alone and sound them out about
whether they are aware of
health problem and risks and so on.
DSC did make a complaint about this conduct to the DGO as recorded in exhibit
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 9
exhibit 2.7 the Respondent makes the following statement regarding this
I did not specifically encourage the girls to
their sexual activities but they became boisterous in the way that adolescent
girls do when they are disputing with each other.
The short comings of the
soundproofing of the School Counsellor Interview room was a Department of
Education plant failing, nothing
to do with the Counsellor as normal speaking
conversations in resonant voices could be heard in neighbouring rooms. The
vulnerability was not being exploited. Like I’ve said before
the peer reviewer wasn’t there and because the complaint
negatively from EPAC they assume that this description is accurate. EPAC
specifically solicits negative reviews from colleagues
and supervisors; and as
their overarching line manager has little difficulty eliciting such sentiments.
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 9
Keogh makes the following observations in his report (exhibit 2.13) at page
Whilst it is generally true that clients should feel free to express any
issues of concern to them in a trusting and confidential
relationship,
encouraging girls to yell and details of their sexual and drinking behaviour
does not respect the dignity and welfare
of a client client group.
The reported behaviour of Mr. Holbrook also suggests he did not properly
take into account the vulnerability of the client group nor
did he pay proper
respect to the age and gender o the client group. Further, such behaviour could
be viewed as voyeuristic.
A further concern with the incident concerning groups run by Mr. Holbrook
is that encouraging the yelling out of personal information
in a manner which
makes such information audible to people outside the therapeutic space
represents a failure to respect the confidentiality
of the client group in
In summary, Mr. Holbrook's conduct in this instance fell below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
training or experience, applicable at the time of conduct. At best the
behaviour seems to show a lack of insight into the
vulnerability of the client
group in question and could suggest that the client group was being exploited,
possibly indicating some
psychological disturbance on the part of Mr.
As such, I believe that Mr. Holbrook's conduct fell significantly below
the standard one might expect of a practitioner of an equivalent
training or experience, applicable at the time of the conduct.
Given the level of trust placed in him by the school and the vulnerability
of the client group in question, his conduct attracts my
Tribunal notes the comments made by Dr Diamond regarding the response made by
the Respondent dated 22 April 2008 (exhibit 2.7)
as follows:
The document focuses on criticism of the opinion and pointing
out perceived inaccuracies or contradictions in Departmental policy.
There is no
reflective material that examines what is being alleged and examined overall. Mr
Holbrook has failed to address the overriding
concern and prefers to argue
pedantically about his perception of being wronged and misrepresented.
Tribunal endorses the view expressed by Dr Diamond and is of the view that this
was the approach adopted by the Respondent toward
the entire Tribunal process.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the DSC and is reasonably satisfied that this
conduct occurred as set out in the Particular.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed, and care exercised
in the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and that he
engaged in improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The
conduct is found
by the Tribunal to be unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Findings with respect to Complaints One and Two
set out above, the Tribunal has made findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct with respect to Particulars 1, 2, 4, 6, 7
and 8 and of professional
misconduct with respect to Particular 3. The Tribunal is also of the view that
the conduct particularised
in Particulars 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8 together amounts
to professional misconduct. Complaint Two is therefore established. (Particular
5 was found to be conduct below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training and experience).
Particulars specifically with respect to
good character’ – Complaint Three
HCCC relies upon Particulars 1 to 9 above, in addition to the following two
particulars, Particular 10 and Particular 11.
Particular 10
the psychologist was employed by the Department of Education as a school
counsellor at schools in New South Wales between 24
July and 28 July 2006, Child
F was a high school student aged 16 and undertaking work experience at Primary
School D, NSW.
morning of 24 July or 25 July 2006 in the psychologist’s office at Primary
School D, NSW, the psychologist asked
for and obtained from Child F her personal
mobile telephone number;
approximately midday on 28 July 2006 in the psychologist’s office at
Primary School D, NSW, the psychologist made comments
to Child F which were
inappropriate in the circumstances, namely he spoke words to the effect of:
you free on the weekend?”
thought maybe we could catch up?”
guess I’d better give back your number then?”
approximately 3.40pm on 28 July 2006, the psychologist telephoned Child F on her
mobile telephone and made comments which were
inappropriate in the
circumstances, namely he spoke words to the effect of:
you still okay to talk to me?” and
tell anyone about this because I could lose my job or worse.”
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 10
HCCC relies upon the handwritten note made by Child F (exhibit 1.33), the
transcript of a Department interview with Child F (exhibit
1.34) and the
statement of the school’s administration office (exhibit 1.35). The HCCC
further relies upon the admissions
made by the Respondent at exhibits 1.37, 2.7
(and pages 9, 11-13 of R1).
F was at Primary School D for one week from 24 July to 28 July 2006 for the
purpose of work experience. She was a high school
student at the time.
28 July 2006 Child F made a handwritten statement outlining the events as set
out in this Particular. Child F stated that the Respondent
had asked her for her
telephone number so that he could contact her to do some filing work for him at
some time in the future.
Respondent showed her some files (which were not student files) that had some
place names such as Rainbow Bay, Byron Bay and Hawaii
on them and asked her to
‘pick one’. She stated that this made her confused and uncomfortable
because she thought he
meant that she should pick a place that she would like to
go to with him. The Respondent then asked her if she was free on the weekend
which she replied ‘No’ that she would probably not be free as she
intended going to Dream World if it was not raining.
She then said to the
Respondent that she was sorry, but she did not understand what he meant and
asked if it was for
. The Respondent shook his head
to indicate no and said
. Then the Respondent said that
it was only for the purpose of
‘catching up’
handwritten statement continues as follows (with spelling and grammar
corrected):
I was so shocked but I tried to be polite and
no I’m sorry I actually have a boyfriend and I’m only 16’.
So I waited for a reaction to the fact that I was 16 but it did not seem like he
cared that I was young.
And then he goes
‘Oh OK well I guess I better give back your
number then’
I was really nervous and uncomfortable and I said
that’s OK. I only thought you wanted it on a business basis but I
don’t want anything other than that and being
out of the room as quick as I could.
I then told Linda
[the administrative assistant]
straight away what
had happened.
administrative assistant (exhibit 1.35) stated that she asked Child F to leave
the ‘front office’ and collect a student
record card from the filing
cabinet in the room that was occupied by the Respondent. When Child F returned
to the ‘front office’
she looked quite visibly shaken prompting the
administrative assistant to ask Child F if she was alright. Child F responded by
‘How old do you think the counsellor is?
statement continues as follows:
I said I was not sure – why? Child F then told me that
earlier in the week Graham had asked her for her phone number. When she
him why he said that he may have some filing work for her to do. Today he asked
her if he could call her on the weekend. She
asked him if it was for work and he
said – No, just to catch up. She told him she had a boyfriend and left the
statement sets out details of the incident as reported to the Administration
Manager and the Principal and indicates that Child
F was very concerned to
retrieve her mobile telephone number from the Respondent’s possession.
set out below, it appears that the post-it note with her mobile telephone number
on it was retrieved from the Respondent.
an interview with the Department of Education, Child F gave an account of what
happened shortly after she left Primary School
D on 28 July 2008 and went her
‘Nan’s home’
. Child F stated that shortly after she
arrived her mobile telephone rang and she recognised the voice as that of the
but the caller identity was withheld (private number).
the conversation, the Respondent identified himself and confirmed he was the
counsellor at Primary School D. During the Interview
with representatives of the
Department of Education Child F provided the following information regarding
this conversation:
The Respondent
stated that ‘
We had the embarrassing interruption’
‘something like that’
. When asked about the
‘something like that’
she stated that it may have been
‘embarrassing fiasco or whatever earlier on today’
Child F had
formed the view that the Respondent was asking her out on a date when he spoke
to her on 28 July 2006.
The Respondent
asked her if it was
for him to still talk to her and she
. The Respondent then told her that he would not
bother her again and told her not to tell anyone about the matter as he may lose
terminated the call.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular
exhibit 1.37, being a letter from the Respondent dated 1 February 2007, the
Respondent confirmed that he had approached Child F
under the pretence of
offering her filing work, requested her home telephone number and then elicited
her mobile telephone number
from her and said to her
. Further, he confirmed that he approached Child F with files
tabbed with names such as Byron Bay, Rainbow Bay and/or Hawaii on them
her to pick one. The Respondent indicated to Child F that this was not
‘business’ but said words to the effect
‘I thought maybe we
could catch up’
. After Child F informed the Respondent she was 16
years of age and had a boyfriend the Respondent confirmed that he said the words
to the effect of
‘Well I guess you want your number back
. The Respondent further accepted that he rang Child F’s
mobile telephone on the afternoon of 28 July 2006, identified himself
school counsellor from the Primary School D, and that the conversation as set
out in Particular 10(c) occurred.
exhibit 1.37 the Respondent states that his conduct occurred whilst he was under
the influence of the psycho-active medication,
exhibit 2.7 the Respondent does not cavil with any of the details set out in
this Particular, he does however state that by the
end of the week in question
he was taking 10 mg of diazepam a day and was aware that this drug was having a
‘similar disinhibition/impaired social judgement problem’
that he had suffered with Zoloft. In response to this he had made an
appointment with the EAP psychologist. Unfortunately the appointment
was not for
several weeks later during which time the Respondent continued to use diazepam.
his most recent document (R1 – Annexure D, at pages 12 and 13) the
Respondent stated that Child F ‘
fell into my orbit
was taking 5 mg of diazepam. He considered that he was
‘intoxicated
with the diazepam’
in a similar fashion to alcohol intoxication. The
Respondent claimed that Child F was sharing his office during this week, which
the Tribunal notes is contradictory to the statement of the administrative
assistant. The Respondent further states in this report
that he had intended to
recruit the services of Child F to file his student counsellor reports into the
relevant student files. The
Respondent stated that the Principal had indicated
to him that this was a task that would need to be attended to and that he had
intended to seek the Principals permission to engage Child F for this purpose.
The Respondent stated that because he was not sleeping
well at the time he had
increased his dose of diazepam to 10 mg per day. The Respondent stated that when
he returned to Primary School
D he had forgotten to ask the Principal about
employing Child F.
Respondent makes the following statement (R1 – Annexure D, page 13-14)
regarding the reason why he made the telephone call
to Child F even though he
knew the school was aware of what had happened:
Hence, I phoned Child F, in part to apologise to her for the
embarrassment from that morning and also to request of her, as a favour
to not talk about this incident as it would likely cost me my job or worse my
The way EPAC have subsequently presented this interaction makes it appear
as though I was attempting to intimidate Child F, which
was not the case, I
simply recognised, from previous dealings with EPAC, that without Child
F’s help I would not avoid losing
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 10
Tribunal notes that even on the Respondent’s evidence the actions he took
(as set out in Particular 10(c)) occurred at a
time that ‘
his brain had
begun to clear from the effects of the diazepam’.
Tribunal accepts the description provided by Child F as to the manner in which
the Respondent obtained her mobile telephone number.
It was a contrived
situation designed to mislead Child F into trusting that there was a legitimate
purpose for providing it to the
Respondent. Further, it is apparent from the
Respondent’s evidence that he had prepared the ‘Holiday Destination
ahead of time which is indicative of a significant degree of
premeditation as opposed to a lack of impulse control.
Tribunal notes at exhibit 1.28 there is a statement from the School
Administration Manager which records that after the incident
was reported to the
Principal on the afternoon of 28 July 2006 she located the Respondent as he was
leaving the school. She asked
him to return the telephone number of Child F. The
School Administration Manager used Child F’s name when she asked the
for the telephone number to be returned. The Respondent asked the
School Administration Manager who she meant and was informed that
she was the
‘work experience student’
. The Respondent replied
and retrieved a small yellow post-it note from his brief
case and gave it to the School Administration Manager. The School
Administration
Manager then returned the post-it note to Child F and saw Child F
tear it up and place it in the bin.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent had no regard to the question of
confidentiality with respect to his proposition that Child
F would undertake the
filing of school counsellor reports.
Respondent puts forward the following propositions for the Tribunal to consider:
that he was intoxicated by the diazepam, he was
‘disinhibited’ and
had his social judgment impaired by the diazepam, and that he was also using the
diazepam for sleep.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct as set out in this Particular
occurred. Child F made immediate complaint, the
Respondent had possession of
her mobile telephone number even after he had returned the number and his
head had cleared’
from the effects of the diazepam he still
rang Child F.
conduct certainly brings the profession into disrepute and undermines the
confidence that the public is entitled to repose in
a registered health care
practitioner. The Respondent used his position as a school counsellor to obtain,
under false pretences,
for his own benefit, the telephone number of a minor. The
fact that the Respondent was employed as a school counsellor at the time
conduct occurred adds a further dimension to this conduct. In his role as a
school counsellor his duty of care to students is
paramount. The Tribunal finds
the dishonesty employed by the Respondent to obtain the telephone number, the
motivation for interacting
with her and the age of the girl involved as
aggravating factors of this conduct.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that this Particular alone would demonstrate
that at the time this incident occurred the Respondent
did not have the good
character required to hold registration as a psychologist.
Particular 11
approximately December 2006, the psychologist attended the [Local Hairdressing
Salon], and whilst at the salon the psychologist
made comments to and/or asked
questions of the staff members at the salon which were inappropriate in the
circumstances, namely he
spoke words to the effect of:
am a psychologist and I work in local schools, but the money is terrible. I am
thinking about taking photos of young girls
for extra money”
it bother you if I took photos of your daughter for the internet ... photos for
dirty old men?”
you know of any young girls who I could photograph for men to look
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 11
HCCC relied upon statements at exhibits 1.38, 1.39, 1.40, 1.41 and a partial
admission of the Respondent at pages 9, 11, 15 and
16 of R1 (Annexure D). The
Tribunal cannot find any particular reference to Particular 11 on page 11 of R1
as was indicated in the
submission.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 11
page 9 of R1 the Respondent stated that he was under the influence of Zoloft at
the time of this incident. On pages 15 and 16 the
Respondent records the
However, this same supply of Zoloft was my undoing in the
hairdresser scenario. By this time I had been transferred to district office
for alternative duties whilst the process of my termination was finalised.
I had had a bad day. By this I mean that it became self-evident to me
that the authorities in the NSW Dept of Education, either did
not believe me
regardless.
There was still some Zoloft left. I took a one off dose of 25 mg to try
to raise my mood. It precipitated a further hypomania episode.
Under the influence of the medication it appeared a good idea to explore
an independent career working with children and young people.
I had seen an “Oprah” show on television which indicated that
it was legal to commercially publish photographs (non-pornographic)
of children
and young people on the internet. This potential self-employment option,
appeared the perfect riposte to EPAC who had
over-zealously
“constructed” me as a sexually deviant and effectively prohibited me
from working with children and young
people in any employee capacity.
The “Oprah” show had indicated that if you took steps to
protect the identity and location of the subjects that the business
from “undesirables” trying to directly contact the children and
young people.
I undertook some market research into the idea, at the all female local
hairdressers. I wanted to know whether mothers would allow
children’s photographs to be published on the internet. Note, all my
questions at the time to the hairdressers were
hypothetical but when you read
through the collated transcript it makes it appear as though I was asking
permission to photograph
their children. That was not the case.
The concept was, and is, still a controversial idea and if mothers would
be reluctant to give informed consent for their off spring’s
participation
then, as a business, the venture would not be viable.
Un-medicated, even I admit, it is a dubious proposition and in good
conscience I would not recommend it to parents of young people
as a desirable
career move. The incident serves to further illustrate the ability of Zoloft to
impair social judgement.
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 11
statements in evidence before the Tribunal describe the conduct of the
Respondent as Particularised. The statements made by the
substantially corroborate the statements of the witnesses.
statements made by the staff in the hair dressing salon record that the
Respondent identified himself as a psychologist. The Respondent
used this title
as some attempt to gain credibility for the incredulous proposition he was
putting forward.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent conducted himself as set
out in this Particular. This conduct demonstrates
that the lack of good
character continued at the time this conduct occurred.
Not of Good Character
Tribunal has had regard to the entirety of the Particulars relied upon by the
HCCC to support the Complaint of ‘Not of good
character’.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC with respect to this Complaint
in general terms. The Tribunal is of the view
that individually Particulars 3
and 10 each establish a finding of not of good character. The conduct
established in Particulars
2, 7, 8, 9, and 11 also support a finding of not of
good character. The conduct of the Respondent has demonstrated that his
has been seriously flawed for a significant period of time. The
defects are absolutely inconsistent with holding registration as
professional. Taking advantage of one of the most vulnerable groups in our
community is inexplicable.
is nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal that would allow the Tribunal to
be reasonably satisfied that the defects in
character identified by the conduct
established above has in any way been remedied by the Respondent. The mere
effluxion of time
does not remedy defects of character. Complaint 3 is
established (
Ex Parte Tziniolis
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448).
only appropriate order that could flow from the defects of character identified
would be to deny the Respondent the privilege
of registration as a psychologist.
Given the Respondent’s inability to frankly confront the manifestations of
his defects of
character the Tribunal could not be satisfied that any set of
conditions would adequately protect the public, maintain the reputation
profession and not damage the trust that the public is entitled to repose in
registered psychologists.
Complaint 4 – Impairment
HCCC evidence and submissions
HCCC allege that the Respondent suffers from an impairment, namely, personality
Tribunal notes the comments made by the Respondent at page 10 of his submission
(R1 – Annexure D). The Respondent stated
that he had a conversation with
his then line manager who he considered to be an experienced DGO. The Respondent
stated that the
conversation included the DGO raising concerns about his
behaviour and occurred sometime after the incident described in Particular
he assumed that this incident or
‘another similar incident’
provoked the conversation. The Respondent stated they discussed his use of
Zoloft. The Respondent’s submission contained the
following statement
regarding what occurred after this conversation:
However, at this time the side effects, i.e. a lack of
interpersonal sensitivity, some blunted cognitive acuity and professional
were comparatively minor and did not outweigh the perceived benefits to
my service delivery of raised mood, sociability and approachability.
continued on the medication.
Tribunal further notes that the DGO was concerned about the following aspects of
the Respondent’s conduct (1.32):
There was general concern about his behaviour towards female
students and young female staff. The behaviour which caused concern included
making sexual innuendos and behaving inappropriately.
evidence before the Tribunal demonstrates that the Respondent took no notice of
the advice and comments made to him by senior
staff and peers in the DGO
Tribunal adopts and endorses the comments made by Dr Diamond at page 12 of his
report (exhibit 2.17) which reads as follows:
A further example of such insightlessness relates to his
description of what occurred with the high school student who was not
comfortable
to socialise with her alcohol-drinking school friends. He correctly
states that the issue was not essentially about encouraging
her to drink alcohol
but he fails to understand that of all the possible solutions to this problem
the one he offered and that caused
offence was clearly not appropriate
Mr Holbrook reiterates his strong belief that the effect of Zoloft and
other medication caused him to behave inappropriately at various
times. What he
fails to acknowledge is that whatever drug effect occurred, it remains that the
exposure of existing underlying emotions
and sources of gratification are the
source of concern. It is these underlying features that are the cause, in my
view, of the recurrent
difficulties and unacceptable behaviour that he has
exhibited over a number of years.
In a disingenuous way he addresses this issue quite clearly in his
submission. He states as follows:
“The whole structure of EPAC, HealthQuest and the HCCC appears to
reflect a system premised on attributing behaviour to internal
pathology and the
traditional “medical model” rather than a recognition of the greater
impact of contextual factors on
behaviour than personality factors to allow
issues of misconduct to be reduced to the simplistic concept of “impaired
practitioners”
who can simply be deleted from the system. Problem solved.
A simple quick fix for public relations purposes and which has limited
psychological validity given its reluctances to consider medication issues on
behaviour and systemic issues in systemic bias in information
collection by
complaining agencies”.
The above paragraph is a very clear description, in my view, of what
causes Mr Holbrook to repeatedly offend people and to conduct
inappropriately in his professional role. It is not by any stretch of the
imagination a quick fix to identify such individuals
and to confront the
repeated incidents of inappropriate conduct that become evident.
To ascribe his conduct simply to a lapse in controls caused by
pharmacological effects is shallow and insightless. It demonstrates
to understand his personal vulnerabilities that arise from his personality
traits in operation. He deals with his awareness
of his personality by simply
describing his social awkwardness and “stubbornness” without
acknowledging his motivations
for gratification that arise in the course of his
work with children.
conduct of the Respondent is demonstrative of significant and entrenched impulse
control problems. It would be speculative to
conclude that he seeks children as
his preferred area of work because of his personal vulnerabilities, and this
conclusion is not
necessary for any of the Tribunal’s findings herein.
Dr Diamond made the following comment at pages14 -16 of his report:
Mr Holbrook has some features of an anxiety disorder. He is
socially avoidant and reports anxiety in a variety of social situations.
description of his symptoms in this regard is accurate in that he is socially
awkward, anxious and uncomfortable. He is unable
to tolerate close or intimate
relationships and has constructed his life around these features.
He does not however meet criteria for any specific primary psychiatric
illness that would be described as an Axis 1 diagnosis in the
classification system.
He does exhibit those features consistent with the diagnosis of a
personality disorder. He demonstrates a persistent set of traits
evidenced by
odd ways of perceiving and interpreting himself and people around him.
His affect is affected by this as evidenced by his anxiety and
unhappiness.
He has impaired interpersonal functioning and at times he has demonstrated
lapses in his impulse control although he contends that
this is due to the
effects of medication alone.
His pattern of functioning is rigid, inflexible and pervasive across the
broad range of his personal and social situations. The extent
of his patterns
of behaviour has led clinically to periods of significant anxiety and impairment
in his social functioning.
It has impacted on his occupational performance and continues to impact on
his capacity to form relationships.
His personality pattern is longstanding and traceable back to his shyness
in childhood and inability to interact with his adolescent
peers thereafter. It
has persisted over the years.
His personality disorder is not consequent upon another psychiatric
The enduring pattern is not due to the direct physiological effects of
substance such as a drug or abuse or medication. It does not
occur as a result
of a general medical condition.
The nature of the personality disorder is best described in the DSM-IV-TR
classification as “Cluster C Personality Disorder”.
This includes
Avoidant Personality Disorder, Dependent Personality Disorder, Obsessive
Compulsive Personality Disorder and a group
called Personality Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified.
Whilst this latter category is the least specific diagnosis, in this case
it probably is best applied to Mr Holbrook in that he clearly
has the features
of a personality disorder with its incumbent impairment to the individual but
the descriptors of his personality
traits do not fit neatly into a specific
He is by nature an inhibited, shy individual in his interpersonal
relationships whilst at the same time he is an intelligent and vociferous
who resents authority in a stubborn, self-destructive manner. He seeks
emotional connection but is unable to tolerate intimacy.
He is pathologically self conscious and feels most comfortable where he
feels the least susceptible to criticism. He does not cope
competition or censure. He expresses himself as single minded and something of
a dissident. His ideal is to be left to
his own devices where he feels he can
judge his own motives, monitor his conduct and evaluate the effectiveness of his
work without
taking into account the comments or criticism of others. He
remains convinced of the appropriateness of his views...
...I am not certain about the extent of supervised training undertaken by
Mr Holbrook with regard to his suitability to do “clinical
which is his stated preference. It seems to me that he has been drawn to this
work in the absence of sufficient academic
and clinically supervised training
and has operated in an environment where he has been able to continue in an
idiosyncratic way
for some time. This has however finally led to his
personality disorder. In order for him to practise in any clinical milieu,
appropriate
therapy to aid maturation and the associated understanding and
insight into his functioning would be mandatory, in my view.
In order for Mr Holbrook at some future time to practise safely with
children and young people he would have to demonstrate a significant
appreciation of those shortcomings and provide evidence that he has overcome
these deficiencies in a way that would convince
his peers and registration body
that he is no longer susceptible to any conduct that might place children and
young people at risk
in the future.
Respondent – evidence and Submissions
noted elsewhere the Respondent made submissions in writing (exhibit R1 –
Annexure D).
the first page of his statement (exhibit R1), after asserting that the signs and
symptoms of an adverse drug reaction (ADR) had
been misattributed
‘based upon confirmatory bias’
by Mr Milic, Dr Stewart, Dr
Diamond and Dr Keogh, the Respondent makes the following statement
(submission):
There is a mass of "evidence", (4 Lever Arch Files), to be
scrutinized by the Tribunal in a short period of time. May I suggest an
approach which will negate the necessity for reading much irrelevant
To determine the veracity of the HCCC assertions it will be necessary for
the Tribunal at some stage, to reach a decision as to the
impact of adverse drug
reactions (ADRs) upon me whilst taking the medications sertraline (Zoloft) and
diazepam. I suggest you establish
your perspective on this question early in
the inquiry to inform the validity of other evidence.
If you accept the evidence for the ADRs, only one example of poor conduct
will remain unaccounted for. The latter I attribute to
a stress reaction. It
occurred at a time when my character and career were being undermined by a
misguided EPAC process. (Now a
misguided HCCC process).
Alternatively if you reject my argument for ADR induced inappropriate
behaviour, inevitably, you will find me guilty of multiple examples
misconduct.
How you appraise this fundamental question will determine the sense that
you make of the collated "evidence".
Consequently ADRs are central to this case – so that that is where I
will begin my submission. I will outline the evidence
for an adverse drug
reaction to these medications compromising my practice as a psychologist. Also,
as I am not appearing in person
before the Tribunal due to insufficient funds,
you may make reference to my testimony given under oath in the related criminal
proceedings to support this written submission (
Having established the evidence for this, involuntary induced
intoxication, I will address the specific concerns listed by the HCCC.
will critique some of the "expert opinion" solicited by the regulatory agencies.
There is much repetition of material in
the various "expert witness" testimony
such that I will not concern myself with material rendered obsolete by an ADR
understanding
This approach helps structure the material so that one can see the wood
for the trees, and if the Tribunal read this submission (
and referenced
evidence) first, it will help counterbalance the confirmatory bias experienced
by the prosecuting agencies.
this point the Tribunal confirms that the entirety of the evidence and
submissions placed before the Tribunal by both parties was
Respondent makes detailed and lengthy submissions regarding the ‘ADR; from
pages 2 to 9 of his statement (exhibit R1). In
particular the Respondent refers
to the criminal case of
R v Hawkins
(2001) NSWSC 420
, a decision of
O’Keefe J. The Respondent repeats selected sections of this decision in
his submission. The Tribunal has had
regard to the entirety of this decision.
The Tribunal notes the defendant in this matter was convicted of the offence of
manslaughter
despite the acceptance that he would not have killed his wife had
he not been under the influence of a 250 mg dose of Zoloft taken
over four or
five hours. The defendant had taken 25 mg of Zoloft some time previously and had
experienced the adverse reaction of
feeling as if he was walking two feet above
the ground. The Tribunal notes that the reaction to Zoloft suffered by the
did not exculpate him from the consequences of his actions. Further,
there is a distinct and significant distinction between the
pattern of drug
taking of the defendant and that described by the Respondent in the current
matter. A careful consideration of R
reveals significant
distinctions between the conduct of the defendant and that of the Respondent.
One example of these distinctions
would be that the defendant immediately
realised the gravity of his conduct and set about dealing with the consequences
of his actions.
The Tribunal does not find
R v Hawkins
of particular
assistance in this matter, and is not of the view that an ‘ADR’ is a
matter that would, in the circumstances
of this matter, exculpate the
Respondent. It is a matter that may be taken into account when the Tribunal
considers the question
of the appropriate Orders to make in view of the finding
made with respect to the Complaints established.
Findings in relation to the Complaint Four
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s submissions regarding his
conduct being the result of adverse drug reactions
should be considered in the
context of the evidence in its entirety (as urged upon the Tribunal by the
Respondent in his submissions
– exhibit R1). This has been done by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal finds the inescapable conclusion to be that the
has retrospectively diagnosed ‘ADR’ as the excuse for his
conduct. Significant support for this position was given to
the Respondent by
the reports of Dr Lucire who has based her reports solely on the self-reports of
the Respondent made some five
years after they occurred and some results of
‘genetic testing’. Five years later there is no evidence of
contemporaneous
information from treating medical practitioners or therapists
being gathered or considered prior to the writing the reports.
Tribunal accepts the opinion of Dr Diamond that the Respondent is suffering from
an impairment, namely Personality Disorder. The
Tribunal recognises the general
debate associated with the diagnosis of Personality Disorder and accepts the
evidence supports the
identification of the coexistence an anxiety disorder made
by Dr Diamond. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent
from the impairment of Personality Disorder which detrimentally affects his
mental capacity to practise psychology and that
he poses a risk to children and
young people. Complaint Four is therefore established.
General Findings
Respondent’s reporting of his
use of Zoloft and Valium
Tribunal has considerable evidence with respect to the Respondent’s use of
Zoloft and Valium. A table of part of the Respondent’s
history of taking
these drugs was prepared by the HCCC. The Tribunal notes that this table is not
a complete history and has set
out some additional details above of the
Respondent’s reports of drug use. Although there is some evidence from the
records of various medical practitioners as to when prescriptions were
provided and the reports of the dosages prescribed or being
taken by the
Respondent at various times, much of the evidence with respect to the use of
these drugs comes from the reporting of
the Respondent. The Tribunal notes that
there are many inconsistencies in the reports made by the Respondent as to his
It is of particular concern that the Respondent stated that he
withheld some of the Zoloft from HealthQuest when had claimed he had
all of his supplies of this drug. He claims that his subsequent relapse into
self-medication with Zoloft from some left
over stock resulted in the conduct
set out in Particular 11.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC with respect to the evidence
and submissions put before the Tribunal by the
Respondent with respect to
‘ADR’ (see Annexure C).
Other submissions - HCCC
HCCC made further submissions not summarised above. The written outline of
submissions is attached to this document as Annexure
C. The HCCC submitted that
Complaints Two, Three and Four should be established and that the appropriate
order would be de-registration
accompanied by a period in which the Respondent
would not be entitled to apply for re-registration. Other HCCC submissions
a submission that this was an appropriate case for a Prohibition Order
to be made and for costs to be awarded against the Respondent.
Protective Orders
noted above the primary role of this Tribunal is to protect the public. The
Respondent has engaged in a course of conduct over
a lengthy period of time.
Even if it was accepted that all of his conduct arose solely as a result of
adverse drug reactions, it
is the Respondent’s evidence that he was aware
that the medication was affecting him and yet continued to take it, fairly
persistently.
is no evidence before the Tribunal that indicates this pattern of drug usage was
based on medical advice. This is, at the very
least, reckless conduct on the
part of the Respondent; it was conduct devoid of insight and is demonstrative of
a serious flaw in
his character.
Tribunal notes that even on the Respondent evidence he was not under the
influence of medication on at least one occasion described
in the Particulars.
Even If ‘ADR’ was accepted by the Tribunal, which it is not, it
could not explain all of the conduct
nor could it excuse the conduct. While the
Tribunal accepts that the Respondent took both Zoloft and Valium at different
Tribunal does not accept that it had the effect described by the
Respondent. The Tribunal has no doubt that medications of this sort
potential to affect people’s behaviours; The Tribunal does not accept that
it affected the Respondent’s conduct
in the pattern found herein.
is extremely unfortunate that the Respondent acted inappropriately towards a
number of children in his care. This conduct is damaging
to the reputation of
the profession of psychology, in particular to those engaged in school
counsellor services.
Tribunal notes that the conduct of the Respondent breached several sections of
the Board’s Code of Ethical Conduct, by which
all registered psychologists
are bound, as well as the Codes of Conduct binding those employed within the
Department of Education.
His conduct represents significant and serious
departures from accepted practices.
only did the Respondent have training as a psychologist, he also had training as
a teacher. These children in his care were not
only vulnerable by virtue of
their age and the power imbalance in the therapeutic relationship but also, in
the most part, by their
particular social and emotional states at the time.
nature of the conduct has substantial potential to cause harm to the children
involved. The Respondent’s conduct abused
the trust placed in him not only
by the children themselves but also by their parents and carers and the
Department of Education.
The vulnerability of children, in particular children
under the care and control of an adult, is well recognised in law and the
has seen fit to make special provisions in an attempt to protect
them. The criminal law specifically provides for more severe penalties
imposed on those who offend against children within their care.
conduct is of such a nature that is likely to bring the profession into
disrepute and has the potential to undermine the confidence
that the public
reposes in the profession. The misconduct is considered to the more serious by
the Tribunal given the period of time
over which it occurred and the repeated
nature of the conduct.
Tribunal has considered the possibility of placing conditions on the Respondent
restricting his access to children. The Tribunal
however cannot be reasonably
satisfied that similar conduct would not occur with members of other vulnerable
groups. Due to the nature
of the practise of psychology many clients will be
equally as vulnerable as the children involved in the matters subject of
One, Two and Three. The Tribunal is of the view that imposing
conditions on the Respondent’s registration restricting him to
only with groups other than ‘vulnerable’ would demonstrate that he
was unfit to practise psychology and therefore
the only appropriate order is one
cancelling registration (
Health Care Complaints Commission
v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297).
respect to the finding of impairment, the Tribunal notes that it is generally
accepted that there is no real cure for personality
disorders. Rather, persons
suffering from personality disorder are managed and treated. The history
provided by the Respondent to
Dr Diamond supports a view that his personality
disorder may have affected his conduct and his behaviour in the workplace from a
time prior to his departure from England.
the Tribunal has considered the opinion expressed by Dr Diamond as to
supervision conditions that may be appropriate, there
are significant and
relevant details of the Respondent’s conduct known to the Tribunal but not
known to Dr Diamond at the time
he provided his report. The Tribunal is not of
the view that conditions on Registration would protect the public despite fully
acknowledging
that there were no reports of issues when the Respondent was
formally supervised for a period by the Department of Education.
Tribunal is also of the view that no benefit can flow to the Respondent from not
attending the Tribunal in person.
Tribunal considers the Respondent’s initial denials deceitful, rather than
an ‘irrational decision’ as suggested
by Dr Lucire (paragraph 139 of
this document).
Tribunal is of the view that a even if the Respondent entered into consistent
therapy and complied with medical advice from a
medical practitioner with
appropriate experience and qualifications (who had been fully appraised of all
the issues raised in this
Reasons for Decision), given the length of time the
conduct occurred and the Respondent’s current state a minimum period of
three years would be required before the Respondent may be in a position o apply
to have his registration restored.
As the Tribunal has been advised that a Prohibition Order may have an impact on
his participation in a TAFE course he is currently
enrolled in, the Tribunal
will Order the Respondent to provide a copy of the Orders to the appropriate
supervisor of that course
if he has not formally graduated as at the date of
this decision. If the Respondent applied for re-registration in the future proof
of the supply of a copy of the Orders made herein to the course supervisor would
no doubt be required by the Tribunal convened for
the purpose of considering
such application.
Tribunal is of the view that any application for registration that may be made
by the Respondent after the expiration of the three
year period provided for in
Order 2 should be made to the Psychologists Tribunal of NSW (or the equivalent
successor in time). The
Tribunal is of this view for a number of reasons which
include; the fact that the Respondent chose not to attend before his
professional
disciplinary body to give an account of his conduct in person, his
claim to be under the influence of medication for many of the
established
Particulars, the period of time over which the conduct of the Respondent was
unprofessional, and the serious nature of
the conduct.
provisions of the Act relating to the award of costs are what is commonly know
as ‘costs follow the event’. The Respondent
indicated his objection
to this Order being made. The Respondent did not provide any material that the
Tribunal could consider to
support this objection. The Tribunal orders costs in
favour of the HCCC in the usual terms.
Publication
copy of this document should be forwarded to the Respondent, the HCCC, AHPRA,
the Psychologists Council of New South Wales and otherwise
as the Council and
the Psychologists Board of Australia sees fit.
The Tribunal orders:
(1) That the Respondent‘s name is to be cancelled from the Register.
(2) That the Respondent is not entitled to reapply for registration (a review of
Order 1) for a minimum period of 3 years from the
date hereof.
(3) That the Respondent is prohibited from providing the following health
services for a period of three years from today:
(i) therapy,
(ii) psychotherapy,
(iii) hypnotherapy,
(iv) mental
health service,
(v) welfare
services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
(vi) counselling,
(vii) massage
therapy to any person under the age of 18 years or to female patients and/ or
other alternative/healing health care/therapies.
(4) After the expiry of the period of three years in Order 3 above, the
Respondent is permitted to provide these health services
on the condition that
he gains registration as a psychologist or other health professional, at which
time the registration authority
should consider the further continuation of the
prohibition order.
(5) The Respondent is to provide a copy of these Orders to the appropriate
supervisor of the current TAFE course he is undertaking.
(6) The Respondent is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted
for an application to apply to
have the matter re-listed before the Tribunal to determine costs.
Dated 13 July 2010
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Hilary Tupling
___________________
___________________
Noel Greenaway
Annexure A - Index of Exhibited Documents
Annexure B -
Transcript of the Local Court Proceedings
Annexure C – HCCC
written Outline of Submissions
Annexure D – The
Respondent’s Submissions – exhibit R1
Annexure E -
Schedule of Names/Other matters Suppressed
INDEX OF EXHIBITED DOCUMENTS
HCCC v HOLBROOK
documentation
Certificate
of Registration (to be supplied)
Complaint dated 23 October 2009
of Complaint
from Department of Education and Training
(“DET”) dated 7 March 2007
from NSW Health dated 19 November 2008
Complaints 1 and 2
Particular 1
of Vaneta Donkin dated 20 June 2008 and letter to Ms Donkin from DET dated 1
August 2002
of Child A dated 20 June 2008
of Dave Harvey dated 7 March 2008
Particulars 2, 8 and 9
of Paula Kennett-Sloan dated 10 March 2008
Statement of Child B
Particular 3
of Child C dated 3 December 2008
of Jennifer Gunderson dated 25 March 2009
form completed by Beth Curnow dated 23 February 2004
of interview with Child C dated 2 March 2004 (and diagram)
of interview with Jessica Kratzman dated 2 March 2004
of Ros Mayberry dated 30 April 2009
to the Respondent from the DET dated 23 February 2004 and 12 March 2004
to the Respondent from the DET dated 24 March 2004
to the DET from the Respondent dated 31 March 2004
to the Respondent from the DET dated 19 November 2004
to the Respondent from the DET dated 25 January 2005
to the Respondent from the DET dated 10 January 2006
to the DET from NSW Police Force dated 20 June 2005 and letter to the NSW Police
Force from the DET dated 15 September 2005
to the Commission from NSW Police Force dated 3 March 2008 and Copy search
warrant issued to the Commission by NSW Police Force
dated 16 May 2008
Attendance Notice and Facts Sheet
of criminal proceedings at Ballina Local Court 11 December 2009 and 12 February
Particular 4
of Annette Fairhall dated 8 May 2008
Particulars 5 and 6
of Jane Anderson dated 25 June 2008 and handwritten note of Jane Anderson dated
22 March 2004
of Maryann Judge dated 18 June 2008
of Robyn McMullen dated 12 June 2008 and note dated 28 July 2006
Particular 7
of Geoff Coghlan dated 30 May 2008
of Robert Rodney Hollis dated 30 May 2008
note written by Diane Hardy dated 3 June 2002
of Henry Lohse dated 4 April 2008
Complaint 3
Particular 2
Handwritten
note of Child F dated 28 July 2006
of interview with Child F dated 18 August 2006
of Linda King dated 28 July 2006
to the Respondent from the DET dated 29 November 2006
to the DET from the Respondent dated 1 February 2007
Particular 3
of Robina Lathouras dated 30 May 2008
of Anita Frost dated 20 May 2008
of Alison Tuck dated 20 May 2008
of Corina Murray dated 29 July 2008
Complaint 4
of Dennis O’Neill dated 11 March 2009
Documents from/relating to EPAC Investigation and
HealthQuest
to Respondent from DET re referral to EPAC dated 3 August 2006 and 19 September
to HealthQuest from DET requesting medical assessment of Respondent dated 25
September 2006
to HealthQuest from the Respondent dated 4 October 2006
to the Respondent from the DET dated 6 October 2006
to HealthQuest from the Respondent dated 10 November 2006
HealthQuest
report (Mark Milic) on Respondent to DET dated 12 December 2006
to the DET from the Respondent dated 1 February 2007 and letter to the
Respondent from the DET dated 9 February 2007
to Carol Carrigan, Regional Director re outcome of EPAC investigation dated 26
February 2007
to the Respondent from the DET at conclusion of EPAC investigation dated 7 March
2007 (with enclosures)
to the Commission from HealthQuest dated 23 November 2007
HealthQuest report (Dr Michael Stewart) on Respondent
dated 14 December 2006
HealthQuest report (Mark Milic) on Respondent dated 11 December 2006
(extended version)
Correspondence between the Commission and the Respondent
to Respondent from the Commission dated 21 May 2007
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 29 May 2007
to Respondent from the Commission dated 6 August 2007
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 15 August 2007
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 7 November 2007
to the Respondent from the Commission dated 17 April 2008
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 22 April 2008
to the Respondent from the Commission dated 28 November 2008
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 11 December 2008
to the Respondent from the Commission dated 11 May 2009
to the Commission from the Respondent dated 3 June 2009
Expert Reviews/Assessments
of instruction from the Commission to Dr Timothy Keogh dated 8 February 2008 and
24 March 2008
of Dr Timothy Keogh dated 8 April 2008
of instruction from the Commission to Professor David Bennett dated 27 November
of Professor David Bennett dated 29 December 2009
to the Psychologists Board from the Commission dated 14 May 2008, email from
Psychologists Board to the Commission dated 28
May 2008 and letter to the
Psychologists Board from the Commission dated 11 July 2008
of Dr Michael Diamond dated 18 August 2008
Documents obtained from Respondent’s General
Practitioners
Stefahn Dunn
Meredith Betts
Hugh Dearnley
Ramana Panda
Ramin Harirchian
Documents obtained from Respondent’s Psychologists
John Kotroni
Sandra Masih
Documents obtained from Respondent’s Psychiatrist
Stephen Huntsman
Documentation relevant to professional
obligations/expectations
to the Commission from the DET dated 15 October 2007
to the Commission from the DET dated 4 June 2008
of Professional Conduct for Registered Psychologists dated 3 November 1997 and 1
November 2004
Covering letter from Registrar dated 16 March 2010 and copy summons
Transcript of proceedings at Ballina Local Court (to be inserted)
Miscellaneous formal Court notices
Statement of Child C dated 10 May 2005
Written Submissions by the Prosecution
Written Submissions by the Defence and character references
Documents provided by Dr Yolande Lucire (see separate internal Index)
DOCUMENTS FILED BY THE RESPONDENT
Statement/submission of Respondent dated 3 May 2010
Report of the Psychiatric Drug Safety Expert Advisory Panel PDSEAP
Antideprressants and Violence: Problems at the Interface of
Medicine and Law. David Healy et al, (2006)
Analysis of Adverse Behavioural Effects of Benzodiazepines With a
Discussion on Drawing Scientific Conclusions from the FDA’s
Spontaneous
Reporting System, Peter Breggin, (1998)
Recent U.S., Canadian and British regulatory agency actions
concerning antidepressant-induced harm to self and others: A review
analysis, Peter Breggin, (2004)
EPAC, Action Details, Liz Munro, 08/08/2006
Jane Anderson’s fax to Liz Munro, 14/08/2006
Verification by Principal of Annual Review of Teacher Performance,
(TARS), 12/09/2006
EPAC Case Officer, Action Details, P/C to Jane Anderson
EPAC Case Officer, Action Details, P/C from Ian Huxley PEO
Student Counselling
South Australian Acute Mental Health Risk Assessment Tool,
HCCC v HOLBROOK
Transcript of the Local Court Proceedings
IN THE LOCAL COURT
MAGISTRATE POGSON
FRIDAY 12 FEBRUARY 2010
R v Graham Patrick HOLBROOK
Mr Sanderson for the Informant
Mr Bell for the Accused
HIS HONOUR: I’ve gone through those submissions that you - or both the
submissions that you’ve given me which I prefer
to just take five minutes
and go through them again but there’s just a couple of questions. Mr
Sanderson in relation to -
there was a particular case that you quoted or I
think it might have been you Mr Bell in a matter of--
BELL: Hawkins your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
BELL: I could say something about that, just in response if I could.
HIS HONOUR: Before you do, in that matter where - I mean it was an entirely
different and a far more serious charge than this clearly,
how long had that
defendant been on that medication?
BELL: I’ve got a copy of the case here, it will probably take me a
minute to find it.
SANDERSON: A copy was actually handed up with that bundle of documents I
handed up on the last occasion your Honour.
BELL: What I did want to say about that though your Honour was that that was
in fact not a defence to the murder charge, it was something
that the DPP
accepted as diminished responsibility, the same as if he’d been
HIS HONOUR: That’s right.
BELL: And the Judge made those comments but certainly it was a plea of
guilty to manslaughter. It wasn’t a defence of automatism
or anything
HIS HONOUR: So
application was never made in respect to it?
HIS HONOUR: That’s what I was gathering from reading it, that’s
what I didn’t quite understand.
BELL: This was a Supreme Court trial for murder of his wife, it proceeded on
the basis that the Crown accepted an argument of what
was then called diminished
responsibility because of the drug and as a result he entered a plea to
manslaughter and was convicted
of manslaughter.
HIS HONOUR: Just so I can get it straight in the present case Mr Bell, do I
understand that the Zoloft that was taken on this occasion
was or was not
prescribed?
BELL: It was prescribed your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: And had been prescribed since 1999 I understand?
BELL: That’s correct.
SANDERSON: Well I would seek evidence of that. There’s a letter that
I’ve been given from a doctor who prescribed Zoloft
in 2004 when Mr
Holbrook came in and said “I’m using a certain amount of Zoloft
HIS HONOUR: Do we have that letter or that witness here? Have you seen it
BELL: It’s a letter I’ve shown to Mr Sanderson, I’ve got a
copy that’s been marked.
HIS HONOUR: I know it was discussed on the last occasion that you have
tendered your brief Mr Sanderson and had your submissions,
I think we were going
to proceed on that basis but I think we probably need the defendant himself to
give evidence to a certain extent
as to certain things contained, both in your
submissions and your submissions.
SANDERSON: In particular the issue in relation to the prescription of the
drugs and so forth.
HIS HONOUR: Well yes, a few items actually that will need to be addressed.
But if you’re happy to proceed that way, I’ll
do it whatever way you
gentlemen wish me to proceed with it but was it intended to call him?
SANDERSON: Well the only thing is and I think unfortunately this letter, I
don’t think it was going to be tendered but I think
it’s now become
an issue - part of the letter says, starts off saying that this doctor treated
Mr Holbrook for a workers comp
claim in February 2004 but it says “Prior
to this Graham had seen me for the first time on 23 April 2003--
BELL: Should be 2 actually.
SANDERSON: Well whatever that date is but still “requesting Zoloft 50
milligram half to one daily which he found he needed
when at work”. Now
that, if Mr Holbrook started using Zoloft in 1999 to my knowledge there’s
no evidence that that was
prescribed. He in fact went to this Dr Dunn and said
“This is what I’m using, I want a script for it”.
HIS HONOUR: Yes I understood it wasn’t prescribed.
SANDERSON: Well it was prescribed by Dr Dunn apparently in 2003.
HIS HONOUR: 2003 but we’re not talking about 1999.
SANDERSON: But in 1999 and that’s part of my major submission your
Honour that this wasn’t a side effect of the drug
that was used for
something else, for example if you were taking a blood pressure tablet and you
had some odd reaction to it, that’s
one thing. This man has expressed to
psychiatrists, and I don’t think we need any more evidence on this but he
says the very
reason he took the tablets was to give himself or to make him less
inhibited in relation to women.
BELL: Well I don’t think he says that.
SANDERSON: I think I can find that in the--
HIS HONOUR: I think it’s probably best, rather than just making
general comments, that we sort of have some formality involve
din this and if
you wish to cross-examine the defendant - I mean your case is contained in the
brief that you have presented.
SANDERSON: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Subject to cross-examination.
SANDERSON: Subject to cross-examination.
HIS HONOUR: And Mr Bell your case is contained in the submissions and
material you’ve provided.
BELL: That’s correct.
HIS HONOUR: Subject to his cross-examination too but no cross-examination of
any prosecution witness.
HIS HONOUR: Well I will formally admit the DPP brief as exhibit 1 and your
evidence Mr Bell as exhibit 2.
EXHIBIT #1 DPP BRIEF OF EVIDENCE TENDERED, ADMITTED WITHOUT OBJECTION
EXHIBIT #2 DEFENCE DOCUMENTS TENDERED, ADMITTED WITHOUT OBJECTION
MATTER INTERPOSED
BELL: I’d be asking your Honour if this matter could stand down so I
can explain to my client what we’re doing and if
your Honour would be
minded to finalise some other matters.
HIS HONOUR: Have you got any objection Mr Bell if I speak to Mr Sanderson
BELL: Not at all.
HIS HONOUR: It’s nothing to do with this it’s a completely and
utterly unrelated matter.
SANDERSON: I hope I’m not in trouble your Honour.
SHORT ADJOURNMENT
<ACCUSED, SWORN(12.00PM)
<EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF BY MR BELL
Q. Sir is your full name Graham Patrick Holbrook?
Q. You currently live at 41 Elizabeth Grove, Pottsville.
Q. You are aged 45.
Q. You came to Australia in about 1997.
Q. Prior to that you were born and raised in England.
Q. You attended university in England and attained certain qualifications,
can you just tell the court what qualifications they are
and where you obtained
A. I had a BA in General Arts from Durham University in English
Psychology and Russian Studies; I then did external examinations
for the British
Psychological society to get graduate status as a psychologist in the UK. I
worked as - I then did a Masters in
Educational Psychology but I didn’t
complete the course because I failed an assignment but I then worked for six
an Educational psychologist in Surrey Education Authority and then I
came across to Australia.
Q. Do you remember the date you arrived in Australia?
A. I think it was
Q. So you had worked as an Educational Psychologist prior to coming to
Australia. When you came to Australia where did you first
A. Okay there
was an advert in the UK that I responded to looking to recruit school
counsellors in the NSW Department of Education
so that’s what brought me
across so that’s what I tried to get employment as. They were happy to
take me but they also
wanted me to do the school counsellor training so I did
that part time through Charles Sturt and they put me out in Bourke in a posting
out in Bourke, like in the schools out there as a school counsellor in training.
I did that for a couple of years where I qualified
and then I became a
registered Psychologist in NSW in about 2000.
Q. So about when in 97 did you arrive in Bourke do you know?
October 97.
Q. Then you worked as a school counsellor out there.
Q. While at the same time doing what you had to do to keep registration as a
psychologist?
A. Yes doing the school counsellor traineeship through the
Department of Education and Charles Sturt University and then I did the
registration as a psychologist with the NSW Health Board.
Q. Then in 1999 you saw out in Bourke?
Q. Do you remember who that doctor was?
A. No I can’t remember,
she was an ex pom, she was a lady, there was only about two doctors in the whole
of Bourke but I can’t
remember her name.
Q. Why did you go and see her?
A. I’m a fairly introverted, quiet
sort of person. I guess I feel I struggled with being - some of the aspects of
which require you to be fairly extrovert and gregarious and
approachable.
Q. So you are talking about your role in an employment sense.
a social sense as well outside work so I was looking for something that might, I
guess, assist with that and there was
newspaper articles at the time by people
purporting to be ex patients who tried an SSRI called Zoloft and they reported
that it was
good for alleviating social anxiety disorder as well as
depression.
Q. So you say that social anxiety disorder and depression, now were you
actually diagnosed with any form of disorder at that time?
A. No I then went
to my GP in Bourke, this lady, and I said I’ve been reading about this,
would this help me and then she gave
me a script to try Zoloft under the
diagnosis of dysthymia which is sort of low level, ongoing persistent subdued
mood and also social
Q. It’s on that basis she prescribed you Zoloft.
Q. So the GP in Bourke but you’re saying that prior to that, you had
actually read about Zoloft and so you raised that with
Q. Now what was the initial dose that you were put onto do you
A. She started me on a starter pack which was these kind of
freebies that they’re given by the pharmaceutical company, they
think they are 50 milligram tablets but only a short number and so I just
started that. She said start slow so I broke
those down into four pieces and I
started on about 12 milligrams and I felt 12 milligrams was fine, that was
plenty so I had immediate
Q. You felt an immediate effect at that time.
Q. How long at that stage did you continue taking that Zoloft?
Q. For how long did you continue taking it?
A. I basically took it
continuously from that point, I suppose intermittently, as--
Q. From what point?
A. From when it was prescribed.
BELL: From the point it was first prescribed when in Bourke your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Which is 1999 or--
BELL: This is 1999.
WITNESS: It was a previous doctor, previous to Dr Dunn.
Q. You then from that time started taking continuously. When did you come
across from Bourke? You left Bourke at some stage.
A. It was about 99, I
think I came across in 2000 to Kempsey initially for six months and then I came
up to the north coast up here.
Q. In terms of the prescription of Zoloft how was that being
prescribed?
A. From memory because I think I had it prescribed to me in
Bourke towards the end of my time there, I had enough scripts because
they’re normally about half a dozen to last me I think until I saw Dr Dunn
so I can’t remember intervening doctors, so
basically that’s how it
continued because I was on a very low dose I guess at that point in time and I
was still having the
50 milligram tablets prescribed and I was just breaking
them so I could continue.
Q. So one prescription would last you a fair amount of time.
Q. When did you first start seeing Dr Dunn do you recall?
can’t tell you exactly but I know that in that report he’s written
obviously the first date is incorrect so it’s
either probably 2002 or 2001
but I couldn’t tell you exactly when but I was up here around 2001 so it
might have been then,
don’t know.
Q. Was the dose increasing over time.
A. Yeah as you take any medication
your tolerance develops over time so you have to increase the dose to get the
same effects.
Q. So if we take you now to the incident in 2004 which is the matter before
the court, what was the dose you were on at that stage?
A. 75 milligrams
when I started the term which was about the end of January,
beginning of February. I took that for about two weeks and then I had the
incident with the girl in question.
Q. I think you said that was the beginning of school term 2004 that you took
it up to 75 milligrams.
A. Yeah during the school holidays there’s
less obligation on me to be sociable, I try to reduce the dose because
just that continuous use of the medication makes me feel numb so I
couldn’t feel anything. I didn’t feel any pleasure
or anything so
while it would block things like anxiety, it took out the good side as well so
when I could, I would try and reduce
the dose during the school holidays and
then I resumed with the dose I felt I needed at the beginning of the term.
Q. So that was only a few weeks before the incident with Ms Ambrose
wasn’t it, beginning of school term.
A. Yes only about two and a half
weeks or something.
Q. So can you just explain to the court what were the actual effects that
you felt from the Zoloft generally speaking over the course
of the time that you
were taking it?
A. You feel euphoric, you feel invulnerable, you feel
obviously elated and full of confidence and feel that you were on top of the
world I suppose. There are some negative things that you find it more difficult
to focus and concentrate. I was aware to a certain
degree that there was some
cognitive distortion, I couldn’t think critically in that it kind of
anaesthetised part of your
brain so you can’t think of the negative things
Q. Can you just explain, you can’t think of negative things.
For example normally when you think about something you would weigh up the pros
and cons but that part of your brain which looks
at the cons, feels like
it’s ..(not transcribable).. and anaesthetised and you--
Q. That’s how you noticed the effects on you personally?
So I mean I, for wont of a better term, am sober now so I can talk about it
articulately but at the time when you’re
on the medication you’re
obviously not fully aware of how impaired you are.
Q. So what was it that led you to then take 75 milligrams at the beginning
of school term 2004?
A. I suppose there’d been a gradual progression
since 99, gradually, slowly been increasing the dose in about 12 milligram
and that was where it felt it was appropriate.
Q. So at the time of the incident did you recall - well do you recall the
incident with Ms Ambrose.
Q. How were you feeling at the time of that incident?
A. A bit like I
said earlier, I was feeling very elated, euphoric, powerful, invulnerable. I
was feeling deluded perhaps that I
was good at my job but I
obviously wasn’t because I wasn’t sensitive to where she was.
The whole point of being a counsellor is to be empathetic
and to be in tune with
somebody else’s feelings and where they’re coming from but I clearly
wasn’t. I was I guess
I was- my mood was being determined by the
medication so I was out of sync with her, I was in this state where I guess I
I did later on was okay when I initially started doing it.
Q. So you said that you were out of sync with the way that she was.
Q. What about your own thought patterns, your own level of judgment. How
did that feel?
A. Well you’re not, as I say when you’re on the
medication you don’t fully appreciate that you’re not functioning
appropriately so you’re just aware that everything seems rosy.
Q. You said that you actually do recall the incident with Ms Ambrose.
Q. You agree that you put your hand on her leg.
Q. And you’ve read her statement and you agree with the facts. Can
you say to the court why it happened?
A. She had interesting legs. She had
muscular legs. I mean she’s not Polynesian but in the way the Polynesian
big boned and have muscular legs, she had muscular legs and I wanted
to put my hands on them and feel what they were like.
Q. So you’re in a position where you’re a school
counsellor.
Q. Why did you do that?
A. Because it seemed like it was a good idea at
the time. Because I didn’t, I wasn’t thinking that she was a
I wasn’t thinking it was inappropriate because I was counselling
her, I was just thinking she’s got interesting legs.
What would it be
like to run my hands up the legs.
Q. And that’s all you were thinking?
A. Basically yeah.
Q. That’s what you can recall, that’s all you are thinking so
was there any level of actual critical judgment or thought.
A. No only when
she kind of - she was on a chair with wheels and I pulled it towards me and I
started running my hands up her legs
and then she pushed back with her legs so
that she wheeled backwards away from me and it was only when she sort of did
I was aware that she obviously wasn’t happy with what I was
Q. You then apologised, said ”I’m sorry” why did you do
A. I felt obviously what I’d done wasn’t what she wanted, no or
appropriate.
Q. Say that again sorry?
A. What I’d done wasn’t - you know
she wasn’t happy with it so it wasn’t appropriate.
HIS HONOUR: I couldn’t hear that.
Q. That what she did--
A. What I’d done.
Q. What you had done she wasn’t happy with it.
Q. So you apologised because she wasn’t happy with what you had
Q. But how did you feel yourself about what had happened.
A. Well I was
a bit nonplussed and also a bit, I suppose, embarrassed as well.
Q. I think you said before you felt, well you thought she had interesting
legs and you just wanted to touch them and that there was
no critical thought
preventing you from doing that. I think you said you didn’t think that
she was a minor or that thought
never entered your head.
A. Well I mean
normally obviously talking now I’m obviously aware that she was 14 turning
15 and that would make it totally
inappropriate but at the time it was not, you
know, ..(not transcribable).. that was kind of in that anaesthetised part of
your brain.
Q. So that’s what you’re saying that those critical thoughts
would have been anaesthetised--
A. By the medication.
Q. --by the medication at the time.
Q. If I can just summarise and my friend will tell me if I’m
overstepping. Effectively you are saying that your thoughts
- there was no
critical faculties there to prevent you basically acting on your thoughts at the
time which were related to the fact
that this person in front of you had
interesting legs.
Q. Now you’re saying that that was because of the medication?
SANDERSON: I hesitate to interrupt but I’m just not sure about the
witness giving expert evidence as to what the medication
was, other than from
what the psychiatrist says.
HIS HONOUR: Yes it’s pretty hard for him to express a medical opinion
BELL: It is hard. I’m trying to get it back to what he was feeling
HIS HONOUR: I think he’ll have to come to that conclusion without you
telling him what the conclusion is.
BELL: I don’t disagree with your Honour
SANDERSON: Even further though your Honour it’s asking him whether it
was the Zoloft that caused this, that’s for perhaps
a pharmacologist or
someone, not this man.
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
WITNESS: May I say something your Honour?
Q. No that’s okay. So when did you stop using the Zoloft?
After that incident I thought it - there was no way that I could carry on using
it. They put me on alternative duties as a child
protection measure so they put
me off out of schools into district office, shuffling bits of paper.
Q. I’m having trouble understanding you sir. The answer to the
question was when did you stop using it?
A. Yeah after this incident.
Q. That could mean a lot of things, how long after this incident?
Immediately. So immediately because I was aware that obviously I’d broken
a boundary that was unaccepted.
Q. So immediately after this incident you stopped using the Zoloft.
Yes they put me in a district office which I didn’t like because I was
away from counselling students which was what I enjoyed
doing but it was useful
in some ways because coming off cold so to speak without any rundown was quite
difficult so I got a kind
of rebound effect and I felt very emotionally fragile.
So I was able to do that, I still kept getting the script filled in at the
pharmacy so I was accumulating these packets of Zoloft--
Q. Why were you doing that?
A. Because it was reassuring to feel that I
had them there and it’s kind of like when you go to the doctor and you get
if you don’t use it you feel you kind of wasted it so I just
wanted to keep, I had about half a dozen allocations so I accumulated
packets that I wasn’t using.
Q. What did you end up doing with those.
A. Later on when the Department
of Education sent me to Health quest I took them down there.
Q. You went on to Valium for a while?
Q. What were the effects of Valium? Sorry I withdraw that. Once you went
onto the Valium what did you feel?
A. Okay I got a script for Valium as like
a substitute for using the Zoloft in that I determined that after this incident
consciously you know - it wasn’t appropriate for me to
carry on using it because I had such a bad reaction so I got the Valium
alternative. I didn’t use it for a long, long time and then I was flying
overseas and I was a bit nervous about flying
and that prompted me to use it and
then I found it made me feel relaxed so it had positive benefit in the way I saw
it and then later
on I took I guess too much at one go and it again had slightly
disinhibiting effect, a bit like being drunk on alcohol.
Q. So you stopped using the Valium at that time?
Q. You said you’re a qualified or registered psychologist. Are you
actually able to prescribe Zoloft yourself.
A. No the only sort of
psychologist who can do that is a clinical psychologist, they have additional
training and authority to prescribe
so they’re similar to a doctor or a
psychiatric nurse but I can’t do that.
Q. So you can’t prescribe to anyone or yourself.
Q. Just given your profession, are you aware whether it’s possible to
obtain that medication outside a prescription.
A. Well it would be illegal
and I wouldn’t know how to do it.
Q. You said that basically immediately after the incident with Ms Ambrose
you went off the medication.
Q. Once you went off the medication what were the changes that you
experienced in terms of your own feelings and thought processes.
said, immediately you get a kind of rebound effect because it’s been
elevating your mood artificially so I felt incredibly
vulnerable and fragile so
I didn’t want to really interact with anybody, that was quite - so
it’s like you’ve got
a massive hangover from alcohol, it’s
having that all the time and you just feel like, “just don’t talk to
Q. I asked you about your thought processes, obviously you said that at the
time of the incident with Ms Ambrose that you felt that
your critical faculties
or critical thoughts were inhibited.
Q. After you went off the Zoloft did you notice any changes in terms of the
way you thought and the way you perceived your thought
processes--
mean as critical thinking comes back, I don’t think the Zoloft has
permanently changed me. Sometimes I think about
it but I don’t think
Q. So what you’re saying is that you noticed a distinct difference
when you were off Zoloft to when you were on Zoloft.
<CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR SANDERSON
Q. Sir you’re aware that the statement by the young lady involved in
this incident has been tendered and you would know that
she says this about the
incident, that you pulled her chair over towards her, touched her legs--
Q. Over towards you, touched her legs, she then pushed her chair away and
you say that’s when you realised that she wasn’t
comfortable?
Q. And you said “Sorry?
Q. But after you said sorry, you said “Sorry you’re such a
A. Yeah I said that as part of the same sentence.
Q. So you came to the realisation that you were doing the wrong thing and
that you were sorry for it, but you added “You’re
A. Yeah I was kind of embarrassed and it was a way of putting
it on her, as though blaming her but it was unfair.
Q. Now what you spent some time telling my friend was the effect of the
Zoloft on you as you understand it. Perhaps summarised by
what you just said
earlier about wanting to elevate your mood. The effects of the Zoloft were
exactly what you were using the Zoloft
for, in other words you were using the
Zoloft to achieve an elevated mood is that right?
A. That is part of the
effect of it.
Q. You said this to the psychiatrist, this is on page 7 of the report
“I’m a quite, introverted person, cosmetic pharmacy
made me all
extroverted’.
A. Okay cosmetic pharmacy is the phrase that Dr Lucia
used so that was the reason - that’s echoed there, that’s not my
Q. And you also say, this is over on page 9, after the doctor says, this is
towards the end of page 9 - the doctor says to you “Did
you have any
increase in sexual desire” and you say “No I felt more confident as
if, if I liked someone, I’d be
happy to start a conversation, smile and be
A. That’s true.
Q. That’s exactly why you were taking Zoloft.
A. That’s not the whole reason as I explained to Mr Bell, I was taking
it for the broader social interaction as well.
Q. Certainly, social interaction. Would you agree with me and perhaps you
can’t answer this but what Zoloft is designed for
is the alleviation of
depression--
A. Also licensed to be used for social anxiety.
Q. Social anxiety. So let’s just take that. The social anxiety you
have detailed as being that you were a shy person, you’re
introverted person.
Q. And so that was what you call social anxiety.
A. There are some
people who think it’s not a legitimate disorder but it’s listed as a
disorder now.
Q. I think that the psychiatrist actually says what it really means is just
good old fashioned shyness.
A. That’s as I say the cosmetic
pharmacology is her phrase rather than mine.
Q. This cosmetic pharmacology, back sort of in about 1999 perhaps or about
that time the other drug perhaps better known than Zoloft
was Prozac would that
be right? Prozac actually - and this is where it became called cosmetic
pharmacology - was being used by lots
of people as a smart dug because they
could think better on it.
A. I didn’t know that.
Q. Certainly with the Zoloft you told the doctor that you read all about it
on the internet and you--
A. No I didn’t say that. I said I read
Q. Anyway that’s neither here nor there. You certainly read about it
and I’ll just go back to the point that you took
the Zoloft to achieve
exactly what it did do to you.
A. I didn’t take the Zoloft to abuse
A. Abuse minors.
Q. No, no but you certainly used the Zoloft to take away some of your
shyness and your inhibitions.
A. Self consciousness yes.
Q. And you know exactly and you remember exactly what you did to this
Q. And you told her you were sorry and then you called her a tease.
As I said I was embarrassed and I tried to put it on her.
Q. To a very large degree you have been self medicating on Zoloft
haven’t you? Very large degree?
A. I don’t know whether I agree
with that, I mean--
Q. Well for example you say - well I’ll just go to this, would you
agree with me that this Dr Dunn that you saw says this in
“Prior to this Graham had seen me for the first time on 23 April 2003
requesting Zoloft 50 milligram half to one
daily which he found he needed for
A. That date is wrong so it’s not 2003.
Q. Okay forget the date, say it’s 2002 even.
Q. You went into Dr Dunn and you said “I’m a psychologist, I
want a script for 50 mls” what is it “Half to
one a day” and
that’s what he did for you?
A. But I guess I also probably - although
I can’t remember the specifics, probably had previous packets that
using that I showed him from the lady in Bourke, the lady doctor
who prescribed in Bourke.
Q. How long did you see the doctor in Bourke for?
A. Probably just one
or two consultations.
Q. So you’ve had one or two consultations with a doctor whose name you
can’t remember in Bourke.
A. Yes she’s the only lady doctor in
Bourke at the time.
Q. Was she, you haven’t tried to investigate whether you can get
something from her to say she prescribed--
A. Nobody’s asked me
Q. No-one’s asked you for that, right. So you say that you saw this
doctor once or twice.
Q. When was the next script that you got?
A. I think it would have been
Q. Dr Dunn in at least 2002?
A. Could have been 2001.
Q. So from the period of - from 1999 to 2002 you were using Zoloft.
It could have been 2001.
Q. Okay maybe 2001 you were using Zoloft on the basis of having had one or
two consultations with a GP in Bourke whose name you can’t
Q. Then you were using the Zoloft between 1999 and 2002 or 1 or whenever it
was that you saw doctor and you were self medicating?
see why you think that’s self medicating.
Q. Well how long - we know how long - 1999 till at least 2001 that’s
two years isn’t it.
A. I guess the reason I wasn’t seeing
another doctor in the interval is because I had enough Zoloft because I was on a
dose so although it was prescribed in 50 milligram doses I was still on a
Q. So you’re telling us that between 1999 and 2002 you had enough
Zoloft prescriptions to keep you going for three years without
going to see a
A. That’s all I can recall, I can’t remember--
Q. Then you go in and see Dr Dunn and you say to Dr Dunn “I want 50
milligrams half to one a day, that’s what I’m
That’s not quite how it was.
Q. Well that’s - just read that to you again. “Saw me for the
first time requesting Zoloft 50 milligram half to one
daily which he found he
needed when at work”.
A. I would agree it’s much more the case
telling this is an existing script I’ve been on, can I continue it and so
Q. You told him, “Dr Dunn I’ve got this script from this doctor
out at Bourke whose name I can’t remember and it
was given to me three
years ago and I just want you to update it”.
A. Well because obviously
I'd run out so.
Q. Run out after three years. Is that right?
A. (no verbal reply)
Q. Just strictly on the self medication business, you say this to the doctor
“I’m a quiet, introverted person, cosmetic
pharmacology made me all
extroverted” blah blah blah “It was great for two weeks I gradually
put it up to one and a half
tablets, my general practitioner told me one or two
tablets”. Now which general practitioner was that?
A. As I say the
prescription I’ve always got is 50 milligram tablets because they -
that’s after the trial one anyway,
is because they’re easy to
subdivide or basically subdivide so you can either have less than 50 milligrams
or increase it by
breaking another tablet and have a bit more. Anything bigger
like 100 milligrams would have been too big so every script I had was
milligrams.
Q. You yourself are not qualified to prescribe Zoloft to anyone are
Q. But you know all this and you’re saying that you worked all that
as to how much you needed.
A. Because I guess the general instruction was to
take one to two tablets as required.
Q. That was the instruction on the first packet that you got in 1999.
Q. And were still using in 2002 or 1 or whatever.
A. Four even.
Q. You say this incident happened, this is what you say to the doctor,
happened in February 2004 a month after I restarted Zoloft,
restarting at 75
A. Yeah beginning of school term.
Q. So who told you to restart the Zoloft and to take 75 milligrams.
Nobody specifically, 75 milligrams was where I--
Q. You were self medicating?
A. I was following instructions, the
general instructions of one to two tablets as required.
Q. As required on your own self medicating prescription or diagnosis.
BELL: I object to that, that wasn’t the evidence your Honour.
SANDERSON: Well--
BELL: He’s saying quite clearly that’s what it says on the box
“take one to two tablets as required”. So
it’s not up to my
friend to--
HIS HONOUR: Yes I think the point, this is what was on the box that was
contained in 1999.
BELL: And also he said in 2004 as well your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Yes but this was not subject to supervision by any medical
practitioner was it.
BELL: But this has been prescribed by a medical practitioner yes.
HIS HONOUR: Well it had been - okay anyway continue.
SANDERSON: I won’t press that any further.
Q. You said this, on page 9 of the psychiatrist report “I felt
insulated from reality by the medicine. I have to admit I was
It’s not as if anybody in Australia had seen me before I became creepy or
inappropriate. I started Zoloft in 1999”.
Now this may be pedantic but
didn’t you say you came to Australia in 1997.
Q. And for two years you weren’t taking Zoloft.
Q. But no-one in Australia had ever seen you when you weren’t
A. When I said that I guess I was talking relatively in that I work
Department of Education for about nine years and I guess two of those years I
was unmedicated.
Q. Are you saying that you were creepy before you started the Zoloft?
I wasn’t did you say?
Q. Are you saying you were creepy before you started taking Zoloft?
Q. So that’s not expressed very well by the doctor. “I have to
admit I was creepy it’s not as if anybody in Australia
had seen me before
I became creepy or inappropriate”?
A. I did say that to the doctor
but that I guess was an inaccuracy in a verbalisation and I didn’t think
Q. An inaccuracy.
A. --required to specify precisely.
Q. In 2004 I looked at all the Zoloft history I thought I’m not going
A. Yeah that was about--
Q. Self medicating?
A. No that was about court cases and that most
people are found guilty.
Q. You actually made a workers compensation claim for anxiety because of
this allegation didn’t you?
A. Because of the alternative duties they
put me on yes.
Q. And the anxiety that you were suffering as a result of this allegation
being made against you?
A. It was more the alternative duties not the
allegation.
Q. Sometimes in this case sir I suggest that it’s a bit hard to work
out who is being characterised as the victim and who is
BELL: I object to that your Honour. I don’t think it’s in
SANDERSON: I withdraw that.
Q. When Dr Lucia that’s the psychiatrist she said the Zoloft was
prescribed by his general practitioner.
Q. So that’s either the unknown doctor at Bourke with the one script
or Dr Dunn who you went in and asked for specific medication.
Q. “He did not see a psychiatrist then, I am not sure that he has
actually seen one for treatment or medication review”.
A. That’s correct.
Q. So Dr Lucia the psychiatrist knew nothing about whether or not
you’d been actually prescribed the Zoloft other than for
what you told
Q. She’s not sure whether you saw any psychiatrist.
Q. You would agree with me that with a drug, an anti depressant like Zoloft,
the appropriate person to prescribe and monitor that
is a psychiatrist?
That’s not the way it works. I mean doctors prescribe.
Q. Doctors prescribe it when they clinically diagnose you as being
A. They also prescribe it for social anxiety disorder and
Q. That’s the shyness thing so they prescribe it if you’re not
going - if you don’t have the Dutch courage to approach
women in relation
A. That would be perhaps one symptom but it’s broader than
Q. And that’s exactly why you took it so that you would have the
courage to approach women--?
A. But as I said in that report I did have that
when taking it.
Q. Now you tell the magistrate here that the major reason for your
indecently assaulting this 14 year old student was because she
had interesting
muscly legs.
A.’ That's correct.
Q. So what you’re saying is this was like some sort of - you had an
interest in athletes and sport, perhaps at the school
and you thought jings this
girl could be a very good runner is that what you were thinking?
just had unusual, interesting legs.
Q. Yes and she was teasing you, that’s what you thought.
Q. At least that’s what you said to her, “You’re teasing
A. Yes I said that as I said because I was embarrassed.
Q. Teasing you with her athletic legs.
A. I don’t - that
wasn’t as though - I said the phrase about teasing because I was
embarrassed at what I’d done.
Q. The whole reason that you did this to this girl was because you were
seeking sexual gratification.
A. As I said it was more that I found her legs
interesting.
Q. Oh I see. Thank you your Honour.
NO RE-EXAMINATION
Q. Can we accept the fact that this Zoloft that you’re on, you had
been on it since 1999?
Q. On a regular basis?
A. Fairly consistently, I’d try and reduce
the dose during the school holidays when I wasn’t obliged to be so
Q. You did or you tried to?
A. Well I did.
Q. Would you regard yourself as addicted to medication?
difficult to give it up, addiction isn’t - it’s not technically an
addictive drug. I was probably dependent
on it for a certain amount of time.
Q. So you would call yourself dependent upon it but not addicted.
Well I was dependent until it reached a crisis point where I didn’t feel I
could use it any more.
Q. Could you tell me what the difference is between a dependency and an
A. Well an addiction is a technical, psychological psychiatric
term and technically Zoloft doesn’t qualify for that. I can’t
you the distinction but--
<THE WITNESS WITHDREW
SANDERSON: That I take it is the end of the defence case.
BELL: Yes it is.
SANDERSON: I ask your Honour to consider my written submissions. The only
point - well there is one thing I wanted to raise about
Dr Lucia’s report
which probably doesn’t really go to the case but your Honour might wish to
make some comment on it.
On p 3 of the report she says “My experience is
that judges and members of the legal profession who understand science in
evidence are more receptive to those who do not”. Sounds to me--
HIS HONOUR: I think that would be a pretty valid assumption.
SANDERSON: It might be but it sounds to me like it’s saying if your
Honour doesn’t agree with her views, then you aren’t
a very good
HIS HONOUR: I’m not a very good scientist.
SANDERSON: And you’re not meant to be. You’re meant to be a
judicial figure.
HIS HONOUR: I’m a hopeless scientist in fact at school I obtained half
a percent in science.
SANDERSON: Well your Honour then one would expect then for you to reject, on
this basis you would reject Dr Lucia’s point of
view because you
aren’t clever enough basically. Anyway that’s by the by. The major
thing in this your Honour is that
this man was taking this drug so that it
would have exactly the effect that it did on him, that is to relieve his
inhibitions. Why
I say this is more an intoxication case, this is no different
to going out and drinking six schooners so that you got the courage
put the hard word on someone. That’s what he’s done here.
It’s not like a case where say, I think I
might have said this earlier but
where you take a particular prescribed drug for high blood pressure and it makes
you act somehow
psychiatrically strange and that’s an unexpected side
effect; this is not a side effect of the drug, this is exactly the effect
man who was largely self medicating was seeking to attain. Dutch courage.
The fact that he said “sorry” and then said “You’re
a tease” is quite important because it means that
he was aware what he was
doing sufficiently that when she rejected him, and this is only a 14 year old
student by the way, but when
she rejects him he knows to say sorry but then he
adds “You’re a tease” as though you know - and that’s
whole flavour of this case seems to be no great concern about the
complainant. Poor Mr Holbrook is a victim in this because he took
some tablets
to give him some Dutch courage and then he did something inappropriate.
In my submission your Honour would find him guilty of the offence.
BELL: Your Honour my friend’s quite correct in that he said the whole
thing is about no concern for the complainant. Certainly
at the time
that’s what we’re saying, that there was no concern about the
complainant because of the effect that the
drug was actually having on the
defendant at the time. It’s not Dutch courage your Honour it’s
basically taking a drug
for legitimate reasons, for reasons that the drug was
actually prescribed but the side effects being that he found himself acting
not only inappropriate ways but in ways that are potentially criminal through
losing the critical and judgmental faculties that
are normally ascribed to human
The prosecution argument to that extent also not particularly relevant, just
saying he’s taking it for Dutch courage for a start
it’s not argued
that he wasn’t taking the drug. He was taking the drug, it’s a
prescription drug and a prescription
drug is a prescription drug. There’s
no evidence found of any fraud in obtaining that drug your Honour and misses the
point that these drugs were and are being handed out and prescribed
effectively without due regard to their side effects and that’s
expert statement of Dr Lucia. Dr Lucia is the expert, there’s no
expert being provided by the prosecution to rebut
what she said and she said
that the drug companies lie to doctors and patients and drugs effectively, it
seems that she is saying
are touted as the Emperor’s new drugs. So drugs
are taken to assist a patient to perform interact and to be more amenable
daily basis your Honour and that’s
exactly why drugs were being taken. In this case dealing with a social
anxiety disorder or dysthymia.
Now your Honour’s aware that he can go into a GP and just get Zoloft,
it doesn’t need to be prescribed by a psychiatrist
obviously no evidence that there needs to be any ongoing monitoring or
psychiatric intervention at any time anyway
and I guess we can take judicial
notice of the fact that going to doctors and you have notepads, pens with drugs
written all over
them, drug companies advertise and drugs are pushed in that
manner. You get drugs written on numberplates of doctors so your Honour
that’s the way it’s marketed, that’s the way that these drugs
are marketed, not only to the public but also to
the medical profession.
The prosecution in their submissions make certain comments in relation to
Dr Lucia. First of all that she has an agenda, that she
believes that the
drug companies design--
HIS HONOUR: I haven’t really - I don’t take any notice of
BELL: Thank you your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: I leave that out, I’m merely looking at this in relation
to not what she thinks, I’ve found quite - someone
not the usual
psychologist or psychiatrist ..(not transcribable).. from her brief appearance
in court that day but I’m more
interested in her findings as a matter of -
with her background not in relation to whether she thinks someone’s on an
BELL: Certainly given her background and her findings, that’s what the
evidence is before the court. There’s no actual
evidence before the court
to say that her findings are not correct, nothing from another expert to
actually undermine that and what
you do have now is the evidence of the
defendant basically saying yes I did take the drug on prescription, this is what
I felt when
I went to first find out about the drug, I had read about the drug,
this is the condition that I wanted to actually deal with and
prescribed the drug and I continued to take it and then just before this
incident occurred - this is important - just
before the incident occurred I
increased the dose to 75 milligrams, the prescription, the box said take one to
two tablets daily
as required, well 75 milligrams is one and a half tablets
daily. Obviously there wasn’t medical supervision occurring at the
and effectively it’s left up to the defendant to make that assessment or
judgment for himself. As your Honour would note,
there was never at any stage
any information given to the defendant and certainly there wasn’t until
2004 even in the Pfizer
right up or catalogue in relation to this drug any
warning as to side effects. So the defence case is very simple your Honour,
the evidence that the defendant was taking Zoloft that was
prescribed; medically, and this is important, this is what’s raised
Lucia, he had a genetic structure that couldn’t properly metabolise the
drug, that’s very, very clear. That led
to the toxicity which leads to
the side effects which then leads to the behavioural dysfunction and as Dr Lucia
says - and there’s
scientific evidence in that bundle of documents to
support that your Honour, to support the fact that that
toxicity does lead to behavioural dysfunction. Dr Lucia, given her
expertise, has said that it led to mental condition as a result
of that toxicity
and the consequent behavioural discontrol and that must be accepted your Honour.
Furthermore, I say in submission that but for the Zoloft Mr Holbrook would
not have committed the act that he did so therefore it
comes within
does raise a possible automatism and intoxication defences which are outlined in
my written submissions and the principle to
be applied here, with respect your
Honour is this, it’s not in the interest of the public or the law or the
individual involved
that someone who is prescribed the drug and taken it in good
faith, as he was, at a time when the side effects were not reported,
punished at law either as a deterrence or for other reasons your Honour. Those
are our submissions.
HIS HONOUR: Thank you. This is a charge where this defendant has been
charged with an aggravated indecent assault with a child under
the age of 18.
The act that is complained of is the touching of the bare thighs of this young
girl and running his hands up her leg
in the circumstance of aggravation being
the fact she was 14 years old at the particular time.
The statement of the victim herself, the relevant statement is contained in
paragraphs 13 and 14 of her statement. It would appear
that this young girl had
been seeking counselling from the defendant who was applied at the school as a
counsellor and had a degree
it would appear in psychology. Page 13 of the
statement reads:
“Graham was sitting on the chair beside the desk so he was facing
towards me. While I was drawing Graham grabbed the arm of
the chair that I was
sitting on and pulled me and the chair towards him. My legs came in between his
legs as he was sitting on his
chair. Once I was there Graham put both of his
hands on both of my knees. Graham moved his hands up on both my thighs. He was
walking his fingers up my thighs, like creeping as if a spider, as a spider
would. As he did this his hands were bunching up my
skirt causing it to be
pushed up into my lap. Graham got to the tops of my thighs with his hands and
my shirt was bunched up. I
pushed myself in my chair backwards away from
Graham. The chair that I was sitting at was on wheels.”
Paragraph 15:
“I didn’t say anything to Graham, I was in shock and I
didn’t expect that”
then certain portions have been cut out.
“Graham said “Sorry you’re just a tease”. He said
“You should get back to class now”. Graham
said “You’ll
need a note”. She said “Screw the note”.
There is no denying that the acts complained of by the defendant(as said)
were in fact carried out by him. What he is saying that
it was an involuntary
act. That he was suffering a mental condition at the time. That mental
condition was brought about, it
would appear, by taking this drug called Zoloft.
This offence occurred in 2005 and he had been taking this drug since 1999, a
of some five years. During the course of that five years there has been
no other report of instances just this one particular case
on this day.
It’s been put that because of that, I should deal with this under s 32 of
the Mental Health Forensic Procedures
Section 32 states:
“Persons suffering from mental illness or condition. If at the
commencement or at any time during the course of the hearing
proceedings before a Magistrate it appears to the magistrate
(a) the defendant is or was at the time of the alleged commission of the
offence to which the proceedings relate, developmentally
disabled or suffering
from a mental illness or suffering from a mental condition for which treatment
is available in a mental health
facility but is not a mentally person and that
on the outline of the facts alleged in the proceedings or such other evidence as
magistrate may consider relevant, it would be more appropriate to deal with
the defendant in accordance with the provisions of this
part than otherwise in
accordance with law, the magistrate then may take the following
decisions.”
That section involves two parts. One, whether the defendant was suffering a
mental illness at the time or any time during the proceedings
I think it’s
necessary to come to that conclusion, and secondly, if it is more appropriate to
deal with it in accordance with
that act rather than at law.
A report has been provided by Dr Lucia who is a forensic medico legal
psychiatrist. She has prepared rather a lengthy report dated
24 April 2009. It
must also be remembered that the defendant himself is also a psychologist. She
gives a report which indicates
that at the time the defendant was suffering from
a mental illness as a result of taking Zoloft and that, as such, the acts he did
on that day were involuntary and therefore in her opinion he was suffering from
a mental illness brought about by the taking of this
She mentions on page 5 that Mr Holbrook, that is the defendant, started on
Zoloft around 1999 and was on 12 milligrams which is about
a quarter of the 50
milligram tablet. 50 milligrams is the standard dose. She says Mr Holbrook had
no physical or mental disorder.
He said “I get a low mood sometimes. I
can be taciturn. Around 1999 I read all about Zoloft.” So it is clear
in 99 he had done a great deal of reading into that particular drug and no
doubt the effects that drug would have upon him. After
reading that material he
then, it would appear, sought medical advice and was prescribed this medication.
At the bottom of page 5
of the report apparently quoting the defendant again, he
said as to the effects of the Zoloft “Excellent initially, it gave
lift, it made me more extroverted and positive and then it stopped doing that
and I had to increase it. I never got that same
positive buzz again without
side effects”. So again he is saying there were side effects although he
doesn’t say at
that stage what those side effects were.
She then goes on to say or the doctor then says “What did you
“Mr Holbrook is a psychologist, he answered me in a psychological
language. ”Cognitive impairment, I wasn’t able
to focus, I
wasn’t able to discriminate, I couldn’t think, I couldn’t
judge..(not transcribable).. in my head.
I felt part of my head was
anaesthetised.” Despite that he continued in his occupation as a
professional counsellor at a school.”
It then goes on in page 7 on the report, the events of 2004, the 2004
“I took myself off Zoloft after the indecent assault incident. She was
a 14 year old, upset because the teacher had confiscated
her mobile. I was on
75 milligrams of Zoloft and I felt entirely ..(not transcribable).. “
Comment, he knows this is called
psychic numbing, nothing matters, people are
devoid of feeling. “I couldn’t work out why she was so upset. Both
and I were sitting on office chairs with wheels. I’d pulled her
chair closer to me. It was then after touching her thighs
and only when she
pushed her chair away again that I was able in my medicated state to recognise
that she was uncomfortable with
what I was doing and that it was inappropriate
and that I should stop which I did. She told people immediately.”
It would appear at the time he did it he knew it was wrong. He also placed
himself in a situation knowing the side effects and knowing
and recalling, in
memory of course these events took place in 2004 after having been on the drug
it would appear at that stage for
some five years. The reason he took the drug
would appear to give him a lift to avoid the inhibitions both sexually and
that he experienced in the past. He was a fairly placid person and
felt a need, it would appear, to get a lift. As he said he had
no experience of
women other than kissing and this drug was taken for the purpose of lifting his
mood and getting rid of suppressed
inhibitions. That was the intention of
taking the drug therefore if that happened, which apparently it did, it could
not be regarded
as a side effect of the medication that he was taking.
My concern is that as I have said before, he was a psychologist. He had done
a great deal of reading in relation to the drug and
had been using it the whole
time whilst he was in fact placing himself in a position of dealing with school
children on a one on
one situation on most occasion, knowing that his
inhibitions could be wiped out, so to speak, by the taking of this drug. Then
one occasion it would appear this event happened which, from his comments, he
knew darn well was inappropriate. It wasn’t
a matter that he realised it
later on. And then the comment of course “well you teased me”
clearly in his mind, although
he said he pulled the chair away when he thought
it was wrong, he had the intention of doing what he was doing. Had she not
the chair away no doubt he would have continued. Even that knowing the
fact it was wrong.
I cannot be satisfied that he was in fact suffering from a mental illness at
the time. It was a condition that he was suffering,
I accept his movements on
that day, he had less inhibitions as a result of taking this medication but he
had taken it for five years.
Even if I accept that he was suffering a mental
illness, which I don’t, going to the second leg and bearing in mind the
circumstances
under which this offence occurred and knowing that he had the
background of the effects of this drug and taking it for the sole purpose
ultimately he did achieve, then it would be inappropriate in my opinion to even
deal with it under that particular section
and I think it is more appropriate
the matter be dealt with at law.
Now what is the current situation. I assume that the job is - he is
suspended from the position he is in?
BELL: That is correct your Honour. Currently suspended and there are also
currently proceedings on foot by the Psychologist Registration
Board which have
been put off basically, one could say, until this hearing has been
HIS HONOUR: I do accept Mr Sanderson that what he did was a result of
taking the medication, to a certain extent, but done with
the knowledge of
taking the medication, what the outcome may well be.
SANDERSON: Yes. Much like drinking beer.
HIS HONOUR: Is there any prior record?
SANDERSON: No. I’m sure there is not, is there?
HIS HONOUR: Do you wish to make any submissions as to what should be done?
What penalty should be imposed? I think I know what
I want to do but--
SANDERSON: The only comment I’d make and I’m not certainly
urging in any way that as a result of these proceedings, the
accused can’t
really say that he has shown much remorse.
HIS HONOUR: I accept that proposition. Yes Mr Bell what do you wish to
BELL: Well your Honour we are asking for your Honour to deal with it by way
HIS HONOUR: That would not be appropriate.
BELL: Okay.
HIS HONOUR: I certainly would not be dealing with it by way
BELL: Okay your Honour. So far as the lack of remorse goes, your Honour -
and I presume having got to this stage you’ve also
- because you raised
automatism and intoxication. I presume
you’re saying that you don’t
find those are made out either?
HIS HONOUR: I don’t think - not on what I can see. Not on the
evidence that is before me having considered that report and
the circumstances
under which the offence was committed and his background as a psychologist.
BELL: Thank you your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Taking medication to achieve a result that he was trying to
BELL: There is some taking of responsibility your Honour to the extent that
obviously he hasn’t asked for the young person
to be called to give
evidence. He’s taken responsible for the fact that the incident actually
occurred but what he’s
actually asked the court to do is decide what is
actually a very, very important legal issue and that is the effect of drugs on
ability to act. Your Honour’s found that the effect of
the drugs wasn’t enough for the defences or the s 32 application
made out. What we do have is somebody without any priors with evidence of
adverse effects of the drugs. Scientifically there
is that evidence before your
Honour that these drugs cannot be properly metabolised by him so they do have
an adverse effect.
Your Honour’s found the offence has been committed but in my respectful
submission your Honour, there are extenuating circumstances
in relation to the
commission of this offence. Obviously since the time of the incident he’s
effectively received extra judicial
punishment in terms of the fact that
he’s lost his job, it’s likely that he’s going to lose his
profession. If
I just hand up to your Honour, there’s two letters, one a
character reference and one from a clinical psychologist that indicates
has entered into a therapeutic relationship since the commission of this offence
which obviously wasn’t existing prior
to the commission of the offence
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: I might just consider this over lunch if you don’t
LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
HIS HONOUR: Continue Mr Bell.
BELL: Effectively your Honour he didn’t take the drug with the intent
obviously of going and doing something to somebody who
is one of his clients
that was adverse, nor did he actually take that drug with any other thing in
mind than trying to effectively
make himself more a confident person, both in
the workplace and socially and that was the reason for taking the drug and that
the reason that people do take those drugs. I ask your Honour to note there
was nothing in the way of any reports of adverse side
effects at the time he
started taking the drugs and it’s only been in more recent years that a
lot of this has started to come
out. Certainly your Honour we submit, but for
him actually taking the drug, there wouldn’t be any crime.
Your Honour it’s a different case to somebody who says “I’m
going to have a drink tonight”, it’s Dutch
courage, and goes out and
you know tries to score, to use the vernacular, you know, full of grog and full
of confidence. It’s
just not that sort of case your Honour. This is an
otherwise decent, law abiding citizen in a responsible profession who has made
poor judgment which is now affecting the rest of his life, I ask you to take
that into account, but the judgment was made under
the effects of the drug and
as your Honour said, there is still the evidence of Dr Lucia that says that
really can’t be ignored
that the effect of that drug - the effect of that
drug did play on him. I did say at the beginning your Honour that we would ask
you to consider dealing with this matter by way of s 10 because of extenuating
circumstances and everything else that is before you.
I know your Honour said
at that stage you weren’t considering that. I’m asking you to
reconsider that. In my respectful
submission this is definitely an extenuating
case. The fact that he’s actually defended it has not been - does not
that there’s no remorse, does not indicate that he hasn’t
taken responsibility, it is because there is a very important
legal issue to be
decided; in my respectful submission your Honour he can’t be punished or
penalise further for that. Those
are my submissions your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: I’m not saying that he took that drug for the sole purpose
of doing what he did to this particular girl. I am
saying that by taking that
drug, he would have known that with less inhibition there was a possibility,
certainly being in the situation
he was in, and completely devoid of those
inhibitions that he could have then in the situation he was in, could have
committed this
offence and that’s something he should have well known,
bearing in mind the background he carried out in respect of this particular
drug. Mr Sanderson what do you want to say in relation to this penalty? A
person of otherwise good character and a person of otherwise
unknown convictions
or a clear record I should say is that the case.
SANDERSON: Yes. I don’t believe that your Honour would be considering
full time custody.
HIS HONOUR: No. I certainly would not.
SANDERSON: It’s really a question of probably s 10 or a conviction.
Your Honour I’ m not becoming involved in forensic
urging but it is - the
actus is not terribly serious but in the context of--
HIS HONOUR: I accept that.
SANDERSON: --the girl being a 14 year old student.
HIS HONOUR: Position of trust.
SANDERSON: --on her own with him and what
he did, I think justice requires that there be some penalty.
HIS HONOUR: Yes. It’s very difficult. All sexual offences involving
women or children I should say are certainly serious
matters and, for all
intents and purposes, usually are deserving of a custodial sentence. But
having, as I say, come to the conclusion
on the evidence before me that this is
a situation that he could have foreseen as happening but continued to place
himself in that
situation as a school counsellor with young girls and still
continued to take the medication is of concern. But having said that,
accept the fact that it was a result of this medication that this offence
probably was carried out and in that regard it
certainly could be a mitigating
Although there has been no contrition by the course that has been taken, it
has also led to the victim not being called and hence
that is another fact that
must be taken into account, that she has not been put through the trauma of
reliving the events on that
particular day.
That, combined with his lack of a record and being a person of otherwise good
character, leads me not to consider a custodial sentence
on this particular
occasion. I think in all the circumstances it would send a very wrong message
for someone to be accused of this
offence albeit under the influence of a drug,
to be dealt with by way of s 10. I do not think that that is appropriate in the
circumstances.
IN RESPECT TO THIS MATTER HE IS CONVICTED. I DEFER PASSING SENTENCE PURSUANT
TO S 9 CONDITIONAL UPON HIM ENTERING A BOND TO BE OF
GOOD BEHAVIOUR FOR A PERIOD
OF 12 MONTHS.
COURT COSTS $76.
HCCC v HOLBROOK
HCCC WRITTEN OUTLINE OF SUBMISSION
HCCC OUTLINE OF SUBMISSION
INTRODUCTION
submissions are made on behalf of the HCCC.
HCCC reserves the right to further supplement these submissions either orally
and/or in writing at the hearing.
Graham Patrick Holbrook is a registered psychologist under the Psychologist Act
2001 (“Holbrook”).
complaint dated 23 October 2009 lists four complaints against Holbrook.
first complaint is that Holbrook has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of section 25 of the
Act in that he has demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill, judgment possessed, or care exercised, by him is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training and experience and/or he has been guilty of
or unethical conduct relating to the practice of or purported practice
of psychology.
second complaint is that Holbrook has been guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of section 24 of the Act in that
he has demonstrated that the
knowledge, skill, judgment possessed, or care exercised, by him is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training and experience and/or he has been guilty of improper or
conduct relating to the practice of or purported practice of psychology.
third complaint is that Holbrook is not of good character.
fourth complaint is that Holbrook suffers from an impairment which detrimentally
affects or is likely to detrimentally affect
his mental capacity to practice
psychology.
particulars of the first two complaints are identical.
third complaint relies upon the particulars of the first two complaints plus two
further particulars.
fourth complaint has three separate particulars.
to proceeding with the complaint the HCCC had consulted with the Psychologist
Registration Board of New South Wales in accordance
section 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 34 of the
Health Care Complaints Commission
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR
HCCC v Mazaleigue
[2009] NSWPST 3).
In the exercise of its
protective jurisdiction the Tribunal is required to take into account the
maintenance of the standards of
the psychologist profession, the maintenance of
public confidence in the psychologist profession and the protection of the
Gayed v Walton
, unreported, NSW CA, 31 July 1997 at page
object of protection of the public may require that a psychologist be removed
from the Register in order to:
(a) protect the public from the risk of recurrence of further
professional misconduct;
(b) deter the psychologist in question from repeating the misconduct and
deterring others who might be tempted to fall short of the
high standards
required of them; and
(c) maintain the standards of the profession or maintain public confidence in
the profession.
Skinner v Beaumont
(1974) 2 NSWLR 106
at 109 per Hutley JA and
Buttsworth v Walton
(Court of Appeal of NSW, 19 December 1991 at 15)
addition, the public, and professional colleagues, must be able to repose
confidence in the profession. The maintenance of professional
ethical standards
requires not kindness but hardness, not flexibility but intransigence (see
Skinner v Beaumont
at 109D). An element of deterrence is an assurance to
the public that serious lapses in the conduct will not be passed over or lightly
put aside, but will be appropriately dealt with (see
Law Society of NSW v
(1994) 34NSWLR 408 at 471B.)
Legislative Framework
4 of the Act deals with complaints about psychologists.
26 specifies the grounds for complaints against a psychologist. They include in
s26(2) that the psychologist:
(a) has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, or
has been guilty of professional misconduct, or
(b) suffers from an
impairment, or
(c) is not of good character.
25 gives the meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”. This
section provides that "unsatisfactory professional
conduct", in relation to a
registered psychologist, includes any of the following and there follow 5
subparagraphs. Relevantly it
includes any conduct that demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the psychologist
the practice of psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training
or experience and
any other improper or unethical conduct by a psychologist in the course of the
practice or purported practice of
psychology.
25 gives the meaning of “professional misconduct", in relation to a
psychologist to mean “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” (as
defined above) of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or
cancellation of the psychologist’s
registration.
“Conduct” is defined in s3 of the Act to mean “any act or
effect of s25 is that in order for conduct to be “professional
misconduct” the conduct must first qualify as “unsatisfactory
professional conduct”.
10 of the Act defines impairment: This section provides:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person suffers from an
impairment if the person suffers from any physical or mental impairment,
disability, condition or disorder that detrimentally affects or is likely to
detrimentally affect the person’s physical or
mental capacity to practise
psychology.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person who habitually abuses alcohol
or is addicted to a deleterious drug is taken to suffer
from an impairment.
these proceedings in respect to complaint 4 the HCCC relies on s10(1).
In the Practice of Psychology
1 to 3 rely upon conduct in the practice of psychology or purported practice of
psychology.
concept of “practice” is broadly defined (see
Childs v Walton
(NSWCA unreported 13 November 1990 and
Yelds v Nurses Tribunal
Adams J at [19]). In
Roylance v General Medical Council
, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council discussed the extent to
which conduct may be characterised as ‘professional misconduct’.
Committee said at [39]:
In the present case the critical issue is
whether, if there was misconduct, the misconduct was "professional misconduct".
for the respondent pointed out it is not simply clinical misconduct
which is in issue. Professional misconduct extends further than
that. So it is
not simply misconduct in the carrying out of medical work which may qualify as
professional misconduct.
But there must be a link with the profession of
Precisely what that link may be and how it may occur is a matter
of circumstances. The
closest link is where the practitioner is actually
engaged on his practice with a patient.
Cases here may occur of a serious
failure to meet the necessary standards of practice, such as gross neglect of
patients or culpable
carelessness in their treatment, or the taking advantage of
a professional relationship for personal gratification.
first and second complaint concerns a breach of s25(a) and (e) which refers to
the practice or purported practice of psychology”
Oceanic Life Limited and Anor v Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties
NSWCA, Fitzgerald JA said at [56] when considering the phrase “relating
"The width of the phrase `relating to' is undoubted.
Lord Macnaughton stated that `[t]here is no expression more general or
far-reaching',
IRC v Maple & Co (Paris) Ltd
(1908) AC 22
, 26. See also
Fountain v Alexander
[1982] HCA 16
(1982) 150 CLR 615
(629); Colakovski v
Telecommunications Corporation
[1991] FCA 152
(1991) 100 ALR 111
; Secretary, Department of
Foreign Affairs & Trade v Boswell
[1992] FCA 321
(1992) 108 ALR 77
; PMT Partners Pty Ltd
(in liq) v ANPWS
[1995] HCA 36
(1995) 131 ALR 377
, 398, although the addition
of the words `or depending on' was presumably intended to give the combined
phrase `relating to or depending
on' a wider operation than `relating to'. The
difficulties of construction presented by such language have also been noted.
J observed that `...the expression `relating to'...is...vague and
indefinite...' and `...leaves unspecified the plane upon which
the relationship
is [to be] sought and identified.' Tooheys Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties
(NSW) [1961] HCA;
[1961] HCA 35
(1961) 105 CLR 602
, 620. One area of debate has been whether,
in particular legislation, a relationship need or need not be `direct' or
`direct and
immediate'. See, for example, Ausfield Pty Ltd v Leyland Motor Corp.
of Australia Ltd (No 2)
[1977] FCA 6
(1977) 14 ALR 457
, 460, 462; Re Dingjan; ex p Wagner
(1995) 182 ALR 81
, 110, 115; Joye v Beach Petroleum NL & Cortans Ltd (in
[1996] FCA 1552
(1996) 137 ALR 506
, 514. See also Perlman v Perlman
[1984] HCA 4
(1984) 51 ALR 317.
Overall, the position judicially adopted has been that the operation of the
phrase `relating to' is determined by the statutory context
and purpose. Butler
[1984] FCA 118
(1984) 55 ALR 265
, 268; Hatfield v Health Insurance Commission
, 106-107."
Yelds v Nurses Tribunal
[2000] NSWSC 75
Adams J held at [24]:
In the context of this legislation, I consider that the
necessary relationship between the alleged misconduct and the practice of
nursing for the purposes of s4(2)(e) is demonstrated where the misconduct shows
attitudes or characteristics inconsistent with the
moral qualities fairly
required of a person undertaking the responsibilities of nursing.
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Spigelman CJ said:
"There is authority in favour of extending the
terminology "professional misconduct" to acts not occurring directly in the
of professional practice.
That is not to say that any form of personal
misconduct may
regarded as professional misconduct.
authorities appear to me to suggest two kinds of relationships that justify
applying the terminology in this broader way.
First, acts may be sufficiently
closely connected with actual practice, albeit not occurring in the course of
such practice. Secondly,
conduct outside the course of practice may manifest the
presence or absence of qualities which are incompatible with, or
for, the conduct of practice.
In this second case, the terminology of
"professional misconduct" overlaps with and, usually it is not necessary to
distinguish it
from, the terminology of "good fame and character" or "fit and
proper person
"."(emphasis added)
High Court in
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South
[2004] HCA1 held at [20]:
The dividing line between
personal misconduct and professional misconduct is often unclear.
Professional misconduct does not simply
professional
person. At the same time, even though conduct is not engaged
in directly in the course of professional practice, it
connected to such
as to amount to
professional
misconduct.
Furthermore, even where it does not involve professional
misconduct, a person's behaviour may demonstrate qualities of a kind that
require a conclusion that a person is not a fit and proper person to
(emphasis added)
issue of whether a practitioner who breaches an employment code of conduct
engages in professional misconduct is a more complex
question (see
Dartford & Gravesham. NHS Trust
[2003] UKHL 27
(22 May 2003) and
Saeed v Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust
[2000] Lloyd's Rep Med
Improper or unethical conduct
considering the issue of improper and unethical behaviour, one of the matters
the Tribunal will have regard to is the relevant
Code of Conduct (see
Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) v Mead
[2007] NSWPST 3
Biersteker No 1
[2007] NSWPST 2).
That code of conduct is found at Volume 2
of the HCCC at Tab 29.
order for professional misconduct to have been established on the basis of
improper and unethical conduct, there needs to be evidence
professional reprobation (see
(unreported, NSW
Court of Appeal 13 November 1990). Improper conduct in a professional respect,
is misconduct that falls short of
infamous conduct. It is constituted by
something less than serious misconduct but is, nevertheless, conduct which would
be regarded as improper by professional colleagues of good repute and
competency (see
A Practitioner v The Medical Board of Western Australia
[2005] WASC 198
NSW Court of Appeal case
Pillai v Messiter [No 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
gives assistance on the distinction between unsatisfactory professional conduct
and professional misconduct
In that case, Kirby P noted that:
The statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more
required. It includes a deliberate departure from accepted standards or such
serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to
portray indifference and an
abuse of the privileges which accompany registration as a medical
practitioner.
Subsequently he noted comments made by Hutley JA in a journal article as
Professional
seems, in the eyes of the profession, to be concerned
with moral delinquency of some kind ... The authorities relied on provide no
justification for the degree of indifference to negligence and/or incompetence
exhibited by the Law Society in the past.
Kirby P then continued:
These remarks, read in their context, do not justify a conclusion that
mere negligence or incompetence amounts to “misconduct”.
would be to reverse many years of authority.
The purpose of providing such a drastic consequence is not punishment of
the practitioner as such but protection of the public. The
public needs to be
protected from seriously incompetent professional people who are ignorant of
basic rules or indifferent as to
rudimentary professional requirements. Such
people should be removed from the register or from the relevant roll of
practitioners,
at least until they can demonstrate that their disqualifying
imperfections have been removed.
Not of Good Character
3 relies upon Holbrook not being of “good character”.
was noted in
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
that the concept of
“good character”, though given statutory recognition, is not one
which bears some special or technical
meaning: rather, the words are used in
their ordinary meaning. Such a meaning has traditionally been identified as a
question of
fact, not law. Further, it is necessary to consider aspects of
character, which are relevant to the exercise of professional functions.
question of what “not of good character” means in practice is a
complex one (
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) v McKay
question for the Tribunal is not one of good character in the general sense
but good character of a person seeking to practice
as a psychologist
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR(NSW)
at 475.4 at 475.4).
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
476.1 Homes JA stated:
“Good character” is not a summation of acts alone,
but relates rather to the quality of the person. The quality is to
be judged by
acts and motives, that is to say, behaviour and the mental and emotional
situations accompanying that behaviour. However
character cannot always be
estimated by one act or one class of an act. As much about a person as is known
will form the evidence
from which the inference of good character or not
of good character is drawn.
Bannister v Walton
930 April 1992- NSW Court of Appeal Mahoney JA
‘The right to practice [medicine] affords to a
practitioner
privileges and opportunities which are not available to others. He is
expected to maintain a relationship with patients who are affected
character. The relationship is one which touches matters such as trust,
confidence, confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical
capacity is by no means
the only consideration to which regard is to be had in determining whether a
person is appropriate to practice
medicine. It is necessary that the public be
protected against those who, through having the appropriate skills do not have
the character
for the opportunities and privileges which the right to practice
considering the question of “good character”, the Medical Tribunal
has adopted the following principles:
“To determine whether a finding of proven misconduct
should be followed by a consequential finding that the practitioner is
good character in the context of fitness to practise medicine, one must
(a) whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment rather than a defect of character;
(b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practise
(c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and
hence atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner’s
normal qualities
of character;
(d) the motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
misconduct; and
(f) whether the practitioner’s conduct post the proven episode of
misconduct demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed
in him to uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a
medical practitioner.”
Nurses Tribunal adopted a similar approach in
HCCC v Meyer
[2008] NSWNMT
HCCC v McKay
[2007] NSWNMT 5.
the above items properly understood only provide guidance by way of a checklist
of considerations, which may be of varying
relevance depending on the
circumstances of the case and which may not be comprehensive. These criteria are
not to be treated as
if expressed in the statute (see
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
HCCC v Wingate
). A summary of what is meant by good character is set out by
the Medical Tribunal in
Re Dr Richard Wingate
[2007] NSWMT 2 at
Burden of proof
burden of proof in the Tribunal is that which requires a comfortable
satisfaction on the balance of probabilities, having regard
to (a) the gravity
and importance of the issues to be decided, and (b) the possible consequence to
the psychologist that a finding
would be made that he or she had been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct (see
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 360-363;
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
at 711-712 and
Lindsay v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2005] NSWCA 356).
Role of Tribunal
Tribunal’s first step is to determine whether as a matter of evidence some
or all of the particulars of the complaint are
Tribunal’s second step is then to determine whether the particulars as
found amount to:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct, or
(b) professional misconduct or
(c) the psychologist suffering from an impairment or
(d) the psychologist is not of good character.
if the Tribunal is satisfied of the above will the Tribunal need to consider
what if any orders are made under s53 of the Act.
First and Second Complaint
respect to this complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence to
establish the complaint:
Particular 1
(a) Statement of Vaneta Donkin dated 20 June 2008 and letter to Ms Donkin
from DET dated 1 August 2002 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 4 at [4-6]
and Annexure A);
(b) Statement of Child A dated 20 June 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 5 at [4-6]);
(c) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 4);
(d) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 at Tab 7); and
(e) Admission by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9, 11 and 30)
Particular 2
(a) Statement of Paula Kennett-Sloan (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 7 at [8]);
Statement of Child B (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 8 at [6-7]);
(c) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 4);
(d) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 7); and
(e) Admission by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9, 11 and 30).
Particular 3
(a) Statement of Child C (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 9 at [4-7]);
(b) Statement of Jennifer Gunderson dated 25 March 2009 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 10 at
[6] and Annexure A at p2-4);
(c) Transcript of interview with Child C dated 2 March 2004 (and diagram) (HCCC
Vol 1 Tab 12 at p5-8);
(d) Transcript of criminal proceedings at Ballina Local Court 11 December 2009
and 12 February 2010 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 24);
(e) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 7); and
(f) Admission by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9, 11, 25 and 26).
Particular 4
(a) Statement of Annette Fairhall dated 8 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 25 at [6] and
statement of integration meeting);
(b) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 4);
(c) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 7); and
(d) Admission by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9, 11 and 14).
Particulars 5 and 6
(a) Statement of Jane Anderson dated 25 June 2008 and handwritten note of Jane
Anderson dated 22 March 2004 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 26 at
(b) Statement of Maryann Judge dated 18 June 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 27 at
(c) Statement of Robyn McMullen dated 12 June 2008 and note dated 28 July 2006
(HCCC Vol 1 Tab 28 at [5-10]);
(d) DET Code of Conduct (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 27);
(e) This is denied by Holbrook on the basis that it never happened (HCCC Vol 2
Tab 4); and
(f) Holbrook in the material filed in this Inquiry rather than deny the
incident claims he had permission to leave the door ajar
or would close it in
certain circumstances (Holbrook material at p17-18).
Particular 7
(a) Statement of Geoff Coghlan dated 30 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 29 at
(b) Statement of Robert Rodney Hollis dated 30 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 30 at
(c) File note written by Diane Hardy dated 3 June 2002 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 31 at
(d) Statement of Henry Lohse dated 4 April 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 32 at [5-8]);
(e) There appears to be an admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab
Particular 8
(a) Statement of Paula Kennett-Sloan (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 7 at [9]); and
(b) There appears to be an admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 4)
Particular 9
(a) Statement of Paula Kennett-Sloan (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 7 at [7]); and
(b) This appears to be admitted in part by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 7].
respect to the additional particulars of the third complaint, the HCCC relies
upon the following evidence to establish the complaint:
Particular 2
(a) Handwritten note of Child F dated 28 July 2006 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 33);
(b) Transcript of interview with Child F dated 18 August 2006 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab
(c) Statement of Linda King dated 28 July 2006 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 35);
(d) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 37);
(e) Admission by Holbrook (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 7); and
(f) Admission by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9 and 11-13).
Particular 3
Statement of Robina Lathouras dated 30 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 38
(b) Statement of Anita Frost dated 20 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 39 at
(c) Statement of Alison Tuck dated 20 May 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 40 at
(d) Statement of Corina Murray dated 29 July 2008 (HCCC Vol 1 Tab41 at
[4-8]); and
(e) This allegation is admitted in part by Holbrook (Holbrook material at p9,
11 and 15-16).
HCCC submits that based upon the above evidence all of the particulars that form
the bases of complaints 1-3 have been established.
then seeks to justify or provide his defence to these particulars by relying on
an adverse drug reaction (“ADR”).
HCCC submits that Holbrook bears the onus of establishing an ADR as the basis
for his conduct and that on the evidence no such
a basis is established.
Accepting that there may be ADR does not mean that Holbrook had such a reaction.
only direct evidence of such an ADR is that of Holbrook and this evidence is at
best unreliable. In particular:
(a) Holbrook has not made himself available to be cross examined on
his claims of an ADR;
(b) in such circumstances the Tribunal should draw a
Jones v Dunkel
(c) there is no medical evidence to support that Holbrook had some an ADR
(the closest evidence is that of Dr Yolande Lucire and even
her opinion is based
upon what she is told by Holbrook and he only “appears” to have
suffered an ADR to Zoloft (HCCC
Vol 3 Tab 1 at p10);
(d) none of the documents attached to Holbrook’s material at attachment
1-12 demonstrate he had an ADR;
(e) the possibility of an ADR is not made by Holbrook’s treating doctor
Dr Sandra Masih (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 24 correspondence of
8 February 2009 at
(f) the possibility of an ADR from Zoloft was accepted by Holbrook’s
own psychiatrist Dr Huntsman (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 26 correspondence
to Dr Panda of 24
December 2008);
(g) the effects of the medication are overemphasized by Holbrook (Michael
Diamond p15 HCCC Vol 2 Tab 17 at p15-16); and
(c) Holbrook’s evidence is unreliable generally (see 54(below)).
evidence of Holbrook is unreliable for the following reasons:
(a) Holbrook was question by DET (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 16) about incident
involving Child C and denied incident (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 17) It is
(b) There are inconsistencies in the responses given to particulars 5 and 6.
Initially these allegations are denied by Holbrook (HCCC
Vol 2 Tab 4)and then
Holbrook in the material filed in this Inquiry rather than deny the incident
claims he had permission to leave
the door ajar or would close it in certain
circumstances (Holbrook material at p17-18).
(c) The matter involving Child F was not dealt with candidly by Holbrook in
correspondence of 4 October 2004 to Ms Thorpe where the
incident is described as
an “allegation” (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 45).
(d) Holbrook’s evidence in cross examination as to his medication
history is vague (HCCC Vol 3 Tab A);
(e) In HCCC Vol 1 Tab 47 Holbrook claims:
(i) began taking Zoloft in 1998/1999;
(ii) took 25mg per day from day 1;
(iii) increased dosage to 75mg over 12 month period;
(iv) stopped in 2004;
(v) started taking again at 12mg in September 2006;
(vi) got Diazpam in October 2004;
(vii) started taking in July 2006 due to flying overseas;
(f) Dr Dunn (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 18) reports:
(i) told by Holbrook in 2002 had used Zoloft intermittently over last 2
(ii) told by Holbrook dos increased to 75mg on 14 August 2002 and after
speaking to Dr Dunn recommended only 50mg; and
(iii) told by Holbrook on 5 November 2003 only taking 25mg.
(g) Dr Dearnley (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 20) reports:
(i) began trial of
Diazapam on 3 February 2005;
(h) Dr Panda (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 21) reports:
(i) still seeking Zoloft on 30 August 2006
(i) no mention of ADR in report of Dr Masih of 12 November 2006 (HCCC Vol 2
Tab 21) and only included in report of 10 October 2007
(HCCC Vol 2 Tab 21);
(j) Told Mr Kotroni on 18 February 2006 taking both Zoloft and diazepam (HCCC
Vol 2 Tab 23) and on 8 August 2006(see notes of that
(k) evidence in criminal proceedings (HCCC Vol 3 Tab A):
(i) prescribed Zoloft in 1999 (p6 and 7);
(ii) started on 12mg per day (p6);
(iii) started 75mg in 2004 (p7);
(iv) stopped using Zoloft after incident with Child C (p11); and
(v) started valium when flying overseas (p12).
(l) The HCCC also relies on the chronology in Annexure B concerning
medication use.
light of the above evidence the Tribunal should be comfortably satisfied that
the particulars are made out.
evidence from Dr Timothy Keogh (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 13) in respect of particulars 1-9
establishes that Holbrook’s conduct falls
below the standard expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience and some of those
departures is significantly
below the standard for professional conduct and this
departure invited the peer’s strong criticism. In respect to particular
the HCCC also relies upon Professor Bennett (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 15) who finds that
Holbrook’s conduct attracts strong criticism.
light of the evidence the HCCC submits that Holbrook’s conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 25 of the
this conduct also will amount to professional misconduct.
addition the conduct as particularised and especially the conduct which forms
particular 2 of Complaint 3 is such that the Tribunal
applying the above tests
of “not of good character” could be comfortably satisfied that
Holbrook is not of good character.
In particular:
(a) In respect of
these matters HCCC submits that the misconduct cannot be satisfactorily
explained as an error of judgment rather
than a defect of character. There are
numerous acts of misconduct over a number of years. On consideration of the
evidence, the Tribunal
cannot consider all of these matters an error of judgment
relating to a confined period but rather than an indication of a defective
(b) This defect in character is further reinforced by the content of the
correspondence from Holbrook to the Tribunal.
(c) The HCCC submits that the conduct is most serious. It demonstrates numerous
incidents involving young women.
(d) The evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the conduct of Holbrook
continued over may years. The behaviour of Holbrook cannot
properly be seen as
an isolated episode and atypical or uncharacteristic of Holbrook’s normal
qualities of character.
(e) The evidence before the Tribunal did not show a clear motivation for why
Holbrook has acted as he has done.
(f) The Tribunal should be satisfied that Holbrook does not have a good
character on the evidence.
(g) The HCCC submits for the reasons above and when considering the totality of
the evidence public and professional confidence may
not be reposed in him to
uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required for a
psychologist.
(h) Holbrook does not regain
good character
simply by the effluxion
of time. There has to be some evidence of a change of character and an
improvement in character. There is
no evidence of that kind before the Tribunal.
Indeed, the indications from the material before the Tribunal are that there is
remorse on the part of Holbrook. Furthermore, there is a history
demonstrated of recurring inappropriate behaviour.
Complaint 4
complaint is of a different nature than the other 3.
HCCC submits that Holbrook suffers from an impairment as defined in the Act
since he suffers from a mental impairment, disability,
condition or disorder
that detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect his mental
capacity to practise psychology.
In support of this submission and on the
particulars of this complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence:
(a) Michael Diamond (HCCC Vol 2 Tab 17); and
(b) Healthquest Reports (HCCC Vol 1 Tab 48 and 52).
HCCC submits that the Tribunal could be comfortably satisfied that Holbrook is
Orders Sought
HCCC submits the Tribunal should be comfortably satisfied all the complaints
were proved against Holbrook.
proof of each complaint would be sufficient of itself to justify his removal
from the Register.
submits that if professional misconduct is found, ordinarily, deregistration
would have been open to the Tribunal as an appropriate
protective order.
HCCC seeks the orders set out in Attachment A.
HCCC also seeks its costs as agreed or assessed pursuant to Clause 13 of
Schedule 5 of the Act.
the parties cannot agree on the quantum of costs either party may apply for the
matter re-listed before the Tribunal for determination.
HCCC v HOLBROOK
RESPONDENT’S WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
03 May 2010
Ref: Psychologists Tribunal - Inquiry concerning Graham Patrick Holbrook
(PS0060257) pursuant to 109 of the
Psychologists Act
Dear Chairperson Muller,
I enclose my written submission in response to the concerns raised as to
my practice as a Psychologist by the Health Care Complaints
It has been suggested that my practice as a Psychologist has been deficient
in knowledge, skill, or judgement, care exercised and
indicative of improper or
unethical conduct. Furthermore it has been suggested that I am not of good
character and have a personality
disorder compromising my ability to practice
psychology and involving a threat to children and young people.
I contend that the above assertions have been based upon confirmatory bias
misattribution
of the signs and symptoms of an adverse drug
reaction, (ADR), to personal deficits and a lack of professional competence.
arisen within a health care environment with an apparent reluctance to
give due credence to ADRs by professionals who should be in
the know i.e.
HealthQuest’s, Mark Milic, and Dr Michael Stewart, and the NSW Psych
Board’s Dr. Michael Diamond, and the
HCCC’s Dr Timothy Keogh.
There is a mass of “evidence”, (4 Lever Arch Files), to be
scrutinised by the Tribunal in a short period of time. May
I suggest an approach
which will negate the necessity for reading much irrelevant material?
To determine the veracity of the HCCC assertions it will be necessary for the
Tribunal at some stage, to reach a decision as to the
impact of adverse drug
reactions (ADRs) upon me whilst taking the medications sertraline (Zoloft) and
diazepam. I suggest you establish
your perspective on this question early in the
inquiry to inform the validity of other evidence.
If you accept the evidence for the ADRs, only one example of poor conduct
will remain unaccounted for. The latter I attribute to a
stress reaction. It
occurred at a time when my character and career were being undermined by a
misguided EPAC process. (Now a misguided
HCCC process).
Alternatively if you reject my argument for ADR induced inappropriate
behaviour, inevitably, you will find me guilty of multiple examples
misconduct.
How you appraise this fundamental question will determine the sense that you
make of the collated “evidence”.
Consequently ADRs are central to this case - so that that is where I will
begin my submission. I will outline the evidence for an
adverse drug reaction to
these medications compromising my practice as a psychologist. Also, as I am not
appearing in person before
the Tribunal due to insufficient funds, you may make
reference to my testimony given under oath in the related criminal court
proceedings
to support this written submission (
Having established the evidence for this, involuntary induced intoxication, I
will address the specific concerns listed by the HCCC.
Then I will critique some
of the “expert opinion” solicited by the regulatory agencies. There
is much repetition of material
in the various “expert witness”
testimony such that I will not concern myself with material rendered obsolete by
understanding of events.
This approach helps structure the material so that one can see the wood for
the trees, and if the Tribunal read this submission (
and referenced evidence)
first, it will help counterbalance the confirmatory bias experienced by the
prosecuting agencies.
Adverse Drug Reaction to sertraline (Zoloft)
A reputable forum for examining the evidence for ADRs in Australia only just
recently published its findings.
In August 2008 the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) established the
Psychiatric Drug Safety Expert Advisory Panel (PDSEAP) to
review concerns with
new or unrecognised ADRs caused by antidepressant and antipsychotic medications.
The report was published in
Vol 4, Tab 1
Sertraline (Zoloft) normally prescribed as an antidepressant featured as part
of this report. PDSEAP also looked at whether information
to prescribers was
sufficient in relation to serotonin syndrome and the induction of hypomania /
PDSEAP defined an ADR as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient
administered a medicinal product such that a
relationship between
the drug and the occurrence is suspected. The report listed the minimum required
- a patient, a reporter, suspect
medication, and details of the suspected ADR.
In this regard, my GP at the time, Dr. Dunn’s report of the 22/03/2004,
clearly indicates that I was taking Zoloft over the
duration of the majority of
the HCCC complaints (
Vol 2, Tab 18
). I reported the ADR complications to
my Employment Assistance Program, EAP, Psychologist, John Kotroni (
); my Mental Health Care Plan, Clinical Psychologist, Dr. Sandra Masih
Vol 2, Tab 24
); EPAC; HealthQuest; Dr Michael Diamond, and Forensic
Psychiatrist Dr Yolande Lucire (
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
Zoloft, a SSRI, has a history as a suspect medication. Witness the Regina
versus Hawkins NSW Supreme Court 2001 case:
“Regina v. Hawkins”
(2001) NSWSC 420
(24 May 2001)
3, E, Tab 12
34 Zoloft is the trade or brand name of an antidepressant medication, the
essential chemical in which is sertraline. Whilst the recommended
initial dose
is 50 mg, the medical evidence suggests that 25mg is a safer initial dose,
particularly for elderly people. The effective
drug in Zoloft is capable of
causing sleeplessness, agitation, confusion, hallucination and psychosis.
Furthermore, because responses
to antidepressants can be idiosyncratic the
effect of a given dose on one particular individual may be more profound than on
or even on a statistically “average” person.
35 The Australian Dept of Health and Aged Care (the Dept) maintains an
Adverse Drug Reaction System. In it the Dept records instances
reactions reported to it in relation to particular drugs.
There is no
obligation on medical practitioners, pharmacists or suppliers to advise the Dept
of adverse reactions. As a consequence
the numbers recorded in the Adverse Drug
Reaction System do not represent the totality of the cases of adverse reaction
which occur
in Australia.
However, the numbers are useful and such as to
raise a warning of particular adverse effects that may be experienced.
36 In the Dept’s Adverse drug Reaction System, sertraline has been
recorded as the sole drug implicated in:
20 cases of aggression
319 cases of agitation
63 cases of confusion
8 cases of delirium
5 cases of delusion
43 cases of hallucination
34 cases of manic reaction
18 cases of psychosis
38 The figures in the Dept Adverse Drug System are consonant with the
views expressed by Dr David Healy of the University of Wales
In his report Dr Healy confirms that Zoloft can cause agitation and
a certain amount of disinhibition so that some individuals engage
in aggressive
or dangerous behaviours without due regard for the consequences and in a manner
that is out of character for them.
45 Dr Healy’s views as to the effects of Zoloft have particular
weight since his doctoral thesis was based on research on the
transporter system and the role of serotonin in depression and suicide. In this
regard it should be noted that Zoloft is
a serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI).
His interest in SSRI’s has been on-going. Furthermore, he has carried out
and clinical work on existing and novel psycho-pharmacological drugs
and is an author in the field of psych-pharmacology. His opinion
supported by an assessment of suicidal acts of patients on sertraline prepared
in response to an inquiry from the Irish Medicines’
Board in 1999, and by
a study in healthy volunteers conducted in the College of Medicine in the
University of Wales using a dose
of only 50mg of Zoloft. Two subjects with no
prior history of mental or psychiatric problems and no current problems became
and aggressive on such a dose of Zoloft. This was said by Dr Healy to
significant in that it demonstrates that such problems can occur
in an entirely normal individual
46 In addition, he analysed the results of the clinical trials and company
trials conducted in relation to SSRI’s, which included
Zoloft. He said
that “the results show a consistent pattern of drug-induced conditions
variously described as agitation –
anxiety – nervousness-
hyperkinesis –tremor”. Those results are supportive of his
conclusion that “suicidality
/ homicidality can arise as a consequence of
the drug...”
Regrettably very few of the studies have been published so
the attention of the wider academic community has been effectively diverted
the problem.
66 ...tragic reminder to medical practitioners and the community of the
possible serious and even dangerous detrimental side effects
that can be
produced by Zoloft.”
In this submission I have delineated the variety of side effects and adverse
drug reactions that I experienced using Zoloft at different
doses and over time.
I have received a diagnosis of a toxic, manic shift, attributable to the Zoloft
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
). Together with an indication that I have a particular
genetic / biological susceptibility to the ADRs associated with these drugs
that the resultant level of hypomania / mania would account for the behaviours,
observed by others, in myself.
The 2009 PDSEAP report (
Vol 4, Tab 1
) references Sir Bradford
Hill’s nine criteria for causation to help evaluate ADRs.
Strength of the association
: How large is the effect?
By implication there was an effect between antidepressant
medications and hypomania in the studies reviewed by PDSEAP (2009).
The reports describe brief periods of agitation, overactivity and
lability of mood...Thus the clinical picture is closer to hypomania
.” Although the report did not draw an ADR / hypomania
conclusion - (they immediately made the assumption that the hypomania
associated with an undiagnosed bi-polar disorder). In the body of the text they
acknowledge that the hypomania might also be
a true ADR effect “
be a true side effect of antidepressant in those with unipolar depression,
at a much higher rate than that reported in the
It is accepted, for scientific rigour, that an
condition should be accounted for as a confounding variable in
pharmaco-vigilance studies but here there was
confounding underlying condition. Yet, the authors chose to speculate that there
might have been i.e. an
undiagnosed
affective disorder or bi-polar
disorder. The PDSEAP authors appear to have deliberately sidestepped drawing the
most parsimonious
conclusion of a significant causal association between
antidepressant medications and a hypomania ADR.
The consistency of the association
: Has the same association
been seen by others, in different populations, using a different method?
Witness that the Food and Drug Agency (FDA), the US regulator,
issued the following Public Health Advisory (March 2004) (
Vol 3, E, Tab
Symptoms of anxiety, agitation, panic attacks, insomnia,
irritability, hostility (aggressiveness), impulsivity, akathisia (psychomotor
restlessness),
, and mania, have been reported in adults,
adolescents and children being treated with antidepressants for major depressive
as well as for other indications, both psychiatric and non
psychiatric.(
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
Dr David Healy (2000) cites a healthy volunteer study which reported
aggressive behaviour in one subject taking sertraline (Zoloft).
Dr Healy (2006) (
Vol 4, Tab 2)
also cites “data from
sertraline paediatric trials submitted by Pfizer, aggression was the joint
commonest cause for discontinuation
from the two placebo controlled trials in
depressed children.”
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (2004) (
Vol 3, Tab 7
) states “Many
cases of SSRI-induced violent or suicidal behaviour involve children or young
adults. However, even in regard
to cases involving older persons, the literature
on children and youth is important.
Adverse behavioural effects tend to show
up more frequently and severely in children, providing a magnified view of the
same or similar
effects that the drugs are causing on adults.”
Specificity
: Does altering only the cause alter the
Subsequent to the Zoloft precipitated, Kara Ambrose (Feb
2004) incident and HCCC complaint; and during a period of EPAC imposed extra
supervision there were no complaints, and indeed ADRs, when I discontinued
taking Zoloft. I was doing the same job and the extra
supervision only entailed
a greater frequency of contact with my DGO with no other impact upon my
Temporal relationship
: Does the cause precede the
When I later, once again, resorted to a modest, single, dose
of Zoloft (25mg), after a substantial period medication free, I experienced
similar hypomania episode (the hairdresser incident). An example of a
de-challenge / challenge effect.
Biological gradient:
Is there a dose response?
I had modest blunted interpersonal sensitivity, impaired social
judgement and verbal disinhibition on lower doses of Zoloft (25 -
50 mg) with
progressively more physically acting out by the time I reached a dose of 75 mg.
The NSW Supreme Court Case (2001) of David Hawkins highlighted that the
defendant initially took a lower dose of Zoloft, and experienced
Later he took a further 200 mg and murdered his wife.
Vol 3, E, Tab
Biological plausibility
: Does it make sense?
The SSRIs impact the retention of serotonin at the synapse. This
neurotransmitter helps regulate mood. The most frequent effect is
an activation
/ stimulation effect.
As the body adapts, i.e. tolerance develops to the drug, all emotions tend to
be blunted (anhedonia) as the body seeks to compensate
for the stimulation
effect of the medication and to establish a new equilibrium.
With increasing dosage, cognitive distortions from continuing stimulation /
elevated mood, coupled with emotional blunting produce
ADR type behaviours.
In layman’s terms you lose the emotional and cognitive cues to help you
regulate your behaviour - what might be considered your
moral compass.
Dr David Healy (2006) (
Vol 4, Tab 2
“A link between
antidepressant use and violence needs a plausible clinical mechanism through
which such effects might be realised...Another
mechanism that may contribute to
hostile events is treatment-induced emotional blunting. Several reports
published since 1990 have
linked SSRI intake with the production of emotional
blunting, detachment, or an amotivational syndrome, described in one report as
the equivalent to a “chemical lobotomy”. It is quite common in
clinical practice to find people who say they are simply
not bothered any more.
Things that would previously have worried them no longer do so.”
Does the evidence fit with what is known regarding
the natural history and biology of the outcome?
People with social anxiety disorder are typically shy retiring
individuals who would not be expected to break social conventions.
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (2006) states from his research with many patients
“ shy and perhaps cautious individuals. Were they
psychologically inhibited people who broke loose under the influence of drugs
and expressed their underlying frustrations or fantasies? I found no evidence
for predispositions of this kind in my in-depth clinical
evaluations, which
usually included a review of all the medical, occupational, educational, and
legal records and collateral interviews
with family, friends and work
associates. As a group they were law-abiding, ethical human beings, it is purely
speculative to impugn
unconscious motivations toward violence or toward suicidal
or criminal behaviour.” (
Vol 3, Tab 11
Experimental evidence
: Are there any clinical studies
supporting the association?
Dr David Healy (2006) (
Vol 4, Tab 2
main finding is that unselected sets of placebo-controlled trials of
antidepressants show evidence for an increased risk of aggressive
behaviours on
treatment, although such outcomes apply to only a small subset of
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (2004) (
Vol 3, Tab 7
unpublished FDA report obtained through the Freedom of
Information Act
that fluoxetine caused mania at a rate three times greater than tricyclics
antidepressants given in the same studies (Kapit
reviewed in Breggin (1997).
Furthermore, in 23 of the 33 cases, fluoxetine caused mania in patients with no
past history of mania.
In no cases did the older antidepressant cause mania in
patients with no prior history.
This data contradicts the commonly held
clinical notion that SSRI-induced mania is limited to patients with an
underlying bipolar
Reasoning by analogy
: Is the observed association supported
by similar associations?
Yes, the phenomena is observed across the class of SSRIs.
Dr David Healy (2006) (
Vol 4, Tab 2
) in paroxetine clinical trials
“ In these trials, hostile events are found in excess in both adults
and children on paroxetine compared with placebo, and are
found across
indications , and both on therapy and during withdrawl. “
The ADRs that I experienced on Zoloft ranged on a continuum including
insomnia, and an irrationally elevated mood with blunted cognitive
impaired social judgement to what might be classified as verbal aggression to
eventual hypomania / mania with the impulsive,
acting out, of sexualised
behaviours against Kara Ambrose. The latter potentially classed as a crime of
violence (aggravated indecent
assault - victim under 16) in the criminal courts.
Regrettably it would appear that I am one of that subset of patients,
referred to earlier by Dr David Healy; that manifest a response,
antidepressants, of increased aggression.
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
The particular significance of the FDA Public Health Advisory of March 2004
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
) is that it marks the
first official recognition by
the regulatory authorities
that there is a problem with ADRs for these
medications. The Australian regulator, the TGA, followed suit a few months after
FDA with a watered down version acknowledging these ADRs but placing more
emphasis on self-harm than harm to others.
Hence, the official recognition for this medication “problem” did
not occur until after the “offence” with
Kara Ambrose had already
happened in February 2004.
It is therefore untenable to hold the consumer (myself) accountable for these
Zoloft related ADRs.
Zoloft is a prescription controlled medication that by definition the
consumer is deemed to have insufficient life experience, training
professional expertise to take over the counter, without oversight from a
suitable health care provider.
How can a consumer be expected to prescient and pre-empt the FDA / TGA that
there are significant problems with the safety of this
medication before the
regulator has even alerted prescribers of their concerns?
To appreciate how much of the HCCC material and their specific complaints are
thus rendered groundless it helps to divide the incidents
into pre and post the
Kara Ambrose incident which happened in February 2004.
As detailed above; this incident is pivotal because only a month later, in
March 2004, did the largest and most influential regulator,
the FDA, first issue
its warning to prescribers that Zoloft was associated with the following ADRs
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
“Anxiety, agitation, panic attacks,
irritability,
impulsivity
, akathisia,
, and mania have been reported in
paediatric patients being treated with antidepressants for major depressive
as well as for other indications, both psychiatric and
non-psychiatric
Look at the detail of the FDA 22 March 2004 Public Health Advisory.
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
It makes explicit that these ADRs occur across patients and presenting
conditions from licensed uses of antidepressants; e.g. for
Zoloft - depression,
social anxiety disorder, and OCD, etc to potential off label uses.
medication that is the constant variable in these adverse patient outcomes, not
any underlying condition, rational for using
the medication or the personal
qualities of the subjects.
Yet the “expert witnesses” from HealthQuest, Mark Milic, and Dr.
Michael Stewart; the Psychologists Board’s Dr.
Michael Diamond, and the
HCCC’s Dr. Timothy Keogh all minimise the role of the medication and
accentuate the personal whilst
the professional standards bodies have been happy
to accept this interpretation i.e. EPAC, the HCCC, the Criminal Court and the
Psychologists
Registration Board.
This reflects an agenda that predisposes these health care professionals and
regulatory bodies to screen for, and pathologise individuals,
rather than
looking for more complex systemic causes to poor consumer outcomes. In a
politically, and legally sensitive health sector,
where ADRs represent
“bad news”, their opinions appear designed to promote public
relations rather than public safety,
Even in the 2009 PDSEAP (
Vol 4, Tab1
) report the “experts”
prefer to whitewash the finding of a significant percentage of hypomania
reactions to antidepressants
by correlating it to a proposed percentage of an
undiagnosed, and therefore hypothetical, bipolar disorder.
This reflects expediency rather than rigour, and is not good science.
Peter Breggin, as previously mentioned, has questioned the validity of the
commonly held clinical notion that ADRs likely represent
undiagnosed bipolar:
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin and Kapit’s study (2004) (
“ An unpublished FDA report obtained through the Freedom of
Information Act
indicated that fluoxetine caused mania at a rate three times
greater than tricyclics antidepressants given in the same studies (Kapit
reviewed in Breggin (1997). Furthermore, in 23 of the 33 cases, fluoxetine
caused mania in patients with no past history of mania.
In no cases did the
older antidepressant cause mania in patients with no prior history.
data contradicts the commonly held clinical notion that SSRI-induced mania is
limited to patients with an underlying bipolar
Let us move on to examine the specific HCCC complaints.
The complainants are 1) Child A/Mother of Child A (Zoloft in use:
2) Child B (Zoloft in use:
), 3) Child C (Zoloft in use:
Child D (Zoloft in use:
[N.B The Respondent amended this document
when he spoke to the Tribunal on the telephone to indicate that he was not
taking Zoloft
at this time},
5) Child E (Zoloft in use:
Principals Maryann Judge and Dennis O”Neill (Zoloft in use at the very
) 7) Primary School E (Zoloft in use:
), 8) Paula Kennett -
Sloan (Zoloft in use:
), 9) Staff of Local Hairdressing Salon (Zoloft in
), and additional complainants, Child F (Diazepam in use:
), and Staff of Local Hairdressing Salon (Zoloft in use:
(NB. the bold
indicates the use of Zoloft by the defendant at the
time of the majority of these incidents.
Below I structure the list of complaints chronologically to reflect, pre and
post, the FDA’s March 2004 advisory warning.
2002 the Child A
complaint 1 in the Tribunal’s list
2002 there is
the Primary School E complaint (
complaint 7 in the Tribunal’s list
2002 the High
School B, District Guidance Officer meeting complaint (
complaint 8 in the
Tribunal’s list).
the Child B
complaint 2 in the Tribunal’s list
Hairdressing Salon complaint (
complaint 9 in the Tribunal’s
the Child E
complaint (
complaint 5 in the Tribunal’s list
alleged date for this incident is incorrect. I did counsel Child E when I was at
High School B but it was not on the 18 March
2004. All my service delivery to
High School B. significantly preceded in time the Child C incident in Feb
As you can see from the above list, 7 out of the 9 complaints,
listed by the HCCC occurred prior to the prescribers of Zoloft, and
the consumer i.e. me; being issued with fair warning by the FDA and TGA as to
these ADRs.
of the above 7 out of 9 complaints occurred whilst I was taking
Zoloft, and only with the benefit of hindsight - I was oblivious
to it at the
time due to the “intoxication anosognosia” effect of the medication
see Peter Breggin 2006 (
Vol 3, Tab 11
), have I been able to recognise
that my behaviour and professional standards were adversely affected in the
of these incidents.
How did this litany of poor professional conduct continue for so long
culminating in the Kara Ambrose incident?
At this time, my line manager and District Guidance Officer (DGO), was Henry
Lohse who was, and is, an experienced DGO for whom I
have the utmost respect.
Indeed, early in the piece, (it may have been the Primary School E incident
(complaint 7) or another similar)
he raised concerns with me about my behaviour
and the fact that I was taking Zoloft was openly discussed.
However, at this time the side effects, i.e. a lack of interpersonal
sensitivity, some blunted cognitive acuity and professional gravitas
comparatively minor and did not outweigh the perceived benefits to my service
delivery of raised mood, sociability and approachability.
Hence I continued on
the medication.
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (2006) (
Vol 3, Tab 11
) is unequivocal in
his research into the intoxicating effects of psychoactive medications:
“Intoxication anosognosia causes the victim to underestimate the
degree of drug induced impairment, to deny the harmful role
that the drug plays
in the person’s altered state, and in many cases compel the individual to
mistakenly believe that he or
she is functioning better. In the extreme, the
individual displays out-of-character compulsively destructive behaviours,
violence toward self and others.”
This raises an important issue in relation to the NSW Psychologists Board
Code of Conduct (2004) (
Vol 2, Tab 29
) under subsection Personal and
Professional Welfare which states:
“iv. Psychologists should withdraw from practice (and seek
professional help where appropriate for their impairment) when a
physical or
psychological condition (for example as a result of alcohol, drugs, illness or
personal stress) seriously impairs their
abilities or professional judgement. In
cases of less serious impairment, Psychologists should consult with colleagues
extent they should withdraw from or adjust their
How does my behaviour fare against this scrutiny?
The matter of my taking Zoloft was raised with an appropriate colleague, my
DGO. This was prior to the FDA March 2004 warning and
at this time, the
recognised side effects and impairment were not considered at the serious end of
the continuum.
As Psychiatrist Peter Breggin, (2006) (
Vol 3, Tab 11
), subsequently
made clear it is frequently not feasible for a patient taking a psychoactive
medication to accurately appraise their
own behaviour.
Biopsychiatric treatments produce their “therapeutic”
effect by impairing higher human functions, including emotional
responsiveness,
social sensitivity
, self-awareness or
self-insight
, autonomy, and
self-determination
In other words consumers, prescribers and professional supervisors are
dependent on the regulatory authorities identifying these serious
through RCTs and pharmaco-vigilance studies.
After the misconduct of the Kara Ambrose incident I stopped using Zoloft and
sought professional help, (seeing EAP Psychologist John
) and Clinical Psychologist Dr. Sandra Masih (
Vol 2, Tab 24
GP facilitated Mental Health Care Plan) for non-pharmalogical treatments for my
social anxiety symptoms.
Consequently I maintain that my behaviour at this time was congruent with all
aspects of the NSW Psychologists Code of Conduct’s,
Personal and
Professional Welfare section (
Vol 2, Tab 29
Thus 7 out of the 9 complaints, listed under Complaint One, that my practice
has been deficient in knowledge, skill, or judgement,
care exercised and
indicative of improper or unethical conduct and that I am not of good character
; for they are inaccurately attributed to my personal
qualities rather than to an ADR to Zoloft.
I will go on to address the remaining complaints from Complaint One;
specifically, complaint 4, involving Child D and complaint 6,
the reputed breach
of school policy at Primary School D, and Primary School E.
I will also address the additional complaints listed under Complaint 3,
involving Child F and the hairdresser.
I will deal, firstly, with the Child F incident, complaint 3. After the Child
C incident, I stopped taking Zoloft and was initially
placed on alternative
duties. Eventually I was allowed back into schools in October 2004. In essence
there were no complaints from
this period between Oct 2004 and up to July 2006.
This is over two and a half years complaint free!
There was extra supervision provided but only between November 2004 and
December 2005. So how did my behaviour improve so dramatically?
Quite simply I
was free of anxiloytic medication for this period of this time.
When I was allowed back into schools, clearly Zoloft was contraindicated; so
I obtained a prescription for Diazepam in February 2005
from Dr Dearnley (
) (a GP practice close to my new base school). I sought the
Diazepam only as a fall back medication should I re-experience social
symptoms. Note, this was a device for reassurance and I did not seek recourse to
this medication until over a year later.
It was not work which precipitated the recourse to Diazepam but flying
overseas on a carrier with a poor safety record. I used the
Diazepam to quell
anxiety about flying overseas in the July 2006 holidays. I found the Diazepam to
be addictive. I was still trying
to wean myself off the Diazepam when I returned
to school for Term 3 at Primary School D on the 17 July 2006. The following week
the child C incident occurred whilst I was still dealing with the Diazepam.
Child F was a work experience student, seconded to work out of the school
counsellor room at Primary School D on administrative duties
to do with the
school’s pupil record files. Consequently she fell into my orbit whilst I
was initially taking 5 mg Diazepam.
The Diazepam had a similar effect to
alcohol. (Alcohol is prohibited from NSW Dept. of Education workplaces for good
reason). I was
intoxicated with the Diazepam and wished to utilise her work with
the pupil files to assist with my workload and to establish rapport
with someone
new sharing my office.
I intended to get Child F to pull the standard student files from the
cabinets that required the addition of school counsellor reports.
Previously I
kept all school counsellor reports in a separate school counsellor filing
cabinet, but the Principal had indicated that
once a school counsellor report
went home to parents that she wanted a copy left in the regular pupil files for
classroom teachers
I initiated a conversation with Child F to assist me. My plan was for her to
pull the relevant pupil files for when I was next in
the school. However, I
needed to obtain the Principal’s permission before I could officially
start recruiting Child F’s
services, which meant getting back to Child F
at a later date. Hence I took her contact number.
By Friday when I was next in Primary School D, I was not sleeping well and
had resorted to an increased, 10 mg, dose of Diazepam and
sought help for this
medication through an EAP Psychologist appointment. I had forgotten to ask the
Principal about Rene.
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (1998) (
Vol 4, Tab 3
benzodiazepines can produce a wide variety of abnormal mental
responses...including rebound anxiety and insomnia, mania...antisocial
acts...they can impair cognition...induce dependence and
addiction..disinhibition (dyscontrol) or loss of impulse control.”
David Jacobs (1997) (
Vol 4, Tab 3
) “Many people tacitly
assume that when a person experiences an adverse drug reaction, he or she can
and will simply stop taking
the medication, thus terminating the adverse drug
reaction. The picture when it comes to the benzodiazepines is commonly very
different.”
For me this was true. Zoloft had arguably precipitated the greater adverse
drug reactions, yet when I recognised that it was counterproductive
had been easier to discontinue than the Diazepam.
Consequently on that Friday the 28 July, I was aware that it was Child
F’s last day of work experience and, intoxicated under
the influence of
the Diazepam, I asked her out in a clumsy manner related to our previous
conversation about the pupil files.
Psychiatrist Peter Breggin (2006) (
Vol 3, Tab 11
benzodiazepines produce an array of spellbinding (anosognosia) effects that are
very similar to alcohol but often without
the telltale drunkenness with slurred
speech and stumbling that alerts the individual to intoxication.”
Child F sensibly declined my invitation and I offered to return her contact
number. She said that would not be necessary and that
we could still
Besides being interpreted as a polite putdown I equated this phrase as
permission to stay in contact. By the late afternoon, my brain
had begun to
clear from the effects of the Diazepam and I was aware that the school knew what
had happened and that as a second major
misconduct incident (after the Child C
incident) my school counselling days would be numbered.
Hence, I phoned Child F, in part to apologise to her for the embarrassment
from that morning and also to request of her, as a favour
to me, to not talk
The way EPAC have subsequently presented this interaction makes it appear as
though I was attempting to intimidate Child F, which
was not the case. I simply
recognised, from previous dealings with EPAC, that without Child F’s help
I would not avoid losing
The phrase, “
we can still be friends
is omitted from Rene’s transcribed account and has presumably been lost in
the “not transcribable” sections.
As an aside, when I was later stationed at district office I met another
colleague who had fallen foul of EPAC and he mentioned that
when he was
interviewed by the Police in relation to his alleged misconduct they used the
technique of omitting “undesirable”
responses from evidence, by
stating that they were “not transcribable”. Many EPAC personnel are
ex-Police and may use
a similar strategy.
To address complaint 4: the Child D incident - I acknowledge that my
behaviour was unprofessional and inappropriate.
I have previously articulated, in other forums, some of the contributing
factors to this but I will briefly reiterate them here.
The mother had been a difficult client to accommodate at the other primary
school I serviced. Perhaps, due to her anxiety condition,
the mother had
vacillated about what she wanted and had expressed prejudiced reasons for
selecting her school of choice.
At this time, following the Child F incident in July 2006, I was under
extreme stress. Post this incident, it was clear that EPAC
had decided they had
had enough and had set about systematically soliciting written evidence of any
wrong doing from all my NSW Dept
of Education supervisors to facilitate my
termination.
Consequently I was feeling exasperated, in a no win situation at work, and
considered taking sick leave as I was not operating well.
However, I did not respond quickly enough to the warning signs of excessive
stress; and the Child D incident occurred and was my responsibility
and was not
related to any medication.
My defence is that it is most out of character for me to be disparaging
towards someone with disabilities. My whole job, for close
to a decade as a
school counsellor, had been to facilitate the empowerment and support of such
students within the education system.
It does not make sense for me to be unsympathetic towards someone with an
anxiety condition (as I know first-hand, having one myself,
what that involves)
or to not accommodate a student with physical disabilities (Child D) as I know
well the trials of this condition
from having a brother with hemi-plegia. I can
only apologise for this lapse in conduct, and reiterate that it was as a result
excessive, (EPAC induced), stress.
Following this incident I immediately followed through on the plan to take
sick leave. (See sick leave letter from EAP Psychologist
John Kotroni,
However, my GP, Dr Panda persuaded me that it would be better to address my
critics rather than attempting to avoid the issues by
taking sick leave; and I
had some left over Zoloft, from a previously half opened packet, that had
therefore not been handed in to
HealthQuest.
Consequently, I restarted on a low 12 mg dose, the same quantity as the
initial dose that I had first started on Zoloft back in 1999.
I reasoned that I
had “crashed and burned” only on 75 mg with Child C and that
previously a 12 mg dose had been a safe
and therapeutic dose. (see my letter to
Dr Panda explaining my decision). I took 12mg daily, without incident, for the
of the term.
However, this same supply of Zoloft was my undoing in the hairdresser
scenario. By this time I had been transferred to district office
for alternative
duties whilst the process of my termination was finalised.
I had had a bad day. By this I mean that it became self-evident to me that
the authorities in the NSW Dept of Education, either did
not believe me about
the ADRs or did not care, and that they were pursuing my termination regardless.
There was still some Zoloft left. I took a one off dose of 25 mg to try to
raise my mood. It precipitated a further hypomania episode.
Under the influence of the medication it appeared a good idea to explore an
independent career working with children and young people.
I had seen an “Oprah” show on television which indicated that it
was legal to commercially publish photographs (non-pornographic)
of children and
young people on the internet. This potential self-employment option, appeared
the perfect riposte to EPAC who had
over-zealously “constructed” me
as sexually deviant and effectively prohibited me from working with children and
people in any employee capacity.
The “Oprah” show had indicated that if you took steps to protect
the identity and location of the subjects that the business
was safe from
“undesirables” trying to directly contact the children and young
I undertook some market research into the idea, at the all female local
hairdressers. I wanted to know whether mothers would allow
children’s photographs to be published on the internet. Note, all my
questions at the time to the hairdressers were hypothetical
but when you read
through the collated transcript it makes it appear as though I was asking
permission to photograph their children.
That was not the case.
The concept was, and is, still a controversial idea and if mothers would be
reluctant to give informed consent for their off spring’s
participation
then, as a business, the venture would not be viable.
Un-medicated, even I admit, it is a dubious proposition and in good
conscience I would not recommend it to parents of young people
as a desirable
career move. The incident serves to further illustrate the ability of Zoloft to
impair social judgement.
The hearsay evidence of me lurking in the bushes watching some children going
to a dance class I can only say was not me. That the
Tribunal allows the
presentation of such uncorroborated hearsay evidence I find troubling.
To summarise; with hindsight, I accept that under the influence of Zoloft I
experienced blunted interpersonal sensitivity, disinhibition,
and impaired
social judgement; and in addition was perceived by others as creepy and sleazy.
This occurred both, in the school setting
with various teachers and students,
(complaint One: nos. 2, 3, 7, 8, and 9), and out of school with the hairdresser;
but at the time
whilst under the influence of the medication, I was oblivious to
this perception.
Unfortunately these events have been glossed over as ADRs due to EPAC’s
child protection model of supervision and an adversarial
legislature.
EPAC’s solution of an initial period of extra supervision, later
followed with termination - failed to address the real issue
prescription medication.
I note by contrast the NSW Dept. of Health operates a different clinical
incident supervision process for its own health professionals
involved in a
“clinical incident” - a euphemism for a serious adverse patient
outcome as a consequence of a health intervention.
They provide an “amnesty” to health practitioners involved in
such incidents, (with the exception of negligent practice).
They recognise that
in order to accurately ascertain the factors that contribute to a serious
adverse patient outcome it is necessary
to provide the participants with some
insulation from litigation and negative supervisory evaluation.
This acknowledges that Health provision is a potentially fraught activity and
practitioners are ever mindful of covering their personal
and professional
liabilities. Even the HCCC in requesting information from health practitioners
for this Tribunal have been careful
to explicitly state that the respective
practice of the health providers is not the issue of concern to the HCCC.
The Employment Performance and Conduct Unit (EPAC) of the NSW Dept. of
Education have no such provision. EPAC “outsources”
medical concerns
to HealthQuest.
To appreciate the importance of the following criticism you will require an
understanding of organisational psychology and a systemic
perspective.
EPAC used to be known as the Child Protection Inspectorate (CPID) and was a
separate sub-section of the management structure of the
NSW Dept. of Education
solely responsible for child protection concerns.
However, following a re-structuring it metamorphosed into EPAC with
supervisory responsibility for
NSW Dept. of Education
personnel. This “unintentionally” led inquiry outcomes to be unduly
favourable towards EPAC’s
perspective. EPAC’s former witnesses, now
supervisees, became unwilling to risk their own careers within the Department of
Education by disputing any EPAC interpretation of events.
EPAC was, and is not, looking for complex systemic causes to issues but
behaves as a law-enforcement agency identifying and
constructing
” evidence against deviant practitioners. Hence
by the time I was referred for external evaluation through HealthQuest I had
already been labelled internally as deviant and evidence amassed to support this
erroneous assumption.
This is reflected in complaint One, no 6, the breach of school policy at
Primary School D, and Public Schools. School Counsellors
have always been given
discretion in operating behind a closed door to provide appropriate privacy and
confidentiality to clients;
even though teachers, indeed all personnel, are
advised to maintain an open door scenario where ever possible, for the sake of
I discussed my open / closed door protocol with my line manager, my DGO, Jane
Anderson, and she was happy enough with my solution
of keeping the door ajar for
the majority of sessions, maintaining a degree of privacy and confidentiality
for the client whilst
also ensuring that any potential impropriety might be
interrupted.
This was particularly pertinent at Primary School D where students, being
disciplined for misbehaviour by the executive staff; were
frequently lined up
outside the school counsellor office as the access corridor to the playground
passed by my door.
NB. It is significant that my DGO, Jane Anderson, also acknowledges that
there are circumstances, where using her discretion, she
will operate as a
counsellor behind a closed door.
“ The Investigation Officer asked whether I would shut the door
during a counselling session with just one student. I explained
that only if the
child asked for the door to be shut. It could be that there are kids milling
around the door and if the student
being counselled wanted the door closed, I
would then shut the door.”
Vol 1, Tab 26
, Jane Anderson)
This practice only became a “problem” for
delivery at Primary School D and P.S. when EPAC started requesting written
evidence of wrongdoing from Principal supervisors
to supplement their submission
to HealthQuest.
To elaborate I serviced P.S. and Primary School D for 2 years between 2005
and 2006. Yet mysteriously, significant reservations about
my service delivery
only occurred post the Child F incident in July 2006, when EPAC had decided it
was time that I was terminated.
Primary School D’s Principal, Maryann Judge, was even able to sign off
on my TARS (verification of acceptable teacher performance)
as late as September
Vol 4, Tab 7
NB School Counsellors are employed as teachers rather
than as psychologists). There was no global concern about my practice at P.S.
Primary School D. prior to the Child F incident. “Deficiencies” were
only later sought and solicited from the Principals
to strengthen EPAC’s
“the way to proceed would be for EPAC to generate a HealthQuest
referral, since EPAC largely have a concise history of the employee
investigations. She recommended that in addition to EPAC providing relevant
information that his immediate supervisors, the
two Principal and the DGO also
provide supporting reports to the application.”
(Liz Munro EPAC Case
Officer, 10/08/06,
Vol 4, Tab 5
This raises a question about the reliability of testimony of all NSW Dept of
Education personnel including additional complainants,
peers, counselling
supervisors, and school principals. They are in effect; the
unqualified witnesses
” in this Tribunal as it is a medico
legal / forensic case, and they lack the medical expertise to distinguish
between ADR’s
and character flaws. Consequently their collective testimony
is full of erroneous assumptions as well as inaccuracies.
Furthermore, due to the fact that EPAC enjoys an explicit supervisory
relationship to them, they are not independent of the agenda
of EPAC. This is
not to disparage their professionalism but for the purposes of this Tribunal the
evidence of the NSW Dept of Education
personnel is prejudiced and should be
evaluated in that light.
I will exaggerate to make my point.
Imagine if the Police were supervised by the Mafia we would not anticipate
many successful prosecutions against organised crime. The
power differential
inherent in the supervisory relationship would not allow the requisite
independence of thought and action by the
supervisee.
Similarly Dept of Education personnel have had to comply with the
expectations of their supervisor, EPAC, for requests for “suitable”
evidence. The defendant has consistently raised concerns about this aspect of
the management structure of the NSW Dept of Education
and how it biases the
collation and soliciting of evidence in child protection cases inadvertently
constructing employees as unnecessarily
high risk liabilities. It is the same
power differential argument being levelled against me by the HCCC that I should
be prohibited
from working with vulnerable clients.
Let us examine the example of Jane Anderson, District Guidance Officer,
(DGO), registered psychologist and the defendant’s counselling
Jane had only recently been appointed my supervisor after having returned
from a year’s sabbatical away from the NSW Dept of
Education. She was
newly appointed to High School B where I had previously worked and experienced
some ADR’s due to Zoloft.
Consequently Jane would have heard stories from
students and staff, attributing examples of my poor school counsellor
performance
to my character (see the Head Teacher Welfare, Meredith Burton,
incident referred to later in addressing Dr Keogh’s evidence).
these personnel were privy to my medical history.
Though an experienced counselling psychologist, Jane Anderson has no medical
training or authority to prescribe medication or expertise
to distinguish
between dispositional factors and an adverse drug reaction to the prescription
medication Zoloft.
From information received from the Dept of Ed through the Freedom Of
Information Act
Liz Monroe Case Officer 07/08/06
Jane rang...she advised the PSOA (the defendant) has a long history
of efficiency and social skills issues including being unable
to read body
language signs from others, poor social skills, lacks insight, needs to have
everything outlined before action can occur,
resistant to change in routines,
has unusual eye contact and has limited social judgement.....It is her view that
the PSOA is not
suitable to be a counsellor...She stated that she did not feel
that she has a conflict in providing support to the a/v and supervising
Vol 4, Tab 8
Does not the Tribunal agree that the defendant might legitimately feel
disadvantaged by having a supervisor, who is not qualified
to distinguish
between ADRs and personal flaws, offering their misinformed opinion behind my
back suggesting to EPAC that I am not
fit to be a counsellor?
Later Jane contacted Liz Monroe again, 15/08/06, “
Jane’s phone call. She was concerned that
some of the issues she was
considering putting in her report she had not discussed with the PSOA
. I explained that while that may be a little uncomfortable for her
with the PSOA, it does not detract from her opinion of the PSOA’s
suitability in the role of DSC.” (
Vol 4, Tab 8
I beg to differ. Jane is a competent psychologist and had recognised that if,
as good supervisory practice would recommend, she had
raised concerns directly
with her supervisee, it would have given her the opportunity to learn of the
PSOA’s medical history
before she wrote her report and disabuse her of her
misattribution of the PSOA’s apparent inter-personal deficits as
attributable
to drug-induced intoxication. (see Jane’s fax of the 14/08/06
Vol 4, Tab 6
). Yet EPAC effectively silenced her concerns.
Later again, 21/09/06, “
Ian (Ian Huxley PEO Student Counselling,
Janes’ counselling supervisor) rang to advise that he had received a
letter from the
PSOA wanting his supervisor (Jane) changed....
I indicated
that given the circumstances of the DGO not signing off TARS (which they are not
obliged to do) that a change of supervisor
would not be appropriate
however, this was a matter for him.
Vol 4, Tab 9
If it was genuinely for the line manager, Ian to decide; surely it was not
appropriate for EPAC to articulate an opinion?
Jane Anderson submitted a critical report of me listing the aforementioned
apparent inter-personal deficits, and rationalised the
absence of clarifying
these issues with the defendant as trying to be supportive.
Ian also refused the defendant’s request for a change of supervisor on
the grounds of a potential disruption to the team. This
even though the
defendant had previously worked in a mobile role across the whole district and
was consequently familiar with the
other counsellor team. Based upon this
experience such a re-arrangement would have caused minimal complications but
perhaps, more
pertinently, may have confounded EPAC’s plans to try to
medically retire the PSOA.
The above are just a few samples of how EPAC’s, overarching management
structure responsible for all employee performance and
conduct, subtly corrupts
disinterested information gathering and natural justice processes for employees
under investigation. Other
employees from whom EPAC elicited, or rather
solicited, written reports the same type of inadvertent massaging of message
took place.
The only personnel, legally qualified to discriminate between ADRs and
character driven behaviour are the medical professionals -
the “expert
witnesses”. I will address their reports and opinions now.
Dr Michael Diamond’s report (
Vol 2, Tab 17
Firstly Dr Diamond was specifically recommended to the NSW Psychologist
Registration Board by the HCCC (letter from Kieran Pehm date
stamped 14 May 2008
Vol 2, Tab 16
) for being experienced in child protection. I’m not a
lawyer but this would appear to be intentionally influencing the selection
the decision maker / judge; akin to when I was reprimanded for trying to specify
the makeup, and skill base, of the Tribunal’s
The HCCC had made their assumption that I was
and recommended
/ selected a psychiatrist who they believed would reflect a child protection /
law enforcement / legal model of assessment.
This attribution bias to Dr Diamond’s outlook is further reinforced by
his cv which lists the NSW Police Force as a major client
Dr Diamond’s cv also lists that he was a member of the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists Psychotropic
Drugs Committee 1990 -
1992. RANZCP has long history of accepting drug sponsorship of its organisation
by the major pharmaceutical
companies, including Pfizer.
So much so that a former chair of RANZCP, Dr. Malcolm Battersby, recently
resigned in protest when a motion, put to members to decline
drug sponsorship,
was defeated. Consequently, Dr. Battersby and other concerned experts, have
resorted to boycotting drug sponsored
RANZCP events.
Professor Paul Komesaroff (responsible for the ethical guidelines for the
Royal College of Physicians) in speaking on SBS’s
Insight programme
(26/05/09), was unequivocal
- “ that the evidence indicates that the
advertising and marketing by the pharmaceutical companies sells drugs,
influences the
prescribing habits of clinicians and contaminates the
relationship between doctors and their patients.”
It is illegal to simply pay doctors to use a product so much drug company
persuasion is disguised as consultancy, research and / or
education. Pfizer
Australia admitted on SBS’s Insight (26/05/09) that in 2008 they spent $6
million dollars on “educational”
events for doctors in Australia.
Clearly they are a big influence in the Australian market.
Noted opinion makers, such as psychiatrist Dr. Michael Diamond, Dr Timothy
Keogh, Mark Milic, and Dr. Michael Stewart would be a target
for influence by
the big pharmaceutical companies and unfortunately there is currently no law of
disclosure for financial links between
practitioners and pharmaceutical
companies in Australia.
To critique what Dr Diamond states in his report.
Let’s start with the diagnosis.
“...he clearly has the
features of a personality disorder with its incumbent impairment to the
individual but the descriptors
of his personality traits do not fit neatly into
a specific category.”
Vol 2, Tab 17
In other words I
have a recognised personality disorder unless
he labels me with the catch all
“...Personality Disorder Not Otherwise
. He mentions
“...his problematic conduct
“...a global disagreement with all bodies of
authority in keeping with his longstanding self description of conflict with
authority.”
I suggest that Dr. Diamond is guilty of misquoting me and
engaging in exaggeration.
What is the evidence to contradict Dr Diamond’s analysis of a
problematic conduct pattern?
) Forensic Psychiatrist Dr. Lucire’s expert witness
diagnosis of some schizoid traits but a manic shift brought about by an
Zoloft. (see court report
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
) Pam Moore Group Facilitator Character Reference -
find Graham to be careful and conscientious in all he does... he is polite and
courteous... have a realistic and honest perception
of himself: both his
strengths and weaknesses. He is approachable and sincere.(
) EAP Psychologist Maartje (Maryke) Hoeksema’s
statement only mentions anxiety symptoms (
Vol 2, Tab 25
) MHCP Clinical Psychologist Dr. Sandra Masih’s
Vol 2, Tab 24
) only mentions social anxiety and her court
character reference is complimentary of my personality and behaviour (
) NSW Dept of Ed. Alison Soutter awards me “Conflict
Resolution” in-house continuing professional development qualification
Vol 2, Tab 5
) NSW Dept of Ed. Base School Principal Maryann Judge
Centaur Public School issues Verification of Annual Review of Teacher
Performance
Vol 4, Tab 7
) EAP Psychologist John Kotroni mentions only social
anxiety plus side effects of Zoloft -
impaired social judgement and makes
(emotional blunting) (
Vol 2, Tab 23
) Psychiatrist Dr Gregory Pearson’s diagnosis
indicates dysthymia / social anxiety (
Vol 1, Tab 47
) Dr Meredith Betts only mentions anxiety and depression
Vol 2, Tab 19
) Dr Stefahn Dunn only mentions social anxiety and
dysthymia (
Vol 2, Tab 18
) NSW Dept of Ed. Principal Ken Bushell Public School
Performance Report mentions capable service delivery (
Vol 2, Tab 5
) NSW Dept of Ed. Principal Maree Angus Letter to District
Guidance Officer mentions excellent service and highly valued member of
Vol 2, Tab 5
) I pass health screening and skills points test for
migration to Australia from the UK
) Surrey County Council Personnel Officer indicates
employed as an Educational Psychologist (
Vol 2, Tab 5
) Principal [High School] mentions fulfilled all his
(teaching) duties in a most reliable, enthusiastic and personable manner (
) Headmaster Seaforth College mentions a conscientious
teacher ...very competent and develops a good rapport with his pupils (
If it existed, surely some of the above supervisors
would have noticed a global antagonism to authority?
Quite simply there is no antagonism to authority and therefore no personality
disorder but professional complications manifested,
between 2002 and 2006, due
to ADRs to sertraline and diazepam.
Dr Diamond dismisses the effects of the medication,
“To ascribe his
conduct simply to lapse in controls caused by pharmacological effects is shallow
and insightless.”
He does not elaborate any evidence for this
viewpoint. Yet his perspective is contradicted by the regularity authorities,
pharmaco-vigilance studies.
Dr Diamond prefers to speculate upon my upbringing and asserts that I have
...”deficient personal and family role modelling to draw on in relation
to the ordinary developmental issues of children and
young people.”
This despite me enjoying a 5 year career as a teacher (
prior to training as an Educational Psychologist in the UK and
having a significant family tradition of teaching and suitable role
amongst my relatives with my mother, my uncle and both my aunts, all being
qualified teachers. Child development is so central
to these vocations that it
is spurious to suggest that I could have qualified and practiced without the
necessary values, and ethics.
Dr Diamond disparages my professional abilities and asserts
chance of passing because of his repeated failure at the academic
assignments.”
assignment that I failed that
prevented me completing my Masters qualification in Educational Psychology.
Hence how I was still able
to find employment in this role in the UK (
Dr. Diamond claims
“...told me that he was incompatible with the
requirements of the course because he did not have the social skills to do
organisational
psychology role, akin to a consultancy role, that was required of
graduates.”
The above is simply inaccurate quoting. I had no social problems completing
the course but once in post as an Educational Psychologist
discovered that I
preferred, and was better suited to, a direct service model of client support
rather than a consultancy model.
Dr Diamond asserts that
...”his psychosexual development was not
expressed openly. He describes his experience as lived in quiet
desperation.”
I admit I am an introvert by temperament and have no wish to flaunt my sexual
orientation. I do not see myself as having a partner
but that is because I
recognise that I would not do justice to the obligations inherent in a serious
relationship. There is no lack
of sensitivity to what is required just a lack of
I am an ex-English teacher and the quiet desperation reference was a romantic
quotation from Henry David Thoreau (1817 - 1862) from
“Walden” published in 1854 and was never intended to be taken
“The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.” (Oxford
Dictionary of Phrase, Saying and Quotation. 2nd Ed. 2002, p
266). You may not be
familiar with Henry David Thoreau but his book “Walden” was the
inspiration for the later book “Walden
Two” published in 1948 by the
psychologist B.F. Skinner.
Dr Diamond asserts
“ he was not prone to reflective interaction and
he maintained rigid views.”
When I defend my perspective, in an adversarial context not of my making; I
am disparaged for merely having the temerity to dispute
establishments’ unfavourable, and pathological, interpretation of events
and my personality.
With the continuing refusal to accept the ADR effects on my behaviour is it
any wonder that at times I feel misunderstood and vilified?
Dr Diamond’s perspective is summed up in the following passage
“What he fails to acknowledge is that whatever drug effect occurred, it
remains the exposure of the existing underlying emotions
and sources of
gratification are the source of concern. It is these underlying features that
are the cause, in my view, of the recurrent
difficulties and unacceptable
behaviour that he has exhibited over a number of years.“
This is the crux of Dr Diamond’s opinion and indeed also underpins Mark
Milic’s opinion and the veracity of the majority
of the allegations that I
face. Note that this “expert opinion” flies in complete opposition
to the FDA March 2004 Public
Health Advisory (
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
The most parsimonious explanation for my misconduct is an ADR. This is
sufficient to explain what occurred and there is no need for
speculation about
any underlying emotional baggage that I may or may not posses.
However, this is clearly not the palatable answer that the authorities appear
to be seeking.
If you accept Dr Diamond’s perspective that the medication was not to
blame then his attributions to my personal deficiencies
become more
understandable. If you accept the ADR evidence then Dr Diamond’s views and
misperceptions stem from this misguided
central premise.
Consequently, I will not continue to further document all the areas where I
disagree with Dr. Diamond’s interpretations. The
Tribunal must make up
their own mind about the ADR issue.
I will move on to address the other “expert witnesses”.
Senior Clinical Psychologist Mark Milic (
I have some sympathy for HealthQuest’s Senior Clinical Psychologist
Mark Milic’s report.
The overwhelming impression created from the evidence collated by EPAC of the
NSW Dept. of Education paints me as a rotten apple.
Hence, Mr Milic’s cynical interpretation of my Mental Health
Plan, as standing for “Cover My Arse and Retain Employment
Plan” (his words not mine).
The evidence of ADRs from Zoloft from purely clinical trials is, as he
states, confined to a statistically small proportion of patients.
I can quite
easily understand why, when one Government organisation; the NSW Dept.of
Education, had made it plain that they wanted
rid of my services; Mark Milic,
acting for another Government organisation, HealthQuest; simply went with the
momentum and wrote
a plausible report attributing the misconduct to underlying
Mark Milic admits there are rare examples of hypomania and disinhibitory
reactions to Zoloft but then goes on to quote the results
of RCTs which are
widely recognised to be inadequate at identifying rare ADR phenomena.
The 2009 PDSEAP report clearly states
“Long term safety and
effectiveness therefore require continuous surveillance after a drug has entered
the market to establish
real world safety and effectiveness, and to collect
information on rare, but serious, adverse events.”
Mark Milic’s perspective is simply complacent.
Peter Breggin, MD. Is an American Psychiatrist and clinical psycho
pharmacologist, whose background includes Harvard College, Case
Western Reserve
Medical School, a teaching Fellowship at Harvard Medical School, three year
residency training in psychiatry, a two-year
staff assignment at the National
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), and several teaching appointments including
The John Hopkins
University Department of Counselling and the George Mason
University Institute for Conflict Analysis and Resolution.
In his paper “Recent U.S., Canadian and British regulatory agency
actions concerning antidepressant-induced harm to self and
others: A review and
analysis” International Journal of Risk and Safety in Medicine 16 (2004)
247-259 IOS Press observes
“Although most attention has been given to
warnings about drug-induced suicidality, more emphasis needs to be placed upon
and Canadian warnings about the potential production of stimulation and
mania with hostility and aggression.”
Vol 4, Tab 4
He goes on to conclude the paper with
“The American agency (FDA)
required a black box warning concerning suicidality in children and additional
warnings concerning
stimulation effects in children and adults, including
hostility and aggression. The agency published its FDA Proposed Medication
Guide: About Using Antidepressants in Children and Adults in which it warned
including new or
worse irritability, acting aggressive, being angry, or violent and acting on
dangerous impulses.
Health Canada warned that antidepressants cause stimulation or activation
in children and adults, including a variety of adverse events
violence, such as agitation, irritability, dyscontrol, hostility, aggression,
and mania. Health Canada warned about the
risk of harm to self and others in
children and adults.
In conclusion, clinicians need to give greater attention to
antidepressant-induced activation (stimulation) that can result in both
and violent acts in children and adults.”(
Vol 4, Tab 4
Aggravated indecent assault of a person under 16 is classified in criminal
law as an offence of
This was the charge that I recently had to defend in the local criminal court
in relation to this Tribunal’s misconduct Complaint
subsection 3
involving Child C. (
) This was the most significant ADR
attributable to Zoloft but there were many others of lesser magnitude which
therefore did not
feature in the criminal proceedings. The court accepted the
medical evidence and my testimony under oath that the ADR had precipitated
behaviour but held me responsible on the grounds that I should have known better
as a psychologist?
I believe that the local court magistrate did not fully understand the
implications of the FDA Public Health Advisory of March 2004
Vol 3, E Tab
) i.e that the “offence” occurred before any warnings were
provided to prescribers, let alone consumers; and that the
medical evidence
indicates that these ADRs occur across subjects and conditions and therefore
have nothing to do with underlying
motivations or intentions in taking the
medication, even if you happen to be a reasonably informed consumer as a
psychologist.
My phrase, “I’m sorry. You’re such a tease.” Occurred
only after the ADR event with Child C and does not indicate
intent but was an
immediate, and inaccurate, attempt to rationalise what had just happened.
Furthermore the information that I had read about in relation to Zoloft in
1999 prior to starting on this prescription medication
was akin to the examples
of thinly disguised marketing material presented as patient stories quoted in
Vol 3, E, Tab 10
). In no way could it be considered scientific or
comprehensive and provide sufficient information to provide informed consent for
the consumer.
Hence this local court verdict is currently under appeal in the District
This initial legal decision would seem to reflect the bias of regulatory
agencies using law enforcement / legal models of human behaviour
which assign,
as the default position, personal responsibility upon the defendant even though
the medical evidence, and chronology
of health advisory warnings, suggests such
culpability is unfounded.
I do, did, suffer from social anxiety symptoms and a diagnosed social anxiety
disorder. This is an anxiety condition and has nothing
to do with my
social-emotional age as Mr Milic asserts.
I had worked intimately with children and young people, as a teacher and
psychologist for 8 years, prior to migrating to Australia
as a 33 year old male,
without any history of child protection concerns.
The misconduct issues only arose, in Australia; whilst on the medications
Zoloft and Diazepam. Yet Mr Milic infers that it is the
rewarding social interaction and relationships have left Mr Holbrook
increasingly at risk of pursuing inappropriate
channels for emotional
fulfilment.”
This is at odds with the perspective of noted Psychiatrist, Peter Breggin,
Vol 3, E, Tab 11
) from his work with similarly shy reserved
individuals who experienced ADRs to medication: “
psychologically inhibited people who broke loose under the influence of drugs
and expressed their underlying frustrations
or fantasies? I found no evidence
for predispositions of this kind in my in-depth clinical evaluations, which
usually included a
review of all the medical, occupational, educational, and
legal records and collateral interviews with family, friends and work
associates.
As a group they were law-abiding, ethical human beings, it is purely
speculative to impugn unconscious motivations toward violence
or toward suicidal
or criminal behaviour.”
Mark Milic’s report prefers not to dwell on the contradictory evidence
available from “real world” pharmaco-vigilance
studies and in
essence reflects the same rationale as Dr. Diamond’s with a plausible
attribution to underlying social / emotional
drives precipitating the
misbehaviour rather than an ADR.
“ While Mr Holbrook’s medication
may have played a part in the professional transgressions he has admitted, it is
unlikely to be the only significant factor. A more comprehensive
explanation is that underlying problems with anxiety, including
rewarding social interaction and relationships have left Mr Holbrook
increasingly at risk of pursuing inappropriate channels
for emotional
fulfilment. “
Yet the FDA 22 March 2004 Public Health Advisory makes it explicit that these
ADRs occur across patients and presenting conditions
utilising antidepressant
medications such as Zoloft.
It is the medication that is the constant
variable in these adverse patient outcomes not any “
or personality factors.
“Anxiety, agitation, panic attacks,
irritability,
impulsivity
, akathisia,
, and mania have been reported in
paediatric patients being treated with antidepressants for major depressive
as well as for other indications, both psychiatric and
non-psychiatric
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
A cynic might conclude that the promotion of personal pathology is preferable
to the government and the NSW Health system rather than
the admission of
significant ADR problems with mainstream medications.
Dr Michael Stewart (
Vol 1,Tab 52
Dr Michael Stewart, again of HealthQuest, simply aligned himself with the
opinion of Mark Milic.
Dr. Stewart’s reason for dismissing my account of events as that of an
unreliable historian I find contrived. His rationalisation
for this position is
that I inaccurately recalled the date of prescription of the Diazepam from Dr
At interview when asked off the top of my head to say when this was I did
incorrectly attribute it to Oct 2004 when in fact it was
several months later in
February 2005 (
Vol 2, Tab 20
However, in my defence this was a script that I filled but did not
subsequently use for over a year, so it would be highly unlikely
accurately remember the date purely from memory.
Furthermore, I had just handed in the single packet of diazepam to Dr Stewart
together with the unused packets of Zoloft. Therefore
he had the date stamp on
the diazepam packet from the issuing pharmacy right in front of him and was
deliberately trying to find
fault with my account of events to dismiss the ADR
It’s not just HealthQuest personnel demonstrating this reluctance to
pursue possible ADRs, even the PDSEAP report, (2009), deliberately
sidestepped
emphasising their finding of a greater than anticipated rate of hypomania on
antidepressants by preferring to interpret
the statistics to an undiagnosed
disorder (bipolar) even though overseas regulatory authorities already make the
ADR attribution.
PDSEAP even acknowledges the real world strengths of these overseas
administrative studies:
“ Canada provides one example of
pharmacosurveillance using administrative databases....Advantages:
They cover full populations and real world safety and
effectiveness (e.g. less selected populations)
Analyses are relevant to policy decisions
Cross-juridistictional pooling of large datasets may allow for
earlier analyses of rare events than waiting for them to accumulate
over time in
(PDSEAP 2009) (
Vol 4, Tab 1
PDSEAP appear unwilling to bring themselves into accord with these other
regulators.
And remember Canada’s health regulator...”
Health Canada
warned that antidepressants cause stimulation or activation in
children and
, including a variety of adverse events related to violence, such
as agitation, irritability,
dyscontrol, hostility, aggression
. Health Canada
warned about the risk of harm to
children and
(Peter Breggin 2004
Professor David Bennett (
Vol 2, Tab 15
First I must acknowledge that the credentials of Professor Bennett are
impeccable and I find much to appreciate in his comprehensive
response to the
However, his overall opinion has been rendered unreliable as he clearly
indicates that he bases his evaluation upon the facts presented
to him by the
HCCC which include the erroneous assumption that, “During the course of
the interview, Mr Holbrook asked Alex,...
“Do you ever masturbate in
front of anyone?”.
p 2, letter from Kate Purdy to Professor Bennett
dated 27 Nov 2009. (
Vol 2, Tab 14
This question was
Therefore Professor Bennett’s
evaluation becomes
erroneous and void, which is unfortunate as he is by far the most impressive
“expert witness” utilised
by the regulatory agencies.
Not quite as misleading as this erroneous assumption promoted by the HCCC but
also troubling, is that Professor Bennett was provided
with additional complaint
information which he was told to disregard for the purposes of his specific
What better way to prejudice a respondent than oblique him to read through
other negative material to determine that which he is to
It would have been more equitable for the HCCC to black out or delete this
“irrelevant” material.
These are two examples of complacency, or at worst, deliberate manipulation.
These deficiencies in the HCCC’s procedures illustrate
how easy it is for
a supposed “neutral” regulatory agency to inadvertently participate
in the “construction”
of a deviant practitioner.
I am glad that the Child A incident keeps getting referenced. I was using
Zoloft at this time but at a low dose. I do not believe
that it had an impact in
this situation. At low doses and early in time I believe that Zoloft had
positive therapeutic benefit for
me and I am not always citing Zoloft for
precipitating complaints.
The Child A scenario illustrates how the regulatory agencies are complaint
driven, if not obsessed; and persist in trying to find
substantial practitioner
fault where none exists; until they ultimately end up “constructing”
Initially this complaint was handled internally by my respective NSW
Department of Education line managers, both Registered Psychologists.
internal evaluators found areas of the interaction that I might have handled
better (there is clearly a discrepancy in expectations
between client and
practitioner) but were happy that I had neither been negligent or inappropriate
in my interview of Child A. (NB
I also note that Professor Bennett was only
given cursory information that this internal validation had occurred).
EPAC, resurrected this old complaint when later legitimate concerns arose
through lack of
substance, EPAC dropped the Child C Complaint; yet now the HCCC rehashes it once
It is significant that you will
find any reference to this
“Do you ever masturbate in front of anyone?”
question from
any of the material collated by EPAC during their inquiry. The fact that the
[Child A’s family] raise this second
question, only in 2008 (
), asks more questions about their reliability than it does about my
professionalism.
Is it creditable that Vaneta and indeed Alex would have forgotten to mention
in 2002 such a loaded phrase as, “Do you ever masturbate
in front of
anyone” when they took such pains to complain about the far less innocuous
question, “Do you masturbate?”
How has this erroneous new “fact” arisen? I can think of a number
of plausible possibilities.
1). When approached by the HCCC, six years after the original incident,
neither Child A nor Child A’s mother, could believe
that the simple
question “Do you masturbate?” had generated such sustained
consternation and so rationalised a more controversial
2). Before I took over as School Counsellor at the school, Child A had been
involved in an incident with a group of boys which was
referred to by a
non-specific phrase such as “interfered with” when written up in the
School Counsellor student file.
this incident had
involved masturbation in front of others presumably Child A would have discussed
it with the former school counsellor.
Although this incident preceded my arrival
at the school by some months, after the time lag of an intervening six years, it
be easy to compress and equate the two incidents together.
3).The legacy of this “interference” incident was such that
although I merely asked “Do you masturbate?” this
question evoked
past emotions such that Child A “heard” it as, “Do you ever
masturbate in front of anyone?”
4). It was the kind of revelation that the HCCC wanted to hear and
consequently they inadvertently elicited it from the {Child A’s
2008 in the same spirit that they subsequently passed this uncorroborated
information on to Professor Bennett as fact.
My purpose in speculating about these possible scenarios is not because I
believe that any of them are necessarily right but to demonstrate
how easy it is
to do - to create plausible inferences that have nothing to do with fact.
This is in essence no different to what “expert witnesses” Mark
Milic, Dr. Diamond, and Dr. Timothy Keogh are doing in
their reports;
speculating about cause and effect when in fact they have no direct
Although I have already made it plain that Professor Bennett’s overall
conclusions have been rendered untenable by his inaccurate
briefing from the
HCCC I will still comment on some of his specific criticisms.
In criticism
Professor Bennett suggests that I should have better
included Child A’s mother in the interview process.
As I have previously mentioned I initially took the referral from Sue Mason
(now retired) of the Child and Family Team and I telephoned
mother to confirm permission for Child A’s suicide risk assessment.
At this time Child A’s mother declined to provide any background
information, as to her or Child A’s circumstances, when
requested to do so
by myself. She appeared frustrated that the Child and Family Team of the NSW
Department of Health were unwilling
/ unable to do the suicide risk assessment
themselves and she did not wish to share information with the school counselling
I do not recall meeting Child A’s mother at all in the school,
when I first met Child A’s for interview.
Utilising the “Visitor / Complainant / Customer” metaphor from
Solution Focussed, Brief Therapy, Child A’s mother
appeared to be
interacting from a “Complainant” position in all her dialogue with
the school. So much so that at the
post interview de-brief with the Principal,
Child A’s mother continued to ventilate about other areas of her life that
causing her grief such a being unable to afford the rising rents in the
local area and possibly having to relocate to Tasmania rather
than wishing to
discuss the further management of Child A’s situation.
I acknowledged that I had asked Child A “Do you masturbate?” and
Child A’s mother response was “Doesn’t
everyone?”. I
thought this ironic given that, here in this meeting, I was being chastised for
this question yet I found myself
thinking that I couldn’t agree more.
Masturbation is a normal activity.
That was precisely why I chose to lead into the area of Sexuality on the
HEADSS protocol with this question. To me “Do you masturbate?”
straight forward, neutral, factual question about an activity, and an aspect of
sexuality, that a 12 year old boy would be
familiar. By being direct, and asking
this question in a matter of fact style, I was modelling that aspects of
sexuality could be
discussed without embarrassment or coyness.
This was an approach that I had previously discussed with, and had
recommended to me, by Department of Health counselling personnel
address the gathering of perceived sensitive or intrusive information.
To me Alex’s non-verbal response still ranks as unusual and indicative
of some emotional legacy rather than shock or surprise.
However, the point is that Child A’s mother was not looking for any
participation in Child A’s interview - she just wanted
the suicide risk
interview undertaken, and by me if necessary, if not the NSW Depatment of
Health’s Child and Family Team.
With hindsight, with any inter-agency referral, where the possibility of
divergent expectations between client and practitioner might
be exacerbated, I
would take greater steps to minimise client confusion and ensure full
In similar criticisms,
, Professor Bennett suggests
that no information was provided as to processes taken to develop rapport with
Child A’s and sensitively
introduce him to the HEADSS protocol.
I did not provide information as to this process to the inquiry, because I
believed that I was writing for a knowledgeable audience,
and that these aspects
of good counselling were a given.
Rapport building and information giving did in fact take place, both at the
beginning of the interview, and at the more controversial
sections of the
protocol - the Drugs, Sexuality and Suicide sections. At no stage did Alex
appear uncomfortable until the specific
“Do you masturbate?”
question was asked.
In criticism
Professor Bennett mentions the School Link joint
training initiative between Department of Health and Department of Education
Prior to this much of Professor Bennett’s constructive criticism
consists of examples of how he would have elicited information
from Alex with
greater finesse and sensitivity. His examples are all excellent and
commendable.
In my defence the approach I adopted had been recommended to me by my
Department of Health counselling peers working with similar
child and adolescent
populations and the relevant School Link training had not been delivered to the
Far North Coast area at the
time of this incident.
Subsequent to the School Link Programme I have utilised an excellent
variation to the HEADSS protocol that is an adaptation to any
standard protocol
for reticent or vulnerable clients.
The counsellor introduces the protocol and states that these are the areas of
inquiry that the counsellor would like to discuss. A
copy of the outline of the
protocol is given to the client with the addition of scaling questions, 1 to 10,
for the client to rank
how comfortable for disclosure and discussion they find
each section of the protocol.
Having ranked each section the client is invited to choose the section of
inquiry that they feel most comfortable with as the first
area to be discussed.
For example this might have been the Activities section in the HEADSS protocol.
In this way the client is empowered
to be in control of the interview, can
anticipate any sensitive areas ahead, and can participate as much, and as only
as much, as
they feel confident.
this approach I have found has successfully negated any
reservations that reticent clients may have held about sensitive areas.
Given the opportunity of hindsight in the [Child A’s family] case it
would be my method of choice with Alex and indeed might
also be similarly used
to better engage his mother’s participation.
As I have already mentioned I concede that there is much constructive
material in Professor Bennett’s analysis of the Child
A incident. However,
once again, I must reiterate his overall conclusions are invalid, and must be
disregarded as such, given the
misinformation he was provided with by the
Dr Timothy Keogh (
Vol 2, Tab 13
Dr Keogh was the previously unidentified “expert” peer reviewer
plain. I note in his defence he too was initially given inaccurate information
by the HCCC.
However, in trying to correct his facts on the Child A family Dr Keogh has
not redeemed his credibility. Dr Keogh now has Child A’s
mother both
committing suicide and initiating the counsellor referral, presumably from
beyond the grave.
Vol 2, Tab 13, p 9
An oversight in cutting and pasting his report perhaps, but I find indicative
that he gives insufficient attention to corroborating
his “facts”
and is too quick in finding fault.
On that same page he devotes a whole paragraph to suicide risk questions
unaware that the HEADSS protocol incorporates these very
questions under the
Suicide section of the protocol.
He admits that he is unaware of the HEADSS protocol.
further, clearly, he is not a counselling psychologist used to working with
children and young people.
Some of his criticisms on page 12, related to safe guarding the privacy and
dignity of my clients, are more to pertinent to the shortfalls
Education plant, rather than counsellor conduct with this age group. To suggest
that they may indicate psychological disturbance
is speculative.
More worryingly still on page 14, Dr Keogh claims that he is a practicing
clinician with a working knowledge of psychotropic drugs,
yet he claims that he
is unaware of any cases of sexual disinhibition caused by Zoloft except with
geriatric patients.
The March 2004 FDA Public Health Advisory (
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
explicit that the following ADRs occur across patients and presenting
conditions from licensed uses of antidepressants,
such as Zoloft, for
depression, social anxiety disorder, and OCD, etc to off label uses.
“Anxiety, agitation, panic attacks,
irritability,
impulsivity
, akathisia,
, and mania have been reported in
paediatric patients being treated with antidepressants for major depressive
as well as for other indications, both psychiatric and
non-psychiatric
One would hope that a practicing clinician would be aware that
disinhibition
, impulsivity and feelings of grandiosity are often
features and manifestations of
A more even minded clinician would appreciate that the evidence indicates
that it is the medication that is the constant variable
in these adverse patient
outcomes not any underlying condition or type of subject.
Many of Dr Keogh’s criticisms I have already addressed previously so I
will confine further comment to his conclusions on page
20 of his report.
Dr Keogh states that the 9 complaints of Complaint One demonstrate a
consistent incapacity for me to act professionally. I have already
the majority of these 9 complaints are rendered invalid when they are correctly
attributed to an ADR to Zoloft.
He later refers to an incident when I allegedly bit the buttocks of a female
member of staff. This is not accurate.
He is referring to a further Zoloft incident, amicably resolved internally,
as it involved an adult colleague of at least my age rather
than a student.
During a professional development workshop undertaken whilst I was working at
High School B, I mimed kissing the bottom of a female
colleague, [omitted], the
Head Teacher Student Welfare. How exactly did this come about?
I am a former English teacher. Under the intoxicating influence of Zoloft I
was “inspired” by Chaucer’s Canterbury
Tales in my
interpretation of the theme allotted to a role play exercise.
In Chaucer’s Knight’s Tale; a knight pontificates and professes
refined, “courtly love”, for the object of
his affections. In
Chaucer’s tale this mannered posturing is lampooned. The lady of his
affections, requests that the knight
close his eyes whilst she positions her
naked bottom in his vicinity and invites the suitor, unbeknown to him, to bestow
a kiss upon
this specific part of her anatomy.
In the role play scenario we were given, we were first invited to completely
ignore our partner and then by contrast to worship the
ground at their feet.
Under the influence of the Zoloft, I became rather manic and followed
Chaucer’s bawdy example, in a way which seemed amusing
at the time.
However, I admit that when you are not intoxicated on Zoloft it is simply
embarrassing.
I subsequently apologised to the colleague concerned who forgave me but
retained an unfairly jaded perspective of my character as
they were not aware of
my use of Zoloft.
EPAC ignored the incident because it did not involve students or child
protection concerns. Furthermore, this incident would have
contradicted their
agenda, that I was sexually deviant and a specific liability around minors; when
the reality was that examples
of intoxication on Zoloft and inappropriate
disinhibition and impulsivity were occurring randomly.
That several subsequent complaints involved students, merely reflects the
school counsellor role where by necessity I was frequently
interacting with this
population group. It makes a mockery of the NSW Psychologist Registration
Board’s current temporary restriction
to my practice, preventing me from
working with children and young people. A prohibition, which for all practical
purposes, stops
me working as a psychologist in any capacity.
Whilst not ignoring the incident, Dr Keogh is content to inaccurately report
it and to cite it as further evidence of character pathology.
stigmatising reasoning parallels that of Mark Milic and Dr Diamond. In his view
it is the person not the medication.
His assertion that there were concerns about my behaviour between 2004 and
2006 not related to anti-depressant medication is also
inaccurate.
When you break down this period of time, (some complaints are chronologically
misattributed), the complaints in this period were inconsequential
Diazepam incident with Rene Jacobs which subsequently reignited all EPAC’s
Post the Child F incident supervisors were invited to document in writing
anything damaging to me that they could recall (
Vol 4, Tab 5
). I suffered
in this work environment and under stress committed the only error of
professional judgement
medication precipitated - the Child D
complaint, complaint One, 4.
If it were not so serious, it would be ironic that the regulatory authorities
disinclination to recognise the legitimate ADRs associated
with Zoloft and
Diazepam, eventually precipitated - all be it inadvertently, the sole genuine
case of inappropriate professional
In Conclusion
The only incontestable facts in this whole inquiry are that I was taking
Zoloft for a significant proportion of the time that complaints
occurred (see Dr
Dunn’s report) (
Vol 2, Tab 18
The overwhelming majority of these complaints preceded the first major Public
Health Advisory (
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
) notifying prescribers of the dangers of
ADRs to these medications.
My behaviour has been congruent with the NSW Psychologists Board Code of
Conduct, Personal and Professional Welfare section (
Vol 2,Tab 29
no fault should be found with this psychologist, who happened to be a consumer
of a prescription medication. Involuntary intoxication
is a valid legal defence
Crimes Act 1900
) for consumers of medication prescribed and overseen by
a GP who experience an ADR precipitating behaviour that might be construed
misconduct and or criminal (
I have a diagnosis of a toxic, manic shift, attributable to the Zoloft (from
Dr. Lucire) (
Vol 3, E, Tab 1
). Together with an indication that I have a
particular susceptibility to the ADRs associated with these drugs and that the
level of mania would account for the behaviours, observed by others,
I no longer use the problematic medications and my behaviour has subsequently
been balanced and professional, so any reference to
my personality or underlying
motivations would appear, at best ill-informed, and at worst prejudiced.
The Tribunal has read my submission and associated evidence. I suggest they
now evaluate my current risk of harm to self and or others
utilising the two
page triage form enclosed in (
Vol, Tab 10
). I believe that the Tribunal
would be hard pressed to rank me any higher than a 1. Also notice how in this
alternative context (i.e.
triage) health personnel quite readily acknowledge the
influence of psychoactive substances upon dysfunctional individual behaviour
in the HCCC evidence they have been loath to give it any credence.
I am not undermining the medication Zoloft; - I experienced therapeutic
benefit from this medication at low doses. However, I personally
would not use
this medication, or any other SSRI, again.
Marcia Angell M.D., former Editor in Chief, of the New England Journal of
Medicine and Member of Harvard Medical School’s Department
Medicine discusses the American experience of current medications and the big
pharmaceutical companies in her book “The
Truth About the Drug
Companies” Scribe Publications 2005.
“In 2004, Pfizer, the largest drug company, had a profit margin of
nearly 22% of sales (which were $53 billion). The same year
it spent 32% of
sales on marketing and administration and only 15% on R&D.”
“Furthermore
these excess profits have been used to buy the
hearts and minds of politicians, drug regulators and doctors
There is an amazing statistic from Dr Angell’s book about the influence
that the big pharmaceutical companies are able to wield
due to their excessive
profits. In the US the most profitable five hundred companies across all sectors
of the economy are known
as the Fortune 500. In one year, the combined profits
of the top ten pharmaceutical companies found in the Fortune 500, so called
“Big Pharma”; exceeded the combined profits of all the remaining
four hundred and ninety, Fortune 500, companies. This
level of wealth and
resultant influence is corrupting.
“As I saw industry influence grow, I became increasingly troubled
by the possibility that
much published research is seriously flawed,
leading doctors to believe new drugs are generally more effective and safer than
actually are
p xxx & p xxxi
An important function of inquiries such as this Tribunal is to maintain the
credibility of the profession in the eyes of the consumer.
The current
ambivalence of the TGA, and their advisors i.e. PDSEAP 2009, towards ADRs in the
Australian health care environment undermines
this objective.
Consequently Australian criminal legislation and professional Codes of
Conduct are flawed - erroneously stigmatising individuals under
the guise of
protecting the public, and in the process absolving underlying systemic problems
from appropriate scrutiny.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.47 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter