URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RILEY, Jonathon Matthew [2018] NSWMPSC 4 (24 July 2018)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Jonathon Matthew Riley MED0001145759
Date/s of Inquiry:
28 & 29 June 2018
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul, Chairperson Dr Michelle Mulligan
Dr Richard Halliwell
Ms Rosemary Kususma, lay member
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Mr Feneil Shah
Appearance for Dr Jonathon Matthew Riley:
Ms Ragni Mathur, instructed by Brit Mainhoff from HWL Ebsworth
Date of decision:
24 July 2018
The Committee made a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
reprimands Dr Riley.
Publication of decision:
A non-publication direction has been made to protect the identity of the
three patients.
Introduction
inquiry concerns the conduct of Dr Jonathon Matthew Riley on three occasions
when working as an anaesthetist at The Cosmetic Institute.
Health Care Complaints Commission complains that on 30 January 2015 Dr Riley
failed to have a discussion with a surgeon about
whether the local anaesthetic
to be administered to a patient (Patient A) was unsafe when the circumstances
required that he should
have spoken.
Commission complains that on that same day Dr Riley did not have an adequate
discussion with Patient A about the relative risks
of anaesthesia or sedation
techniques nor did he check Patient A’s understanding of the anaesthesia
or sedation she was about
to receive.
Commission also complains that on 9 May 2014 Dr Riley did not have an adequate
discussion with Patient B about the relative risks
of anaesthesia or sedation
techniques nor did he check Patient B’s understanding of the anaesthesia
or sedation she was about
to receive.
Commission alleges that in these instances Dr Riley’s conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(a)
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
in that his conduct was
significantly below the standard reasonably to be expected of him.
addition, the Commission alleges that Dr Riley was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s139B(1)(b) of the National
Law in that he failed to
record the total doses of Fentanyl and Ketamine used on 15 April 2013 during a
procedure involving Patient
C, the conduct being in breach of Schedule 2, clause
1(2) and/or clause 2(1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (NSW)
Regulation 2010.
the reasons explained below we have come to the conclusion that other than in
respect of the breach of the Regulation Dr Riley’s
conduct did not amount
to unsatisfactory professional conduct. Whatever might be said about Dr
Riley’s engagement with the
surgeon and his conversations with Patient A
and Patient B, and some criticisms can be made, his conduct was not
significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Riley’s failure to record particulars of the medication prescribed for
Patient C amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
because his conduct was
a breach of the Regulation. For this failure we have decided to reprimand Dr
we set out our findings of fact, the material upon which our findings are based,
and provide reasons for our decision.
on-publication direction
in the proceedings an order had been made to protect the identity of Patient A,
Patient B and Patient C. That order continues
in operation and the identities of
those patients or information that might reveal their identities is not to be
he material provided
received evidence on 28 and 29 June 2018. Mr Feneil Shah appeared for the
Commission. Ms Ragni Mathur appeared on behalf of Dr
Riley instructed by Ms
Brit Mainhoff of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
documentary material before the Committee consisted of:
A being two volumes provided by the Commission containing 54 tabbed
B being a list of Agreed Redactions and Remaining Objections;
1 being a volume of 31 tabbed documents on behalf of Dr Riley;
2 being a partly redacted file note of a discussion between an officer from the
Commission and Patient A.
a directions hearing Ms Mathur had foreshadowed objection to some of the
Commission’s material on the grounds it was not
relevant to our
consideration of the Complaint. At our request Mr Shah and Ms Mathur discussed
the objections ahead of the hearing.
The result of their cooperative approach
was a schedule listing Agreed Redactions and Remaining Objections to the
material (Exhibit
essence of the objection made by Ms Mathur was that the Committee was to focus
on the particulars of Complaint as advanced by
the Commission and not otherwise.
Mr Shah submitted that our jurisdiction was not so limited and we were to deal
with the subject
matter of the Complaint and the issues arising from the
material before us -
Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission
2018 NSW SC
at paragraphs [34] to [37]. After hearing from the parties we agreed with
the proposed redactions. Ultimately
Ms Mathur did not press the objection to the material in Tabs 5 and 6 of
Exhibit A. After further consideration we received portions
of the material in
Tabs 4 and 31 of Exhibit A, but not all.
confirm that we have had no regard to the material referred to as the Agreed
Redactions or the Remaining Objections in Exhibit
B, but with the exceptions
noted above.
the commencement of the hearing the Commission handed up an amended complaint
which was added to Exhibit A in place of the original
complaint. The amendment
corrected a typographical error and specified the local anaesthetic used by the
surgeon as being 50mg of
lignocaine and 120mg of ropivacaine with 825mcgs of
adrenaline. There was no objection to the amendments and proceeded on the
Committee heard from Patient A and Patient B, both by telephone, on 28 June.
Later that day Dr Sutherland, Dr Stachkowski and
A/Professor Forrest each
attended as an expert. Dr Sutherland had been briefed by the Commission and Dr
Stachkowski and A/Professor
Forrest had been briefed on behalf of Dr Riley.
They gave their evidence at the same time.
particularly thank Mr Shah and Ms Mathur for cooperating in making those
arrangements. It was useful and productive for the Committee
to have questions
asked of the experts at the same time, and for each to have the opportunity to
comment on the answers given by
the others.
next day Dr Riley gave evidence and answered questions put by us. The afternoon
was taken up by oral submissions on behalf of
the Commission and Dr Riley.
proceeded on the basis that at the same time as considering whether the
complaint was proved we would consider any exercise of
powers under s146B of the
National Law. The parties agreed with that approach.
will be apparent there was little conflict of evidence on the factual matters
ultimately relevant to the Complaint. However, there
were differences as to the
evaluation of Dr Riley’s conduct and whether it fell substantially below
the standard reasonably
he Complaint
subject matter of Complaint is not based directly on complaints made by the
patients. From the material before us it is apparent
that the Commission
received information about certain events at The Cosmetic Institute from other
sources and investigated those
matters. The Commission identified certain
conduct of Dr Riley that has become the subject of the Complaint before us.
way of background Dr Riley obtained his MBBS in 1989. He commenced training in
anaesthetics in 1994 and obtained Fellowship with
the Australia and New Zealand
College of Anaesthetists in 2000. He commenced working at The Cosmetic
Institute in Sydney in early
One of the Complaint deals with Dr Riley’s interactions with the surgeon
and his discussions with Patient A and Patient
B. Complaint Two of the
Complaint concerns Dr Riley’s record keeping and the alleged breach of the
Regulation.
particulars are set out as we deal with each part of Complaint One and Complaint
Two under separate headings. Our concerns were:
were Dr Riley’s interactions with the surgeon, and should he have had a
conversation about the local anaesthetic to be
were the contents of his discussion with Patients A and B and did those
discussions go far enough?
Dr Riley’s failure to record the medication he prescribed a breach of the
Regulation.
Dr Riley’s conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
Df so what order should we
omplaint One
1 – discussion with the surgeon
One concerns the failure of Dr Riley to discuss with the surgeon whether the
local anaesthetic and adrenaline to be used
“was unsafe”.
Dr Riley acknowledges he did not have that discussion.
circumstances which are said to prompt the need for that discussion are:
he local anaesthetic would be injected into a sub-mammary incision deep
into the breast tissue which carried a greater risk of toxicity
compared to an
injection into skin;
atient A was to be deeply sedated, would be breathing on her own and would
not have ventilation control during the procedure which
risked respiratory
atient A’s tolerance to the adrenaline would be negatively
influenced by respiratory acidosis;
oxicity from the local anaesthetic and adrenaline mixture in a deeply
sedated patient may be masked by the effects of deep sedation.
case is not put on the basis that an anaesthetist should in every case have such
a discussion with the surgeon, but whether
the particular circumstances require
the discussion.
their reports and their evidence the three experts considered whether the local
anaesthetic used or its manner of injection was
appropriate, and whether Dr
Riley might need to make adjustments to his management of the sedation. It was
Dr Riley’s view,
confirmed by the experts, and is accepted by us, that the
descriptions in subparagraphs 1(b), (c) and (d) are circumstances that
anaesthesia generally and are not specific to the case of Patient
A. Dr Riley says he was aware of those circumstances and took them into
account in his management of the sedation. He was not criticised
to the subparagraph 1(a) – the precise location and method of the
injection of the local anaesthetic – Dr Riley said
did not know what was
to be the precise location of the injection, as that was something for the
surgeon, but he knew the general
area. Further, how he was to manage the
sedation was not so much determined by the precise location of the injection,
but his observations
of Patient A during the procedure and as he made
adjustments in his treatment. Although he said he was aware that toxicity from
anaesthetics is in part dependant on the vascularity of the site of
injection, he said it was not necessary to his treatment of Patient
the precise location of the injection.
is not in dispute that the injection of the local anaesthetic into a vascular
region or into an avascular region can have implications
for the sedation. But
for the reasons above he says that was less important than his observations of
Patient A, as his observations
of Patient A would tell him more about the
progress or toxicity of the sedation than knowing the precise location of the
of the evidence was about what was the safe level of local anaesthetic for this
patient, although the dose is a matter for the
surgeon not the anaesthetist. Dr
Riley says he did not speak to the surgeon about the dose of the local
anaesthetic as there was
a protocol at The Cosmetic Institute for the dose to be
use of the word “protocol” overstates the position. It seems more
the case that there was an understanding between
practitioners that had
developed from working with each other over a period of time, and from
communications with nursing staff in
response to emails sent to some of the
anaesthetists. No document had been given to Dr Riley that set out the doses of
local anaesthetic
that was to be used by the surgeon. When Dr Riley was at The
Cosmetic Institute he was doing the same procedures on all patients.
worked with this particular surgeon at least six and perhaps ten times in the
recent past.
having worked with this surgeon in the past Dr Riley understood that the local
anaesthetic to be used was to be in the dosages
set out in the background to the
Complaint: 50mg of lignocaine and 120mg of ropivacaine with adrenaline 825 mcgs.
Dr Riley says that
in his view these dosages were safe and in that regard he is
supported by Dr Stachkowski and A/Professor Forrest. Dr Sutherland
believes the
dose should have been lower. The views of each of the experts were carefully
thought out and well considered. The
Complaint is not that Dr Riley proceeded
when he ought to have known that the dose he believed the surgeon was to use was
was evidence about the dose of ropivacaine that the surgeon actually used; it
may have been 150mg instead of 120mg. Dr Riley
said the protocol
was to use 120mg. The clinical record by the nurse and notes made by
Dr Riley at the time record the dose as 150mg. The record by the nurse is of
what was used rather than what was administered. The
ropivacaine came in 150mg
vials. Dr Riley said that his notes, which were made in a different context for
a different purpose, were
wrong. What he meant was 150mg of ropivacaine was used
but only 120mg was administered. The protocol was to mix the 150mg in a 250ml
saline solution and then to inject 100ml of the mixture at each of the surgical
sites. On that basis the dose was 120mg. It is unfortunate
that Dr Riley made no
record of the dose administered by the surgeon. As mentioned above the ANZCA
recommends the keeping of a record
of the “details of administration of
all drugs including any used by the surgeon”. Nevertheless, would a
higher dose
have been unsafe? Had
Dr Riley believed it was to be 150mg ought he have had the discussion with
the surgeon?
this issue Ms Mathur argued that because the Complaint specified 120mg the
Commission could not argue, and we could not find, that
in fact 150mg had been
used. Mr Feneil drew our attention to
Liu v Health Care Complaints
[2018] NSWSC 315
and the Supreme Court’s guidance in saying
that the particulars identify the subject matter of the inquiry but do not and
limit the scope of our inquiry.
Riley says that he believed at the time that the dose was to be 120mg but even
if it were 150mg Dr Riley says the dose was still
within the safe recommended
range for this patient given Patient A’s weight and other medications
– he would not have
altered what he did. Dr Stachkowski and A/Professor
Forrest agreed with that position. Dr Sutherland remained of her view that
dose, whether 120mg or 150mg, was higher than preferable but conceded that there
were differences of views in the literature.
given the nature of the Complaint what is relevant is not so much what was
actually administered but what Dr Riley believed was
to be administered. We have
concluded that what Dr Riley believed was to be administered was the amount
provided by the protocol,
which was 120mg of ropivacaine.
Riley gave evidence that he believed the does was safe and
Dr Stachkowski and A/Professor Forrest agreed. Dr Sutherland says a lower
does would be preferable but she did not go so far as to
say that proceeding
TTCC11,,11
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (497 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter