URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/149.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hossain v Health Care Complaints Commission [2025] NSWCATOD 149; (13 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Hossain v Health Care Complaints Commission
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 149
Hearing Date(s):
16 October 2025
Date of Orders:
13 November 2025
Decision Date:
13 November 2025
Occupational Division
The Hon M Le Poer Trench ADCJ, Principal Member
Dr K Smartt, Senior
Dr J Aitken, Senior Member
M Christensen, General Member
(1) The application of Dr Anwar Hossain for
re-registration as a medical practitioner filed 16 April 2025 is refused.
(2) Dr Anwar Hossain is precluded, for a period of 12
months from the date of this order, from making any further application for
reinstatement of his registration.
(3) Upon the expiration
of 28 days from the date hereof and in the absence of Dr Hossain making an
application to be heard in relation
to why the cost order sought by the Health
Care Complaints Commission should not be made, the Tribunal orders that Dr
Hossain pay
the costs of the Health Care Complaints Commission of his
application for reinstatement. Such costs to be as agreed and in the absence
agreement, as assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009, the disclosure to
any person or
entity of the name and/or the address of the person referred to in
the evidence placed before the Tribunal in this matter is prohibited.
avoidance of doubt this order does not preclude the disclosure or publication of
the name of the applicant.
Catchwords:
HEALTH – non disclosure / non-publication order – application
for reinstatement of a general practitioner after deregistration
- application
refused - costs
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Della Bruna
[2014] NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v Haloob
[2025] NSWCATOD 137
Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield (1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA 342
Hossain v Medical Council
of New South Wales
[2024] NSWCATOD 29
Knowles v Health Care Complaints
Commission [2025] NSWCATOD 145
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Anwar Hossain (Applicant)
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Contradictor)
Representation:
O Jones (Respondent)
Applicant (self-represented)
Care Complaints Commission (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00154452
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) 2009 (National Law), the disclosure to
any person or entity
of the name and/or the address of the person referred to in the evidence placed
before the Tribunal in this
matter is prohibited. For the avoidance of doubt
this order does not preclude the disclosure or publication of the name of the
REASONS FOR DECISION
Anwar Hossain (the Applicant) proceeds before the Tribunal on his application
for reinstatement as a medical practitioner (i.e.
permission to be registered as
an Australian medical practitioner). The Applicant filed a formal application
for reinstatement on
16 April 2025.
Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), named as a party to the
proceeding, appears as a contradictor, and opposes the application
reinstatement.
application before the Tribunal is necessitated by an order made of the Tribunal
made 8 March 2022. That order cancelled the registration
of the Applicant and
set a non-review period of 12 months.
The Documentary evidence
tendered by the Applicant Dr Hossain
Hossain identified the following documents which were admitted to evidence at
the commencement of the hearing:
Exhibit R1: Report of Dr Hassan
dated 26 February 2025.
Exhibit R2: Report of Dr Tuen Nguyen, Cardiologist dated 24 February
Exhibit R3: Letter dated 2 May 2025 from Dr Van Nguyen GP.
Exhibit R4: Letter/Application by Dr Hossain to NCAT dated 3/6/25.
Exhibit R5: General Application filed by Dr Hossain 16/4/2025 +
Exhibit R6: Email 9 October 2025 with blood test results for Dr Hossain.
Exhibit R7: CPD documents supplied by Dr Hossain.
Exhibit R8: Further bundle of documents filed by Dr Hossain.
Exhibit R9: Copy documents from Website of Cleveland Clinic re
Neurodegenerative Disease.
Tribunal also marked for identification (MFI 2) a written submission provided by
Dr Hossain.
Documents tendered by the HCCC
Exhibit A1: A bundle of documents (499 pages) prepared by the HCCC.
Exhibit A2: A bundle of documents (142 pages) prepared by the HCCC.
Exhibit A3: Report of Dr Samuels dated 7 October 2025.
Tribunal also marked for identification (MFI 1) a written submission provided by
is important to note, for the purpose of this judgment, that the cancellation
order made 8 March 2022, followed a finding of professional
misconduct against
the Applicant. That finding was made following the HCCC establishing one
complaint of unsatisfactory professional
conduct (s.139B(1)(c)) and a second
complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct (s. 139B(1)(l)). The first
complaint alleged
the Applicant had breached a condition attached to his then
registration which set the maximum number of patients he could see each
limit was 30 patients, and it was alleged he had breached that limit on eight
separate occasions. The second complaint alleged
the Applicant had provided
false and/or misleading information to Medicare regarding three consultations he
alleged took place on
30 September 2019. It was alleged the Applicant was
motivated to conceal his exceeding of the thirty-patient condition.
31 May 2023 the Applicant applied to the Tribunal for reinstatement of his
registration. That application was heard on 14 and 15
November 2023 with orders
being made on the 14 March 2024 (the “November 2023 hearing”). The
orders dismissed the application
and restricted a further application for
reinstatement until 12 months had elapsed.
reasons stated for the dismissal of the reinstatement application are found in
the Tribunal decision
Hossain v Medical Council of NSW
[2024] NSWCATOD 29
– [56]. We here set out those paragraphs of the
48. The Tribunal considers that Mr Hossain’s position
on re-registration appears weaker than it was when
resisting deregistration,
and repeats the comments made by the earlier
Panel at paragraphs [56]–[58] of
(quoted at [2] above).
49. He does not appear to comprehend the totality of adverse
matters identified by prior decision-makers, including this Tribunal
Hossain No 1
, and, on the evidence before us, we cannot be
satisfied that he has insight, and has “reformed” since he
lost his registration.
50. We acknowledge that he has undertaken self-directed
study, much of it pre-dating
Hossain No 1,
the evidence suggests that it is at such a high level of generality as
to be of no real assistance to his cause.
51. Dr Ahmed’s opinion that Mr
Hossain’s “hard work and extensive studies and discussion with
experienced colleagues”
have “overcome the
initial shortcomings and difficulties” (letter 28 February 2023
in Ex A3) is submitted by the Council
(submissions 45) to
be “dismissive of the gravity of the findings of previous
decision-makers”. We respectfully reject
that opinion.
52. The comments in other letters Mr Hossain relies
upon reveal little or no awareness of those findings on the part of
their authors.
53. We prefer and accept the evidence of Drs Samuels
and Metcalf, and find the evidence of Mr Hossain and Dr Ahmed
unpersuasive.
54. We conclude that Mr
Hossain’s present application should be dismissed, and that
a further non-review period should be
55. The Council recommends that that period should be
a “minimum of twelve months” (submissions 49). Given
Mr Hossain’s
age, we consider twelve months to be appropriate.
56. During that period, we would hope Mr Hossain would give
serious consideration to the evidence and recommendations of Drs Samuels
hearing giving rise to the 14 March 2024 order also considered evidence
addressing Dr Hossain’s cognitive capacity. There
was evidence before the
Tribunal provided by Dr Samuels (a consultant forensic psychiatrist) and Dr
Metcalf (a consultant neuropsychologist).
Both were available to the Applicant
for cross-examination. The decision addressed that evidence as
Dr Samuels produced two detailed reports, the first on 27 July 2023 (Ex R1,
tab 25, which included his CV at pp 365-70), and the
second on 13
November 2023 (Ex R4). Dr Metcalf’s reports are dated 19 September
2023 (Ex R1, tab 27, with CV at pp 399-401),
and 9 November 2023
Dr Samuels opined that Mr Hossain lacks the “higher order of
thinking” that doctors need in all their work, and needed
more extensive
neuropsychological testing such as performed by Dr Metcalf. Dr Metcalf was
worried that Mr Hossain’s medical
issues (heart and diabetes etc) are
“risk factors” for his cognition, and require treatment.
As already noted, the Council’s expert witnesses were closely
cross-examined by Mr Hossain, but the strength of their evidence
was not dented
in any way by that cross-examination. They were sympathetic to his plight, but
cast doubt on his claim that he has
adjusted well to any “deficits”.
Both questioned the level of Mr Hossain’s insight into the issues which
impairment.
Dr Metcalf concluded that Mr Hossain “suffers a significant cognitive
impairment within the meaning of the National Law”
(submissions 38), i.e.,
“a clear cognitive impairment across multiple domains” (Ex R1, tab
27, p 396 at 8.3), and she
held “significant concerns with his capacity to
function safely as a GP in any capacity” (Ex R1, tab 27, p 395 at 7.6),
and “significant concerns that he would be unable to adhere to his
conditions...” (p 397 at 8.8).
Based on their reports and evidence, the Council submits (Ex R5) that Mr
Hossain “suffers from a significant cognitive impairment,
likely a Major
Neurocognitive Disorder (DSM-VTR)”, raising “a significant concern
as a general practitioner in any
The submission continues:
“5. ...The applicant is, it is submitted suffering from a
mental impairment which is likely to detrimentally affect his capacity
practise as a medical practitioner.
6. Further, the evidence before the Tribunal would not permit
it to be satisfied that the applicant has insight into – including
comprehension of – the shortcomings in his practice as general
practitioner identified by previous decision-makers, and that
he has taken
sufficiently focused and intensive remedial action to overcome the identified
shortcomings.
7. The Tribunal could not be confident that if it were to grant
a reinstatement order subject to conditions, the applicant would
comprehend and would comply with those conditions.”
While Mr Hossain attacked Drs Samuels and Metcalf and their evidence, he called
no oral expert evidence in response, despite the
Council’s invitation to
do so (submissions 41).
Tribunal, in the November 2023 hearing, also considered evidence called by Dr
Hossain from Dr Ahmed and found that evidence unpersuasive.
The evidence
provided by Dr Ahmed was described in the Tribunal’s decision as
[35] Dr Ahmed has been Mr Hossain’s GP only since September 2023. He
opined that Mr Hossain is stressed, but mentally stable,
with no psychiatric
diagnosis, and that he is medically and physically fit to resume practice with
supervision, and/or in a multi-member
setting. On a “K10” mood
disorder test, Mr Hossain scored 10/50, as against an average of 27.1. Dr Ahmed
sent him to
various other practitioners for assessment with the following
results: No “evidence of his memory or his cognition problem”,
“minor clinically insignificant changes in blood”, and “no
evidence of dementia... or any neurocognitive disorder...”.
“MSE” score was 30/30 (a later “ACE” was 90/100). Dr
Ahmed observed that Mr Hossain has no family history
of dementia or cognitive
problems/disorder, and opined that he is a compliant patient, with
“good” medical knowledge,
“no physical or mental
impairment”, and “no depression”.
HCCC has provided a submission to assist this Tribunal in this determination.
That submission highlights the evidence it relies
upon from Dr Samuels (a
consultant psychiatrist) and Ms McMillan (a clinical neuropsychologist) and
which leads to the HCCC stating
that the Applicant “is suffering from a
mental impairment which is likely to detrimentally affect his capacity to
as a medical practitioner”.
evidence relied upon from Dr Samuels is found in a number of reports dated 27
July 2023, 13 November 2023, 15 July 2025 and 7
October 2025. The evidence of Ms
McMillan is set out in a report dated 26 September 2025. There are also reports
of Dr Metcalf, neuropsychologist,
who gave evidence before the Tribunal during
the last Tribunal hearing, which considered the 2023 reinstatement application
Applicant. Those reports are dated 19 September 2023 and 9 November 2023.
the report of Ms McMillan dated 26 September 2025 we noted the following in
particular:
(a) Ms McMillan set out the history of Dr Hossain’s disciplinary contact
with the Tribunal and the Medical Council. That included
the detail of the
complaint which led to the Medical Council imposing conditions on the
registration of Dr Hossain on 10 July 2019.
She stated the concerns which gave
rise to the imposition of the conditions: “pertained to the prescribing of
medication without
proper clinical indication, poor diagnostic acumen, and
inadequate management of chronic conditions.” (We note a copy of the
decision of the Medical Council of 10 July 2019 is included in the documentation
tendered by the HCCC before us.)
(b) Ms McMillan set out a summary of the evidence which had been provided by Dr
Anthony Samuels in his report dated 27 July 2023,
11 November 2023 and 15 July
2025. All three reports are contained in the evidence before us.
(c) Ms McMillan provided summaries of reports provided by Dr Metcalf dated 19
September 2023 and 9 November 2023. Both those reports
are in evidence before
(d) Ms McMillan set out summaries of other medical reports relating to Dr
Hossain which had been provided to him. Those reports were
from a cardiologist,
a radiologist (re brain scan) and a geriatrician. There was a letter from Dr
Shirin, psychologist attaching
a NUCOG cognitive profile report dated 10 March
2023. Ms McMillan also was provided with 14 pages of blood test results for Dr
conducted 10 July 2025.
(e) Ms McMillan met with Dr Hossain on 17 September 2025 and spoke with him and
conducted testing of him over a five-hour period.
(f) Under the heading “Behavioural Presentation” Ms McMillan noted
“Dr Hossain was a detailed historian who demonstrated
limited insight into
his cognition...Dr Hossain presented as highly motivated and appeared to be
putting in his best effort throughout
the assessment.”
(g) Under the heading “Clinical Interview” it is noted that Dr
Hossain told Ms McMillan that he had repaid his debt to
Medicare of $600,000
within a two year period by selling assets and borrowing from friends. He wanted
to be able to work for another
two years minimum to repay his debts. He could
not afford to engage a solicitor for the application for reinstatement.
(h) Under the heading “Recent Cognitive and Emotional Functioning”
Ms McMillan noted: “Dr Hossain denied any cognitive
changes or decline,
adding ‘everything is fine’. He denied any changes in his ability to
perform basic and instrumental
activities of daily living. He denied any
difficulty with driving...”
(i) Ms McMillan administered tests with Dr Hossain and reported the result of
each test. We do not here detail the results for each
test. The reports are
detailed and lengthy.
(j) Under the heading “Summary and Impression” we note the
(i) Ms McMillan stated: “The results from the current neuropsychological
assessment are similar to Dr Hossain’s results
in 2023. Allowing for some
mild variability and fluctuation over time, the current results suggest that Dr
Hossain’s global
cognition is far below his expected level based on his
age, level of education and occupational attainment; there are no results
the High Average to Superior ranges.”
(ii) The testing on the ACE-III showed an improvement above his 2023 level of
66/100. “However, his current score of 81/100
remains below the cut-off
for impairment (>88) and well below the expected level for someone with a
high level of premorbid functioning.”
(iii) “On comprehensive neuropsychological testing, while Dr Hossain was
fully oriented, his attention span and working memory
fall well below his
expected level..... His verbal intellectual skills appear to be relatively
stable and a relative strength. However,
his profoundly impaired performance on
the confrontation naming task is noted to be stable over time. There is evidence
of a downward
trend in Dr Hossain’s non-verbal skills over time, notable
over several tests in this domain.”
(iv) Ms McMillan reported: “Overall, I agree with Dr Metcalf that the
level of Dr Hossain’s current performance on testing,
when compared with
his high premorbid level, raises concern about the presence of a Major
Neurocognitive Disorder (DSM-V TR)”.
“The striking semantic and
phonemic errors Dr Hossain made on the confrontation naming task are very
concerning.”
(k) Ms McMillan was asked to provide an opinion in response to specific
questions asked by the HCCC. In providing those opinions
we have noted the
following responses:
1. “Dr Hossain’s performance on the current
assessment suggest he is suffering from a significant neuropsychological
disorder or cognitive impairment and raises concern about an underlying Major
Neurocognitive Disorder.”
2. “Based on my assessment, I consider Dr Hossain to meet
the definition of “impairment” as defined by the National
3. “I think that his level of cognition, coupled with his
reduced insight, would put his patients at risk for misdiagnosis,
mismanagement
and inadequate treatment, especially in a General Practice setting where patient
presentations are varied, unpredictable,
and performed under time
constraints.”
(l) We note that when Ms McMillan was asked whether there could be any
conditions which might be imposed upon Dr Hossain’s
registration which
would ensure he would be able to practise safely as a medical practitioner, Ms
McMillan’s response is: “Unfortunately,
based on the degree and
pattern of cognitive decline within Dr Hossain’s cognitive profile,
coupled with his poor insight,
I am of the opinion that his cognitive deficits
precludes him from working as a medical practitioner.”
The evidence of Dr Samuel
Samuels is a consultant psychiatrist retained by the HCCC to provide expert
evidence to assist the Tribunal in relation to Dr Hossain.
The first report
provided by Dr Samuels is dated 27 July 2023. He provided a supplementary report
dated 13 November 2023 and another
dated 15 July 2025. The last report was
provided without the benefit of the reported testing provided by Ms
the report dated 27 July 2023 Dr Samuels set out detail of Dr Hossain’s
past disciplinary contact with the Medical Council
of NSW and the Medical
Council of New Zealand, where he had practised prior to his migrating to
Australia and obtaining registration
in this country in about 2014.
first report set out detail of a cognitive assessment which Dr Samuels performed
with Dr Hossain. In concluding his description
of that testing and the results
achieved, Dr Samuels stated: “Mr Hossain did score 26/30 which is in the
normal range for the
MoCA but my clinical impression is that he does have some
minor neuropsychological deficits, and at some point, more extensive
neuropsychological
testing may be indicated.” In the final paragraphs of
this report Dr Samuels recommended a neuropsychological evaluation to
“further provide a better understanding of his current capacity to manage
acute clinical situations and complex patients.”
note that neuropsychological testing was undertaken with Dr Metcalf who provided
a report dated 19 September 2023 and a supplementary
report dated 9 November
report authored by Dr Samuels and dated 13 November 2023, followed the provision
to Dr Samuels of Dr Metcalf’s report dated
19 September 2023. Dr Samuels
noted the report “now confirms the cognitive deficits which were evident
to me clinically and
on a screening test at the time of my assessment on 27 July
2023”. Dr Samuels concluded: “This leads me to revise my
opinion, and I concur with Dr Metcalf that Dr Hossain has an impairment within
the meaning of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law, namely a Major
Neurocognitive Disorder and that the identified cognitive deficits do have the
potential to impact upon
his professional functioning.”
the conclusion of the report, Dr Samuels stated: “Given the prior concerns
that even with supervision
and other protective conditions in place, Dr Hossain may pose a risk to his
third report provided by Dr Samuels is dated 15 July 2025. The report was
provided prior to the evidence of Ms McMillan being
available. Dr Samuels set
out the further material provided to him by the HCCC which he identified in his
report. The material included
a bundle of materials relied upon by Dr Hossain
(14 pages) which supported Dr Hossain’s application for reinstatement
3 June 2025. Further material identified is a letter from Dr Muzahid
Hassan dated 2 April 2025, a letter from Dr Tuan Nguyen, cardiologist,
February 2025 and a letter from Dr Van Minh Nguyen (GP) dated 2 May 2025.
Samuels reported that notwithstanding the further material provided to him, his
opinion provided via his report of 10 November
2023 remains unchanged.
addressing an issue which arises between the evidence of Dr Muzahid Hassan,
Geriatrician and that of Dr Metcalf, Dr Samuels stated:
“The Mini Mental
State Examination is an inadequate test to perform unless there are severe
cognitive problems. The Addenbrooke’s
and MoCA are much better screening
measures, but they are not diagnostic tools and provide much less information
than formalised,
comprehensive, multi-modal neuropsychological testing.”
Samuels again confirmed his opinion that Dr Hossain suffers from a Major
Neurocognitive Disorder.
Report Dr Samuels 7 October 2025
(exhibit A3)
report followed Dr Samuels being provided with a copy of the report prepared by
Ms McMillan dated 26 September 2025 (contained
in exhibit A2). Dr Samuels was
asked to review the report of Ms McMillan and advise whether his opinions in
relation to Dr Hossain,
set out in his earlier reports, have changed.
Samuels reports as follows:
(a) “Having Reviewed the very comprehensive and extensive neuro
psychological report of Ms McMillan (26 September 2025), My
concerns about the
level of Dr Hossain’s impairment have increased. Ms McMillan has made it
clear that she feels his cognitive
deficits would preclude him from practising
as a medical practitioner, particularly in a general practice setting. She did
if he were permitted to practise, he would require, “the highest
degree of oversight and supervision”
(b) “I concur with Ms McMillan that the risk to patients and the
possibility of a serious clinical error related to these cognitive
deficits is
(c) “In conclusion, not only do I feel more strongly that Dr Hossain does
have an impairment within the meaning of the Health
Practitioner Regulation
National Law, namely a Major Neurocognitive Disorder, it does seem that it is
now at the level that it prevents
him from safely working as a medical
practitioner.”
(d) “This is obviously a very devastating situation for Dr
(e) “I think it is now imperative that Dr Hossain’s GP notifies the
RTA and determines whether or not he is is fit to
drive a motor vehicle. I have
notified this previously.”
Evidence of Dr Kasey Metcalf PhD.
Metcalf, clinical neuropsychologist, provided a first report dated 19 September
2023. That report set out results and conclusions
following Dr Hossain
undertaking neuropsychological testing.
report provided information Dr Hossain had provided to Dr Metcalf during the
assessment and testing which took five hours to complete.
In that information we
noted one piece of history provided as follows: “He reported that he was
born in Bangladesh in a farming
area.” We note he then described his
academic success from early schooling experiences to completion of his degree at
the University
of Dhaka. There was no other reported history relating to his
early childhood and secondary school or family circumstances. During
the hearing
before us, in an emotional moment for him, Dr Hossain identified some of the
hardships he had faced during the early
part of his life.
note the observation of Dr Metcalf that “overall he (Dr Hossain) did not
appear to have insight into the extent of his cognitive
impairments.”
report sets out in great detail the testing undertaken with Dr Hossain. One of
the matters reported, which we see as pivotal to
the findings, is set out at
paragraph 6.6 under the heading of “Premorbid Intellectual
Functioning”. Dr Metcalf wrote:
“Demographic information based on
his education and work attainment, broadly placed him in the high average to
superior range.
The following tasks were compared to this estimate.” The
words are important in this determination and are the basis for the
expressed by Ms McMillan in her report (see hereafter) where she used the words
“global cognition is far below his
expected level based on his level of
education and occupational attainment.”
the heading “Summary & Opinion”, Dr Metcalf reminded the
Tribunal of the brief or purpose of her report. She
stated: “In summary,
Dr Hossain was seen for neuropsychological assessment in regard to providing an
opinion on whether he
suffers from an impairment within the meaning of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (“the National
report includes the following opinion:
(a) “At the current assessment, Dr Hossain demonstrated widespread and
significant cognitive dysfunction.”
(b) “Moderate to severe impairment in his visual attention span and severe
impairment in his speed of thinking.”
(c) “Executive dysfunction was clearly evident in his reduced
problem-solving, poor ability to respond to feedback, impaired
attention and very poor planning/organisation.”
(d) “Given the level of clear cognitive impairment, I am of the opinion
that Dr Hossain is currently suffering from impairment
within the meaning of the
National Law. On this basis, I have significant concerns with his capacity to
function safely as a GP in
any capacity.”
noted that when Dr Metcalf was asked to opine whether there were any conditions
which might/should be imposed were Dr Hossain to
be permitted to again be
registered as a medical practitioner, Dr Metcalf stated: “In my opinion,
Dr Hossain’s severe
cognitive impairments are likely to preclude his
capacity to work as a GP.”
Metcalf was asked to comment on the results of a report on Dr Hossain provided
by Dr Shafiq Shirin dated 8 March 2023. Dr Metcalf
stated that the testing
conducted, as reported by Dr Shirin was the NUCOG and “is a general
cognitive screen. It does not cover
the breadth of testing contained within a
full neuropsychological assessment.” Dr Metcalf had noted the report
concluded “the
only clear weakness identified on the NUGOC was in regard
to a modest decline (i.e., 1 standard deviation) in Memory.” Dr Metcalf
noted: “Although the NUCOG cannot be directly compared to a full
neuropsychological assessment, in my opinion, it is unusual
to see such
significant cognitive decline within a 6-month period (i.e., March 2023 to
September 2023).”
Metcalf was asked for a further report which she provided on 9 November 2023.
She was provided with further evidence which Dr Hossain
had provided to the HCCC
and/or the Tribunal. One of the documents provided was a further statement from
Dr Hossain dated 31 October
2023. Dr Metcalf summarised the statement which
included the following:
(a) “He further stated that I labelled him with a very low IQ
“almost an imbecile level”. He made further comment
assessment took over 7.5 hours and that it was conducted in a “stormy
& dynamic manner”. He reported that
he had already completed a similar
cognitive test with a “different highly experienced & and
exceptionally qualified educated
consultant psychologist” who diagnosed
(me) with having no “symptoms or poor memory or poor cognition” and
he was “very doubtful & concerned with the validity”
of my (Dr Metcalf’s) findings.”
(b) Dr Hossain reported he had paid his Medicare debt and had “lost
everything in my life” and that he had an “inhuman
life” as he
had not worked for the past 18 months.
(c) Dr Metcalf summarised all of the documents provided by medical practitioners
which Dr Hossain had provided.
(d) Dr Metcalf opined that the further material did not “substantially
change” the conclusions as detailed in the report
of 19 September 2023.
The Evidence relied upon by Dr Hossain
Dr Hossain was self-represented, the Tribunal, with the consent of the HCCC,
asked Dr Hossain at the commencement of the hearing
to take an oath or
affirmation, in order that we could have regard to all of his statements, which
he provided during the hearing,
as part of his sworn evidence. We also had his
written evidence which was identified at the commencement of the hearing and
as an exhibit.
Hossain relied upon documentary evidence which we set out
The evidence of Dr Muzahid Hassan
Hassan provided a report for Dr Hossain dated 25 October 2023. That report is
contained in exhibit A1. The report was updated on
26 February 2025 and is
contained in exhibit R1.
M. Hassan is a geriatrician to whom Dr Hossain was referred by Dr Ritz. Ahmed.
We note earlier in this judgment that the report
predated the November 2023
hearing before the Tribunal. We note in that report a cognitive assessment was
administered through the
utilization of the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination III, which indicated an ACE score of 90 out of 100. Dr Hassan stated
that result was “performance within the normal range”. Dr Hassan
further set out details of other testing conducted of
Dr Hossain. Under the
heading “Impression”, Dr Hassan noted: “Taking into account
the comprehensive history, cognitive
evaluations, and imaging results, the
clinical impression is that Dr Hossain maintains normal cognitive functioning
appropriate for
the report of Dr Hassan dated 26 February 2025 (exhibit R1) we noted that the
report does not state Dr Hossain had again been seen
by Dr Hassan for this
report. It refers to testing on the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination
providing a score of 90/100,
however it does not say that testing was additional
to the earlier testing referred to in the report of 25 October 2023. There is
inference that as the score was identical to the 2023 testing result, the test
had not been repeated.
The evidence of Dr Abdul Mamun
Abdul Mamun provided Dr Hossain with a report dated 23 October 2023. The report
is contained in exhibit A1 and is dated prior to
the November 2023 hearing in
this Tribunal. Dr Mamun is a consultant Neurologist. He provided a report to Dr
Ahmed, who is Dr Hossain’s
GP. Dr Hossain had been referred for cognitive
and memory assessment.
Mamun administered a cognitive assessment with MMSE and noted he scored 30/30.
Dr Mamun concluded “From a neurological perspective
I did not Identify
compelling indications of major neurodegenerative dementia.”
Dr Hossain provided a letter to the Medical Council of NSW dated
23 June 2023.
is contained in exhibit A1 and is dated prior to the November 2023 hearing in
the Tribunal. The letter details the evidence relied
upon by Dr Hossain and set
out his proposals and submission in support of his application for
re-registration then before that Tribunal.
We note this document has been
updated by the material provided by Dr Hossain for this hearing before the
Report Dr T. Nguyen, Cardiologist 24 February 2025
(exhibit R2).
Nguyen reported having seen Dr Hossain in consultation on 24 February 2025. He
reported his opinion that Dr Hossain has been stable
from cardiac perspective.
He described reported exercise undertaken by Dr Hossain, his blood pressure
reading taken that day, together
with heart rate and weight. He was of the
opinion that from a cardiology perspective Dr Hossain was fit for work.
Letter dated 2 May 2025 Dr V. Nguyen GP (exhibit R3)
is a reference provided for Dr Hossain by Dr V Nguyen, who has been a work
colleague of Dr Hossain. The reference is very supportive
and commending of Dr
Hossain. Dr Hossain worked at the Rosemeadow practice of Dyvest Health Care.
The Oral evidence of Ms McMillan
McMillan presented as a witness clearly cognisant of the impact upon Dr Hossain
of her report. She demonstrated careful attention
to the questions asked and
propositions put by Dr Hossain in his cross-examination of her. She answered in
a clear and unemotive
manner. There was empathy in her manner and the
presentation of her evidence.
Dr Hossain was clearly appearing in a forum which he was unaccustomed and
probably uncomfortable, the Tribunal members assisted
him in formulating what
was understood to be his intended question or proposition. He confirmed each
question or proposition framed
for him before Ms McMillan was asked to answer.
McMillan was cross-examined by Dr Hossain. The area’s covered in the
cross-examination included the following:
(a) The possible impact of stress, fatigue and anxiety which Dr Hossain said he
was suffering on the day of the testing, upon the
test results.
(b) The unfairness to Dr Hossain of failing to explain to him that he will be
required to remember aspects of some tests carried
out earlier in the day when
tests were administered later in the day.
(c) That the results of the testing do not amount to conclusive evidence of a
major neurocognitive disorder.
(d) Whether the results were properly adjusted to reflect the cultural, language
and religious background of Dr Hossain.
McMillan answered each question or proposition put, in a coherent and empathic
manner. Her answers were compelling and negatived
the impact Dr Hossain was
clearly seeking to have on the reliability and acceptance of her evidence. At
the conclusion of her oral
evidence we find there was no admission made or
concession given which led us to find her evidence unacceptable in any manner or
which required us to reduce the weight which should otherwise be given to the
totality of her evidence.
Written evidence of Dr Hossain
(Exhibit R4)
Hossain provided a written document which is in the nature of a statement and
which is dated 3 June 2025. In that document we noted
the following in
particular:
(a) Dr Hossain provided detail of his current medical condition and the steps he
was taking to care for his medical conditions.
(b) Should he be re-registered he has a job at the Rosemeadow medical practice
owned by Dyvest.
(c) He is prepared to work under any level of supervision which the Tribunal
might require.
(d) He set out his history of obtaining his medical qualifications and his work
as a medical practitioner for 37 years in different
countries including
Bangladesh, Iran and New Zealand.
(e) He has not worked since February 2022 and has undertaken extensive medical
study since then.
General Application Form (Exhibit R5)
Hossain filed this application on 16 April 2025. Apart from the request that his
registration be reinstated, there is no further
evidence of note in the
Exhibit R6. Blood test results for Dr Hossain
exhibit sets out the results of blood collected from Dr Hossain on 7 July 2025.
There was no further evidence provided to us
during the hearing which addressed
these particular results. Although the results of blood tests provided by Dr
Hossain is the subject
of some of the medical evidence provided to us, nothing
adverse in relation to the Exhibit R6 results was raised or submitted in
Exhibit R7. Evidence of CPD undertaken by Dr Hossain
during 2025.
are many documents forming part of this exhibit and we can see Dr Hossain has
been engaged extensively in continuing to update
his medical knowledge during
Exhibit R9. Copy of information in relation to
Neurodegenerative Diseases published on the web site of Cleveland
Hossain provided this document for the assistance of the Tribunal and also to
support his submission that if he does suffer from
a neurodegenerative disease
(which he denies he does suffer from) it could not be at a level which would
make him a danger to his
patients were he to be permitted to practice as a GP.
The document is 25 pages in length and we were not referred to any specific
of the article by either party. We did note the following matters in
particular:
(a) “The conditions are permanent and incurable, but many are now
treatable thanks to medical advances. Currently, the main
goal is to treat the
symptoms and slow the progress of these conditions when possible.”
(b) “Degenerative brain diseases are uncommon...Researchers estimate they
affect more than 50 million people worldwide.”
(c) The document sets out the symptoms of the diseases and notes the symptoms
can vary widely.
(d) There is considerable further information about the diseases, possible
causes and symptoms.
The oral evidence of Dr Hossain
first thing for the Tribunal to note about Dr Hossain is that he appeared
unrepresented. In a case such as that pursued by Dr
Hossain self-representation
would generally place him at a disadvantage. The fact that he did represent
himself meant that in the
hearing we had the opportunity to hear more from him
than we would have expected to hear were he represented.
note with gratitude, the representation of the HCCC by Mr O. Jones of counsel,
who conducted the case for the HCCC with great sensitivity
and tolerance to the
circumstances of Dr Hossain.
Hossain did not provide any further oral evidence when he was asked to enter the
witness box. He did however address the Tribunal
when he gave his submission.
Where it was appropriate to do so we accepted what he said as his sworn oral
evidence, given the procedure
we had adopted at the commencement of the hearing
where we asked him to take an oath to cover all that he may wish to say to the
Tribunal during the hearing.
Hossain was cross-examined. He was asked whether he understood the
neuropsychological test he underwent with Ms McMillan was to
ascertain if he was
fit to practice as a medical practitioner GP. He said he initially did not know
that however he later knew the
attendance with Ms McMillan was to provide
evidence for this proceeding.
Hossain was asked if he was aware Dr Metcalf had conducted a neuropsychological
assessment of him. Again, he said he knew at some
time that testing had been
undertaken of him, however, he said he had not seen the report. He said he had
spent about one hour with
Dr Metcalf.
The written and oral
submission of Dr Hossain
Hossain provided a written submission which was contained in an email dated 13
October 2025. In that submission we particularly
noted the following.
(a) Dr Hossain set out his academic attainment, his work history and the history
of his cancellation of registration in February
(b) Dr Hossain asserted he has taken steps to address the identified aspects of
his health and practise which led to his cancellation.
He set out detail of his
current health and physical activity.
(c) He referred to the evidence of Dr Samuels and Dr Metcalf which was provided
to his November 2023 hearing in the Tribunal. He
said he has undertaken what was
suggested by those two experts. He has consulted a neurologist and a
geriatrician and they concluded
he did not suffer from a “cognitive
problem” and that he is “fit for practice”.
(d) Dr Hossain stated: “Relatively poor performance of some aspects of
cognitive test with the neuropsychologist in my opinion
is due to my very upset,
fatigue and stress-anxiety of the situation and culture issues which are
recognised factors for poor performance
of the test.” “It is a
screening test, not a diagnostic test.” “There is a very high chance
of false positive
test results”
[We pause here to note that Dr Hossain provided no corroborative evidence for
the statement in the last sentence of paragraph (d)
above. The evidence he did
provide which became exhibit R9 did not suggest such a proposition.]
(e) Dr Hossain submitted that all the testing and medical examinations he has
undertaken since the publication of the Tribunal’s
last judgment in March
2024, disclose he is fit for practice and does not suffer from a degenerative
neurological disease.
(f) Dr Hossain asserted that: “No-one can make a diagnosis of major
cognitive disorder DSM V just doing some so-called screening
tests. It is a
definitive clinical entity of Americal Association of Psychiatrists. It must
have two limbs to make a diagnosis. I
am giving the challenge. Do a clinical
performance assessment. If they give me the diagnosis of major cognitive
disorder I will accept
that and give up medical practice.”
(g) The submission states: “The Medical Council and HCCC designated
psychologists’ reports are biased. It is not a true
reflection of my
cognition.”
(h) Although the later paragraphs refer to the neuro-psychological testing he
underwent with Dr Metcalf and Ms McMillan, it is clear
from his other evidence,
his submission addresses his experience with Ms McMillan. He stated:
“Obviously I was very tired and
exhausted with this long assessment of
even from the
start of the assessment. I told this to the psychologists at the
beginning of the assessments. I can remember that I was doing relatively
during initial 4 hours then the assessors plunged me intentionally with so many
different tasks ignoring my objection to that.
For example, in some cases they
even didn't mention that they will be asking me the same questions after some
time to remember the
same words or drawings. That was done intentionally to mark
me down. It was clear to me. It is not a professionally good thing to
very, very upset about this.”
(i) Dr Hossain said he is ready to accept any level of supervision which may be
required to permit him to practice. He said: “I
can guarantee 100%
compliance as I had done that before.”
(j) Dr Hossain set out his acceptance that his registration was initially
cancelled because of his “serious error of judgment”.
He said he has
learned from his mistakes, however, he has now totally changed his clinical
practice. He referred to his successful
Medical Council appointed Performance
Assessment in September 2020.
(k) Dr Hossain reminded the Tribunal of his extensive further medical study
undertaken by him since his cancellation of registration
in 2022. He further
spoke of the financial stress which has been imposed on him resulting from the
requirement to repay $600,000
to Medicare, which he has now completed.
(l) Dr Hossain explained that he could not afford a lawyer to represent him.
(m) He concluded his submission with this request: “Please give me a
chance to survive. This is my final and last try. I want
to live – just
live as a human being.”
Oral submission of Dr Hossain
his oral submission at the hearing, Dr Hossain repeated much of what had been
set out in his written submission. He told the Tribunal
of the hardship, both
financial, emotional and cultural he would face if he was not permitted to
practice again. He emphasised he
was not telling the Tribunal of those matters
to engender sympathy rather to set a background for his application. He asserted
was fit to practice and would submit to any condition imposed which enabled
that outcome. He emphasised that he only proposed to
practice for a short while
(a few years at most) so that he might recover some of the financial
consequences of his having to repay
Medicare and the legal costs he had faced.
Hossain emphasised that this was his last attempt to regain his registration.
The HCCC written and oral submission
HCCC provided a written submission which was filed on 8 October 2025. In that we
note the HCCC seeks that the Tribunal dismiss
the application pursued by Dr
Hossain. It submits that the Applicant has failed to discharge the onus of
demonstrating that he can
be trusted to practise in a manner which presents an
unacceptable risk to the safety of the public and their confidence in the
profession.
HCCC relied on its written submission in the hearing before us. It added the
following in oral submission.
HCCC outlined the history of Dr Hossain’s outcomes in proceedings before
the Tribunal. His registration was cancelled in
March 2022 following a finding
of professional misconduct, and his application for reinstatement as a medical
practitioner was refused
in March 2024.
Dr Hossain had challenged Ms McMillan in cross-examination as to her having
regard to his fatigue, stress and cultural background
(the impact of those
aspects of Dr Hossain’s presentation on the day of her neuropsychological
testing) she had said she did
take all those matters into account when preparing
her report. It was submitted that Ms McMillan presented as an expert whose
credentials
had not been challenged and that her evidence should be
HCCC pointed out that Ms McMillan’s report was consistent with the earlier
testing conducted by Dr Metcalf. That added to
the weight which should be given
to the evidence of Ms McMillan.
evidence of Dr Samuel was also highlighted by the HCCC. Dr Samuel’s final
report dated 15 July 2025 reaffirmed his diagnosis
that Dr Hossain suffers from
a Major Neurocognitive Disorder.
HCCC submitted that the evidence before the Tribunal, including Dr
Hossain’s oral evidence, demonstrates he does not have
insight into the
diminution in his cognitive capacity. That diminution rendered him unfit to
practice as a medical practitioner.
relation to the possibility of allowing Dr Hossain to practice under conditions,
the HCCC submitted that the possibility of conditions
would commence with the
imposition of Category A supervision under the Medical Council of NSW
supervision regime. Such supervision
requires an approved supervisor (in this
case it would need to be a GP) to be present at all times while Dr Hossain was
The HCCC pointed to the impracticality of such a condition in the
circumstances of a working GP. It also drew our attention to the
NSW Court of
Appeal decision in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
41 NSWLR 630 at paragraph (f) on page 639.
response to a question asked by the Tribunal members, the HCCC submitted that
although Dr Hossain had said he would not be applying
again for reinstatement
should his application be refused, the Tribunal should impose a period of 12
months as the earliest date,
following the decision of the Tribunal, before
which date Dr Hossain could not make a further application for reinstatement.
The applicable law
the submission provided by the HCCC it set out in detail what it submitted was
the relevant principles which would guide the Tribunal
to a determination in
this case. That submission stated as follows:
18. “Under s 163A of the National Law a person may apply for a review of
an order that the person’s registration as a
health practitioner be
cancelled. Section 163A(2) provides that an application for review may not be
made while the terms of the
order provide that an application for review may not
be made. If the Tribunal considers it appropriate, a reinstatement order made
made pursuant to s 163B(1)(c) of the National Law.
19. Section 163C of the National Law makes clear that the review is not a review
of the original decision to cancel the practitioner’s
registration, but is
rather a review to determine the appropriateness of the cancellation order as at
the date of the hearing of
the application.
20. Brereton JA, with whom Bell P (as His Honour then was) agreed, stated in
Qasim v Medical Council of New South Wales
[2021] NSWCA 173
“...In performing that task, the Tribunal must have regard to the
objectives and guiding principles of the National Law, which
relevantly include
the protection of the public by ensuring that only those practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent and ethical manner are
registered, the paramount consideration being the protection of the health and
safety of the public.”
8 The general principles to be followed were identified by the
Tribunal in
Zepinic v Health Care Complaints Commission (No 2)
NSWCATOD 166
as follows:
“[7] The approach to be adopted in considering an application for a
reinstatement order under the National Law has been set
out in several decisions
of this Tribunal and the former Tribunals. In
Haber v Health Care Complaints
[2018] NSWCATOD 16
the Tribunal stated the principles in the
following terms:
12. We accept as correct the Commission’s submissions as to the relevant
principles to be applied. These include:
(1) The Tribunal must have regard to the objectives and guiding principles of
the National Law (see s 3). These include the objective
of the protection of the
public by ensuring that only health practitioners who are suitably trained and
qualified to practise in
a competent and ethical manner are registered (s
(2) The paramount consideration is the protection of the health and safety of
the public: see s 3A;
(3) The onus lies on the applicant for reinstatement to demonstrate that he or
she can be trusted to practise in a way that conforms
to the professional
standards expected of a health practitioner, and in particular in a manner that
presents no risk to the safety
of the public and their confidence in the
profession;
(4) The purpose of the jurisdiction is to protect the public, and is not for the
punishment of the former practitioner: s 3A of the
National Law;
(5) There is no public interest in denying forever the chance of redemption and
rehabilitation to [a] former practitioner. On the
contrary, the public is better
served if, in appropriate cases, those who have offended, once they have
affirmatively proved they
are reformed, are afforded a second chance;
(6) “Clear proof” is required to establish that there has been a
reformation of character. In this respect, the applicant
is “in a more
disadvantageous position than an original applicant. He or she must in effect
displace the decision for deregistration
that has been made”;
(7) It is not “a question of what an applicant has suffered in the past.
It is a question of his [her] worthiness and his [her]
reliability for the
future”. The decision in any particular case is to a greater or lesser
extent dependent upon the Tribunal’s
assessment of the Applicant.
Ng v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2018] NSWCATOD 105
Tribunal stated:
Re Mansoor Haider Zaidi
[2006] NSWMT 6
(at [42]) the Medical
Tribunal made the obvious point that:
[A]n Applicant for reinstatement ... is in a more disadvantageous position than
an original applicant. He must displace the decision
for deregistration which
has been made. As a consequence, presumptions of fitness which might otherwise
arise than from an absence
of contrary suggestions can no longer advantage him,
precisely because of the removal of his name from the Register on the basis
31. In that case, the Medical Tribunal also stated at [42]:
[T]he ultimate issue ... is a question of [the applicant’s] worthiness and
his reliability for the future. What in this respect
the Tribunal must determine
is whether it is satisfied that for the future the applicant will act in
accordance with the high standards
and responsibilities of the
profession.”
Donnelly v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2014] NSWCATOD 155
the Tribunal said that assertions of a change in character must be
approached “with a healthy scepticism”, such that
to reinstate should be exercised with the greatest caution and only upon solid
and substantial grounds”.
22. Given that the National Law is directed at the protection of the public, the
Tribunal must be satisfied of the appropriateness
of making a reinstatement
order “to a robust level”:
Mnyandu v Health Care Complaints
[2015] NSWCATOD 43
the last decision of the Tribunal which considered an application by Dr Hossain
for reinstatement (see
Hossain v Medical Council of New South Wales
[2024] NSWCATOD 29)
the Tribunal set out the applicable principles as
5. The relevant provisions and applicable principles were
summarised by the respondent, the Medical Council of New South
(Council), in Annexure A to Exhibit R2, and were
not disputed by Mr Hossain.
6. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction to consider an application
for a reinstatement order is conferred by s 163A and made pursuant
s 163B(1)(c) of the National Law.
7. The “appropriate review body” is this
Tribunal: s 163(1)(c).
8. Section 163B provides as follows:
163B POWERS ON REVIEW
(1) The appropriate review body must conduct an inquiry into an
application for review and may then do any of the following--
(a) dismiss the application;
(b) make an order ending or shortening the period of the
suspension concerned;
(c) make a reinstatement order;
(d) make an order altering or removing the conditions to which the person's
registration is subject, including by imposing new conditions;
(i) ending or shortening the period of a prohibition order; or
(ii) altering or removing the conditions to which the person is subject under a
prohibition order, including by imposing new conditions.
9. A reinstatement order does not have the effect of
causing re-registration of a person but permits a person to apply to the
Board, which then decides whether to register that person. The National
Board cannot impose conditions that are inconsistent with
those imposed or
altered by the Tribunal (s 163B(3A)).
10. Section 163C identifies the scope of the
Tribunal’s review:
163C Inquiry into review application
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order,
or any findings made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into
account, the review must take into account any complaint made or notified
Council or a National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about
the person, whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the
making of the order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the
complaint was referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was
taken on the complaint.
(4) A Council and the Commission are entitled to appear at any
inquiry conducted by the Tribunal under this Division.
11. As the Council annexure notes, the review to be undertaken
by this Tribunal is to determine the appropriateness of the time
of the review
of the Order concerned. It is not a review of the previous
decision itself, nor of the correctness of any findings
made at the
time of that decision. The Tribunal’s task does not involve a
re-examination of the applicant’s conduct at
the time of the
previous hearing, but it will have regard to the Tribunal’s previous
findings in assessing whether or not deficiencies
have been remedied:
Bahramy v Medical Council of New South Wales
Bahramy No 1
”), at [84].
12. All complaints made against the applicant are
relevant to the review.
13. The Tribunal’s task under ss 163A, 163B and
163C was summarised in
Council of New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATOD
Bahramy No 2
”). The Tribunal held (at
[50]) that the issue for determination was:
“...whether the applicant, since the [previous] decision, has
demonstrated change such as to establish that the applicant has
overcome the shortcomings referred to in the [previous] decision. The onus of
doing so rests upon the applicant. Further, the
factual background of
the applicant is a necessary consideration.”
Zepinic v Health Care Complaints
[2020] NSWSC 13
, at [85], and the cases cited
therein, and
Qasim v Medical Council of New South Wales
”), at [17]–[19].
14. Section 3A of the National Law requires the protection
of the health and safety of the public to be the paramount consideration,
and the Tribunal is to have regard to the objectives and guiding principles
of the National Law (see ss 3, 3A and 4) in determining
the appropriateness of the orders made on 8 March 2022.
15. As the Tribunal’s task is to consider the
appropriateness of the cancellation order at the time of the review, it is
relevant to consider the statutory basis for the making of the cancellation
order, i.e., s 149C(1).
16. The onus of demonstrating that a reinstatement order should
be made rests on the applicant, on the balance of probabilities,
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
60 CLR 336).
17. As the Tribunal observed in
Vo v Medical
Council of NSW
[2018] NSWCATOD
”), at [15]–[16]:
“...a finer judgment is required in relation to an applicant for re-entry
than the one required by a registration authority
in relation to a new
entrant... The issue will be whether he or she can be trusted to practise
in future with integrity, not to present
any appreciable risk of repeating the
misconduct that gave rise to cancellation, to practise in an ethical manner and
not abuse the
trust or safety of patients.”
accept the principles as set out by the Tribunal in its 14 March 2024 decision
(above set out) and the principles submitted by
the HCCC address the course of
considerations and applicable law for this
determination.
decision of the Tribunal in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Haloob
[2025] NSWCATOD 137
the Tribunal stated: “The principles underlying
the purpose of protective orders was summarised by President Wright J in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Della Bruna
[2014] NSWCATOD 31
as follows:
“[88] In determining the appropriate protective orders that it should make
in this matter, the Tribunal is guided by the following
considerations:
(1) In the exercise of its functions under Subdivision 6 of Division 3 of Part 8
of the National Law, the protection of the health
and safety of the public must
be the Tribunal's paramount consideration - s 3A of the National Law.
(2) Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are intended to
maintain proper ethical and professional standards,
primarily for the protection
of the public but also for the protection of the profession -
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 637,
(3) The public interests served by protective orders include, indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance
of public confidence in
the high standards of medical practitioners –
Prakash v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
(4) Protective orders also involve an element of deterrence or, to put it more
positively, encouragement to other practitioners to
recognise the importance of
complying with professional standards and the risks of failing to do so –
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
(5) Although the specific purpose for which the Tribunal makes orders is
protective of the public interest and not punitive with
respect to the
practitioner, that is not to deny that such orders may be punitive in effect and
that punitive effect may be relevant
in formulating a protective order -
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Director General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
the above quoted decision addressed the principles to be followed when
considering the making of a protective order, we accept
that statement of
principle also has application to the decision to be made by us in this
determination is one which demonstrates the role of the Tribunal in
circumstances where the Tribunal is faced with a set of facts
which engender
great sympathy for a practitioner seeking reinstatement. In this case we have
concluded that the application made
by Dr Hossain for reinstatement as a GP must
be declined. We reach that decision following the direction specified in the
Law that the safety of the public must over-ride the empathy which the
Tribunal would otherwise have for circumstances in which Dr
Hossain presents
Hossain is a medical practitioner who has risen from circumstances where he was
required to work in Bangladesh as a young boy in
order to contribute to the
support of his family. Fortunately for him he did well at school and earned a
place in university to study
medicine. He achieved his degree and then embarked
on a career which saw him practice in a number of countries. He was able to
registration as a GP in NZ and then immigrate to Australia where his NZ
qualification permitted registration in Australia as a GP.
He had practised as a
medical practitioner for 37 years prior to his registration being cancelled by
the Tribunal in 2022.
are satisfied the evidence in this case establishes Dr Hossain no longer has the
capacity to practice as a medical practitioner
in NSW/Australia. That does not
mean that he is incapable of functioning at a level which enables him to live in
the community without
care. At the moment he does continue to drive a motor
vehicle in this State, although we note Dr Samuel recommends Dr Hossain’s
GP should be considering notifying the State controller of driver’s
licences (Dr Samuel said RTA) for that body to carry out
its own assessment as
to Dr Hossain’s driving or non-driving status. There is no evidence that
he has been restricted in his
driving or other functioning in the ordinary
course of day to day life at the time of the hearing before us.
evidence establishes, in this case, that to practice as a medical practitioner,
it is necessary for a practitioner to have a level
of neuropsychological
functioning which enables clear and speedy recognition of symptoms and make
diagnosis for the patients the
practitioner will meet in everyday practice. The
ability to recognise those cases which need to be referred for specialist
and the ability to be able to prescribe appropriately are
prerequisites for continued medical practice. All those attributes, and
to show the practitioner is fit to practice as a medical practitioner as
required by the National Law.
Hossain has asked that we impose any conditions we deem appropriate to allow him
to continue to practice even for a few years.
We have concluded that the
conditions which would need to be imposed would require, at the very least,
Category A supervision as
defined by the Medical Council of NSW. That level of
supervision requires another, approved GP, to be present whenever Dr Hossain
seeing a patient and would further involve over-viewing medical records. That
level of supervision highlights impracticalities
in the management of a medical
practice. It would probably mean supervision would only be available for a short
period of time on
the days that Dr Hossain was working. Consequently, he would
not be able to see many patients.
other aspect of imposing a very high level of supervision is that it should only
be imposed where there is a foreseeable outcome
of supervision being no longer
necessary or being able to be de-classified to a less intense and more
manageable level. In this case
the evidence does not establish that there is a
possibility or even a probability that Dr Hossain’s diagnosis of Major
Neurocognitive
Disorder changing through his continuing to work as a GP or
through any form of therapy.
have concluded therefore that the order sought by the HCCC is the only order we
should make in this case, namely that the application
of Dr Hossain is refused
and that he is prohibited from making another application for reinstatement
within 12 months of this decision.
its submission the HCCC sought an order that Dr Hossain pay its costs. No
further submission was made in support, however, in the
circumstances we do not
see that as excluding the Tribunal from making an order.
Hossain did not direct a submission directly to the question of whether he
should pay the costs of the HCCC in this proceeding.
He certainly addressed the
fact that he had been required to pay costs associated with his 2023 application
for reinstatement which
he said had caused him financial stress. He clearly
opposes the making of any costs order against him.
Hossain addressed the Tribunal in both writing and orally about the financial
impost on him of the requirement to repay a large
sum of money to Medicare and
also the cost of the proceedings he had faced and initiated in this Tribunal. He
told us of having to
sell assets to meet those expenses.
13 of Schedule 5D to the National Law provides, relevantly, as follows:
Tribunal may award costs [NSW]
(1) The Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person
entitled to appear
(whether as of right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry
or appeal before the Tribunal
to pay costs to another person as decided by the
(3A) The Tribunal may fix the amount of costs itself or order that the amount of
costs be assessed by a costs assessor under the
legal costs legislation (as
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act
) or on any other basis.
(4) This clause applies instead of
(Costs) of the
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Knowles v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2025] NSWCATOD 145 the
Tribunal stated:
122. “The HCCC submits the general rule is that costs
follow the event:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Philipiah
Qasim v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2015] NSWCA
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
https://jade.io/#correct-this-citation
https://jade.io/#correct-this-citation
123. The HCCC also relies on
Ake v Health Care Complaints
[2019] NSWCATOD 165.
Ristevski v Medical
Council of NSW
[2026] NSWCATOD 18 with approval, the Tribunal found:
51 We agree with the view expressed by the Tribunal
at [70]-[71] that in conducting a review of a
relevant order under s 163B of the National Law, there is a public interest in
the Tribunal
being assisted by the relevant practitioner Council or the
Commission. Without a respondent in this class of matters, there is a
the Tribunal might only have available the self-serving evidence adduced by the
applicant practitioner. The involvement
of, to use the term coined in
, a “public interest respondent” in review
proceedings, assists the Tribunal in discharging its obligation to ensure that
all relevant material is disclosed so as to enable it to determine all relevant
facts in issue:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
52 While we have considerable sympathy for
s position and the inevitable financial burden imposed
by a costs order, the authorities have consistently stated that mere
impecuniosity
of the losing party is not a justifiable reason to departing from
the usual rules in respect of costs:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
HCCC is a party, entitled to appear for the purposes of clause 13(1) of Schedule
5D of the National Law. In applying the provisions
of clause 13, the general
rule is that costs follow the event, and are intended to compensate the
successful party, in the absence
of any disentitling conduct. (see
Care Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA 342)
onus is on the Applicant (in this case Dr Hossain), as the unsuccessful party,
to establish a basis for any departure from the
usual rule.
is nothing immediately noticeable in the evidence before us to suggest that the
HCCC should be disentitled to an order for its
costs to be paid as the
successful party to the proceeding, however, Dr Hossain had not been
specifically requested to address the
entitlement to costs by the HCCC should he
fail to obtain the order he sought before the Tribunal. Arising from that
circumstance
and not wishing to put either party to any unnecessary expense, we
propose to make an order that Dr Hossain pay the costs of the
HCCC as it seeks
unless he should apply to the Tribunal to be heard further on such an order
being made. He should be aware however,
that continuation of the proceeding
beyond this judgment may cause a greater burden of costs for him should he be
unsuccessful in
challenging the proposed costs order.
is no doubt the case that Dr Hossain may wish to argue that he is impecunious
and cannot afford to pay any further costs order.
He certainly made clear that
he was representing himself because he said he could not afford to engage a
solicitor to appear for
him. He should however note that the impecunious
circumstances of a party are not grounds for the Tribunal to refuse to make a
order. Such is the determination of the NSW Court of Appeal in the
decision of
Health Care Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA
order to be made in the subject circumstance is: Upon the expiration of 28 days
from the date hereof and in the absence of Dr
Hossain making an application to
be heard in relation to why the cost order sought by the HCCC should not be
made, the Tribunal orders
that Dr Hossain pay the costs of the HCCC of his
application for reinstatement. Such costs to be as agreed and in the absence of
agreement, as assessed.
Non-disclosure/publication order
propose to make an order which prevents the disclosure of the name of any person
who is named in the evidence placed before us
in this hearing. It is appropriate
to do so as a considerable amount of history relating to earlier proceedings
against Dr Hossain
has been tendered before us and some of that evidence names
former patients.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
(NSW) 2009 (National Law), the disclosure to any person or entity of the
name and/or the address of the person referred to in the
evidence placed before
the Tribunal in this matter is prohibited. For the avoidance of doubt this order
does not preclude the disclosure
or publication of the name of the
(1) The application of Dr Anwar Hossain for re-registration as a medical
practitioner filed 16 April 2025 is refused.
(2) Dr Anwar Hossain is precluded, for a period of 12 months from the date of
this order, from making any further application for
reinstatement of his
registration.
(3) Upon the expiration of 28 days from the date hereof and in the absence of
Dr Hossain making an application to be heard in relation
to why the cost order
sought by the Health Care Complaints Commission should not be made, the Tribunal
orders that Dr Hossain pay
the costs of the Health Care Complaints Commission of
his application for reinstatement. Such costs to be as agreed and in the absence
of agreement, as assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(NSW) 2009, the disclosure to any person or entity
of the name and/or the address of the person referred to in the evidence placed
before the Tribunal in this matter is prohibited. For the avoidance of doubt
this order does not preclude the disclosure or publication
of the name of the
************
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter