URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jonathan (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 11; (9 May 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Jonathan (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 11
Hearing Date(s):
23 April 2025 and 9 May 2025
Date of Orders:
Decision Date:
Guardianship Division
R H Booby, Principal Member
Dr M J Wroth, Senior Member
(Professional)
Emeritus Professor P J Foreman AM, General Member
(Community)
The application for a financial management order is dismissed after
The Tribunal notes that the dismissal
of the application for financial management has the effect of revoking the
interim financial
management order made pending further consideration of
Jonathan’s ability to manage his affairs.
Catchwords:
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – application for a financial management order
– subject person is a 94-year-old man – interim
financial management
order made – reports of cognitive decline, social isolation, age and
physical and economic dependency
–subject person intends to sell property
– concern that subject person is being manipulated and has not been
adequately – whether subject person is incapable of managing his
financial affairs – evidence of previous irresponsible
financial dealings
– evidence of subject person having adjustment disorder and depression due
to court proceedings six years
ago – evidence that subject person unable
to complete current sale forms correctly – evidence not accorded weight or
misconceived or insignificant– satisfied that the subject person
understands options and effect of the sale and has reasonable
plans about
disbursement of proceeds – presumption of capacity – evidence
insufficient to overturn presumption –
application dismissed.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWSC 498
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Financial Management Application
Jonathan (the
Oliver (applicant, proposed financial manager)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
D Kaiti, as Jonathan’s separate representative
File Number(s):
NCAT 2025/00128177
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
is 94 years old. He lives in Northwest Sydney, NSW, where we are advised he has
a unit in a property held as tenant in common
with his former wife who lives
separately from him in the same building. His son is Oliver and his daughter is
3 April 2025, the Tribunal received a Financial Management application from
Oliver proposing that he be appointed as financial
manager for Jonathan.
11 April 2025, the Tribunal ordered that Jonathan be separately represented in
the proceedings. Denise Kaiti was Jonathan’s
separate representative.
23 April 2025, the Tribunal made an interim financial management order for a
period of six weeks and committed Jonathan’s
affairs to the management of
the NSW Trustee and Guardian (NSWTG) for that period, and adjourned the hearing
of the financial management
application for six weeks. Directions were given
the end of these Reasons for Decision are lists of the parties to the
application and the witnesses who attended the hearing. [Appendix
removed for
publication.]
Z, solicitor, participated in the hearing on 9 May 2025 as Jonathan’s
McKenzie friend.
did not participate in the hearings. We were satisfied that she had been
provided with details of the hearing and with a reasonable
opportunity to
participate in the hearing. We determined to proceed with the hearing in her
the commencement of the hearing on 9 May 2025, Oliver was not in attendance. We
made numerous attempts to contact Oliver. We were
satisfied that Oliver had been
provided with notice of the hearing and with details about how to participate
remotely and had been
provided with an adequate opportunity to participate in
the hearing and to put his views. There was no indication that adjourning
hearing was any more likely to result in Oliver attending the hearing.
indicated that he wanted to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the
has provided a report of a psychologist referring to Jonathan’s depression
and anxiety related to previous legal proceedings.
Despite his advanced age,
Jonathan attended the hearing in person, catching buses to do so. Having regard
to Jonathan’s efforts
to attend the hearing in person and the
psychologist’s evidence regarding the psychological effects of previous
legal proceeding,
we were of the view that it was in Jonathan’s best
interests to proceed with the hearing.
satisfied of Jonathan’s best interests and that Oliver had been provided
with a reasonable opportunity to participate
in the hearing, we commenced the
hearing in the absence of Oliver.
joined the hearing at approximately 12:30 pm, approximately one hour after the
time at which the matter was listed. He said
that he was overseas and was
confused about time.
The application
his application, Oliver indicates that in his view, Jonathan has a
decision-making impairment due to cognitive decline, social
age, and physical and economic dependency. He provides the following
information as to why there is a need for a financial
(1) Jonathan was planning to sell real estate in East Sydney. He had signed a
sales agreement with a real estate agent without consulting
“legal carer” or family members and had banned family
members from contacting the real estate agent or his solicitor.
considered that the sale was taking place without proper oversight.
(2) Oliver believes that the solicitor and real estate agent were acting
independently without instructions from Jonathan and that
his father was being
unduly influenced or manipulated.
(3) Jonathan was planning to donate the proceeds from the sale to charity and
would be left with insufficient funds for his lifestyle.
(4) Oliver submits that Jonathan has a history of irresponsible financial
dealings, including attempting to sell jointly owned property
without telling
his wife, misappropriating family funds to build a house in Greece that was
later claimed by a cousin, losing $100,000
in legal action taken against a
neighbour and donating $50,000 to charity.
his application, Oliver said that he had not told Jonathan about the application
because Jonathan lives upstairs from his divorced
wife and he was concerned that
Jonathan would “retaliate” against his former wife and family
Preliminary matter – “withdrawal” by
references to Sharone as Jonathan’s “legal carer”, we are
aware of no legal designation of her as such.
However we accepted that she is a
person who assists Jonathan by arranging services and support for him and is,
therefore, a person
who “has the care of” Jonathan as that role is
defined in s 3D,
Guardianship Act 1987
an email dated 16 April 2025, Sharone identifies herself as an applicant in the
matter. She states that “we” were worried
that Jonathan was being
exploited by the real estate agent and by his solicitor, but that Jonathan had
taken their concerns into
account. Jonathan was now being supported by Sharone
“and the whole family”, he was taking advice and was no longer in
“vulnerable situation”. She states that “we” are
withdrawing the application.
also submitted an Application for Withdrawal dated 16 April 2025.
an email dated 23 April 2025, Oliver advises that Sharone might have withdrawn
“under stress and confusion” but he
(Oliver) wanted the proceedings
to continue.
is not identified as an applicant in the application and Oliver did not seek to
withdraw the application. Accordingly, we
proceeded to hear the
The adjournment on 23 April 2025
was not present at the hearing on 23 April 2025. Oliver said that he did not
have a telephone number for Jonathan, who, in
any case, is profoundly deaf and
would not be able to participate in the hearing by telephone.
Kaiti said that she had not been able to speak to Jonathan. She was unable to
telephone him and was unwilling to knock on his door
as a stranger because
documents submitted by the applicant referred to Jonathan as having been
extremely anxious about an earlier
legal proceeding and also referred to some
possible family violence.
suggested that there was a risk to Jonathan’s financial affairs because of
a sales agreement that he had signed regarding
his East Sydney property and his
proposal to donate the sale proceeds, leaving him with insufficient means to
fund his lifestyle.
Oliver said that he understood Jonathan to have signed the
sales agreement without legal advice and lacking proficiency in the English
were concerned that Jonathan might be unaware of the application and the
proceedings. We contacted Jonathan’s solicitor,
Mr Z. He said that he had
acted for Jonathan in relation to the proposed sale of the East Sydney property
and had issued a sales
contract to the real estate agent. He undertook to advise
NCAT if a sale was proposed. Oliver was not satisfied that this undertaking
sufficient to prevent an inappropriate sale and noted that the property could be
sold by the real estate agents without notification
had been no offer on the property.
Jonathan was not present at the hearing, we were not able to assess his
understanding of his financial affairs in general and the
proposed sale of the
East Sydney property in particular. Having regard to the concerns expressed by
Oliver we decided to make an
interim financial management order appointing the
NSWTG to manage Jonathan’s affairs during a period of adjournment during
which Mr Z undertook to advise Jonathan of the hearing and to encourage his
attendance at the adjourned hearing.
Complaint about Ms
a letter to the Registrar dated 25 April 2025, Oliver records that Ms Kaiti made
no attempt to speak to him until two hours before
the hearing on 23 April
2025 and then proposed to work with Jonathan’s solicitor in respect of the
current matter. Oliver notes
that he has made a complaint to the
Legal Services Commissioner regarding Mr Z.
considered Oliver’s concerns but were not of the view that there was a
need to remove Ms Kaiti as the separate representative.
We reached this view for
the following reasons:
(1) Oliver had not told Jonathan about the application and in his application
indicated a risk that Jonathan could “retaliate”
against family
members once aware of the hearing.
(2) Oliver had provided no means of contacting Jonathan other than by attending
at his home. Based on Oliver’s evidence, to
do so without notice could
constitute a risk to Ms Kaiti and also to Jonathan’s estranged wife who
lived in the same building
as Jonathan.
(3) In an email dated 23 April 2025, Ms Kaiti contacted Oliver about the
exchange of documents. In his email, Oliver indicates that
he was overseas and
would be participating remotely. In an email to Oliver and Sharone, Ms Kaiti
indicates that she had not spoken
to Jonathan, noting that he might not know
She seeks information
from Oliver and Sharone about their roles in respect
of Jonathan and also seeks further information about allegations made concerning
professionals taking advantage of Jonathan.
(4) We accept that there were limited opportunities for Ms Kaiti to
have further contact with Oliver. In any case, whilst it is common
separate representative to seek the views and information of other parties,
their primary responsibility is to assist the separately
represented person to
put his views.
(5) Mr Z had undertaken to advise Jonathan of the proceedings and to facilitate
his attendance at the hearing. We considered that
under the circumstances
noted in this section of these Reasons, it was appropriate Ms Kaiti seek
access to Jonathan through Mr Z
as other methods of contact were problematic.
Report of the NSWTG
a report dated 2 May 2025, John Gregory of the NSWTG indicates that Jonathan is
the sole owner of the East Sydney property and
owns a property in Northwest
Sydney as 50% tenant in common with his wife. The NSWTG has placed a caveat on
the East Sydney property.
What did the Tribunal have to
questions to be considered by the Tribunal are:
Is Jonathan
incapable of managing his affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Jonathan’s affairs and is it in his best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
Is Jonathan
incapable of managing his affairs?
test for determining a person's capability to manage his or her affairs has been
described as follows (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[307]-[308]):
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his or her own affairs in a
reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of
a [financial manager]
charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and interests?
[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with (making and
implementing decisions about) his or her own affairs
(person and property,
capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with due regard
to his or her present and prospective
wants and needs, and those of family and
friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense,
consideration may be given to:
past and present
experience as a predictor of the future course of events;
support systems
available to the person; and
the extent to
which the person, placed as he or she is, can be relied upon to make sound
judgments about his or her welfare and interests:
see Lindsay J in
[2015] NSWSC 498
, at [38], and
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
, at [309].
were provided with documents related to legal action taken by Jonathan in 2019
regarding a dispute with his neighbour. An email
from a law firm
indicates that the matter was settled on instructions from Jonathan as he
was too ill to attend court, but Jonathan
had not signed the deed of settlement.
The email indicates that as Jonathan (and Sharone – to whom the email
was addressed)
were not willing to accept the advice of the firm, they would
cease acting for them.
are not satisfied that the information provided about this dispute or the
unwillingness of Jonathan and Sharone to accept the advice
of the legal
representative in 2019 is of weight as evidence of Jonathan’s current
inability to manage his affairs.
were provided with a report of Ms Y, Psychologist, dated 12 June 2019.
(1) Ms Y refers to Jonathan as having an adjustment disorder and depression
precipitated by an ongoing court case. Jonathan was stressed
and was not
sleeping. He had sought a letter to support an application to adjourn the
matter. However Ms Y encouraged him to attend
the hearings and to bring about a
finalisation of the matter.
(2) Ms Y records that Jonathan appeared oriented to time, place and people, was
appropriately attired, and his memory appeared intact.
There was no report of
delusions or hallucinations. He appeared to lack motivation. Jonathan’s
presentation was consistent
with a diagnosis of adjustment order with depressed
and anxious mood and with a depressive disorder.
were not satisfied that Ms Y’s assessment of Jonathan’s presentation
in that context of legal action some six years
ago was of weight as evidence of
his current ability to manage his financial affairs.
also provided an excerpt that appears to be part of a property settlement
between Jonathan and his former wife in 1999 that
refers to property in Greece
that was to be given to Jonathan’s children. Oliver claims that Jonathan
gave that property away.
During the hearing Jonathan told us that the property
was owned by family members. We had no evidence of any legal proceedings
this matter, much less any legal outcome. With very limited available
information about this Greek property issue, we reached no
determination about
it and placed no weight on it as evidence of Jonathan’s inability to
manage his affairs.
also provided copies of letters and notes from Jonathan to his estranged wife
regarding proposals to sell their house in which
they are tenants in common.
Whilst the letters appear to evidence Jonathan’s lack of proficiency with
the English language,
we are not satisfied that they provide evidence of an
inability to manage his affairs.
a letter dated 29 April 2025, in support of appointing Oliver as a financial
manager (and opposing the appointment of the NSWTG),
Sharone makes statements to
the following effect:
(1) She has provided care for Jonathan since 2019 and has been aware that in the
past few years, he has struggled to manage the East
Sydney property.
(2) She was initially opposed to Oliver managing Jonathan’s funds because
she was of the view that she could assist Jonathan
informally. Jonathan has put
money into an account from which she can withdraw funds for daily needs and to
pay regular outgoings.
respect of the Sales Inspection Report and Auction Agency Agreement with the
real estate agent, Oliver asserted the following:
(1) There are blank sections on the form. This indicates that due to his
impaired cognition, Jonathan had failed to ensure the completeness
of the form.
(2) The Property Summary provided by the real estate company demonstrates that
Jonathan was receiving significantly less rent than
the projected rent. This
demonstrates poor financial management by Jonathan.
asserted that Clause 8 of the Sales Inspection Report and Auction Agency
Agreement was left blank. However this was not the
case in the copies that
Oliver had provided to the Tribunal. Oliver also noted that the auction date was
not completed. However we
are satisfied that the property was not for auction,
and so no date had been entered. We were not satisfied that there were
significant
omissions in the Sales Inspection Report and Auction Agency
Property Summary does indicate that there was potentially greater rent to be
obtained from the property. Oliver also claims that
the property could return a
rental amount double that obtained by Jonathan. However we are provided with no
evidence of the reliability
of this estimate. Nor are we satisfied that seeking
maximum rental is always the best commercial choice. In this respect we also
noted evidence from Jonathan that the property is in need of repair. In the
absence of further evidence we are not satisfied that
the receipt of sub-maximum
rent is an indication that Jonathan is not able to manage his affairs.
asserted that Jonathan was being exploited by Mr Z. In support of this view, he
referred to:
(1) what he described as a transcript of a conversation between Sharone and
Jonathan in which Jonathan appears to express dissatisfaction
with a solicitor
whom he asserts is “against me”. However it is not clear who the
conversation is about or what is being
complained about. We do not accept this
as evidence of exploitation by Mr Z of Jonathan.
(2) claims that Mr Z had tricked Jonathan into paying $10,000
“upfront” as a marketing fee for the sale of the property
told the real estate agent to make sure that they obtained their fees
“upfront”. In respect of this matter:
(a) Oliver sought to play a recording of a conversation about this matter.
However we were not able to understand the words on the
(b) Mr Z denied the conversation with the real estate agent. In respect of the
$10,000 marketing fee, Mr Z said in effect, that Jonathan
had considered
delaying paying the marketing fee, but Mr Z advised him that this would result
in the real estate agent arranging
a loan to Jonathan for the sum and this would
entail interest. Jonathan had decided to pay the amount upfront.
(c) We do not consider it unusual that marketing fees for a commercial real
estate sale are sought as an ‘upfront’ payment
and we accept Mr
Z’s explanation of Jonathan’s decisions about this matter.
(3) We are not satisfied that the issues around the payment of the marketing fee
indicate that Jonathan is not able to manage his
affairs, or that he is
susceptible to exploitation.
correspondence with Mr Z in March 2025, Oliver asserts that Mr Z is aware that
Jonathan lacks capacity. He refers to Jonathan having
“delusions and
auditory hallucinations” and refers to making a complaint about Mr Z
to the Legal Services Commissioner.
For his part, Mr Z replies that he would
discuss Oliver’s email with Jonathan and would do nothing if he thought
Jonathan lacked
capacity, and he had no such concerns. In relation to the
assertion that Jonathan is subject to “delusions and auditory
hallucinations”
we note that in her report in 2019, Ms Y specifically
indicates that there was no evidence of such issues.
other matters raised, Oliver asserts that Jonathan was proceeding with the
sale of the East Sydney property without discussion
with family members.
However Oliver told us that the transcript
he provided (see [42(1)]) was a recording of a conversation
Jonathan and Sharone. In that transcript, Jonathan appears to seek
the assistance of Sharone. Further, Sharone has indicated that
places funds into an account that she can access to assist him with purchasing
his household needs. We are not satisfied
that Jonathan refuses to discuss his
financial affairs with Sharone.
The Evidence of Jonathan
a note dated 30 April 2025 in broken English that can nevertheless be
understood, Jonathan states that Oliver was a real estate
agent who let the East
Sydney property to a “problems tenant” who paid with “fake
Cheques” and cost him legal
fees. In a further letter, Jonathan indicates
the following:
(1) He has seen Oliver only twice in 40 years. He believes that Oliver has taken
this action to prevent him donating his money to
the Children’s
(2) Since Oliver was a child, Jonathan has had problems with him. The problems
have caused discord with his former wife.
(3) He purchased the East Sydney property with money obtained from workers
compensation after he injured his back. He is selling
the property because the
lease ends in four months, and the property needs repairs. He will be left
without income once the property
is vacated. He intends to keep 50% of the sale
price of the property to fund his future needs.
the hearing, Jonathan said that initially when he purchased the East Sydney
property he put in joint names with him owning
one half and his wife and
daughter, one quarter each. (Mr Z clarified that Jonathan had later bought out
his wife and daughter).
He said that apart from a small pension of $10,000 from
superannuation, the rental income from the property is his only income. However
the tenant would be vacating the property, and he had decided to sell the
property. He would support Sharone, whom he described as
and a ‘disabled’ grandchild, and would donate money to charity.
asked about the possible sale price for the East Sydney property, Jonathan said
that he had received three quotes; two suggesting
$2.5M and one suggesting $3M.
He said that for many years he has donated to charity, and he would use 40% of
the sale price to meet
his needs and those of his daughter and grandson and
would gift 30% each to the Sydney Hospital and to the Smith Family. He knew
he would need to pay tax when he sold the East Sydney property. He has a tax
accountant in Lower North Shore Sydney and paid
$1200 tax in the previous
financial year.
told us that:
(1) He had travelled to the Tribunal premises in the city alone using two buses.
(2) If he needs help at home, he seeks it from his daughter.
(3) He did not believe that he needed to plan his financial affairs to allow for
residential aged care because he would be able to
continue to rely on his
daughter for assistance.
(4) He currently receives $80,000 per year income from the East Sydney property
and $10,000 in a superannuation pension. His expenses
are $30,000 per year.
(5) He is able to manage his own financial affairs.
were satisfied that Jonathan understood and had considered his options around
the sale of the East Sydney property and having regard
to the end of the lease
and need for repairs to the property his decision to sell was a reasonable one.
We were also satisfied that
he understood the possible sale price and had clear
views about what to do with the proceeds of the sale. Whilst Oliver was of
view that Jonathan would leave himself with insufficient funds, we are
satisfied that having regard to his age and expenses, Jonathan’s
calculations and intentions about dispersal of the sale proceeds are reasonable.
The views of the separate representative
was Ms Kaiti’s submission that Jonathan is not unable to manage his
is a long-established common law principle that a person is presumed to have
capacity. We were not satisfied that the evidence
before us is sufficient to
overturn that presumption in the case of Jonathan. We formed this view for the
following reasons
(1) The information provided regarding his dispute with Jonathan’s
neighbour indicated that Jonathan had lost that matter and
was required to
pay costs. We are not satisfied that the information provided about that
matter evidences Jonathan’s inability
to manage his affairs. Nor are we
satisfied that diagnoses of depression and anxiety at the time of that matter
has bearing on Jonathan’s
current ability to manage his affairs. Whilst
Oliver asserts that Jonathan is subject to delusions and hallucinations, Ms
report from the time of the dispute indicate that she saw no evidence
of those issues.
(2) The evidence about dealings with property in Greece is inconclusive.
Furthermore, we do not consider that the information provided
matters reflects Jonathan’s ability to manage his affairs.
(3) Jonathan recalled, and provided credible accounts about, issues around the
2019 proceedings involving a neighbour and about the
real estate in Greece.
(4) The issues that Oliver identified with the Sales Inspection and Auction
Agency Agreement are either misconceived or insignificant.
(5) Concerns expressed that Jonathan has entered into a sale agreement without
adequate consultation are not borne out in the evidence
that he has consulted
his solicitor and has an accountant who assists with his taxation affairs. The
transcript provided also suggests
that he has spoken to Sharone about this
(6) Jonathan was able to describe his decision-making process regarding the sale
of the East Sydney property and his intentions in
relation to the sale proceeds.
We noted that in the letter of 30 April 2025, he indicated that he would keep
50% of the sale price
for his own purposes and in his oral evidence, he
indicated that he would keep 40%. We were satisfied that this was a reasonable
change of mind and does not indicate lack of financial capability.
(7) Jonathan was also able to explain his poor relationship with the applicant,
and the reasons why he would not seek his assistance.
(8) Jonathan has demonstrated that he understands the proposed sale and likely
proceeds and has reasonable plans about disbursement
of the sale proceeds. He
was able to discuss with us the likely tax on the sale of the property.
(9) We are not satisfied that the receipt of less than maximum rent for
the East Sydney property is, by itself, evidence of lack
of financial
management ability, particularly having regard to Jonathan’s evidence that
the property is need of repair.
(10) Jonathan was able to travel alone by public transport involving two buses
from the suburbs to the city for the hearing. In our
view this is an indication
of his general ability to plan and carry out plans, despite his advanced age.
has provided examples of Jonathan’s financial decision-making that he
considers demonstrate that Jonathan lacks the ability
his affairs. However, having considered the issues raised by Oliver,
both as individual issues and cumulatively, we are
not satisfied that
they demonstrate that Jonathan is unable to manage his affairs.
accept that Oliver might make decisions about the East Sydney property that are
different from those made by Jonathan. We also
accept that Jonathan’s
intention of donating a significant sum to charity whilst he is alive, is
unusual and that Oliver opposes
that intention. However so long as Jonathan is
able to manage his affairs, he is free to make his own decisions about these
are not satisfied that Jonathan is unable to manage his affairs. Having reached
this conclusion, we dismissed the application for
management.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter