URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lisa (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 17 (8 October 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Lisa (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 17
Hearing Date(s):
10 September 2024
Date of Orders:
18 September 2024
Decision Date:
8 October 2024
Guardianship Division
A Britton, Deputy President
Dr B McPhee, Senior Member
(Professional)
S Bullock, General Member (Community)
The Tribunal is not satisfied that it is necessary to carry out the
proposed treatment on Lisa in order to save Lisa’s life
or to prevent
serious damage to Lisa's psychological or physical health. Therefore, the
Tribunal cannot give consent under
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW), to the carrying out of the proposed
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – application to NCAT under s 175 of the Children and
Young Person (Care and Protection) Act 1998 (NSW) in respect
of transgender
child – whether gender affirming hormone therapy constitutes
“special medical treatment” –
whether gender affirming hormone
therapy treatment is reasonably likely to render child permanently infertile
– whether the
Tribunal is limited to considering the effect of proposed
treatment on the child’s fertility up to age 16
GUARDIANSHIP
– discretion to consent to special medical treatment (gender affirming
hormone therapy) under s 175(3) of the Children
and Young Person (Care and
Protection) Act 1998 (NSW) – whether necessary to carry out gender
affirming hormone therapy in
order to save the child's life or to prevent
serious damage to the child's psychological or physical health – gender
hormone therapy not necessary in order to save the child's life or to
prevent serious damage to the child's psychological or physical
Tribunal cannot give consent to gender affirming hormone
WORDS AND PHRASES – “reasonably likely”
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(5)(a)(i)-(ii),
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
(NSW), s 208
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Cases Cited:
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
[1986] HCA 29
Department of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
(2009) 76 NSWLR 22
[2009] NSWSC 530
Re the Will of Bridget
Texts Cited:
Children (Care and Protection) Further Amendment Act 1988 (NSW); NSW,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Council, 13 October 1988,
2202 (Virginia
Chadwick, Minister for Family and Community Services)
I De Nie, NM van Mello,
E Vlahakis, C Cooper, A Peri, M den Heijer, A Meißner, J Huirne, KC Pang,
“Successful restoration
of spermatogenesis following gender-affirming
hormone therapy in transgender women” (2023) 4(1) Cell Reports
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition, Text Revision
Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne
“Australian Standards of Care and Treatment Guidelines: For Trans and
Gender Diverse
Children and Adolescents”, Version 1.4
S Bertelloni, G I
Baroncelli, M Ferdeghini, F Menchini-Fabris, G Saggese, “Final height,
gonadal function and bone mineral density
of adolescent males with central
precocious puberty after therapy with gonadotropin- releasing hormone
analogues” (2000) 159(5)
European Journal of Pediatrics, 369-374
Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), “Standard of Care
for the Health of Transgender and Gender Diverse
People”, Eighth
Principal judgment
Hunter New England Local Health District (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Ministry of Health NSW (Joined Party)
Representation:
G Wright SC (NSW Ministry of Health, Hunter New England
Local Health District)
Solicitors:
Minter Ellison (NSW Ministry of
Health, Hunter New England Local Health District)
Legal Aid NSW, Separate
Representative for Lisa (Respondent)
D McMullen (Respondent)
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00246460
Publication Restriction:
The publication of the evidence given in these proceedings to the Tribunal
is prohibited. This order is made under
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
The publication or broadcast of
the name of the witness is prohibited. This order is made under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Note: A Reference
to the name of a person includes a reference to any information, picture or
other material that identifies the person
or is likely to lead to the
identification of the person.
REASONS FOR DECISION
decision is about Lisa who will turn 16 in three months. Lisa is a transgender
female (assigned male at birth) who has been diagnosed
with Gender Dysphoria.
Since April 2021, Lisa has been taking medication, prescribed by an
endocrinologist, designed to delay the
physical and psychological changes
associated with puberty. Lisa wishes to commence “gender affirming hormone
which involves taking a cross-sex hormone, oestrogen (the
proposed treatment
). The purpose of that treatment is to prevent the
masculinisation of Lisa’s body.
lives with her mother and younger sibling. According to her mother, Lisa has
identified as female since age three. In Grade 3,
Lisa enrolled in a new primary
school as a girl and wore the girl's school uniform. Lisa's younger sibling is
not aware that Lisa
is transgender and has only ever known Lisa as their sister.
parents are separated. Each have given written consent to Lisa receiving the
proposed treatment.
Psychiatrist
Dr 5 reports that Lisa has been “persistent, insistent and consistent in
her gender identity and has not wavered
in seeing herself as female for many
Hunter New England Local Health District has applied to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (NCAT) under
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act
consent to carry out the proposed treatment on
It is an offence to carry out
“special medical treatment” on a child, that is, a person under the
age of 16 years otherwise
than in accordance with s 175 of the Care Act: Care
Act, s 175(1). Special medical treatment includes treatment that is reasonably
likely to have the effect of rendering permanently infertile the person on whom
it is carried out: Care Act, s 175(5)(a). It is not
an offence for a medical
practitioner to carry out special medical treatment on a child if NCAT consents
to the carrying out of that
treatment: Care Act, s 175(2)(b). To give consent to
the carrying out of special medical treatment on a child, NCAT must be satisfied
that the treatment is necessary to “save the child’s life or to
prevent serious damage to the child’s psychological
or physical
health”: Care Act, s 175(3).
considering whether we can and should grant consent to the proposed treatment on
Lisa, the central questions to be decided are:
(1) whether the proposed treatment is special medical treatment; and
(2) if so, whether it is necessary to carry out the proposed treatment on Lisa
in order to save her life or to prevent serious damage
to her psychological or
physical health.
the reasons we explain below, we find that the proposed treatment is special
medical treatment. We were not satisfied that it
is necessary to carry out that
treatment in order to save Lisa’s life or to prevent serious damage to her
psychological or
physical health. Therefore, the discretion to consent to use of
the proposed treatment cannot be exercised.
a hearing on 10 September 2024, we heard the application made under s 175
of Care Act in respect of Lisa, together with separate
applications made in
respect of two other 15-year-old children. To preserve their privacy, in these
reasons we will refer to those
children as Child 2 (a transgender female) and
Child 3 (a transgender male). Many of the same issues are raised in the
applications made for each child. Parts of these reasons are
identical to those given in respect of Child 2 and Child 3.
made orders under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) that each child be separately represented. Legal Aid NSW
appointed a separate representative for each child. Solicitor, Ms
represented each separate representative. For convenience we will refer
to submissions made on behalf of Lisa as being
made by the
Separate Representative.
NSW Ministry of Health (
) was joined as a party to these
proceedings. NSW Health and Hunter New England Local Health District were
represented in the proceedings
by Ms Wright SC.
Gender dysphoria
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition,
Text Revision (the
) defines Gender Dysphoria in adolescents
and adults as a marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed
their assigned gender, lasting at least 6 months, as manifested by at
least two of the following:
(a) A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in
young adolescents, the
anticipated secondary sex characteristics);
(b) A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics because of a marked incongruence with one’s
experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents, a desire to prevent the
development of the anticipated secondary sex characteristics);
(c) A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the
other gender (or some alternative gender different
from one’s assigned
(d) A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender
different from one’s assigned gender);
(e) A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative
gender different from one’s assigned gender); and
(f) A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the
other gender (or some alternative gender different
from one’s assigned
DSM-V also provides that to meet the criteria for the diagnosis of Gender
Dysphoria, the condition must be associated with clinically
significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
Lisa is diagnosed with Gender Dysphoria
July 2018, Paediatrician Dr 6 referred then nine-year-old Lisa to the Gender
Dysphoria clinic at John Hunter Hospital. In a letter
addressed to Lisa’s
General Practitioner dated 5 June 2024, Dr 6 wrote that since coming into her
care in 2017, Lisa has always
identified as a girl and her gender identity has
not wavered.
early 2020, Lisa began attending a specialist transgender health care facility
operated by NSW Health (the
a letter dated 15 October 2020 addressed to Lisa’s GP, Dr 5 said that she
had diagnosed Lisa with Gender Dysphoria. Dr 5
advised that Lisa has also been
diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder level 3, generalised anxiety disorder,
specific learning
disorder (mathematics, oral expression and comprehension) and
low average IQ. Referring to those diagnoses, Dr 5 wrote that Lisa
nonetheless
meets the criteria for Gender Dysphoria with “persistence, insistence and
consistency”. Dr 5 wrote that despite
the limitation of her consultation
with Lisa (by phone and with her mother) there was “adequate collateral
information from
mum and long-term paediatrician to support this
diagnosis”.
a subsequent report dated 22 August 2024, Dr 5 reported that in a consultation
in December 2023, Lisa was very clear “I don’t
want boy puberty.
I am a girl. I want to take hormones to make me a girl.” In Dr
5’s opinion Lisa has a realistic understanding
of what she can and cannot
expect from the proposed treatment.
Lisa commences puberty
suppression medication (Stage 1 treatment)
Dr 3 took over Lisa’s management in October 2020, Lisa was taking puberty
suppression medication (Goserelin aka Zoladex®)
which had been prescribed by
a paediatric endocrinologist at John Hunter Hospital. In a letter dated 27
August 2024, prepared in
support of the initiating application to
Dr 3 reported that
Lisa’s medical records reveal that when she commenced taking that
medication in October 2021, she was assessed
as being in “Tanner Stage 2
(early puberty)”.
assessment was based on pathology tests as Lisa was not willing to have her
genitalia examined.
to Expert 1 in a report dated 27 August 2024, as Lisa commenced Stage 1
treatment before full pubertal maturation (Tanner
Stage 5) as a natal male, this
means that Lisa is unlikely to have developed ejaculatory function or sperm
production (spermatogenesis).
continues to receive Zoladex administered by subcutaneous implants (by needle)
every 12 weeks. Dr 3 reported that that treatment
has been effective in halting
the progression of male puberty in Lisa.
to Dr 3, despite Lisa’s significant fear of needles she has consistently
expressed a wish to remain on Stage 1 treatment.
3 reported that a social worker at the Facility spoke with Lisa and her mother
on 28 March 2024 about a referral to a fertility
expert. The social worker
recorded that Lisa was very clear she does not want to have children in the
future and would find a fertility
referral distressing. Her mother confirmed
that this was Lisa’s view. Dr 3 reported that the social worker’s
consistent with her conversations with Lisa and her mother.
these reasons we refer to the administration of puberty suppression medication
as “Stage 1 treatment” and the administration
of hormones, in
Lisa’s case oestrogen, as “Stage 2 treatment”. The experts who
gave evidence in these proceedings
used various terms to describe Stage 2
treatment including “gender affirming feminising therapy” and
“feminising
treatment”. Those terms mean one and the same thing.
The proposed treatment (Stage 2 treatment)
the initiating application made to
Dr 3 described the proposed
Stage 2 treatment as “feminising treatment ... in the form of
[E]stradiol either trans-dermally
or orally”. Dr 3 wrote that
“[Lisa] would like to access oestrogen therapy to feminise her
appearance”. In oral
evidence, Dr 3 explained that to be effective in
preventing the masculinisation of Lisa’s body, the proposed treatment must
be taken indefinitely.
3 said that if the Tribunal consents to Lisa being given the proposed treatment,
she will commence Lisa on a low dose of oestrogen.
Because Lisa has not
undergone puberty she would not put Lisa on an adult dosage for one to two
years. Sudden changes in hormone
levels can have adverse impacts on some people.
For a period, she would continue Lisa on Stage 1 treatment and taper off that
treatment as the oestrogen dose being administered increases.
Statutory framework
central provision in these proceedings is s 175 of the Care Act which relevantly
175 Special medical treatment
(1) A person must not carry out special medical treatment on a child otherwise
than in accordance with this section.
Penalty on indictment: imprisonment for 7 years.
An offence against subsection (1) committed by a corporation is an executive
liability offence attracting executive liability for
a director or other person
involved in the management of the corporation--see section 258.
(2) A medical practitioner may carry out special medical treatment on a child
(a) the medical practitioner is of the opinion that it is necessary, as a matter
of urgency, to carry out the treatment on the child
in order to save the child's
life or to prevent serious damage to the child's health, or
(b) the Civil and Administrative Tribunal, in the case of special medical
treatment described in paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of the
definition of
"special medical treatment" in subsection (5), consents to the carrying out of
the treatment, or
(3) Consent to the carrying out of special medical treatment on a child must not
be given by the Civil and Administrative Tribunal
unless the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal is satisfied that it is necessary to carry out the
treatment on the child in order to
save the child's life or to prevent serious
damage to the child's psychological or physical health.
(5) In this section—
“medical treatment” includes—
(a) any medical procedure, operation or examination, and
(b) any treatment, procedure, operation or examination that is declared by the
regulations to be medical treatment for the purposes
of this section.
“special medical treatment” means—
(a) any medical treatment that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to have the
effect of rendering permanently infertile the person
on whom it is carried out,
not being medical treatment—
(i) that is intended to remediate a life-threatening condition, and
(ii) from which permanent infertility, or the likelihood of permanent
infertility, is an unwanted consequence, or
the Care Act, a “child” is defined to mean a person who is under the
age of 16 years: s 3.
9 of the Care Act instructs that in any decision we make concerning Lisa, her
safety, welfare and well-being are paramount.
Predecessor to s
175 of the Care Act
predecessor to s 175 to the Care Act is s 208 of the former
Children (Care
and Protection) Act 1987
1987 Care Act
). There is no
material difference between the definition of “special medical
treatment” in s 208 of the 1987 Care Act
and that contained in s 175(5)(a)
of the Care Act.
208 of the 1987 Care Act originally provided that special medical treatment
could be carried out on a person under 16 years
only if a medical practitioner
thought it necessary as a matter of urgency in order to save the patient's life
or prevent serious
damage to health or with the Supreme Court's consent. A
subsequent amendment “[strengthened] ... the protective effect”
the 1987 Care Act “by ensuring that the Supreme Court consents to the
carrying out of any treatment that is likely to result
in a child being rendered
only if the court is satisfied that the treatment is necessary to
save the child's life or to prevent serious damage to the child's
” (emphasis added).
a report published in 2008, “Young people and consent to health
care”, the NSW Law Reform Commission (the
) commented at
“The evolution of the NSW legislation would seem to indicate that the
concept of special medical treatment was introduced principally
to prevent young
people from being subjected to sterilisation undertaken without independent
scrutiny. Other types of treatment were
added soon after. During Parliamentary
debate it was stated that the principal purpose of the above definition of
medical treatment’ was:
to make it unlawful to carry out sterilization, except in a case where it is
necessary to save the life of the patient or to prevent
serious damage to the
patient’s health, or unless the Guardianship Board has held a hearing
concerning the matter and has given
its consent. There have been allegations
over a number of years that intellectually disabled people in particular have
been improperly
sterilized as a means of social control and this practice was
condemned by the Anti-Discrimination Board in a report which it produced
1981. There would be few people in a civilized community who would condone such
a thing and it is a principal purpose of this
bill to outlaw the
” (Footnotes omitted)
NSWLRC recommended that s 175 be retained and said at [8.26] that “[t]he
provision should contain a definition of special
medical treatment that accords
with the present definition contained in s 175(5)(a), (c) and (d), and which
refer to treatments affecting
reproductive capacity and any others declared
special medical treatments by the regulations”.
proposed treatment special medical treatment?
the proposed treatment is special medical treatment within the meaning of
paragraph (a) of the definition of special medical
treatment in s 175(5) of
the Care Act turns on:
(1) whether the proposed treatment is reasonably likely to have the effect of
rendering Lisa permanently infertile; and
(2) if so, whether the proposed treatment is intended to remediate a
life-threatening condition, and from which the likelihood of
infertility, is an unwanted consequence.
Reasonably likely
construing the expression “reasonably likely” in the definition of
special medical treatment in s 175(5) of the Care
Act, the text, context and the
purpose of the Care Act are relevant:
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
a general principle of statutory construction, where words are not defined, they
are to be given their ordinary meaning.
does the expression “reasonably likely” mean in the context of s
175(5) of the Care Act? It is well-established that
the meaning of the word
“likely” may vary according to its context. Generally, it is
accepted that an event is “likely”
if there is a real rather than a
remote chance of it happening. If something is likely to happen, there is a
good chance that it
will happen:
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
[1986] HCA 29
adverb “reasonably” in the expression “reasonably
likely” conveys a sense that the likelihood of an event
occurring is
relatively less than it is “likely”. The qualifying adverb
diminishes the phrase’s weight or intensity
compared with the power of the
adjective “likely” standing by itself. It conveys a sense that there
is “a fairly
good chance” that the potential event will occur: see
(2009) 76 NSWLR 22
[2009] NSWSC 530
(Palmer J); see also
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836.
The “likely” event is not one which is more likely
than not to occur, that is “odds on”, or necessarily probable
must be more than a mere possibility:
Re the Will of Bridget
[2018] NSWSC
(Hallen J).
the context of s 175(5) of the Care Act, the phrase ‘reasonably
likely’ carries a cautionary connotation because the
consequences of a
proposed treatment may be irreversible and, if so, for many people, undesirable.
Medical treatment that is reasonably
likely to have the effect of rendering
a person permanently infertile, in our view, is treatment that creates a real,
not speculative
or remote, but not probable risk of permanent infertility
for the treated person. The apprehended risk is above speculation, conjecture
mere possibility.
Is the Tribunal limited to considering the
effect of that treatment in the period up to Lisa’s 16th birthday?
Separate Representative contends that in deciding whether the proposed treatment
is reasonably likely to have the effect of rendering
Lisa permanently infertile,
the Tribunal is limited to considering the effect of that treatment in the
period preceding Lisa’s
16th birthday, that is in about three months. She
argues that s 175 of the Care Act is only concerned to restrict the carrying out
of special medical treatment on children under the age of 16 years and that any
treatment carried out after that time is not the
subject of intervention
pursuant to s 175. She points out that if Lisa or any child were to commence
treatment on their 16th birthday,
the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction. It
would be inconsistent with the purpose and objects of the Care Act to give the
power to consent to treatment given to a person over the age of 16
Separate Representative points out that in contrast to a form of one-off
treatment, such as a hysterectomy, here the proposed
treatment is a course of
indefinite treatment which will extend beyond Lisa’s 16th birthday. If
Lisa commences Stage 2 treatment
before she turns 16, as explained by Dr 4, she
is not committed to the continuation of that treatment. That treatment can be
or ceased at any time in accordance with Lisa’s wishes and the
advice of her treating team.
Health contends that the Act requires the Tribunal to make a realistic and
holistic assessment of the effect of the proposed treatment,
dose-by-dose assessment. The word “permanent” in s 175(5)(a)
requires the Tribunal to consider the effect of
all of the treatment that is
proposed to be commenced and its effect on the person’s fertility, not
only the effect of treatment
on the person’s fertility until they reach
Consideration
argument advanced by the Separate Representative, in our view, is misconceived.
Section 175 of the Care Act gives the Tribunal
children under the age of 16 years in relation to medical treatment that falls
within paragraphs (a),
(b) or (c) of the definition of special medical treatment
in s 175(5) of the Care Act. Section 175 imposes a decision-making
responsibility
on the Tribunal. The obligation to exercise that jurisdiction
according to law is not concerned with the course or length of the
treatment but with the protection of children from harm that may be caused by
the subject treatment. If a person is under
the age of 16 and an application is
made for the Tribunal to consent to the proposed special medical treatment under
s 175(3), the
Tribunal must consider the evidence and make a decision according
to the principles outlined in the Care Act. The Tribunal must consider
evidence concerning the proposed treatment and its potential effects.
175 is both present-oriented and forward-looking. It requires the Tribunal to
anticipate, as best it can, what may follow
from a treatment of a child who is,
at the time of the application, under the age of 16. In our view, it would be a
failure of jurisdiction,
and potentially lead to absurd results, if the Tribunal
were to consider only the potential effects of a treatment up to the 16th
birthday of a child. Where a “special medical treatment” in the form
of an operation were commenced five minutes prior
to a child’s 16th
birthday, such a stance would require NCAT to ignore the possible effects
occurring after the conclusion
of the operation, as the child would be 16 by
that time. In our view, once seized with jurisdiction, the Tribunal must
consider whether
the treatment over its course is intended, or is reasonably
likely, to have the effect of rendering permanently infertile the person
it is proposed to be carried out. The fact that a treatment may extend
beyond the child’s 16th birthday, in our view,
has no bearing on the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction
at the time of the application.
the Tribunal would not be able to exercise jurisdiction at all if the course of
treatment continued beyond the child’s
16th birthday.
the proposed treatment reasonably likely to have the effect of rendering Lisa
permanently infertile?
Health contends that it is open to the Tribunal to find on the available
evidence that the proposed treatment is reasonably likely
to have the effect of
rendering Lisa permanently infertile. NSW Health acknowledges that the available
evidence would not support
a finding that it is
proposed treatment will render Lisa permanently infertile.
the other hand, the Separate Representative contends that the available evidence
supports a finding that it is possible that the
proposed treatment might
render Lisa permanently infertile but not a finding that there is a real
and not remote chance that it will
render Lisa infertile. The Separate
Representative says that the significant uncertainty surrounding the effects of
Stage 2 treatment
on the fertility of trans females does not establish that
there is a real and not remote chance that the proposed treatment will
Lisa infertile. As pointed out by the two experts who gave evidence in these
proceedings, there is no evidence that establishes
that the effects of oestrogen
on fertility are permanent and there is some evidence which suggests the effects
are reversible.
Expert evidence
the request of NSW Health, obstetricians and gynaecologists, Experts 1 and 2,
gave evidence in these proceedings about the effects
of Stage 2 treatment on the
fertility of Lisa and the two other children the subject of the proceedings.
Experts 1 and 2 each prepared
individual reports and, at the request of the
Tribunal, a joint report. In addition, Expert 1 gave oral evidence. Expert 2
overseas and was not available to give oral evidence.
1 and 2 agree that Zoladex (Stage 1 treatment) has the effect of suppressing
testosterone which, in turn, “prevents
full spermatogenesis [sperm
production]”. In addition, they agreed that the effects of Stage 1
treatment were “fully
reversible” and would have no effect on
Lisa’s fertility. Further, they agreed that if Lisa were to now (September
commence Stage 2 treatment, it would not have any impact on her fertility
over the next three months. However, they differed in their
opinion about the
effects of Stage 2 treatment on Lisa’s fertility beyond her 16th birthday.
a short report dated 6 August
2024, Expert 1
wrote that there is “good
evidence” that oestrogen impairs spermatogenesis and causes testicular
atrophy while it is
being taken. While there is some evidence that this may be
partially reversible when oestrogen is ceased, that is primarily taken
studies of people who commenced gender affirming hormone therapy after pubertal
development. According to Expert 1 there is
no “high-quality evidence to
accurately predict return of fertility” if oestrogen treatment is
commenced prior to “full
pubertal development”.
a more detailed report dated 27 August 2024 prepared in respect of Lisa
(the initial report), Expert 1 repeated those opinions.
In addition, she
said that because Lisa had commenced Stage 1 treatment “before full
pubertal maturation (before Tanner Stage
5) as a natal
she is “unlikely
to have developed ejaculatory function or sperm production”. According to
Expert 1, that will remain
the case while ever Lisa continues Stage 1 treatment.
Expert 1 said that she would expect that if Lisa were to stop Stage 1 treatment
and not commence Stage 2 treatment, that she would “proceed through
puberty to full male puberty maturation and associated
fertility”.
oral evidence, Expert 1 expanded on the effects of oestrogen on trans females:
“It shrinks testicular volume, and it has a direct inhibitory effect on
spermatogenesis, that is, the production and maturation
of sperm cells. It also
decreases ejaculatory function.”
1 wrote that the proposed treatment presents a “high risk of infertility
whilst it is being taken”. According to
Expert 1, “the risks of
infertility are not time or dose dependent ... Having said that, a short
exposure to oestrogen (e.g.
a couple of months) would not be likely to impact
fertility”.
2023, Expert 2
co-authored a report about a study of nine transgender females,
each of whom commenced Stage 2 treatment after full pubertal maturation
later ceased treatment (the
The participants in
that study had used oestrogen treatment for varying periods, the longest period
being five to six years. The
study found that: spermatogenesis was fully
restored in each of the nine participants; four participants had at least one
semen analysis; five participants had a lower quality of sperm; and, the
length of the treatment had no bearing on fertility outcomes.
on the study the subject of the Expert 2 report, Expert 1 said that it is too
limited to be generalised to all patients
who commence Stage 2 treatment with
oestrogen after onset of full pubertal maturation. Expert 1 said in her opinion
of the data, particularly relating to people who commence Stage
2 treatment (oestrogen) before full pubertal maturation there remains
uncertainty as to whether infertility ... is likely to be permanent”.
her report, Expert 1 noted that she has treated a trans female patient who
commenced Stage 2 treatment after full pubertal maturation.
That patient
returned to normal male fertility about five months after ceasing treatment.
a report dated 29 August
2024, Expert 2
gave an opinion about the fertility
implications of the Stage 2 treatment for each of the three children the subject
of these proceedings.
With respect to Lisa, Expert 2 said that there is
“probably not a real chance” that she will become permanently
if she undergoes Stage 2 treatment.
2 acknowledged that the evidence on “fertility outcomes of trans-feminine
individuals is sparse” and noted that
in preparing the Expert 2 report,
the authors completed a systematic literature review and found no studies in
relation to the fertility
outcome of “trans-feminine minors with years of
puberty suppression”. Expert 2 said that oestrogen treatment “will
in the majority of transfeminine patients lead to reduced sperm quality, however
data [is] from adult patients and were always combined
with a testosterone
2 said that currently there was no evidence to prove that the effects of
oestrogen on fertility are “irreversible or
permanent”. Referring to
the Expert 2 report, Expert 2 said that there is some data to suggest that the
effects of oestrogen
in trans-female patients may be reversible.
2 wrote the “current hypothesis” is that “the effects of
hormone therapy with oestrogen are probably reversible,
and that there would be
a return of testosterone, and restored fertility, but that it may take a long
2 said that while “there is no data relevant to [Lisa], based on what is
currently known” she would expect that
if she were to commence on
oestrogen the effect would not be different to the effect of Zoladex.
If hormone therapy ceased, Lisa
“could have a return of testosterone
and fertility with reasonable amount of uncertainty”. (The use of the word
“uncertainty”
may be a typographical error as it inconsistent with
the flavour of opinion expressed by Expert 2). Expert 2 said that the fertility
implications for Child 2 would be similar.
2 emphasised that there is always a chance that a person will be infertile and
there is no guarantee that a person will be
able to parent a biological child.
Joint expert report
the request of the Tribunal, NSW Health requested Experts 1 and 2
to prepare a joint report. Expert 1 and Expert 2 were asked to
series of questions about each of the three children the subject of these
proceedings. The questions were jointly formulated
by NSW Health and the
Separate Representative.
expert was asked to answer the question, “Is there a real and not remote
chance that Stage 2 (oestrogen) treatment would
have the effect of rendering
[Lisa] permanently infertile?” In their joint report dated 9 September
2024, Expert 1
“Due to a complete lack of guiding evidence applicable to these
circumstances (meaning stage 2 treatment commenced before pubertal
maturation)
as for case 1, I am unable to confidently state that stage 2 treatment in the
form of estrogen will not result in a real
and not remote chance of permanent
infertility. It should be noted that this treatment is not intended to cause
permanent infertility
and whilst evidence to support fertility is lacking, there
is no evidence strongly suggesting that it does cause permanent
infertility.”
2 did not respond to that question.
her initial report Expert 2 wrote “[t]he data on fertility outcomes of
transfeminine individuals is sparse” and “[w]hile
there is no data
relevant to [Lisa], based on what is presently known, I would expect that if the
minor were to commence on oestrogen,
the effects would not be different from the
current situation with Zoladex only and, if hormone therapy was ceased, the
minor could
have a return of testosterone and fertility with
a reasonable
amount of uncertainty
. This opinion is based on the case study [in the
Expert 2 report] and some examples from clinical practice” (emphasis
answering what she meant by the phrase “a reasonable amount of
uncertainty” in the above passage, Expert 2 wrote in
the joint report:
“There is no [proof] of fertility other than birth of a healthy infant,
there is always a reasonable amount of uncertainty
in fertility. There is only
evidence of the reversibility of subfertility in transgender adults. And we
don't know what the outcome
in (sub)fertility would have been without this
treatment (background risk of infertility due to other non transgender related
response to the request that she expand on her opinion that she would expect
that the minor could have a return of testosterone
and fertility, in the absence
of data on fertility relevant to Lisa or Child
1, Expert 2
“From cisgender boys treated with GnRHa for precocious puberty we know
that they showed normal sperm analysis 0.7-3 years after
the determination of
GnRHa [gonadotropin therapy]
Together with the case report in adults, all we know is reassuring. So I think
it very well possible that fertility returns after
cessation of GAHT [Gender
affirming hormone therapy].”
Expert 1’s oral evidence
Expert 1’s opinion, the World Professional Association for Transgender
) “Standard of Care for the Health of Transgender and
Gender Diverse People”, Eighth Edition (the
WPATH Guidelines
the Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne “Australian Standards of
Care and Treatment Guidelines: For Trans and Gender
Diverse Children and
Adolescents”, Version 1.4 (the AusPATH Guidelines) represent best
practice for transgender health in Australia.
According to Expert 1, fertility
preservation should form part of gender care. Expert 1 agreed with this
statement contained in the
AusPATH Guidelines at p 14: “the degree to
which testosterone may reduce one’s reproductive potential when taken in
adolescence
and early adulthood is unknown”.
oral evidence, Expert 1 agreed with the proposition that there is evidence that
oestrogen impairs sperm production and that it
is unknown whether those effects
are permanent. Expert 1 said that she could not say there is not a real
possibility of permanent
infertility flowing from Stage 2 treatment for Lisa.
However, she clarified that this was an opinion and there is no evidence to
guide her. Expert 1 speculated that Lisa may be more at risk of permanent
infertility than Child 2 because she commenced treatment
at an earlier stage of
pubertal development.
Consideration
is uncontroversial that Stage 2 treatment affects sperm production and causes
testicular atrophy while it is being taken. We find
that Lisa is likely to be at
high risk of infertility while she is receiving Stage 2 treatment.
more difficult question is whether Stage 2 treatment is reasonably likely to
render Lisa
permanently
infertile if she were to stop that treatment.
Each expert considered that the question was attended by considerable doubt,
because of the dearth of evidence about the effect of oestrogen
treatment on transgender females in general, in particular, transgender
who, like Lisa, had not gone through full natal puberty (that is, the process of
puberty as their sex assigned at birth).
the experts, Expert 2 had a greater degree of confidence that Stage 2 treatment
would not render Lisa permanently infertile. Nonetheless,
the opinion she
expressed in the joint report was more equivocal than that expressed in her
initial report, namely that “there
is probably not a real chance that
[Lisa] will become permanently infertile if [she] undergo[es] Stage 2
treatment”. Expert
2 considered that the study the subject of the Expert 2
report was confirmatory of her opinion but acknowledged its limitations.
report stated: “Our sample size was obviously limited and ultimately only
included three patients in whom reversible azoospermia
could be confirmed". It
recommended future studies with a large number of
the two experts, we consider the opinion expressed by Expert 1 to be more
persuasive. Expert 1 said that she was unable to characterise
the risk of Lisa
becoming permanently infertile as remote. She gave a reasoned explanation for
that opinion. She considered Lisa
to be more at risk than Child 2 because she
was at a less advanced stage of (male) puberty when she commenced taking puberty
suppression
medication. We are mindful that we have had the advantage of hearing
Expert 1’s expanded explanation for that opinion in oral
evidence. In
contrast, we did not have the advantage of hearing from Expert 2 and in
particular on her explanation for the apparent
discrepancy between the opinion
she expressed in her initial report and the joint report. Although Expert 2
expressed some confidence
that the proposed treatment would not render Lisa
permanently infertile, her opinion was, in effect, based largely on a very small
sample of adult subjects. In our view, it was such a small study that it would
be risky, if not impossible, to generalise from it,
especially in relation to
the potential effects of the treatment on children whose puberty has been
medically suppressed.
the evidence as to the likelihood of the treatment causing permanent infertility
is sparse, it cannot be said either to be
so remote as to be an inconsequential
consideration or improbable. We are of the view that there is a real but
immeasurable chance
that permanent infertility may be the effect of the
treatment. In that sense, we find that the Stage 2 treatment sought for Lisa
meets the statutory test of being reasonably likely to have the effect of
rendering Lisa permanently infertile.
follows that the proposed treatment constitutes special medical treatment within
the meaning the definition of special medical
treatment in para (a) of
s 175(5) of the Care Act.
Is it necessary to carry out the
proposed treatment to prevent serious damage to Lisa’s psychological
Separate Representative contends that the proposed treatment is necessary to
prevent serious damage to Lisa’s psychological
health. NSW Health
considering the submissions made by the parties, we will outline the evidence
5 met Lisa on two occasions, most recently in late 2023, apparently for the
purpose of determining whether Lisa continues to meet
the diagnostic criteria
for Gender Dysphoria and is capable of consenting to the proposed treatment.
In a report dated 13 December
2023, Dr 5 wrote that during that
consultation Lisa said “I will be sad and mad”, if she had to wait
until she was age
16 to receive the proposed treatment. Dr 5 wrote that in
exploring Lisa’s feelings about the commencement of the treatment
Lisa and her mother, “we established that her mental health will
significantly decline if she has to wait for this treatment
until she is
18”. Dr 5 wrote that it is “essential that treatment commence at the
time clinicians involved in her care
determine she is ready”.
August 2024, Dr 5 met with Lisa’s mother. Lisa did not attend that
consultation, as apparently, she was sleeping. In a report
dated 22 August 2024,
Dr 5 said that during that consultation, Lisa’s mother talked about the
impact on Lisa of the delay in
commencing Stage 2 treatment and said that
(1) does not talk openly about her feelings due to her neurodivergence;
(2) has become more irritable and argumentative at home. She can be rude and
abrasive to her mother and siblings; and
(3) said that she is angry “I don’t get to have choice [about
treatment initiation] and that we have to fight for it
treatment]”.
5 wrote that the delay in commencing the proposed treatment has been difficult
for both Lisa and her mother. Allowing Lisa to access
treatment will improve
Lisa’s overall mental health as it will “allow her to look like she
wants to look and live the
life she wants to live”.
oral evidence Dr 5 said that Lisa’s emotional distress manifests itself in
behavioural ways described by her mother as Lisa
“being more
unpleasant”. Dr 5 said that Lisa’s condition may progress to a mood
disorder if treatment was further
delayed. Because of gender incongruence, there
is a high likelihood that a person with Gender Dysphoria will develop a disorder
as anxiety or depression.
Dr 5’s opinion, if Lisa were to go through “boy puberty”, she
would be at “high risk of harm”, the
effect would be devastating.
assessing the impact of the delay in starting treatment, Dr 5 considered
significant the fact that Lisa and her family are socially
isolated. Her mother
is a single parent. Lisa is home schooled and her only contact apart from her
immediate family is a NDIS support
worker. Nonetheless, in Dr 5’s opinion,
if Lisa had to wait three months until her 16th birthday to commence treatment
would be able to cope, largely because of the efforts of her mother in
preparing her for that possibility.
Submissions
Separate Representative contends that in considering whether the proposed
treatment is necessary to prevent serious damage to
Lisa’s psychological
physical health, the Tribunal should not confine its consideration to the impact
on Lisa if that treatment
were delayed until she reached the age of 16. Rather
the Tribunal should consider the effects on Lisa, if she were
commence the proposed treatment. As explained by Dr 3 because of the deleterious
effect of long-term Stage 1 treatment, including
on bone health, Lisa will be
unable to receive that treatment indefinitely. The Separate Representative
points to Dr 5’s opinion
that if she were to go through “boy
puberty” it would be devastating to Lisa.
Separate Representative points to the evidence that for many years Lisa has been
“persistent, insistent and consistent”
in her identity and that she
is increasingly distressed by the delay in commencing the proposed treatment and
“having to fight”
to receive that treatment. In support she points
to the statement made by Lisa’s mother that throughout the Tribunal
she has become “more irritable, angry and
distressed”.
Consideration
exercise the discretion conferred by s 175(3) of the Care Act to give consent to
the carrying out of the proposed treatment we
must be satisfied that it is
to carry out that treatment on Lisa in order to
serious damage to her psychological or physical health
reject the argument made by the Separate Representative that s 175(3) should be
interpreted as requiring us to consider the effects
psychological health if she were
to undergo Stage 2 treatment and,
as a consequence at some point she would be required to cease Stage 1 treatment,
and go through
“boy puberty”. Section 175(3) requires consideration
of the effect of not carrying out the subject special medical treatment,
oestrogen therapy, on the child’s psychological health. The use of
the present tense “
satisfied that [the special medical
necessary” (emphasis added) indicates that the
child’s current circumstances must be taken into account.
accept that it is not an option for Lisa to remain on puberty suppression
medication indefinitely but there is no evidence that
if she does not commence
the proposed treatment at this point in time, she will be required to cease
taking puberty suppression medication.
find that it is likely that Lisa will be distressed and disappointed when she
learns that she will be unable to commence the proposed
treatment now. Dr 5 may
be correct that, as a result, Lisa may develop a mood disorder.
In addition, Dr 5 apprehends that Lisa’s
socially isolated family may
not be able to cope if Lisa’s behaviour deteriorates if treatment is
delayed. However, in circumstances
where Lisa is not receiving treatment for her
mental health, and where, according to Dr 5, Lisa will probably be able to cope
the distress and disappointment of learning that she will be unable to
commence the proposed treatment, we are not persuaded that
the treatment is
necessary at this time to prevent serious damage to Lisa’s psychological
being satisfied that it is necessary to carry out the proposed treatment in
order to prevent serious damage to Lisa’s psychological
health, the
discretion to grant consent to that treatment cannot be
ADDENDUM 8 OCTOBER 2024
On 8 October 2024, the parties were given a copy of the statement of reasons
for this decision, which included the names of the individuals
referred to in
that statement, including the young person the subject of the application to
NCAT made by the Hunter New England Local
Health District under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW). In the
version of the statement of reasons published on CASELAW the Tribunal decided to
anonymise the names of the individuals
mentioned in that statement.
Description
A Facility psychiatrist who diagnosed Lisa with Gender Dysphoria.
Paediatric endocrinologist with the Facility and the original applicant in
the proceedings
Paediatrician who oversaw Lisa’s care from 2017 and referred her to
the Gender Dysphoria Clinic at John Hunter Hospital
Senior Paediatric endocrinologist with the Facility
Australian obstetrician and gynaecologist, who gave evidence in these
proceedings at the request of NSW Health
Overseas obstetrician and gynaecologist, who gave evidence in these
proceedings at the request of NSW Health
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
18 December 2024 - Amended pseudonyms - see annexure
Lodged with NCAT on 4 July
2024, the application was initially made by Lisa’s treating
endocrinologist, Dr 3. After the commencement
of the proceedings, at the request
of the Hunter New England Local Health District and Dr 3, NCAT ordered that the
Hunter New England
Local Health District be made the applicant in place of Dr 3.
The NSW Ministry of Health was joined as party to the
proceedings.
See endnote 1
Each Tanner stage is
identified by physical changes to the body, including breast development in
female puberty, the growth of the
penis and testicular volume in male puberty,
and pubic hair development in both genders. See, World Professional Association
Transgender Health, Standards of Care for the Health of Transgender and
Gender Diverse People, Eighth Edition (Report, 2022),
[6.12.f] citing W A
Marshall, & J M Tanner, (1969), “Variations in pattern of pubertal
changes in girls”, Archives
of Disease in Childhood, 44(235),
See end note 1
Children (Care and
Protection) Further Amendment Act 1988 (NSW); NSW, Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Council, 13 October 1988,
2202 (Virginia Chadwick, Minister for
Family and Community Services).
See end note 4 above.
NM van Mello, E Vlahakis, C Cooper, A Peri, M den Heijer, A Meißner, J
Huirne, KC Pang, “Successful restoration
of spermatogenesis following
gender-affirming hormone therapy in transgender women” (2023) 4(1) Cell
Reports Medicine.
S Bertelloni,
G I Baroncelli, M Ferdeghini, F Menchini-Fabris, G Saggese, “Final height,
gonadal function and bone mineral
density of adolescent males with central
precocious puberty after therapy with gonadotropin-releasing hormone
analogues” (2000)
159(5) European Journal of Pediatrics,
I De Nie, NM van
Mello, E Vlahakis, C Cooper, A Peri, M den Heijer, A Meißner, J Huirne, KC
Pang, “Successful restoration
of spermatogenesis following
gender-affirming hormone therapy in transgender women” (2023) 4(1) Cell
Reports Medicine, p 7.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (339 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter