URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of NSW (Inspector Prasad de Silva) v Berri Limited [2006] NSWCIMC 69 (29 May 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Authority of NSW (Inspector Prasad de Silva)
Case Number:
20280409/05/2
29 March 2006
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Ms J Pike,
Dibbs Abbott Stillman Solicitors
Solicitor for the Defendant: Mr G McCann,
Sparke Hellmore Solicitors
Reasons For Decision
1. The defendant pleads guilty to a breach of
section 8(1)
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
. The prosecution arises out of an
incident on 16 February 2004 at the Smithfield premises of the defendant where
it operates a food
manufacturing business.
2. The parties have provided the
court with an agreed statement of facts which sets out the background facts and
circumstances in
some detail and I do not propose to set those matters out in
the body of the decision. The facts are well known to the parties.
sufficient to note that on 16 February 2004, the defendant employed Mr Salih
Serce in the classification of leading hand
and Mr Billy Sou in the
classification of forklift operator. On the day in question, at approximately
11pm, both men were in the
GLF area of the defendant’s premises. GLF is an
abbreviation for “General Liquid Filling” area of the premises.
the time of the accident the injured worker, Mr Serce was walking from the label
printer with a label in his hand towards a pallet
which was located adjacent to
one of the production lines in GLF area. Mr Sou, who was driving a forklift
truck at the time, was
reversing from in between two production lines and
collided with Mr Serce.
4. Following the incident Mr Serce was transported to
hospital by ambulance. It was found that he had suffered severe injuries as
consequence of being hit by the forklift truck driven by Mr Sou. Mr Serce
suffered two compound fractures of his left leg and multiple
fractures of his
left ankle.
5. It is necessary for the court to give consideration to the
objective seriousness of the offence. It is clear that the system of
place at the time permitted pedestrians and the forklift truck to utilise the
same area. The court notes that only one forklift
truck was permitted to use the
area at any one time, however the frequency with which the forklift truck came
into this GLF area
was reasonably substantial. The agreed statement of facts
suggests that a forklift truck would access the area approximately 30-40
day. At the time of the incident, the defendant did not have in place a safe
system of work which ensured that pedestrians
and the forklift truck did not
come into contact. At that time, the GLF area was not marked with painted
walkways or other means
of identifying pedestrian-only areas as opposed to areas
that were specifically provided for the manoeuvring of the forklift truck.
system of work in place at the relevant time, relied in part on the common sense
and training of the defendants employees. Both
Mr Sou and Mr Serce were trained
forklift truck drivers and both had received significant induction and training
specifically relating
to the safe use of forklift trucks. There is no evidence
to suggest that either man was anything other than a competent and diligent
6. The defendant’s system also relied upon features on the
forklift truck itself to warn pedestrians when the forklift truck
was reversing.
The forklift truck in question had gone back to its supplier for servicing on 28
February 2003, approximately 12 months
prior to the incident and at that time
the defendant had arranged for added safety features to be fitted to the
forklift truck. As
a result of these modifications, the forklift truck, when in
reverse, would provide visual and aural warning by way of a flashing
light and a beeper unit which would issue a loud beeping noise to alter any
pedestrian near the rear of the forklift truck
at that time.
7. The evidence
before the court indicates that on 19 February 2004, 3 days after the incident,
the supplier of the forklift truck
inspected the vehicle and recorded that a
faulty strobe light required replacement. Whilst this evidence suggests that at
of the incident it was likely that the strobe light was not
operational, the evidence is silent in relation to the beeper unit which
have given Mr Serce some aural warning that the forklift truck was in reverse
and that it was near him. At the sentencing
hearing of the matter, the court was
advised that there was no evidence available to indicate whether any fault was
present in the
beeper unit on the forklift truck on the day in question.
8. The court was provided with an affidavit of Mr Peter Gates, the General
Manager of manufacturing for the defendant. The affidavit
of Mr Gates includes
as annexure “D”, a number of documents relating to the service
history of the forklift truck in
question. The service history would indicate
that from time to time the electrical system and the wiring on the forklift
caused concern. Further, the court notes that the forklift truck had
been subjected to some further modifications in the month prior
to the incident
in question. On 16 January 2004, a speed limiter had been fitted to the
forklift, decreasing the speed to a maximum
10 km per hour. On 20 January 2004
there had been a further adjustment to the speed limiter which had increased the
maximum speed
to 15km per hour.
9. It is clear that a safe system of work
would require regular checking to ensure all safety features were operational.
At the time
of the incident, there was no daily checking of any of the forklifts
at the defendants premises or formal checklists to assist forklift
carrying out pre-operational checks on the forklifts at the defendant’s
10. In the view of the court, such checking was particularly
important in circumstances where the defendant’s system permitted
pedestrian and forklift trucks to utilise the same floor space.
view of the court the failure on the part of the defendant to establish such a
system of checking to ensure that the safety
systems on the forklift truck were
operational, created an obvious and foreseeable risk to safety in circumstances
where it was well
known that the forklift truck would be accessing the area in
question on a regular basis and would be reversing in circumstances
pedestrians were utilising the same area of the premises.
12. Following the
incident, the defendant has put into place a number of safe workplace
procedures, which collectively diminish in
a substantial way the risk of similar
incidents occurring. One area of remedial action has involved the introduction
of a checklist
and a requirement that forklift truck operators check their
vehicle at the commencement of their shift, including a specific check
strobe light and reversing beeper. Notwithstanding the introduction of this
system, which is clearly an excellent one, the
defendant has candidly admitted
that it has not been entirely successful in getting across to its employees the
necessity for this
system to be complied with. Annexed to the affidavit of Mr
Gates, as annexure “E” are minutes of the defendant’s
occupational health and safety meeting held on 9 March 2006. The meeting minutes
reveal that in relation to forklift trucks “check
sheets are not routinely
filled out by every forklift diver each shift, as required onsite”. The
court accepts that the defendant
has, following the serious injury to Mr Serce,
made valiant attempts to try to establish and reinforce a culture of safety
consciousness
with its employees and it is disappointing to read that employees,
whose health, safety and welfare is being protected by the legislation
than fully cooperative in carrying out the reasonable and proper steps required
by their employer in this regard.
13. The defendant has also put in place
changes to it physical premises to permit separation of pedestrian and forklift
This was not a simple or inexpensive remedial step in this case and
required some substantial expenditure by the defendant to reconfigure
relevant part of the premises to permit this to occur. Further, the defendant
has rearranged the duties of employees to further
improve the safe working
procedure in place in the GLF area of the premises. This includes a procedure
whereby the forklift truck
driver is responsible for securing the relevant
labels, rather than having that task performed by the pedestrian. In order to
this task, the forklift truck driver must turn off the vehicle and step
down from it to obtain a label and this effectively removes
the possibility of
the forklift truck being in motion, whilst this task is undertaken.
14. Whilst this court acknowledges the appropriateness of the
defendant’s remedial steps following the incident, it is also
these were steps which were available prior to the incident which, if taken,
would have had provided a safe working environment
to the injured worker which
was not available on 16 February 2004. I am satisfied that the injuries actually
experienced by Mr Serce
were extremely serious and it is by no means
inconceivable that his injuries could have been far more serious and
incapacitating
in a permanent fashion.
15. It is clear that a general
deterrence factor is required to be included in any penalty imposed by the
court. It is important that
attention is drawn to the risk to safety associated
with the use of forklift trucks without there first being established a safe
system of work and a safe working environment for employees. Not withstanding
the defendants lack of prior convictions under the
legislation and its exemplary
conduct following the incident in the establishment of the substantially
improved safe systems of work,
I am not satisfied that it would be appropriate
for the specific deterrence factor to be treated as an irrelevant consideration
this matter. The defendant is a substantial employer which uses dangerous
equipment including forklift trucks and requires to be
specifically deterred
from permitting unsafe systems of work to be established within its premises.
Notwithstanding the fact that
the defendant is entitled to be regarded as a good
industrial citizen given its previously unblemished record under this
legislation
the objective seriousness of the offence in this case is
substantial.
16. As indicated above here are subjective matters which
mitigate strongly in favour of the defendant. The affidavit of Mr Gates sets
the size and scope of the defendant’s operations and it must be said that
when those factors are taken into account it
is a remarkable and fine
achievement for this defendant to have no prior convictions under the
legislation. It suggests that this
defendant has, in general, a diligent and
vigilant approach to occupational health and safety matters. Further, it is
the defendant provided appropriate co-operation to the WorkCover
Authority of New South Wales during the investigation process and
that it went
to considerable trouble and expense to modify its premises following the
incident and to take other steps to bring about
necessary changes to the system
of work in place in the GLF area. The Court is particularly impressed with the
support given to the
injured worker following the incident which included
support for him and his family during the treatment phase and during the long
rehabilitation phase which followed. This included total co-operation with the
rehabilitation providers and it is noted that the
defendant encouraged and
facilitated the re-skilling of the injured worker so that he could undertake
administrative and clerical
duties as part of his return to work plan following
his undertaking further training in this area by means of a Tafe
17. Having given consideration to both the objective seriousness of
the offence and the subjective matters in mitigation I find that
an appropriate
penalty in this matter is $63,500.00. The defendant is entitled to a discount of
this penalty to take into account
its plea of guilty. The plea of guilty was
entered on the third occasion that the matter came before the Court. This does
not constitute
the earliest practical opportunity for the plea to be entered.
However, I propose to take into account that this was a matter in
substantially amended Court Attendance Notice was filed and served after a
period of negotiations between the prosecutor
and the defendant and the plea of
guilty was entered immediately upon the amended Court Attendance Notice being
filed in Court. In
those circumstances, noting the utilitarian value of the plea
of guilty I propose to discount the penalty by 25 percent. The penalty
reduced accordingly to $47,625.00. There will be a moiety of the fine to the
prosecutor.
18. In this matter there has been no agreement as to costs
between the parties, or at least no such agreement had been reached at
of the sentencing hearing. In those circumstances the order of the Court is that
the defendant is to pay the prosecutor’s
costs as agreed or as assessed by
the Court. In the event that agreement is not reached the parties have liberty
to apply to the
Court for an assessment.
19. The defendant is ordered to pay
the sum of $47,625.00 within 28 days at the level 4 Registry of the Court,
Downing Centre, 143-147
Liverpool Street Sydney.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
29 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter