URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metlege [2006] NSWPB 5 (10 May 2006)
[2006] NSWPB 5
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rodney Metlege
10 May 2006
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged that between 5 June 1999 and
30 March 2000, the pharmacist dispensed supplies of
oral, female contraceptive
drugs pursuant to prescriptions written for a male patient, in circumstances
where the pharmacist knew
or ought to have known that such supplies were in
quantities or for a purpose that did not accord with appropriate recognised
therapeutic
standards. The pharmacist also failed to make adequate enquiries of
the prescribers as to the authenticity of such prescription.
The pharmacist was
first registered some three months before the conduct occurred and was at the
time employed by Mr Sawan. The pharmacist
admitted dispensing a number of
prescriptions for oral contraceptives for the male customer and that in
dispensing that medication,
whatever the quantity, he demonstrated a lack of
knowledge and experience and that his conduct demonstrated a lack of judgment
he did not accept that he acted unethically or improperly. The pharmacist
did not suspect the prescriptions were forgeries or stolen.
In failing to make any enquiry
of a male presenting a prescription made out in his name for oral contraceptive
pills, the pharmacist
had made a grave error of judgment and acted improperly.
Regardless of the pharmacist’s short period of time in practice, the
pharmacist should have immediately recognised the inappropriateness of the
prescription(s) and taken action to determine its authenticity.
The pharmacist is contrite
and his practice has improved since this conduct, the subject of the complaint
occurred. However, conditions
should be imposed on the pharmacist, which make
him accountable to the Board for his continuing professional education and
membership in professional associations.
The complaint has been proved
to the Board’s reasonable satisfaction and the conduct amounts to
professional misconduct in that
the pharmacist has engaged in conduct that
demonstrates a lack of adequate judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy
improper conduct related to the practice of pharmacy.
The pharmacist is
reprimanded, required; to undertake extensive educative requirements including:
presentation of a tutorial to a
panel of pharmacists nominated by the Board on
the legal and professional responsibilities of a pharmacist in dispensing
Prescription
Only medications; to maintain memberships of professional
organisations and to obtain and maintain Quality Care Pharmacy Accreditation
any pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary interest. The pharmacist was also
ordered to use the services of a mentor pharmacist
approved by the Board, who is
to report back to the Board. The cost of complying with these orders is at the
pharmacist’s expense.
(Editorial note: for related cases see Ho
[2006] NSWPB 4
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee (the "Committee") held on 26
October 2005 into a complaint of professional misconduct
made under the
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
") by Judge Kenneth V
Taylor AM, RFD, nominal complainant and Acting Commissioner of the Health Care
Complaints Commission,
Rodney Metlege of Wollongong City Pharmacy 237
Queen Street, Wollongong in the State of New South Wales, being a pharmacist
in this State.
THE COMPLAINT
That Rodney Metlege has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
section 19D(1)(c)
in that the pharmacist
has demonstrated
a lack of adequate judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy and/or
engaged in improper
or unethical conduct
related to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
Between 7 June 1999 and 30 March 2000,
the pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs on the
dates shown in
the attached schedule, Schedule A, pursuant to prescriptions
written in the name of a male patient, Patient A, in circumstances where
pharmacist knew or ought to have known that such supplies were for a purpose
that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic
standard of what was
appropriate in the circumstances, contrary to the requirements of Clause 57,
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
regulation").
Between 7 June 1999 and 30 March 2000,
the pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs to Patient
A on the dates
and in the quantities shown in Schedule A in circumstances where
the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that such supplies were
in quantities
that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what was
appropriate in the circumstances, contrary
to the requirements of Clause 57 of
the regulation.
Between 7 June 1999 and 30 March 2000,
the pharmacist failed to make adequate enquiries of the medical practitioners
who had purportedly
written the prescriptions in the name of Patient A on the
dates shown in Schedule A, as to the authenticity of the prescriptions
appropriateness of the supplies of medication directed thereon, prior to
dispensing the medications.
The following documents were tendered:
Certificate;
Transcript from the Inquiry
into a complaint of professional misconduct by Mr Sawan. Mr Sawan was the
Respondent’s employer
at the relevant time. The proceedings were heard on
20 October 2005;
Reports of Mr Mahoney dated
10 June 2003, 25 July 2005 and 21 October
Testimonials.
The Respondent gave evidence that at the time of the hearing he was aged 29
to be married in the following year and was registered
to practice as a
Pharmacist in 1999. The breaches took place between June 1999 and March
The Respondent gave evidence that he worked for Mr Sawan at the Wollongong
City Pharmacy for a period after registration and left
his employ in July of
2000 when he purchased another pharmacy in Gymea. He is the sole proprietor of
that Pharmacy and is also in
partnership with another pharmacist at a Miranda
pharmacy. The offences took place within three months after registration.
The Respondent admitted he dispensed a number of prescriptions for oral
contraceptives in the name of D. Hughes to a man whom he knew
as David Hughes
and that in dispensing that medication, whatever its quantity, he demonstrated a
lack of knowledge and experience.
He said that he lacked experience when
dealing with suspicious customers.
The Respondent said that he was not sure if the computer printout in Schedule
A, insofar as it refers to those drugs dispensed by
him, was accurate. He said
there was a default setting on the computer which meant that if a pharmacist
after him had dispensed
and not physically changed the initials in the computer
then the computer would default to the pharmacist who had previously dispensed
and who had changed the initials. The Respondent said the software he operates
now does not allow a pharmacist to enter past inserting
the initials. In
cross-examination on the point he agreed with counsel that he had not sought
access to staff rosters and records
to check whether he was working on the days
set out in Schedule A. This would have presumably assisted the Respondent in
determining
if the contents of Schedule A could all be ascribed to him.
It was put to the Respondent in cross-examination that there was a regulation
in 1994 to the effect that any computer program had
to comply with programs
approved by the Director General of Health and that a pharmacist could not have
a program which had a default
setting. The Respondent said he was not aware
there was such a regulation.
The Respondent said in his evidence, that he was using the Winifred computer
system which operated with a default setting. In cross-examination
Mahoney recommended he change to Winifred. He said he used to use Amfac. He
said Mr Mahoney recommended a change of
system to Winifred because:
it was easier to use where you have the function that you put your
initials in after dispensing
He felt that was the better system to go
This evidence is unclear.
The Respondent said Mr Hughes originally told him the medication was for his
wife but that the doctor had put it in his name. He
said Mr Hughes requested
the medication all at once, which would have been for a period of 12 months and
he did not find that unusual.
He said he did not suspect the prescriptions were
The Respondent said:
I didn’t suspect an oral contraceptive would be something to be
misused or used in an illegal way
The Respondent said Mr Hughes was fairly well presented, well mannered and
did not seem nervous or anxious. He said the quantities
were getting larger
each time Mr Hughes returned to the pharmacy but it did not concern him. He
said he felt Mr Hughes was possibly
using the drugs for gender re-assignment.
He said he accepted he should have questioned Mr Hughes about whether Mr Hughes
the medication for his own purposes or hormonal therapy and that he
should have consulted the prescribing doctor. He said he is more
assertive in
the way he deals with patients and customers now. He said that at the time
referred to in the complaint he had not
read any literature dealing with
determining the therapeutic purpose of the medication before dispensing it. He
said he has now,
or since, read the Pharmacy Board’s publication or
guidelines called
The Principles of Dispensing a Prescription
, which was
not published before June 2000. He accepted responsibility for his own actions,
even though Mr Sawan had told the Board
in his hearing that he accepted
responsibility for the Respondent’s actions. The Respondent said he
accepted he acted wrongly
and that his conduct demonstrated a lack of judgment.
He did not accept he acted unethically or improperly. He said:
I put it down to my inexperience at the time...I have learned you really
have to be suspicious of a lot of different situations, not
just the typical
forged prescriptions
He said he is much more aware of his role and responsibilities, which was
something he took for granted and really did not understand
at the time of the
The Respondent said he was interviewed by Mr Mahoney in June 2003 and at the
end of the interview Mr Mahoney recommended he should
do a number of things,
including formal proposal of continuing professional education up to 25 hours
over the next year, that he
should submit a report on a three monthly basis to a
pharmacist on his continuing professional education activities, that he should
do a thirty minute paper based on the responsibilities of a pharmacist in
dispensing S4 prescriptions and deliver that paper to his
peers and that as a
part of the paper he familiarise himself with the Board’s guidelines on
The Principles of Dispensing a Prescription
and demonstrate his knowledge
of the document. The Respondent said he did all those things.
The Committee notes that the Respondent did not produce any evidence to it of
him having completed Mr Mahoney’s suggestions.
We shall refer to this
again later. He said that it involved reading. The Respondent was subsequently
interviewed by Mr Mahoney
over the telephone. He is a member of the PSA. He
said he was, at the time of the hearing, going through accreditation through the
AACP and had joined the AACP. He has been appointed to the Board of his
Shire’s General Practitioners for Effective Use of
Medication and
Medication Reviews.
He apologised for his handling of the situation with Mr Hughes. He said he
has let himself and the profession down. He said he has
a lot to offer the
profession and is a very dedicated pharmacist. He said it has been hard having
the breaches hanging over his
head since July 2001.
He said he read journals such as
Australian Doctor
Australian Pharmacist
. He said he helped coordinate a National
Prescribing Service meeting, organises training seminars and meetings for
pharmacists and
doctors on a weekend and nightly schedule. He said he organised
seminars on diabetes and depression. He attended the seminars,
speaker nor did he write a paper. He said he had been involved in those two
seminars since 2003. He has attended some
night time seminars. He said he
submitted a report to a pharmacist by the name of Potzar Boghossian. Mr
Boghossian is one of the
Respondent’s referees. He said he had copies of
the reports at home. He said that a thirty minute paper based on the
responsibilities
of the pharmacist in dispensing schedule 4 prescriptions was
prepared and it was probably at home at the time this matter was heard
had not considered bringing it to the hearing. He said he presented the paper a
couple of months before the hearing. The
Committee notes that the suggestion was
made in 2003 by Mr Mahoney. He agreed his legal advisers had suggested he
attend to the
report and that he could not have done it earlier because of time.
He said he was doing somewhere between 30 to 40 hours per week
covering both
pharmacies, working 3 or 4 days a week but it does vary from week to week. He
said he had only been working 31/2 days
per week for 3 or 4 months prior to the
hearing. Previous to that he was working 5 days a week.
In re-examination he said that in addition to the 30 or 40 hours per week he
had other work to do such as running the business, administration
work, reading
documentation and so on. He said he works not less than 6 or 7 days between the
two businesses.
Counsel for the Respondent tendered testimonials and references from Mr Gary
Jackson dated 19 October 2005, Mr Boghossian dated 19
October 2005 and Mr John
McLachlan dated 19 October 2005.
Mr Mahoney gave evidence that he visited Mr Metlege in 2003 and made a report
dated 10 June 2003 with an updated report of 25 July
2005, and a further one on
21 October 2005. In cross-examination he said he did the usual sorts of checks
where various items were
stored, whether they were ethically and legally correct
in their storage. He looked around the dispensary as to methods of practising.
He said he did not recall a lot about having a look at the computer system in
relation to dispensing of prescriptions. He said
he was unable to recall at the
time he gave his evidence making a suggestion to the Respondent that he should
change from his then
current computer system to another one. He said he took
notes at the time but he did not have the notes with him. He said he believed
the notes still existed and they would be at his home. He said he had used
those notes to prepare the typed report.
Mr Mahoney said the recommended practice, insofar as dispensing is concerned,
is that you manually override the default system. He
said he had not read a
document he was shown by Mr Griffin entitled
Dispensary Computers in New
South Wales
2001. He said he was aware of documents issued by the New South
Wales Health Department which outlined approved systems for the recording
prescriptions but he had never had occasion to consult them. He said that most
pharmacists would enquire of their software suppliers
as to whether the system
complied with Government requirements. He said he himself had made that enquiry
of his software supplier.
He said he had no recollection as to whether or not
when he interviewed the Respondent in 2003, his system was an approved system.
He said it was not a question he would normally ask.
He said he did not think he really attached great importance to it, or he
would have reported on it. Mr Mahoney said he was surprised
the Respondent had
not been attending formal continuing education events. He said that the PSA
keeps a record of pharmacists’
continuing education. He said he felt that
mentoring was important for young pharmacists. He said when saying
he was referring to a pharmacist who had been registered
for 10 years or less. He said presenting a paper to a group of his peers
his personal preference because it makes the pharmacist more objective in his
thinking regarding his continuing education. He
said that he presumed the
Respondent would turn his attention to his suggestions fairly promptly. He said
he did not ask him specifically
in the telephone conversation in 2005 whether or
not he had taken up those suggestions. He said he did ask him about the extent
of his face to face continuing education and he was told he attended 4 or 5
sessions. He said he felt the Respondent probably needed
to engage in a little
more on-going continuing education before he prepared the paper. He said that
he believed mentoring for younger
pharmacists was terribly important.
Counsel for the Complainant submitted that:
the Committee should be satisfied on the
evidence that the complaint had been made
the Committee should rely upon the
schedule, which indicates large quantities of the particular drug in question
over eight separate
a reprimand,
the imposition of a fine, maintaining memberships, CPE, providing annual reports
to the Board of CPE and mentoring was
appropriate;
his earlier submissions in the
were applicable to this
the fact that Mr Mahoney took no steps
to verify whether or not the Respondent had in fact complied with the
suggestions he made in
2003 was not satisfactory;
the Respondent
had produced no verification or actual documents that he had taken up the
suggestions made by Mr Mahoney;
the seminars attended by the Respondent
would have been better categorised as seminars put on for doctors and not
specifically in
respect of his own professional development.
Counsel for the Respondent submitted that:
there is no evidence the printout which
forms Schedule A is correct and that his client does not know if the schedule is
the Committee is an expert
committee and it can form its own expert view as to whether or not conditions
should be imposed;
the way Mr Battye
conducted the recorded interview in not asking him to locate records, nor
disclosing to him that his conduct was
under particular examination was less
than satisfactory;
the Respondent was not
assertive enough to ask whether the medication was used for hormonal
there was no evidence that the
prescriptions were forged;
his client did
not suspect forgery;
the Respondent was a
victim. He said that even if his client had made enquiries of medical
practitioners he would not have received
Mr Mahoney’s follow up report
establishes that the Respondent had a good understanding of recognised
therapeutic standards and
that he had demonstrated a more dedicated approach to
his professional practice since the 2003 assessment and that Mr Mahoney is
impressed with the progress of the Respondent and that recommendation should
carry considerable weight with the
his client denies any improper or
unethical conduct and that there is no evidence of it. He agrees his client
showed lack of experience
and has had to have this matter hanging over his head
for many years;
his client is
the Committee could recommend he
find a mentor but it should not be in the form of an order, nor was a fine
appropriate;
the testimonials and
references tendered should be carefully considered by the
The Committee accepts that the Respondent’s degree of experience was
relevant to his decision making at the time.
The Committee finds that the breaches took place over a significant period of
time and are objectively very serious.
The Committee accepts that the Respondent did not think that the
prescriptions were stolen or forged. However, the Committee finds
failing to make any enquiry of a male presenting a prescription, made out in his
name for the oral contraceptive pill, the
Respondent has made a grave error of
judgment and has acted improperly. Regardless of the short period of time in
practice, the Committee
believes that the Respondent should have immediately
recognised the inappropriateness of the prescription and taken action to
the authenticity of the prescription.
The Committee does not accept that the Respondent has taken up all of the
suggestions made by Mr Mahoney. The Respondent says that
he has various reports
at home. The Respondent did not bring them to this hearing. The Committee finds
it odd that the Respondent
would not have attended the hearing armed with that
material which would support his assertion that he has been taking remedial
as suggested by his peer reviewer when it was suggested that it be taken
The Respondent did not check the rosters of who was on duty at the times and
dates specified in Schedule A to clarify his position.
He appears not to have
investigated that aspect of the allegations made against him. He does not say
those items dispensed under
his name were not dispensed by him but he says he is
not sure. There is no evidence before the Committee that the Schedule is
The Committee finds that the Schedule is an accurate reflection of
those items he dispensed.
The Committee accepts that the Respondent was also a victim but is critical
of the fact that he did not make any enquiries as to the
authenticity of the
prescriptions, even if those enquiries may not have shed any light on the true
The Committee accepts that the Respondent is contrite and has improved over
time since the subject period. However, the Committee
takes the view that
conditions should be imposed which will make the Respondent accountable to the
Board for his CPE and continued
association memberships. The Committee also
feels that a mentor would be of assistance to the Respondent even though a
years have passed since the breaches.
The Committee accepts that the Respondent has a lot to offer the profession
and that he is a dedicated pharmacist.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including the admissions of
the Respondent and the objective seriousness of the breaches,
the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities"
Bannister v
(1993) 30NSWLR699) that all the particulars of the complaint have
been proved to its reasonable satisfaction and that the conduct
constitutes
professional misconduct, in that the Board finds that the Respondent has engaged
Conduct that demonstrates a lack of
adequate judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy and ;
Other improper conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the public, to deter other pharmacists
from committing the
same breaches and to engender public confidence in the profession. The Board
does not consider that the imposition
of a fine in this case is appropriate. The
Board finds that conditions in respect of maintaining professional associations
memberships,
the appointment of a mentor and CPE are appropriate and that a
significant part of that education should be carried out in contact
members of his profession.
Accordingly, the Board makes the following orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
That Rodney Metlege is
reprimanded;
That Rodney Metlege is required to
complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008 at least 30 hours of
continuing professional
education (CPE), of which at least 15 hours of each year
is to be in lecture, seminar, workshop or other contact activity. At the
conclusion of each year the Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board a
report of the CPE he has completed during that preceding
That Rodney Metlege is required to
present within three months of the date of these Orders, to the satisfaction of
a panel of pharmacists
nominated by the Pharmacy Board, a one hour tutorial on
the legal and professional responsibilities of a pharmacist in dispensing
Prescription Only medications, showing how procedures in place in his pharmacies
ensure that these responsibilities are met at all
times and the importance of
always being satisfied as to the authenticity of the prescription
That Rodney Metlege is to do all things
necessary to obtain and /or maintain memberships with the Pharmacy Guild of
Australia and
the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia or such other professional
organisations approved by the Pharmacy Board for a period of 5
years from the
date of these Orders.
Rodney Metlege is to submit to the Pharmacy Board, on an annual basis, copies
of documents confirming his continuing professional
memberships.
For a period of 3 years from the date of
these Orders, Rodney Metlege is to obtain and/or maintain Quality Care Pharmacy
Program Accreditation
for Rodney’s Pharmacy and Miranda Seven Day and
Night Pharmacy and any other pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary
As part of that ongoing Quality Care Pharmacy Program Accreditation the
Respondent is to submit to an annual Standards Maintenance
Assessment and is to
provide the results of those assessments to the Pharmacy Board annually.
For a period of three years from the date
of these Orders, Mr Metlege is to agree to utilise the services of an
experienced pharmacist,
approved by the Board, as a Mentor.
Mr Metlege is to agree to the Mentor visiting him at a mutually suitable
time, at Rodney’s Pharmacy and Miranda Seven Day and
Night Pharmacy on at
least three occasions in each of the three years.
The Mentor is to provide a report to the Pharmacy Board of the issues
discussed at each visit, within 1 month of each visit taking
The costs of complying with these Orders are to be met by the pharmacist.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
Rodney Metlege is notified by registered post at his address
as it appears on
the Register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (287 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter