URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
COE V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION [2013] NSWNMT 12 (26 July 2013)
Matter No: 059/2012
COE V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
[2013] NSWNMT 12
INQUIRY INTO AN APPLICATION FOR REVIEW UNDER SECTION
Applicant for review: Rachel Coe (nee
Health Care Complaints
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM,
(Chairperson)
Ms Janette Curtis (Nurse Member)
Ms Suellen Moore
(Nurse Member)
David Rosen (Lay Member)
Date and place of Hearing:
Tuesday 18 June 2013
Date of orders
and reasons for decision:
Representation:
Applicant: Ms Linda Alexander, New
South Wales Nurses and Midwives’
Association
Respondent: Ms H Bennett of counsel
instructed by Ms B Butt, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Application
under s 163A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
for review of order imposing conditions on registration –
Where HCCC consents to the removal of three conditions, and does not
or oppose the removal of condition prohibiting the health practitioner from
having authority to possess and supply Schedule
4D and Schedule 8 drugs in the
course of her employment – Whether health practitioner presents a risk to
the public if condition
removed – whether health practitioner has
demonstrated by her actions that all conditions on her registration should be
– HELD – Health Practitioner has demonstrated to the
necessary evidential standard that it is appropriate for all conditions
registration to be removed.
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Section 3, s3A, s163, s163A, s163B, s163C, s292,
Schedule 5D Cl.13 (1).
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
(repealed).
Cases cited:
Arian v Nguyen
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2013] NSWNMT 11
In Re Jason
Martin [2010]NSWMT 13
Law Society of New South Wales v Walsh
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Oshlack v Richmond
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Peter Cecil Harcourt Dawson v
Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
Re Richards and the Medical
Practice Act NSWMT 1 March 2003
at [59-[63].
Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
26 July 2013 the Tribunal granted an application made by Mrs Rachel Coe
(“the applicant”) for an order under s 163B
(1) (e) (ii) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86a
National Law”) removing conditions 1, 3, 4 and 5 to which her registration
is subject pursuant to orders of a differently
constituted Tribunal made on 15
October 2007.
Tribunal ordered that each party pay their own costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
The background leading to the application and the
hearing of the review application
15 October 2007 a differently constituted Tribunal (“the second
Tribunal”) found complaints of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and
professional misconduct instituted by the Health Care Complaints Commission
(“HCCC”) under the now repealed
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
(NSW) (“the repealed Act”) against the applicant, and conceded
by her, to be proved. The applicant did not however concede
she was addicted to
narcotic drugs at the date of the hearing. The second Tribunal was not
satisfied that the applicant suffered
impairment at the date of the hearing.
The second Tribunal ordered that five (5) conditions be imposed on the
applicant’s
registration as follows:
The Tribunal orders the
following conditions be imposed upon the Respondent, Ms McGrath’s
registration:
nurse is not to have the authority to possess and supply Schedule 4D and
Schedule 8 drugs in the course of her employment for
a minimum period of three
nurse is to authorise her current and future employer(s) for a period of three
years to send to the Nurses and Midwives Board,
at intervals of six months, a
brief report on the nurse’s conduct in relation to the issues raised by
these complaints.
a period of three years the nurse is to attend, at intervals of not more than
two months, a drug and alcohol counsellor approved
by the Board, and to
authorise the counsellor to provide short reports to the board at six monthly
intervals. This authority is to
include advice by the counsellor to the Board if
the nurse fails to attend appointments or if the counsellor has
nurse is to inform her current employer of the conditions imposed on her
registration and provide a copy of the reasons for the
Nurses and Midwives
Tribunal’s decision in this matter.
a period of five years, prior to accepting any offer of employment in nursing or
related fields, the nurse is to provide a
copy of the Nurses and Midwives
Tribunals reasons for decisions [sic] in this matter.
this Tribunal the HCCC conceded that, given the applicant’s compliance
with conditions 3, 4, and 5 (and which had expired
by effluxion of time) those
conditions should be removed from the register maintained by the Australian
Health Practitioner Agency
(“AHPRA”) in conjunction with the Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia (“the Board”).
earlier Tribunal (“the first Tribunal”) had, on 20 March 2001, found
complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct
and professional misconduct
proved against the applicant. The first Tribunal found between mid 1996 to June
1997 the applicant had
fallen into drug use and “became addicted”.
The applicant was found to have forged prescriptions, and criminal charges
brought against her were proved, but no conviction recorded. The first Tribunal
found that four and a half years had elapsed since
the applicant’s
convictions, that she had undergone a period of rehabilitation, and her
employment had been supervised. In
those circumstances the first Tribunal
determined the appropriate orders for the protection of the public at that time
were as follows:
respondent [the applicant] is reprimanded.
a period of nine months from the date of these orders the respondent nurse is
not to engage in practice where she is the most
senior registered nurse on duty
in the area in which she is performing her duties.
a period of nine months from the making of these orders, the respondent is to
continue to attend counselling conducted by Stella
psychologist.
27 November 2012 the applicant wrote to Dr Margaret Cooke, Executive Officer,
Nursing and Midwifery Council seeking that the conditions
placed on her
registration by the second Tribunal be removed. As the Tribunal does not have a
formal initiating application, we
treated this letter as the applicant’s
application for review under s 163A(4)(c) of the National Law.
to the initiating application, Ms Linda Alexander of the New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives Association (“the Association”)
made an application
under s 163 (1) (a1) of the National Law for the application to be heard and
determined by the Council, rather
than this Tribunal (see
Coe v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2013] NSWNMT 11
). The Chairperson rejected that
application. In paragraph 6 of her reasons the Chairperson summarised the
findings of the second
Tribunal as follows:
The Tribunal published
its reasons for decision on 12 November 2007. That Tribunal found:
The nurse was
first registered in February 1997. Prior to her registration in 1993 the nurse
was involved in a serious motor vehicle
accident. She sustained multiple
fractures, and in 1996 received a lump sum compensation payment of
In 1997 the
nurse ceased living with her family and became involved with a man who
introduced her to heroin to which drug she became
addicted. The nurse also
stole prescription pads and forged prescriptions to obtain Valium and Rohypnol
(reasons [2]).
The nurse was
charged with criminal offences, but ultimately a conviction was not recorded
(NSW) (s556A). She was referred to a
drug rehabilitation program.
The nurse had
earlier, in 2001, conceded complaints of unsatisfactory conduct and professional
misconduct before a Tribunal.
After the first
Tribunal’s decision in 2001and until 2004 the nurse worked in a private
hospital. In April 2004 she commenced
work at the Hunter Pain Clinic. In about
September 2004 the nurse began to use a discarded Schedule 8 drug
(Dilaudid).
Following the
nurse’s erratic behaviour coming to the attention of a Clinical Nurse
Consultant at the Hunter Pain Clinic the
nurse was suspended from work and she
undertook a medically supervised detoxification and drug
counselling.
attended drug counselling from December 2004 to June 2005, and at the time of
the last Tribunal hearing, had continuously
been attending Narcotics Anonymous
from completion of her detoxification up to the date of the
In April 2005
the nurse obtained employment as a theatre nurse at Hunter Valley Private
Hospital. Thereafter she obtained employment
as an instrument or scrub nurse at
Lake Macquarie Private Hospital. She was in that employment at the time of the
former Tribunal
hearing before the Tribunal occurred on 18 June 2013. The applicant, who was
represented by Ms Alexander, gave oral evidence to
the Tribunal and was
cross-examined briefly by counsel for the HCCC. The HCCC was represented by Ms
H Bennett of counsel instructed
by Ms Butt of the HCCC. Ms Bennett, both
orally, and in her helpful written submissions, explained that the HCCC’s
to the application was “neutral”. In other words insofar
as condition 1 is concerned the HCCC neither consented to,
or opposed, the
removal of this condition, but appeared as a neutral “contradictor”.
As earlier noted, during the course
of the hearing Ms Bennett advised the
Tribunal that the HCCC consented to an order that conditions 3, 4 and 5
presently on the applicant’s
registration be removed.
the hearing Ms Alexander tendered, without objection, in addition to the
documents listed as “respondent’s [semble
applicant’s] list of
documents”, an updating statement dated 14 June 2013 by Mr Brett Dennett,
the former CEO of the
Lake Macquarie Private Hospital, together with a bundle of
documents from the Council’s file relevant to the applicant’s
compliance with the conditions imposed by the second Tribunal.
Bennett relied on documents 1 to 27 indexed in the list of documents produced by
the HCCC. She also provided the Tribunal with
an up to date copy of the
applicant’s current registration status on the register maintained by
is unnecessary that we set out an extensive background to this matter. The
relevant background is found in the previous Tribunal’s
reasons, and
paragraph 7 of these reasons. The documents, which were before the previous
Tribunal, were also provided to us. The
Tribunal accepts the factual matters set
out under this heading as true and correct.
applicant was born in May 1974. The applicant’s curriculum vitae
discloses that, in September 1992, she gained an Advanced
Certificate of Nursing
(Enrolled Nurse). In May 1997 she was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of
Nursing, University of Newcastle.
2004 the applicant obtained employment as a clinical nurse specialist (Pain
Medicine) at the Hunter Pain Clinic. She was dismissed
from this clinic when
her unauthorised use of Dilaudid was discovered.
April 2005, after detoxification supervised by her general practitioner, the
applicant obtained employment at the Hunter Valley
Private Hospital where she
remained employed until February 2006.
2006 the applicant obtained employment at the Lake Macquarie Private Hospital.
Except for periods of leave, including maternity
leave, the applicant has
remained in the employ of that hospital as a scrub nurse.
2007 the applicant commenced a relationship with her present husband, and fell
pregnant with their first child. During her pregnancy
the applicant suffered
hyperemesis gravidarum, was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit at hospital in a
coma, and her baby was delivered
by caesarean section at 27 weeks gestation on
25 May 2008. Tragically, the baby, James, died at age 6 weeks.
applicant and her husband now have two small boys aged respectively 3 and
Matters in issue
was no dispute that the issue before us is a narrow one. The nurse has not
relapsed into drug use for almost ten years. It
is her position that her
life-style as a happily married woman with two young sons is a radical change
from that which led to her
relapse in 2004. She has complied with all
conditions imposed by the second Tribunal. Thus, it fell to this Tribunal to
whether we are satisfied to the relevant civil standard that if the
applicant’s S4D and S
restriction on her registration is removed (and she
can apply for the relevant limitation imposed by the Pharmaceutical Services
Unit under the Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulations to be discharged),
there is any danger to the public.
Relevant legal principles
and the National Law
earlier noted, the conditions were imposed by the second Tribunal pursuant to
the repealed Act. However as a consequence of the
transitional provisions found
in Part 12 Division13 of the National Law those conditions continue in force as
if made under the National
Law (see s 292).
is not a matter of controversy that the applicant bears the onus of proving she
is a fit and proper person to be engaged in the
profession of nursing without
conditions. Nor is it is dispute that the standard of proof to be applied by
the Tribunal is the civil
standard of proof, that is on the balance of
probabilities. Because of the nature of the jurisdiction, as set out in s 3 (2)
and s 3A of the National Law, is protective of the public, the Tribunal must
be satisfied to a high level of probability that the
applicant is “fit
and proper to be held out to the rest of the profession, to patients and to the
whole of the community as
a person worthy of their confidence” (see
Re Jason Martin
[2010] NSWMT 13
; Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
is appropriate that, at this point in our reasons, we set out the relevant
provisions of the National Law. Section 163A (1) provides
a person may apply
to the appropriate review body (in this case the Tribunal) for the review of a
“relevant order”.
Section 163A (4)(c) defines a “relevant
order” to be “an order that conditions be imposed on the
registration in a health profession”.
Tribunal’s powers on review relevant to this application are found in
s163B (1) (a) and (d) and s163B (5) which provides
as follows:
(1) The appropriate review body must conduct an inquiry into an application
for review and may then do any of the following--
(a) dismiss the application;
.................
(d) make an order altering or removing the conditions to which the person's
registration is subject, including by imposing new conditions;
..................
(5) The order on a review under this section may also provide that the order
is not to be reviewed under this Division until after
a specified time.
Tribunal’s task in conducting the inquiry for review of the earlier order
is found in s 163C. That section provides:
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order, or any
findings made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into account, the
review must take into account any complaint made or notified
to a Council or a
National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about the person,
whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the making of the
order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the complaint was
referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was taken on the
made in the context of a practitioner seeking re-registration, and while found
in a dissenting judgment, the remarks of Kirby
P (as his Honour then was) in
Peter Cecil Harcourt Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
apposite to this application. His Honour explained:
There is no
public interest in denying forever the chance of redemption and rehabilitation
to former practitioners. On the contrary,
the public is better served if, in
appropriate cases, those who have offended, once they have affirmatively proved
reform, are afforded
a second chance ....
In Re Jason Martin,
another case involving an application for
re-registration,
the Medical Tribunal pointed out it is not “a
question of what an applicant has suffered in the past. It is a question of his
[her] worthiness and his [her] reliability for the future”. That Tribunal
noted the difficulty associated with predicting
how a practitioner will
behaviour in the future and remarked that “the decision in the particular
case is to a greater or lesser
extent dependant upon the Tribunal’s
assessment of the applicant”. The Tribunal explained “in making
that assessment
[the tribunal] may “draw inferences from what has happened
in the past and in particular, what led to his [her] being removed
in all applications in which the Tribunal in NSW is involved under the National
Law the guiding principle and object in s3A applies.
That section provides as
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the
protection of the health and safety of the public must be the paramount
consideration.
The evidence
we have earlier noted, the applicant’s letter to Dr Margaret Cooke dated
27 November 2012 was before the Tribunal. Additionally,
the applicant relied on
a written statement which she swore to be true and correct, her curriculum
vitae, a letter dated 11 March
2013 from Mr Bruce Dennett, formerly the CEO of
the Lake Macquarie Hospital and now CEO of the Maitland Private Hospital,
with a statement correcting some factual inaccuracies in his letter.
She also relied on statements by her father and husband.
applicant further relied, by way of expert evidence, on a report of Dr Russell
Hinton, (“Dr Hinton”) General Adult
and Forensic
Psychiatrist.
of the persons who provided references or statements, or Dr Hinton, were
required for cross-examination.
applicant gave some oral evidence, and was briefly cross-examined by counsel for
the HCCC. She answered questions posed to her
by the Tribunal.
the request of the HCCC the applicant provided to it, and to the Tribunal,
documents supplied to the Council following the imposition
of conditions by the
second Tribunal.
(i) the applicant’s letter 27 November
2012 and her statement
her letter to Dr Cooke the applicant explained “I have not had any further
incident related to this problem for the last
eight years”. The applicant
then set out some details of her life circumstance since 2007. These have
already been summarised
by us under the heading “Background”. The
applicant said “I will admit that I wobbled badly after the death of
son, I was very distressed, but my husband and I have been able to hold onto
each other”. She went on to explain:
I believe I am very good
at my job, I enjoy scrubbing, and although reinstating my S4 and S8 status does
not reflect personally on
my position, (as a Scrub sister the majority of
medications I dispense is local anaesthetic and antibiotics) it would mean a
deal to me emotionally, as well as my pride. I have worked very hard to
overcome my shortcomings and have gained the respect of
the surgeons I work
with, and am considered a senior scrub sister within my place of employment. I
request that my conditions be
removed, so that I can continue my career without
her statement the applicant at [9] conceded between September and November 2004
she had self-administered Dilaudid whilst at work.
The applicant went on to
explain at [16] that she had “complied with the conditions ordered”.
Further, in referring
to condition 1, the applicant said at [17] “I have
not carried the drug keys and have not handled s4 or s8 drugs since November
2007, in excess of 5 years”. She thereafter set out details of her
compliance with the remaining conditions imposed by the
recording her circumstances in 2004 at [35] the applicant explained as follows:
The lows I have experienced since the Dilaudid incident have been
nothing compared with the death of our son. However, with the support
husband and family I have managed to maintain my resolve and have not succumbed
to my past behaviour. The thought of “using”
drugs does not cross
my mind. I admit to making a terrible decision that affected not only myself
but the profession by showing
poor professional conduct and the faith placed in
me as a registered nurse.
(ii) The applicant’s oral evidence in chief, during her cross
examination and in response to questions posed by the
Tribunal had the benefit of observing the applicant give some brief oral
evidence. A number of questions were directed to the
applicant by the
Chairperson, including questions about her admission to hospital when she
suffered pancreatitis shortly prior to
her marriage and was sent home with
Endone and Oxycontin which her husband Mr Peter Coe (“Mr Coe”)
asserted she did not
take, but threw away.
Tribunal found the applicant’s response to questions posed to her was
candid. We found her to be a witness of truth, and
we accepted her evidence
both written and oral in its entirety.
(iii) The applicant’s referees including the reference and statement
of Mr Dennett
applicant’s father, Mr J J McGrath provided a letter (undated) addressed
to the Chairperson of the Tribunal. He explained
that his daughter is now in a
loving marriage, and referred to her stamina in dealing with the adverse events
in her life in the
last few years. He concluded his reference by submitting
“I strongly believe she has earned the right to have her rights and
responsibilities restored”.
Mr Coe, provided a detailed letter in support of his wife. He set out the
details of the applicant’s first pregnancy and those
of the tragic death
of their baby, James. He poignantly explained “To lose a child and nearly
lose your own life is the most
traumatic experience any one could have and it
certainly affected us both”.
in his letter Mr Coe asserted that the applicant “had to put up with sly
innuendo about her past intercessions [semble
indiscretions]. She has even had
colleagues say that she lost our little boy because of what she had done in the
past. I am very
proud of the dignity that she has shown in trying to ignore
these hurtful comments.”
Coe submitted that his wife had not relapsed in any way, that she knew
“what she has done in the past was wrong and admitted
concluded his letter stating “I truly believe that no matter the
circumstances [the applicant] now has the
tools and support to cope with any
situation she finds herself in”.
Dennett, in his letter dated 11 March 2013, explained that he first met the
applicant when she applied for a position at Lake Macquarie
Private Hospital
which she commenced in February 2006. He maintained a professional role with
the applicant until he left the hospital
in June 2012. He opined
have always found RN Coe to be professional, competent and pleasant. RN
Coe’s behaviour and performance at work was of the
standard expected of
any RN and I never had any reason to believe she might have been in breach of
the conditions of her registration.
There were no occasions that caused me to
suspect RN Coe might have experienced a relapse.
Dennett, after referring to his knowledge of the Tribunal decision and
conditions, which had been provided to him by the applicant,
The degree of honesty and openness displayed by RN Coe at the
start and during her employment while I was at the hospital gave me
in trusting the decision to employ her was justified.
Dennett went on to explain his role in providing reports to the Council
concerning compliance with the conditions imposed by the
second Tribunal. In
his statement Mr Dennett described how he had inadvertently omitted a reference
to S4D in his letter. He also
clarified that he had not read the Complaint
relevant to the second Tribunal decision, but had read the reasons for decision
Tribunal. He explained to the best of his knowledge that the applicant
had complied with the conditions imposed by the second
(iv) the expert report of Dr Hinton
Hinton, whose evidence was unchallenged, provided an expert report dated 6 June
2013. Dr Hinton is a Fellow of the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists. His curriculum vitae discloses his wide experience as a
psychiatrist. He has been in
private practice since January 2011 having
previously been the Staff Specialist in Forensic Psychiatry at the Morisset
Hinton saw the applicant on 31 May 2013 and prepared a report at the request of
the Association. Having set out the history relayed
to him by the applicant,
under the heading “Mental State Examination”, Dr Hinton opined
“There were no cognitive
deficits and [the applicant] presented as someone
who had a good deal of insight into her past problems with substance
dependence”.
He then referred to the applicant’s reporting of the
death of James, its effect on her, and the fact “she feels that
good indicator that she has now beaten her dependency and moved
the heading “Opinion and Recommendations” Dr Hinton
[The applicant] was clearly dependent upon opiates in the
past. By all accounts the last time she used was in 2004 and she has developed
good insight into her problems and ways to avoid relapsing back.
She continues to grieve over the death of her eldest child which I think is
completely understandable given the circumstances. That
being said she seems to
be functioning at a high level.
The question over whether [the applicant] presents a risk beyond that of the
average person of relapsing back to opiates is complex.
I think it is best
summarised as her having an increased risk because of her history
clinical opinion is that I think it would be unlikely given the length of time
from when she last used, her stable family environment,
her maturity and her
level of insight.
Additionally, many of her work colleagues, her employer
and her friends know about her previous problems and would be much more
should she return to any substance abuse and hence it would be very difficult
for [the applicant] to do this undetected for
any significant period of time.
(our emphasis).
earlier noted, at the request of the HCCC, the Association obtained documents
provided to the Council by or on behalf of the applicant.
Amongst the documents
provided are reports prepared by Mr Keith King (“Mr King”). Mr King
is a Drug counsellor whom
the applicant consulted after her 2004 relapse, and
who she continued to consult from time to time, particularly after the death
James. Mr King provided three reports to the former Nursing and Midwifery
Board, (“the former Board”), although it
appears one of his reports
was misplaced.
King’s first report to the former Board referred to seeing the applicant
on 8 April 2008. At that time the applicant was
pregnant with her first child,
James. Mr King recorded that he was able to “fully engage” with the
applicant, and that
“she is obviously not using any illicit
substances”.
a letter dated 12 November 2008 Mr King referred to the applicant’s life
threatening illness, when he noted she was in a
coma for four days and
hospitalised for two weeks, as well as the circumstances surrounding
James’ death. At that time of
his letter he explained he was conducting
grief counselling. He said “I must say it is difficult for the focus to
past mistakes when she is extremely distraught. By the same token I
am always impressed by the lady’s strength of character
resolve”. Although he explained that, at that time, the applicant’s
mental state was such that she would be susceptible
to “returning to past
habits”, she demonstrated “inner strength and determination to hold
fast to the memory of
her lost child”. Mr King concluded his reporting,
noting that the applicant telephoned him from time to time, and said
she will never get over the loss of her child but her marriage
is strong and her desire to redeem herself in the eyes of her peers
paramount importance”.
(v) The findings of the second
consider the findings of the previous Tribunal at [63-67] relevant to our
deliberations. There the Tribunal said:
The Tribunal notes that
the respondent has admitted that she took advantage of the inadequacy of the
drug keeping and recording procedures
at the clinic and took narcotics from the
clinic over a period of three to four months. The Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that
Ms McGrath's conduct in taking the drugs from the clinic and self
administering the drugs represented professional misconduct.
Based on the finding of professional misconduct, the Tribunal considered
whether deregistration was justified, particularly in the
context of the finding
in 2001 of professional misconduct. The Tribunal was satisfied that neither
protection of the public nor confidence
in the profession required the removal
of Ms McGrath's name from the Register given the significant progress she has
made to rehabilitate
herself and avoid further relapse.
Nor was the Tribunal satisfied that a further reprimand would be useful in
the circumstances. The Tribunal accepted that Ms McGrath
significant insight into her problems including her future vulnerability. It
also accepted that she displayed genuine remorse.
The Tribunal was not satisfied that Ms McGrath had shown a lack of candor in
her evidence concerning her drug taking or the treatment
and rehabilitation she
had received for this.
The Tribunal accepted that Ms McGrath has resolved a number of family and
other personal issues and is in a stable and supportive
long-term relationship.
In particular, the Tribunal was impressed by the evidence of the progress made
by Ms McGrath in her professional
work since 2005
The applicant’s submissions
Alexander submitted that the Tribunal should find that the applicant to be an
open and honest witness, and asserted that we could
safely rely on the expert
evidence of Dr Hinton. Thus, it is her position that the Tribunal should be
satisfied that Condition 1
relating to S4D and S8 medications should be
for the HCCC, Ms Bennett, helpfully and cogently explained the role of the HCCC
as a contradictor. She drew our attention
to Dr Hinton’s view that the
applicant’s ongoing vulnerability to relapse was unlikely, and noted Mr
King’s view
of the applicant’s ability to cope with adversity
without drug relapse.
Discussion and Findings
the Tribunal recorded earlier in these reasons, and Dr Hinton very properly
noted, whether or not a health professional such as
the applicant is likely to
re-offend again is often difficult to predict, and the Tribunal’s
assessment in that circumstance
of the applicant’s credit assumes
significant weight in its determination.
we have already indicated, the Tribunal found the applicant to be a truthful
witness. The Tribunal finds that the applicant:
demonstrates
insight into her conduct in 2004;
accepts that her
conduct in 2001 and 2004 was unacceptable for a member of the nursing
profession;
has complied
with all conditions imposed by the second Tribunal;
family support and a changed life-style from that which pertained in 2004; and
is unlikely,
based on the expert evidence of Dr Hinton, which we accept, to relapse
particularly given the period of time since she
misappropriated drugs at the
Hunter Pain Clinic, and the supports she now has in place to deal with life
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied, based on its findings, that it is unlikely
the applicant will relapse in the future and present
a risk to the public.
Accordingly, we find that the applicant has demonstrated it is appropriate that
Condition 1 should be removed
from her registration. We also take this
opportunity to record that, given the applicant’s compliance with
conditions 3, 4,
and 5, we are independently satisfied those conditions too
should be removed.
The parties’ submissions on costs
Alexander initially submitted that, in the event the Tribunal determined the
review application in favour of the applicant, then
the HCCC should pay the
applicant’s costs of and incidental to the proceedings. However, after
hearing submissions made on
behalf of the HCCC by Ms Bennett, Ms Alexander
modified her submission and submitted the appropriate order for the Tribunal to
is one where each party pays their own costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
Bennett provided the Tribunal with extensive and helpful written submissions on
costs. She pointed out that the HCCC “will
have carried out a neutral
role as contradictor, and as such will have assisted the Tribunal in the testing
of evidence put before
it by the applicant”. Ms Bennett very properly
pointed out that it was the applicant’s own conduct which necessitated
imposition of the conditions which are now sought to be reviewed.
support of this submission Ms Bennett referred us to the decision of the Medical
Tribunal of NSW in
Re Richards and the Medical Practice Act NSWMT 1 March
at [59-63]. In that case the Tribunal found an application by the
practitioner for re-instatement to the register analogous to an
applicant in
civil litigation for an extension of time to bring proceedings after expiration
of a limitation period, and where the
applicant is frequently ordered to pay the
costs of the application.
Bennett referred to the principles which have been developed and applied in
costs applications in disciplinary matters, particularly
by the NSW Court of
Appeal. Further, in support of her position that the applicant should pay the
HCCC’s costs, she submitted
that the “proceedings have been
conducted in a proper fashion by the Commission”.
her oral submissions Ms Bennett drew our attention to the fact that Mr
Dennett’s supplementary statement correcting errors
in his original letter
had been produced when the errors were brought to the attention of the
Association by the HCCC, and further
submitted it was an initiative of the HCCC
which resulted in the production of the applicant’s documents held by the
being produced by the Association to the Tribunal. Ms Alexander
acknowledged the correctness of Ms Bennett’s oral
submissions.
Relevant law and legal principles in respect of
costs under the National Law
power of the Tribunal to award costs at the conclusion of an inquiry or the
hearing of an appeal is found in Cl. 13 (2) of Schedule
5D of the National Law.
The power to award costs is a discretionary one.
hearing matters under the National Law have followed well established principles
from earlier cases in disciplinary proceedings
before the courts. They are set
out in a number of leading cases and are summarised comprehensively in the
judgment of Kirby J in
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
as follows:
Statutory costs discretions - general
A number of general remarks may be made about s 69(2) and provisions
common law did not provide for costs although equity from an early date asserted
"the fullest power to order a defeated party
to pay costs". It was by statute
that English law afforded to the common law courts the power to award costs,
culminating in the
Judicature Acts
which reposed a general discretion in
the courts of England to so provide. A point of distinction was drawn between
civil jury trials
and non-jury trials. In the former, costs would follow the
event, unless the court for good cause ordered otherwise. In the latter,
were left to the discretion of the court but under a power to be exercised
judicially by reference only to facts pertinent
to the litigation.
Notwithstanding
the width of the statutory language by which the discretion was conferred on the
trial court, it came to be said in
civil non-jury trials that a successful
party, in the absence of special circumstances, had a reasonable expectation of
an order for costs in its favour unless "for some reason connected
with the case" a different order was specially warranted. Any
departure from
this expectation would require that there should be material upon which the
adverse discretion could be properly exercised.
It could not be exercised by
reference to idiosyncratic notions or to facts and circumstances irrelevant to
the case. Yet, until
the discretion had been exercised and a costs order made
in favour of a successful party, that party had no
to the order of
costs, notwithstanding its success in the litigation.
this background, judicial descriptions of a statutory discretion to award costs
as "absolute and unfettered", "unqualified",
"uncontrolled" or "unconfined"
cannot be taken at face value. Because the discretion is typically conferred
upon a court or tribunal
obliged to act judicially, fetters, confinement and
controls of a sort are provided by the law. Although appellate courts should
avoid the imposition of rigid requirements which would gloss the statute and
narrow the discretion afforded to the donees of the
statutory power, they retain
a function to guide those who are obliged to exercise cost discretions. Such
guidance may be afforded
by referring in general terms to the considerations
which the decision-maker can take into account. Such considerations may be
for the avoidance of arbitrariness and inconsistency in such decisions.
They are not intended to confine the decision-maker to a
rigidly mechanical
approach. Arbitrariness and inconsistency would be potentially unjust and
therefore undesirable. Mechanical
rigidity would amount to an abdication of the
discretion afforded to the decision-maker in large terms.
is because the general purpose of an order for costs in favour of a successful
party is to provide compensation in the form of
a partial indemnity for the
costs incurred that the ordinary principle observed in civil litigation under
the "English rule" (as
contrasted to the "American rule") is that legal costs
will usually be ordered in favour of the successful party. Absent special
statutory provisions, Australian law has followed this English rule. But the
compensatory principle cannot be treated as an absolute
rule. Otherwise, the
discretion conferred in unqualified terms would indeed be shackled and confined.
To permit this would be incompatible
with statutory language expressed in such
terms. Therefore, although there are "rules" or ordinary principles which will
donee of power in the exercise of the discretion, they cannot
extinguish the element of discretion. They must not be allowed to
harden into
rigid or inflexible requirements.
proper approach to the exercise of a statutory discretion may be illuminated by
the particular language in which it is expressed
and the purpose for which it
has been provided. Thus the purpose in
clearly enough, was to
substitute a new and different rule in criminal proceedings for the old rule
governing the payment and receipt
of costs by the Crown. In the present case,
when determining the considerations that might be relevant to the exercise of
the discretion
in question, it would be a mistake, equivalent to that exposed in
to ignore the functions, powers and peculiar procedural
provisions governing the Land and Environment Court in the jurisdiction which
had exercised.
summary, the principles or guidelines in dealing with costs applications
normally in
disciplinary proceedings, as in other civil litigation, costs should follow the
event unless the circumstances of the
case require, in the exercise of
discretion, not to do so (see
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77).
position is frequently referred to as “the usual rule” or
“traditional rule” in respect of costs;
an award of
costs is to compensate, in the form of a partial indemnity, the person in whose
favour it is made not to punish the person
ordered to pay costs;
the onus is
normally on the “losing” or unsuccessful party to establish any
departure from the “usual” rule;
the discretion
to depart from the “usual” rule is unfettered, but must be exercised
judicially (see
Oshlack; Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
generally the
presumption the “usual” rule applies will only be displaced where
there has been some sort of disentitling
conduct on the part of the successful
Oshlack; Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
Discussion and Findings on
an uncritical or superficial view of the outcome of these proceedings it may be
said that the applicant has been wholly successful.
The HCCC has conceded
conditions 3, 4, and 5 should be removed, and the Tribunal is satisfied that
concession is properly made.
The HCCC did not oppose the removing of condition
1, and the Tribunal found it should be removed.
the documents on which the HCCC relied at the hearing were the documents before
the second Tribunal. No new material was
produced by the HCCC, there was minimal
cross-examination of the applicant, and none of her witnesses were required for
cross-examination.
But it would be an error on our part if the Tribunal did not
acknowledge and consider Ms Bennett’s careful and helpful submissions
oral and written, and the HCCC’s role as a neutral contradictor.
was on the basis of success and the “usual” or
“traditional” rule that Ms Alexander initially submitted
should be an order for costs in favour of the applicant.
is no doubt that the proceedings before the second Tribunal, which resulted in
the imposition of conditions, came about because
of the conduct of the
applicant. We also take into account that corrections to Mr Dennett’s
letter, and the material from
the Council came before us because of the HCCC
bringing these matters to the attention of the Association. It was on being
of these matters that Ms Alexander modified, we would say properly, her
submission on costs.
set out above, Ms Bennett drew our attention to the decision of the Medical
Tribunal in
But the facts in that case which governed the
exercise of discretion to award costs are starkly different to the instant case.
practitioner seeking re-registration in
experienced obstetrician and gynaecologist, who initially denied any wrong
doing, but was removed from the register for
professional misconduct involving
serious sexual offences which adversely affected his patient. Here the
applicant conceded the
complaints ultimately found proved by the second
Tribunal. The second Tribunal did not find it was appropriate to remove the
from the register, and she has complied with the conditions
Notwithstanding
the applicant’s compliance with conditions 3, 4 and 5 they remain on the
register as demonstrated by the Confirmation
of Registration Status provided by
AHPRA dated 4 June 2013. Accordingly, we are satisfied that, in a particular
case where an applicant
seeks a review, including seeking orders leading to
re-registration, the approach to costs adopted by the Medical Tribunal in
may well be appropriate. But we do not
consider the approach there adopted is mandatory such that a departure from it
which will constitute
appealable error. To do so would “shackle”
or confine the discretion reposed in the Tribunal. Rather we discern the
Medical Tribunal’s approach in
to constitute a helpful
guideline to be applied in an appropriate case.
turn now to the HCCC’s submission that, because of its position as a
neutral contradictor, costs should be awarded in its
favour. In support of this
submission Ms Bennett drew our attention to the decisions in
Waterman v HCCC
[2011] NSWNMT 31
[2012] NSWNMT 7.
the applicant nurse, who had been removed from the register, was
unsuccessful in her review application. In those circumstances the
ordered she should pay the costs of the HCCC. The Tribunal in its reasoning
noted submissions that were put to it about
the HCCC’s role as
contradictor. The Tribunal recorded at [102] that counsel for the HCCC pointed
out that she had drawn the
Tribunal’s attention to a “number of
significant concerns” about the practitioner and those concerns
look almost uniquely negative”. However, the Tribunal did
not have to decide the costs issue on that basis, rather it found
practitioner applicant for review should pay the HCCC costs because she was
unsuccessful.
also involved
an unsuccessful application by the practitioner for
review. The Tribunal also made an order for costs in favour of the HCCC based
on the definition of costs in
Civil Procedure Act 2005
determining any general principle or guideline in respect of the HCCC having an
entitlement to costs as a neutral contradictor,
this Tribunal can envisage
circumstances where such an order may be appropriate when the Tribunal exercises
the discretion reposed
in it by the statute. But we do not find this is such a
case. The applicant has been successful in her application which was necessary
to correct the register in respect of conditions 3, 4 and 5. We note the HCCC
did not formally concede these conditions should be
removed until during the
hearing. She has also been successful in respect of condition 1.
Significantly, her success in respect
of this condition relied on the expert
report of Dr Hinton whose evidence was not challenged in any respect by the
HCCC. Further,
no new, or contradicting, evidence was put before the Tribunal
by the HCCC, and cross-examination of the applicant was appropriately
these matters up, as we must in the exercise of our discretion, the Tribunal is
satisfied that relevant factors are closely
Alexander’s changed position in respect of costs is, we find, an
appropriate one. It encompasses the technical omissions
applicant’s case drawn to the Association’s attention by the HCCC,
while recognising the applicant’s overall
success. Thus we are satisfied
there is no justification in this case for either party obtaining a costs order
in their favour,
and the appropriate order is that each party pay their own
costs of and incidental to the proceedings.
to s163B(1)(d) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Australian Health Practitioner Agency (“AHPRA”) is requested to
remove Conditions 1, 3, 4 and 5 recorded on the National
Register of Health
Practitioners maintained by AHPRA in conjunction with the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia in respect
of the registration of the practitioner Rachel Coe
(formerly Rachel McGrath).
party shall pay their own costs of and incidental to these proceedings.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chairperson
Ms Janette Curtis
Ms Suellen Moore
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (297 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter