URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v NG [2013] NSWPHT 1 (7 March 2013)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
PETER WING KEUNG NG
MATTER NUMBER: PH06/2010
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
PH076817(NSW); PHA0001585235(National)
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE: COSTS ONLY)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
____________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v NG
[2013] NSWPHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Comp0lainant)
represented by Mr P Ginters of Counsel, instructed by Ms S Connors,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Peter Wing Keung Ng
(Respondent) represented by Mr J
Simpkins of Senior Counsel, with him Mr L Livingston at the Inquiry – Mr L
preparing the written submissions on costs - instructed by Ms W
Blacker, Partner, Gadens Lawyers (Mr R O’Connor, Solicitor,
instructing at
FILE NUMBER: PH06/2010
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy
Chairperson)
Mr David Preswick (Pharmacist
Ms Virginia Bear (Pharmacist Member)
Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
DATE OF DECISION: 7 March 2013 (re costs only)
DATE OF ORDERS: 7 March 2013 (re costs only)
FINDINGS: In HCCC v NG
[2012] NSWPHT 1
the Tribunal found: Professional
misconduct (undisturbed from first Tribunal), circumstances of offences render
Respondent unfit
in public interest to be registered. In
was reprimanded and his registration
cancelled. Respondent not entitled to reapply for registration for a period of
ORDERS (in summary): Costs order in favour of the HCCC
CATCHWORDS: Pharmacy – convictions – unsatisfactory
professional conduct – professional misconduct – unfit
in the public
interest to be registered.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law) - Clause 13 of Schedule 5D.
CASES CITED:
[2010] NSWSC 1220
[2010] NSWPHT 2
[2012] NSWPHT 1
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Ohn v Walton
36 NSWLR 77
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Philipiah
[2012] NSWMT 14;
NSW Medical Board v Dr
(24 June 2009).
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE: COSTS ONLY)
Introduction
Complaint dated 4 March 2009 initially came before a differently constituted
Tribunal (the initial Tribunal). That Tribunal’s
decision (as set out in
was the subject of an appeal to the
Supreme Court of New South Wales (
NSWSC 1220).
The appeal was partially successful and the matter was remitted on a limited
basis to a differently constituted tribunal.
Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court
to determine the question of protective orders
that should flow from the finding
of professional misconduct (Complaint Two) that was the undisturbed finding of
the initial Tribunal.
Although not entirely clear on the face of the record, the
parties agreed that the Supreme Court had left open for this Tribunal
determine Complaint 3. The question of costs, other than those determined by the
Supreme Court, was also left to this Tribunal
to determine. The Short Minutes of
Order of the Supreme Court formed volume 1, exhibit 1 of this Tribunal are
relevant to the decision
set out herein.
Respondent requested that the question of costs be the subject of further
submission only after the Tribunal had made protective
Tribunal made a finding with respect to Complaint 3 and protective orders in
[2012] NSWPHT 1.
This Reasons for Decision deals with the outstanding
issue of costs as far as they were not determined by the Supreme Court.
Relevant Law
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
provides the Tribunal with the general discretion to award costs with
respect to proceedings before it in accordance with Clause
13 of Schedule 5D
which provides:
Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health practitioner
or student concerned, or any other person entitled
to appear (whether as of
right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry or appeal
before the Tribunal to pay costs
to another person as decided by the
(2) When an
order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on application by the person
to whom the costs have been awarded, to
issue a certificate setting out the
terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.
person in whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate in the
District Court, together with an affidavit by the
person as to the amount of the
costs unpaid, and the Registrar of the District Court must enter judgment for
the amount unpaid together
with any fees paid for filing the
certificate.
13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law is for all relevant purposes in the same
terms as the provisions considered by New South
Wales Court of Appeal in
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
The complaint by the Health Care Complaints
Commission was not made out against Dr Ohn. As a result of the Medical Tribunal
to make an order for costs in his favour Dr Ohn appealed. The Court,
(Gleeson CJ, Power JA and Cole JA), held that:
The principles to be applied by the Medical Tribunal in the
exercise of its discretion to award costs under regulation 27 are similar
those applied by a court in similar circumstances, so that costs should follow
the event unless the circumstances of the case
require the exercise of a
discretion not to do so [79B, 81A, 85E].
Gleeson CJ observed that the nature of an order for costs applies
... to civil litigation, summary proceedings and disciplinary proceedings.
This does not mean that the discretionary considerations
relevant to those
proceedings are identical. However, the subject of the discretion, that is, an
order for costs, has the same nature,
and that guides the exercise of the
discretion [79B].
Two things follow:
usual rationale for making a costs order is that it is just and reasonable that
the successful party should be reimbursed for
costs incurred, in the absence of
grounds connected with the charge or the conduct of the proceedings which make
it unjust or unreasonable
that there should be such reimbursement.
test of whether an order for costs should be made against an unsuccessful
plaintiff or complainant is not whether he or she has
done anything to warrant
punishment. It is whether, in the circumstances, the defendant or respondent
should be compensated.
JA observed that "in ordinary circumstances where a complaint against a medical
practitioner has failed, the Tribunal should
make an order for costs in the
practitioner's favour". As a matter of logic it follows that if a complaint is
made out against a
health practitioner then an order in favour of the
complainant should follow.
second reading speech and the explanatory memorandum in relation to the
National Law
does not provide any assistance on this issue.
The Short Minutes
Short Minutes read:
THE COURT ORDERS:
findings of misconduct made by the Second Defendant in its decision dated 29
April 2010 are not disturbed.
disciplinary orders made by the Second Defendant in its decision dated 29 April
2010 are quashed.
amended complaint is remitted to the Second Defendant for determination of the
appropriate disciplinary orders based upon its
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency is to re-instate the
registration of the Plaintiff by 5 November 2010, pending
determination of the
remitted amended complaint.
Plaintiff is to comply with the Form of Undertaking executed by him on 27
October 2010, which is annexed and marked A, pending
determination of the
remitted amended complaint.
Second Defendant to which the amended complaint is remitted is to be differently
constituted to that whose orders have been quashed.
First Defendant is to pay the Plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings in this
Plaintiff is to pay the First Defendant’s costs of the proceedings before
the Second Defendant that related to the determination
of the findings of
misconduct.
of the proceeding before the Second Defendant that related to the determination
of the disciplinary orders to be costs in the
Submissions
parties made written submissions with respect to this matter. The HCCC also made
a submission in reply. The entireties of these
submissions are reproduced as
annexures hereto.
Tribunal notes that both parties consented to this matter being dealt with by
the Tribunal ‘on the papers’. The Tribunal
has done so and now
publishes its Reasons.
Tribunal accepts the entirety of the HCCC’s Written Submissions regarding
Costs (Annexure A hereto).
Tribunal makes a number of observations with respect to the Respondent’s
Submissions on Costs (Annexure B hereto). With
respect to paragraph 4, while the
Tribunal accepts that the statutory power available to this Tribunal
(undisturbed by the Orders
made in the Supreme Court) is a discretionary power,
the Tribunal further accepts that this power should not be exercised by way
punishment of an unsuccessful party. It is curious that the Respondent relies
upon the decision in
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
170 CLR 534
with respect to
this proposition given it is clearly stated in
Ohn v Walton
The latter case relates to a jurisdiction aligned to that exercised by
this Tribunal. The former relates to the criminal jurisdiction
and circumstances
where there are conflicting provisions. In any case, the Tribunal accepts that
there is no room for the exercise
of the costs discretion to be a
‘punishment’.
Respondent then makes reference to paragraphs 47 to 53 of the NSW Court of
Appeal decision
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission (No2)
which read as follows:
provision has been set out in full because, lest there be any ambiguity in
sub-cl (1), it is apparent from the remaining provisions
that the Tribunal is to
determine the amount of such costs, as well as the persons by whom and to whom
the amount is to be paid.
Neither party addressed the quantum of costs in
submissions or evidence before this Court. Nor would it necessarily be
appropriate
for this Court to make such an assessment itself. If this Court is
to exercise a power under the National Law, the relevant provision
virtually identical terms to cl 13, except that the final words in subcl (1)
read "to another person as decided by the Tribunal":
Sch 5D, cl 13. There does
not appear to have been a change in meaning.
a time when the power to award costs was to be found in the Medical Practice
Regulation, reg 27(1), this Court held that, in accordance
with general
principles, costs should follow the event: Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
In that case, the Tribunal
having failed to award costs in favour of the successful practitioner, the
matter was remitted to the
Tribunal for it to determine the costs to be paid by
the complainant to the practitioner: at 85G (Cole JA, Gleeson CJ agreeing with
the proposed orders).
factors militate against the Commission recovering all its costs in the present
case. First, the Commission was successful in
obtaining findings against the
practitioner in respect of unsatisfactory professional conduct, but not
professional misconduct. It
is not correct to apportion costs equally between
the dismissal of the complaint with respect to professional misconduct and the
upholding of the other complaint. The factual basis for each complaint was the
same: the proper characterisation of the legal consequences
of the findings of
fact was a discrete issue, involving a relatively small proportion of the time
at the hearing and submissions
and on which the Commission was partly successful
and partly unsuccessful. Any reduction in costs on account of the part on which
it was unsuccessful would be relatively minor.
the Commission failed to establish each of the particulars pleaded. This aspect
is not to be assessed by a numerical calculation
of the number of paragraphs of
the particulars which were upheld and the number which were rejected. Nor would
failure to establish
some particulars necessarily result in any diminution in
the costs payable to the Commission. However, where it can be said that
elements of the conduct complained of were not established, it may be
appropriate to reduce the costs to be recovered by
the Commission.
the principal judgment, certain criticisms were made of the manner in which the
complaint had been pleaded: [39]-[45]. Similar
comments had been made as noted
at [43] of the principal judgment, well before the present complaint was
prepared. The Commission
cannot complain that it was not on notice of the need
to revise its practices in this respect. These considerations militate in favour
of there being some reduction in the costs recovered by the Commission, to allow
for aspects of the complaints as to which it was
unsuccessful. Again, no precise
evaluation is possible.
the practitioner alleged that there had been oppressive conduct on the part of
the Commission in the Tribunal. This was a
matter addressed in part in the
principal judgment, the practitioner having complained of procedural unfairness
in the conduct of
the hearing: at [113]-[122]. Otherwise, the practitioner seeks
to rely upon an affidavit of her solicitor setting out certain procedural
taken in the course of preparation for the proceedings, which were said to give
rise to unnecessary expense for the practitioner
in preparing for the hearing.
It is impossible for this Court to assess the claims and counter-claims of the
parties in this respect:
without suggesting that proceedings before the Tribunal
should be unduly interrupted by interlocutory applications, any realistic
attempt to impose a costs penalty on the Commission should have been undertaken
contemporaneously with the conduct complained of.
into account the degree to which the complainant was unsuccessful before the
Tribunal, the appropriate basis for the calculation
of costs in the Tribunal
should be that the practitioner pays 70% of the Commission's costs of the
inquiry. The question of costs
should be remitted to the Tribunal for it to
determine an appropriate amount and provide the relevant certificate.
Tribunal notes the reliance of the Court of Appeal in
and its view that it applies to the costs provisions of the National
The Tribunal notes that in the current matter the HCCC established
all complaints and made refinements to the Particulars of the Complaints
evidence evolved (appropriately in the Tribunal’s view). The Tribunal
also notes there is no discrete area of the Particulars
which the HCCC failed to
establish in this current matter. The Tribunal notes the Respondent details
oppressive conduct on the part
of the HCCC. The Respondent’s submissions
set out details of this conduct later in the submission. As set out below, the
is of the view that there was no oppressive conduct on the part of the
HCCC in this current matter. Further, as in
the Respondent raised
various allegations of procedural unfairness during the course of the Inquiry
and these were contemporaneously
dealt with by the Tribunal. Had these matters
not been determined by the Tribunal in an acceptable manner to the Respondent an
was open to him.
respect to paragraph 5 of the Respondent’s submissions this Tribunal notes
that such a decision is not, in any manner binding
on this Tribunal. Given the
nature of the discretionary statutory power exercised by health disciplinary
tribunals there is nothing
on the face of the decision of
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2012] NSWMT 14 that would provide an
appropriate basis for the financial circumstances, the insurance status or
family circumstances
to be considered matters relevant to the determination of
costs. The Tribunal further notes that the HCCC advised in its Submissions
Reply that this decision is the subject of an appeal. This Tribunal is of the
view that the financial and personal circumstances
of a party are not
appropriate considerations in the exercise of the discretionary power. In any
case, it is an exceptional situation
if the Respondent has not been placed in a
position of financial stress and personal difficulties by virtue of the
proceedings. The
Tribunal accepts the Submissions in Reply made by the HCCC that
the decision in
is difficult to reconcile with
Tribunal adopts the elucidation of the relevant principles as set out in
paragraphs 40 to 44 of
NSW Medical Board v Dr Dinakar
(24 June 2009).
particular the Tribunal agrees with the comments made in
relies upon a number of other authorities) to the effect that while the
discretion to depart from the usual rule may be unfettered,
the Tribunal ought
not exercise its discretion against the successful party arbitrarily,
capriciously, or on no grounds at all. Rather,
it should be exercised
judicially,
‘according to the rules of reasons
and justice .... not according to private opinion... benevolence...or
. The decision continues:
‘Generally the presumption will
only be displaced where there has been some sort of disentitling conduct on the
part of the
successful party’.
respect to the submissions made in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Respondent’s
Submissions the Tribunal rejects the submission
made that the Respondent had
‘degree of practical success in the outcome of the remitted
proceedings’
‘some degree of success’.
no success with respect to the outcome of the principle order made by the
Tribunal – being cancellation of his registration.
Additionally the
Tribunal formally and severely reprimanded the Respondent for his conduct.
setting of a period of time before which the Respondent is entitled to re-apply
must take into consideration the circumstances
of the Respondent at the
particular point in time. The position of the Respondent changed to some degree,
largely due to the intervention
of third parties in compliance with the
Undertaking made by the Respondent to the Supreme Court, between the time the
initial Tribunal
made its determination and the time of the decision of this
Tribunal is of the view that an objective assessment of the Respondent’s
position would be that he did not achieve any success
whatsoever on the remitted
hearing. The Tribunal is of the view that even if it was accepted that there was
‘some degree of success’
enjoyed by the Respondent it was not
significant and cannot be seen as a factor that will be persuasive in the
exercise of the discretionary
power to award costs.
respect to the submissions made in paragraphs 9 to 15 of the Respondent’s
Submissions the Tribunal accepts the Submissions
in Reply made by the HCCC and
The Tribunal
heard the Respondent with respect to his objection to the admission of the
Pharmaceutical Services Unit Report (PSU Report)
at the time it was tendered by
the HCCC. The Tribunal determined to allow the report into evidence, granting an
adjournment to assist
the Respondent. No further application was received by the
Tribunal. If the Respondent was of the view that this caused the Respondent
‘substantially prejudiced’
by the course, the appropriate
remedy was to initiate an appeal at that point. Without revisiting the reasons
for the determination
to allow this document into evidence the Tribunal notes
that a tribunal exercising a protective jurisdiction is primarily charged
protecting the public safety. It was incumbent on the HCCC to place such
material before the Tribunal. Ultimately it is material
such as the PSU Report
that allows a tribunal to gain an appreciation for the current state of a
practitioner’s practice and
thereby be in a position to make appropriate
orders. It would certainly not have been in the public interest for the
information
contained in the PSU Report to have been withheld from the Tribunal
so that the ultimate orders made did not take into consideration
all matters
relevant to the Respondent holding the privilege of registration. It would be a
concern if a registered health practitioner
withheld information relevant to
their suitability to practice from the registration authority (or in this case
from a tribunal).
The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent was present during the PSU inspection and spoke to the
PSU Inspectors.
The Tribunal
further notes that the PSU Report was served by the HCCC promptly after it came
into its possession. There was not, in
the Tribunal’s view, any
disentitling conduct in the nature of a delay caused by the HCCC and certainly
there was nothing that
could be construed as breaching the
guidelines.
The calling of
various witnesses and the additional cross-examination of the Respondent to
address matters raised in the PSU report
was necessitated by the conduct of the
Respondent and various circumstances found to exist in his pharmacy as recorded
Report, not by the report in and of itself.
As for this
Tribunal drawing heavily upon the PSU Report, the Tribunal notes the finding of
professional misconduct was made by the
initial Tribunal and left undisturbed by
the Supreme Court.
With respect to
paragraph 15 of the Respondent’s Submissions the Respondent misunderstands
the role of a tribunal in a protective
professional misconduct is made (leaving aside the finding of unfitness on the
basis of convictions)
the tribunal then needs to determine appropriate orders to
make in all of the circumstances. In particular, the subsequent conduct
Respondent is relevant. Ideally a Respondent has taken steps in the intervening
period to address the defects evidenced by
the conduct particularised.
Alternatively, the conduct of the Respondent may not allow a tribunal to repose
confidence in a Respondent
to comply with conditions imposed upon registration.
These matters are highly relevant to the determination of appropriate
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 17 of the HCCC Submissions in Reply.
respect to the submission made in paragraph 16 of the Respondent’s
Submissions the Tribunal accepts the submissions made
by the HCCC in paragraphs
respect to the submission made in paragraphs 17 to 19 of the Respondent’s
Submissions the Tribunal accepts the submissions
made by the HCCC in paragraphs
21 and 22. The Tribunal notes that some of the changes to the Respondent’s
pharmacy were required
to comply with relevant Regulations. Others were to
comply with the Undertaking made to the Supreme Court. Further costs were
by the Respondent in an attempt to remediate the deficits identified in
his practice. These are not matters that are relevant to
the consideration of
the matter of costs.
respect to the Respondent no longer being entitled to hold ownership of a
pharmacy the Tribunal notes that this is a privilege
rather than a right. Many
health practitioners who have had their registration cancelled have also lost
their ‘practices’.
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions regarding costs and will order that the
Respondent pay the HCCC costs of the Inquiry held
by the current Tribunal and
any other costs not covered by the Order of Adams J. The Tribunal notes the
Short Minutes of Order reproduced
above sets out His Honours orders.
The Tribunal makes the following Orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter
as the Practitioner):
Orders 7, 8 and 9 made in the Short Minutes of Order in the matter of
[2010] NSWSC 1220
, the Tribunal Orders the Practitioner to pay the
costs of the HCCC related to the proceedings in
as agreed or assessed. If the parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted
for an application to apply to have the matter re-listed
before the Tribunal to
determine costs.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Pharmacy
Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales,
6) The Pharmaceutical Services Unit of the NSW
Ministry of Health, and
7) as the Council and Board see fit.
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
David Preswick
___________________
Virginia Bear
___________________
Frances Taylor
Annexure A – Written Submissions of HCCC re Costs
Annexure B –
Written Submissions of Respondent re Costs
Annexure C – Written
Submissions in Reply from the HCCC re Costs
Written Submissions of HCCC re Costs
Introduction
submissions address the question of what costs order ought to be made by the
Tribunal following its decision in
Supreme Court has already made a partial costs order in favour of the
power to award costs
Tribunal’s power to award costs arises from cl 13(1) of Sch 5D of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
13(1) of Sch 5D of the
National Law
is in material similar terms to the
costs provision considered by the Court of Appeal in
Ohn v Walton
It follows that the Tribunal would apply the reasoning in
a complaint against Dr Ohn was not made out. Notwithstanding this
fact, the Medical Tribunal declined to make an order for costs
in favour of Dr
Ohn. Dr Ohn appealed against this decision.
headnote to
records the Court as holding:
The principles
to be applied by the Medical Tribunal in the exercise of its discretion to award
costs under reg 27 are similar to
those applied by a court in similar
circumstances, so that costs should follow the event unless the circumstances of
the case require
the exercise of a discretion not to do so. (79B, 81A,
Gleeson CJ observed that the nature of an order for costs applies
... to civil litigation, summary proceedings and
disciplinary proceedings. This does not mean that the discretionary
considerations
relevant to those proceedings are identical. However, the
subject of the discretion, that is, an order for costs, has the same nature,
that guides the exercise of the discretion.
Two things follow:
usual rationale of making a costs order is that it is just and reasonable that
the successful party should be reimbursed for costs
incurred, in the absence of
grounds connected with the charge or the conduct of the proceedings which make
it unjust or unreasonable
that there should be such reimbursement.
test of whether an order for costs should be made against an unsuccessful
plaintiff or complainant is not whether he or she has
done anything to warrant
punishment. It is whether, in the circumstances, the defendant or respondent
compensated.
JA observed that:
... in ordinary circumstances where a complaint
against a medical practitioner has failed, the Tribunal should make an order for
in the practitioner's
a matter of logic it follows that if a complaint is made out against a health
practitioner (and protective orders made) then an
order in favour of the
complainant should follow.
The exercise of the Tribunal’s
costs discretion
NSW Medical Board v Dr
Medical Tribunal usefully identified principles that will guide the Tribunal in
the exercise of its costs discretion. In summary,
these principles
successful party as a “reasonable expectation” of being awarded
costs against the unsuccessful
dictates that the unsuccessful party typically bears the liability for costs,
unless it is demonstrated that some other order
appropriate.
is for the losing party to establish a basis for any departure from the
are awarded to indemnify (“compensate”) the successful party in
litigation, not by way of punishment of an unsuccessful
the discretion to depart from the “usual rule” is unfettered, the
Tribunal ought not to exercise its discretion
against the successful party
arbitrarily or capriciously, or on no grounds at
the presumption (that a successful party is entitled to its costs) will only be
displaced where there has been some sort
of disentitling conduct on the part of
the successful
Application
the Decision the Tribunal made protective orders that accorded with those sought
by the HCCC.
the circumstances, the HCCC can be regarded as being a “successful
party” that has a “reasonable expectation”
of being awarded
being no disentitling conduct, the proceedings are ones in which the
“usual order” as to costs ought to be made.
Written Submissions of Respondent re Costs
compliance with the directions made by the Tribunal on 9 August 2012, the
respondent ("
") makes the following submissions on costs. These
submissions include submissions made in response to the HCCC's submissions dated
13 September 2012.
There should be no order as to
Ng submits that the appropriate order is as follows:
Save for the
costs which are the subject of order 8 made by Adams J in the Supreme Court of
New South Wales on 15 November
there be no order as to the costs of the proceeding, with the effect that, save
for the costs the subject of his Honour's order,
each party is to bears its and
his own costs of the proceeding.
Principles to be applied in the exercise of the Tribunal's discretion as
Tribunal's power to award costs in respect of the inquiry is conferred by
clause 13 of Schedule 5D to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) No 86a
National Law
power is discretionary. It should not be exercised by way of punishment of an
unsuccessful
exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal may have regard, among other things, to
the outcome of the proceeding and the conduct
of the parties in the prosecution
proceeding.
an appropriate case, a respondent's personal and financial circumstances may be
a relevant discretionary consideration which favours
an order that there be no
order as to
favouring an order that there be no order as to costs
order that each party bear their own costs is appropriate in this case for the
following reasons.
Mr Ng achieved a degree of practical success in the outcome of the remitted
proceeding. The effect of the orders made by the Tribunal
on 9 August 2012 is
to cancel Mr Ng's registration and to prevent him from applying for a review of
such cancellation for a period
of 18 months, together with a formal reprimand.
This represents an improved outcome for Mr Ng when compared with the orders made
by the first Tribunal. The first Tribunal had ordered that Mr Ng's registration
be cancelled and that he not be permitted to seek
review of the cancellation for
a period of 2
Accordingly, the submissions made by the
urging that
it be characterised as being a "successful party" represent, at the very least,
an over-simplification in circumstances
where each party enjoyed some degree of
success in the limited remitter.
Ng could not have achieved partial success in the limited remitter without
continuing to defend the proceedings as he has done.
He should not be required
to bear both the costs incurred by him in achieving that partial success and the
costs of the HCCC.
the scope and duration of the remitted hearing, and the number of issues in
dispute, was increased, and the position of Mr Ng in
preparing for the hearing
was substantially prejudiced, by the late service by the HCCC of significant new
evidence in the form of
the Pharmaceutical Services Unit ("
relating to an audit inspection on 15 April 2011. That report was served on
Mr Ng's solicitors at 3pm on 6 May 2011, being
the Friday immediately prior
to the commencement of the remitted hearing on 9 May 2011 (T 4-4). The PSU
report raised allegations
that were not anticipated by Mr Ng,
location of the key for the dangerous drugs safe;
dangerous drugs safe not being secured to the premises;
inconsistencies
in the dangerous drugs register in relation to two specific prescriptions;
alleged dispensing and supply on non-conforming prescriptions.
to the late service of the PSU report, Mr Ng was placed at a disadvantage
because he had insufficient time to consider such matters
as: (i) whether he
should give any and, if so, what further evidence about the matters raised for
the first time in the PSU report;
(ii) whether further evidence should be
adduced on Mr Ng’s behalf from Mr Ho or Mr Lee; and (iii)
whether Mr Mahoney should
give more detailed evidence in response to the
PSU report.
seeking leave or making out a case for leave, and over Mr Ng's objection, the
HCCC was permitted to rely upon the PSU report.
The late and unexpected service
of the PSU report caused the Tribunal to grant an adjournment until the
following day (10 May 2011)
(T 16), which left Mr Ng with insufficient time to
respond to the report, being less than one business day.
subsequent cross-examination of Mr Ng was focussed almost entirely upon matters
dealt with in the PSU
consequence, Mr Ng was required to address, in cross-examination, evidence only
provided on the last business day before the
hearing and without any case being
made for leave.
its reasons for decision, the Tribunal drew heavily upon the PSU report and the
evidence given by witnesses in relation to matters
addressed in that report for
the purpose of making adverse findings against Mr
report was highly material to the Tribunal's decision that Mr Ng's registration
should be cancelled.
a statutory body representing the Crown or the Executive Government, the HCCC
has an obligation to act as a model
requires adherence to standards of fair dealing in the conduct of litigation,
adherence to “the highest standards”
in dealing with citizens, and
acting fully in accord with the principles of equity and good conscience to be
expected of the
principles applicable to the HCCC, as a model litigant, require it to deal with
matters promptly and not to cause unnecessary
HCCC should not be rewarded by a costs order in its favour where such success as
it has achieved in the outcome of the hearing
was largely due to its reliance
upon a report which was served late, without leave and without warning and which
canvassed matters
going beyond the particulars of the Amended Complaints. This
conduct of the HCCC amounts to disentitling conduct within the meaning
authorities governing the award of costs. In that respect, it is important to
note that disentitling conduct does not necessarily
need to amount to
misconduct, and may simply be any conduct "calculated to occasion unnecessary
the total duration of the proceeding, and the costs borne by Mr Ng, have been
substantially increased, through no fault on the part
of Mr Ng, by reason of the
errors made by the first Tribunal in its reasons for decision, which constituted
a denial of procedural
fairness and an error of
By reason of
those errors, the Supreme Court set aside the protective orders made by the
first Tribunal and remitted the question
of protective orders to the
reconstituted
duplicated effort, delay and costs associated with the remittal were a
consequence of the procedures followed and erroneous
reasoning disclosed by the
first Tribunal. It would be unfair and unreasonable to visit any of the cost
consequences of those errors
upon Mr Ng.
Mr Ng has incurred substantial costs in:
out renovations to his pharmacy, including, as the Tribunal accepted, making and
maintaining significant improvements with
respect to the physical aspects of the
pharmacy and its state of
undertaking the considerable task of restructuring his pharmacy
with the undertaking given by Mr Ng to the Supreme
participation in the business mentor regime, preparation and implementation of a
business plan, a period of supervised
practice, and the employment of additional
the proceeding on the limited remitter.
a consequence of the orders made by the Tribunal cancelling Mr Ng's registration
and stipulating that he not be entitled to apply
for review of that order for a
period of 18 months, Mr Ng will now be forced to sell his pharmacy. That result
follows from the
operation of clause 5(2)(c) of Schedule 5F to the National Law.
That clause relevantly prohibits a pharmacist whose registration
cancelled from having a pecuniary interest in a pharmacy business for a period
of more than 6 months immediately following
the day on which the
cancellation took effect.
a consequence of that prohibition, Mr Ng is presently taking steps to finalise
the sale of his pharmacy. Mr Ng is approaching
the end of his professional
career. He has no training or professional experience other than as a
pharmacist. In circumstances
where Mr Ng has already incurred substantial costs
and is now deprived of the means to earn an income to support his family, it
be unreasonable and punitive for him to be required to pay the costs of
these reasons, the contentions advanced by the HCCC at paragraphs 12 and 13 of
its submissions should not be accepted.
balancing the considerations identified above, and in order to achieve a
reasonable and just result between the parties, the
Tribunal should order that
there be no order as to the costs of the proceedings.
Ng does not seek an opportunity to make oral submissions in relation to costs
and consents to the Tribunal dealing with the matter
on the papers.
Written Submissions in reply of HCCC re Costs
Ng provides four reasons as to why he says that (save as to Order 8 made by
Adams J) the appropriate order is that each party bear
their own costs.
of the four reasons proffered provides a proper basis for the Tribunal not
making the “usual order” as to costs.
HCCC consents to the question of costs being dealt with “on the
v HCCC (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA 182
v HCCC (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA 182
– [53], relied upon by Mr
, takes the
matter no further.
three militating features in
not apply in the present circumstances.
v Philipiah
[2012] NSWMT 14
HCCC v Philipiah
[2012] NSWMT 14 at [62] represents a decision of the
Medical Tribunal in which that Tribunal determined, in the exercise of its
discretion,
that there would be no order as to costs, and appears to have done
so having regard to its view that “the doctor is only just
beginning to
get his life in order”, had “limited means”, had “a wife
and children to support” and
had “no insurance cover in New South
Wales”, the HCCC says that the costs finding in
be treated with considerable circumspection.
it is clear from the Tribunal’s reasons that its costs decision arose in
the specific factual context of that case (“Given
the circumstances
recited above ... [i]n the use of the discretion held by the Tribunal ...
the costs decision in
is difficult to reconcile with the Court
of Appeal’s decision in
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
elucidation of principles in
NSW Medical Board v Dr Dinakar
2009, at [40] – [44].
the Tribunal’s costs decision in
is presently the subject
of appeal to the Court of Appeal.
first reason relied upon by Mr Ng
is not correct for Mr Ng to assert that he “achieved a degree of practical
the remitted proceedings, thus justifying an order other than the “usual
order” as to costs.
Tribunal made an Order cancelling Mr Ng’s registration. Further, it
ordered that Mr Ng is not entitled to apply for a review
of the Tribunal’s
decision cancelling his registration for a period of 18 months from the time of
cancellation.
the remitted proceedings Mr Ng resisted the making of a cancellation order and
invited the Tribunal to make orders that his registration
be subjected to a
continued regime of
conditions.
arguments in this regard were wholly unsuccessful. Not only that, Mr Ng was
“formally and severely” reprimanded
cannot therefore be said that the Tribunal’s Orders represent a degree of
practical success or partial success on Mr Ng’s
second reason relied upon by Mr Ng
asserted disentitling conduct relied upon by Mr Ng does not justify an
“each party bear their own costs” order.
is erroneous to suggest that a costs order other than the “usual
order” ought to be made because of the length of time
that Mr Ng was cross
examined and the subject matter of that cross examination. The length and
subject matter of Mr Ng’s cross
examination reflected the time needed to
test Mr Ng’s contention that he had “changed his ways”.
any event, the service of the report of the 15 April 2011 PSU audit inspection
) does not amount to disentitling conduct. It was served on the
Friday before the remitted hearing date on 9 May 2011. On 9 May
2011 the Report
was received into evidence and Mr Ng was granted additional time to consider his
position. If Mr Ng required further
time it was open to him to make an
application for such time.
submissions of Mr Ng in this regard also wholly ignore the time thrown away by
the conduct of Mr Ng’s own case. In particular:
May 2012 the parties were called before the Tribunal so that directions could be
made and further hearing dates set to conclude
the remitted proceedings. The
Tribunal made directions as to the filing of material and directions listing the
matter for further
hearing dates on 27 and 28 July
Mr Ng’s representatives informed the Tribunal that one of Mr Ng’s
witnesses, Mr Mahony,
available on the listed dates. This led to
the setting of a further hearing date on 11 August
the course of the remitted proceedings Mr Ng’s representatives,
any notice to the HCCC or the Tribunal
, made an application (supported by
detailed written submissions) that the Tribunal recuse itself on the grounds of
apprehended bias.
This unannounced application required the Tribunal to
allocate hearing time to hear the parties’ submissions and rule on the
application. The bias application was not successful.
8 March 2012 a directions hearing was arranged to deal with Mr Ng’s
application to tender further evidence relating to matters
dated the Tribunal reserving its decision. This application was
opposed by the HCCC; with an indication that if the additional material
to be relied upon by Mr Ng was received it would lead to the HCCC placing
further material before the Tribunal. The Tribunal
ultimately acceded to Mr
Ng’s application in this regard required a further date to be allocated
(31 March 2012), requiring the parties to be put
to further expense in terms of
preparing for the hearing on that day and attending on the listed day.
in another case, where a respondent had not contributed to the lengthening of an
inquiry, then
at its very highest
, the purported disentitling conduct
sought to be relied upon by Mr Ng
have otherwise led the Tribunal to
discount the costs order that it would make (i.e. Mr Ng pay 90% of the
HCCC’s costs). However,
having regard to Mr Ng’s conduct (as to
which see above), which itself led to a lengthening of the remitted proceedings,
proper course remains that the Tribunal ought to make the “usual
order” as to costs.
third reason relied upon by Mr Ng
third reason relied upon by Mr Ng may have had some degree of cogency if his
position “improved” as a consequence
of the remitter hearing. It
did not. Indeed, notwithstanding the fact that Mr Ng was provided with a
lengthy period of time to
address his shortcomings he failed to do so and a
cancellation order was again made by the Tribunal. To this extent, Mr
submission that his registered status should continue, subject to
conditions, was rejected by the
any event, this reason relied upon by Mr Ng appears to suggest that the making
of the “usual order” as to costs would
be to impose some form of
punishment on Mr Ng. It would not. As the authorities make clear, costs are
awarded to indemnify (“compensate”)
the successful party, being the
party who has a reasonable expectation of being awarded costs.
fourth reason relied upon by Mr Ng
costs incurred by Mr Ng to comply with Court orders and improve his pharmacy and
pharmacy practice arose as a direct consequence
of the fact that Mr Ng was found
to have engaged in professional misconduct.
the HCCC previously submitted:
recent steps taken by Mr Ng, whilst commendable, were not done for altruistic
reasons. There were essential to his attempts to
demonstrate that he is fit to
remain registered as a pharmacist. To this extent they are
ex post facto
matters. They follow, and are reactive to, the professional misconduct
engaged in by Mr
making of the “usual order” as to costs would not be, as contended
by Mr Ng, “unreasonable and
the successful party to a lengthy and hard fought inquiry the HCCC has a
reasonable expectation of being awarded a favourable costs
order. As is stated
above the making of that order is to (partially) indemnify/compensate the HCCC.
It is not to punish Mr Ng.
HCCC continues to press for the making of the “usual order” as to
costs; having particular regard to the costs orders
earlier made in the Supreme
Court (see especially Orders 8 and
HCCC consents to the question of costs being dealt with “on the
[2012] NSWPHT
The Supreme
Court Costs orders are reproduced on page 12 of the Ng decision.
(1995) 36 NSWLR
24 June 2009, at [40] –
Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [42], and the cases cited
Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [42], and the cases cited
Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [43], and the cases cited
NSW Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [43], and the cases
cited therein.
NSW Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [43], and the cases
cited therein.
NSW Medical Council v Dr Dinakar
, 24 June 2009, at [43], and the cases
cited therein.
See Vol R1,
Exhibit 1. By order 8, his Honour ordered Mr Ng to pay the HCCC's costs of the
proceedings before the first Tribunal
that related to the determination of the
findings of
misconduct.
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
at 542-543 (Mason CJ).
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA
See, for example,
Health Care Complaints Commission v Philipiah
NSWMT 14 at
[2010] NSWPHT 2
submissions on costs dated 13 September 2012 at [12].
example, T51, T119 and T120 in relation to storage of the key; T53 to T55, T72,
T78-T80, T90 in relation to the supply
to Mr Ewart; and T 57 in relation to the
name of the dispensing pharmacist.
[2012] NSWPHT 1
, [64]-[84], [152]-[157], [225]-[233],
[236]-[246], [299], [315], [352], [362], [365]-[386], [409]-[439], [441]-[443],
[451], [454]-[456],
[482]-[483], [493], [503], [507].
Cantarella Pty Ltd v Egg Marketing Board (NSW)
[1973] 2 NSWLR 366
(Mahoney J);
Yong v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(1997) 75 FCR 155
at 166 (Beaumont, Burchett and Goldberg JJ);
Mahenthirarasa v State Rail Authority of New South Wales (No 2)
[2008] NSWCA 201
(Basten JA; Giles JA and Bell JA agreeing).
[1999] FCA 404
(1999) 58 ALD 373
(Spender, Finn and Weinberg JJ);
Logue v Shoalhaven Shire Council
[1979] 1 NSWLR 537
at 558-559 (Mahoney
Mahenthirarasa v State Rail Authority of New South Wales (No 2)
[2008] NSWCA 201
[1955] VR 320
Lolls v Loulatzis
[2008] VSC 35
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8 at
[2010] NSWSC 1220
3 and 6 made by Adams J on 15.11.10: Vol R1, Exhibit
[2012] NSWPHT 1
[2012] NSWPHT 1
Exhibit 1. The text of the respondent's undertaking given to the Supreme Court
on 15.11.10 is reproduced at
[2012] NSWPHT 1
Mr Ng’s submissions,
Ng’s submissions,
Ng’s submissions,
[2012] NSWPHT 1
, Annexure B, p 196, [208] –
[2012] NSWPHT 1
, Annexure C, p
the Tribunal’s directions dated 30 May 2011
of the Tribunal’s directions dated 11 July 2011
of the Tribunal’s directions dated 8 March 2012
[2012] NSWPHT 1
, Annexure B, p 196, [208] – [209].
[2012] NSWPHT 1
, Annexure A, p 149,
Ng’s submissions,
Reproduced in
[2012] NSWPHT 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (506 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter