URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Williams [2020] NSWMHRT 2; (11 May 2020)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO WILLIAMS AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE TRIBUNAL
ON 1 JUNE 2020
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2020] NSWMHRT 2
s 46(1) Review of forensic patients
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Judge Paul Lakatos SC
Dr Rob McMurdo
Psychiatrist
Mr Michael Gerondis
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
Hearing Room 4, Mental Health Review Tribunal
APPLICATION:
Grant of leave of absence;
- Unsupervised
overnight leave
1. Having determined pursuant to
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
that neither the safety of Ms Williams
member of the public would be seriously endangered thereby and having considered
the matters to which
refers, the Tribunal orders the
Unsupervised
Overnight Leave for use up to seven (7) nights to expire in 6 months of the date
of the order;
Williams is to attend personally at [A Unit] twice a week (for the first 3
months) with recommendation that the team conduct drug
screens and breathalyser
when appropriate;
Williams subscribe to an amended Unsupervised Overnight Leave Management Plan
(the original version of which was signed by Ms Williams
on [date]) which allows
[A Unit] staff to conduct home visits “at reasonable times” in place
of “as reasonably
requested”.
2. Otherwise, that the current arrangements for Ms Williams’ care,
treatment and detention as a forensic patient at [A Hospital]
continue to apply
including any previously approved leave.
Judge P I Lakatos
Dated 11 May 2020
1. This is the X review of Ms Williams who is
currently detained in [A Hospital] on an order of the Tribunal dated [date] with
to escorted day leave; supervised day leave with family, to attend [work]
and with NDIS workers; unsupervised day leave for use in
accordance with Dr
A’s Leave Plan dated [date] and unsupervised overnight leave for up to two
(2) nights per week to accommodation
that has been approved by the treating
team, as per Dr A’s Leave Plan dated [date]. Ms Williams is not permitted
to exercise
any leave in the [A] Local Government Area.
2. Ms Williams’ treating team is seeking an extension of the already
approved unsupervised overnight leave for use up to seven
(7) nights per week at
this review.
3. [Details in relation to patient’s index offence.]
REQUIREMENTS
4. This is a review pursuant to
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act”). Under
Tribunal is required to review the case of each forensic patient every six
months. On such a review the Tribunal may make orders
as to the patient’s
continued detention, care or treatment or the patient’s release.
5. The Act has special evidentiary requirements in relation to leave or
release which must be satisfied before the Tribunal can grant
leave or release.
In view of this, the Tribunal requires notice of applications for leave or
release to ensure that the necessary
evidence is available. This process also
enables the Tribunal to provide notice of such applications to the Minister for
the Attorney General, and any registered victims who are entitled to
make submissions concerning any proposed leave or release. A
notice was provided
to the Tribunal prior to this review for an application for extension of the
already approved unsupervised overnight
leave for use up to seven (7) nights per
6. The Tribunal must be satisfied pursuant to section 49 of the Act:
that the safety of the patient or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered if the leave is granted.
7. Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must consider the principles set out in section 40 of
the Act and
Mental Health Act 2007
as well as the following matters under
when determining what order to make:
(a) whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
(b) whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control of the person is necessary for the person’s
protection from serious harm or the protection of others from serious harm,
(c) the continuing condition of the person, including any likely
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects
such deterioration,
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
8. The Tribunal considered the documents listed in the Forensic Patient
Exhibit List dated [date]
annexed to these reasons.
9. The Tribunal also had regard to a submission from a registered victim.
10. Ms Williams attended the hearing and was represented by her lawyer, Mr
Todd Davis of MHAS. Also in attendance were:
Psychiatrist;
Dr B, Psychiatry
Ms C, Clinical
Psychologist;
Ms D, Social
Occupational Therapist;
Ms F, Registered
CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONSIDERATIONS
11. [Details in relation to index offence, and particulars of Ms Williams
clinical presentation and personal history have been redacted
12. Ms Williams has a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and alcohol use
disorder. This is the X review of Ms Williams, she most
recently having been
before the Tribunal on [date] when she was granted unsupervised day leave and
unsupervised overnight leave for
up to two nights per week in accordance with
the leave plan provided by the treating team.
13. By separate Notices of Intent, the treating team and Ms Williams seek an
order for unsupervised overnight leave to be increased
up to 7 nights, which
request is occasioned by the current coronavirus epidemic.
14. The Minister for Mental Health by her counsel Ms J Caldwell, provided
written submissions arguing that
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
does not permit the Tribunal to make an order granting
a forensic patient leave of absence on a continuing and indefinite basis.
alternative, the Minister does not oppose the application for leave of absence
but made submissions as to a number of issues
she considered relevant to the
exercise of that discretion.
15. Ms Seares, the solicitor representing Ms Williams, objected to the
Tribunal considering the Minister’s submissions on the
basis that the
Minister had failed to comply with the Practice Direction of the Tribunal which
required such submissions to be filed
one week before the hearing. In the
present case, they were filed on the day before the hearing. The solicitor
stated that this caused
unfair prejudice to her client in allowing proper
submissions in response to be furnished. Ms Seares was unavailable at the time
the hearing and Mr Davis represented Ms Williams.
16. The Tribunal notes that clause 9 of the Practice Direction requires the
Minister to be notified of any review hearings where leave
or release is to be
considered five weeks before the hearing date. The notification requirements for
urgent hearings are “at
least 2 business days” before the hearing
(clause 10). It should also be noted that the Tribunal may decide that a
from the Practice Directions may be appropriate in the individual
circumstances of a particular case. The Minister was notified of
the fact of the
hearing on [date] and of the precise date, on [six days later].
17. The Tribunal concluded that it should make a decision concerning Ms
Williams on the most informed basis that is possible but recognised
prejudice to Ms Williams’ lawyers of the constrained timeframe.
Accordingly, it was determined that the submissions of
the Minister should be
received and that Ms Seares be accorded the opportunity to reply to those
submissions in writing, prior to
any decision being made. Mr Davis did not
press for the opportunity to make further written submissions.
18. The treating team advised that the Director General granted Ms Williams
leave of absence between [date] and [date], pursuant
Act which empowers leave of absence “in circumstances constituting an
emergency or in other special circumstances
as the Director General thinks
19. It is noted that in support of that application, the treating team
indicated that Ms Williams had responded well to treatment
and demonstrated no
psychotic symptoms. When she is untreated, her illness is characterised by a
delusional ideations, auditory hallucinations
and ideas of reference along with
concurrent periods of major mood episodes. The “good prognostic
factors” were the late
onset of the illness, the presence of mood
symptoms, ongoing good communication with her husband, good response to
treatment and
good insight. The letter summarised the risk management steps as
follows: working X days per week at [work]; travelling in her own
motor vehicle;
residing at her own flat in [place] and ringing [A Unit] daily and visiting
weekly. The application was based on the
risks associated with the coronavirus
epidemic and in particular, on Ms Williams potentially mixing with other
patients as she exercises
her current leave. The team does not feel that the
plan places the patient or the general public at risk.
20. The Tribunal considered the psychiatric report of Dr B and Dr A; the
nursing report of Ms G and Mr H; the social work report of
psychotherapy report of Dr I and the report from Ms J from [work]. The
treating team provided a management plan for the
exercise of unsupervised
overnight leave, which has been signed by Ms Williams. In addition, the Tribunal
considered a letter from
Ms Williams.
MENTAL STATE, INCLUDING THE
LIKELIHOOD OF ANY DETERIORATION IN MENTAL STATE:
21. At her mental state examination, Ms Williams presented as polite,
engaging and responsive. She was found to be free of overt and
covert psychotic
symptoms and was well orientated, attentive and alert. Her insight and judgment
were present and she was found to
be accepting of engagement in ongoing
22. The nursing report confirmed that Ms Williams’ insight and judgment
were good and she showed no evidence of overheard psychotic
symptoms or
perceptual disturbances.
CURRENT RISK ASSESSMENT FOR HARM OR
ENDANGERMENT TO SELF OR OTHERS:
23. The risk assessment undertaken in relation to Ms Williams indicated that
she falls into a group of people at low risk of future
violence. She has a very
limited history of violence or offending behaviour.
24. The risk assessment undertaken by the nursing team also confirmed Ms
Williams’ status as presenting a low risk of future
FUTURE PLANS IN RELATION TO CARE, TREATMENT OR CONTROL OF
THE PERSON:
25. Ms Williams acknowledges that she understands her obligation to comply
with the nine conditions which are listed, including to
engage in work at
[work]; to call [A Unit] each day of the week and to “return to [A Unit]
for weekly review as requested by
the Treating Team” and to abide by
conditions relating to abstinence from alcohol and drugs, non-prescription
medication, submission
to urine drug and alcohol tests as well as a number of
other conditions.
26. In a letter to the Tribunal, Dr A sought an early review for Ms Williams
citing the specific effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
ANY OTHER MATTERS
THAT THE TRIBUNAL CONSIDERS SHOULD BE NOTED ARISING FROM THIS REVIEW:
27. As indicated earlier, the Minister primarily relied upon extensive
written submissions made by her counsel and Ms Seares, solicitor
Williams, also furnished written submissions.
28. The Minister submitted that
(1) of the Act permits the grant
of leave for a specified period. Relying upon the ordinary meaning of the word
it was submitted that the notion involved a specific,
apportioned or fixed length of time. Accordingly, it was impermissible in the
proper exercise of that power that a patient be permitted to be on leave in the
community indefinitely.
29. Furthermore, it was argued that the italicised words of the section
relating to leave “for such period and subject to such
conditions,
, as the Tribunal thinks fit” may qualify the
period as well as the “terms and conditions”, but the better view
that they only qualify the former not the latter. (To the extent that it
matters, the Tribunal notes that the words “if
any” could not
sensibly apply to “the period”, because the section proceeds on the
basis that there will be a grant
of leave and then qualifies that leave by
reference to terms and conditions. This can be illustrated by applying the words
which would make the section read in effect: the Tribunal may make an
order granting leave of absence “for such period... if
30. Ms Williams’ solicitor argued that the Minister’s contention
ignores the use of the word “may”, which
it is submitted, gives the
Tribunal “discretion as to whether or not to make the order for leave,
whether the leave granted
is to be for a period of time, how long the order for
leave will stand (another interpretation of
such period
) and whether to
impose conditions”. It is submitted that the section does not oblige the
Tribunal to impose a time limit on
any grant of leave.
31. In the view of the Tribunal, the reference to “such period”
in the section does require a specification of the length
of time in which the
leave of absence will operate. That appears to be the natural and ordinary
meaning of the words and accordingly,
the Minister’s submission in this
regard, is correct. The submission that the use of the word “may”
a discretion) permits the grant of leave in effect for a period of
time or not, in our opinion, does not conform to the language
of the statute.
Statutory construction dictates that if language is used by the legislative
drafters, it was intended that the language
has some work to do. If the
submission on behalf of Ms Williams is correct, it would have been a simple
matter to have drafted the
provision, specifying that the grant of leave could
be made for a fixed time or an unlimited time.
32. Based on this conclusion, the only legislative requirement imposed on the
Tribunal is to specify the period of time in which leave
of absence is granted
i.e. to place a sunset clause on the execution of the order for leave. That
could be done by specifying a point
of time or by reference to a particular
event occurring e.g. the lessening of restrictions consequent upon the
coronavirus epidemic.
33. It should be noted that counsel for the Minister did not accept that
specification of a particular event as the endpoint, was
permissible. That
appeared to be on the basis that such event may never come to pass. However, and
without needing to decide this
point, an event may be a fixed point i.e. the
death of a person, but nevertheless be a point which is not capable of being
There is a reasonable argument to permit the conclusion that such an
endpoint does conform with a fixed or specified portion of time,
precise endpoint being unknown.
34. The Minister then submitted that it would not be permissible for the
Tribunal to grant such an extensive period of leave that
it would in effect,
amount to the release of a forensic patient under
(1) (b) of the Act
and points to the clear distinction between the notions of leave of absence and
the release of a forensic patient.
It was submitted that an unspecified length
of order or alternatively a lengthy specified order, was tantamount to an order
for conditional
release rather than leave of absence. The submission is
underpinned by reference to the additional safeguards attending the release
forensic patient contained in the Act and as the Tribunal reads the submission
of Ms Seares, no apparent issue is taken with
this particular analysis.
35. However, Ms Seares argued that there is a substantial difference between
the notions of leave and release, most importantly that
the latter term involves
the treating team at hospital relinquishing “all authority over
patient”. It is further argued
that the proposed leave application does
not equate with conditional release given the strictures of the management
36. In the opinion of the Tribunal, the submission on behalf of Ms Williams
to the effect that the unsupervised overnight leave sought
is qualitatively
different to a conditional release order, must be accepted. The conditions of
the leave and the fact that Ms Williams
must regularly report to [A Unit],
emphasise the distinction. It is unarguable that the constraints upon her if the
leave was granted,
would be lessened; but it would not amount to conditional
37. Finally, the Minister submitted in the alternative that the following
matters warranted careful consideration in considering the
proposed increase to
Ms Williams’ unsupervised overnight leave:
[clinical information]
38. The Minister submitted that these matters indicate the possibility that
Ms Williams may overestimate her ability to cope with
unsupervised overnight
leave, her vulnerability to alcohol use remains a constant risk factor, Ms
Williams has the capacity to make
decisions which are against the advice of her
treating team and not in her best interests and finally, that she may not be
her treating team about her personal circumstances.
39. In response, Ms Williams’ solicitor contended that the application
should be granted. She has had no psychotic symptoms
and is fully compliant with
medication and treatment. She has worked diligently on her recovery and has a
good therapeutic alliance
with the treating team. She has and will have
continuing contact with her treating team at [A Unit] and has been tested on
which has been gradually increased as she progresses. Her risk assessment
places her at low risk for future violence. Ms Williams
has agreed to be subject
to an agreed leave plan.
CONSIDERATION
40. The Tribunal accepts the validity of the argument on behalf of the
Minister that any order made under
must be for a specified period.
However, if such an order is warranted pursuant to
(3), it is open
for a grant of leave of absence to be made which expires at a certain fixed time
or in relation to a fixed event.
Therefore it becomes necessary to determine the
merits of the application.
41. It should be noted at the outset that even if the Tribunal granted
ongoing unsupervised overnight leave for seven nights, that
does not equate to
the grant of conditional release. It is accepted that it would accord Ms
Williams substantial freedom and removal
from her current close scrutiny at [A
Unit] (and therefore should be approached with the appropriate caution).
However, the fact
that she would be required to present herself on a weekly
basis to the treating team at [A Unit] and if she breaches that or any
condition, she may be returned to the medium secure unit which will continue to
hold a place for her, mark out the leave of
absence as qualitatively different
to an order for conditional release.
42. On behalf of the treating team, Dr A told the Tribunal at the hearing
that the normal process of extending leave in the case of
a patient such as Ms
Williams, was to do so in a graduated fashion, increasing the length of time in
which unsupervised overnight
leave was to be exercised. That process was
interrupted in the present case by the coronavirus epidemic. He stated that
a real risk for Ms Williams’ recovery if she could exercise no
unsupervised overnight leave at all (which was the likely outcome
enforcing the COVID 19 requirements at [A Unit]).
43. Ms Williams otherwise presented no risk factors in recent times and was
settled. The treating team expressed no concerns relating
to Ms Williams’
cooperating with rules and regulations. She has been engaging with the drug and
alcohol program on the unit.
44. The Tribunal sought the submissions of the parties about whether it could
properly take into account the prejudicial effect upon
Ms Williams and her
recovery, if leave was not granted. Counsel for the Minister submitted that it
was a relevant consideration along
with the other matters which have been
raised. Ms Caldwell reemphasised that the Minister was not objecting to leave
but limited
her role to raising relevant considerations.
45. Solicitor for Ms Williams, Mr Davis submitted that Ms Williams had
progressed very well and presented no appreciable risks to
her own safety or
that of any other member of the community. He emphasised that the views of the
treating team were overwhelmingly
positive i.e. in short the benefit for Ms
Williams’ recovery, was not impacted in any significant way by the remote
risks which
may be present.
46. The Tribunal acknowledges the significant assistance provided by Ms
Caldwell on behalf of the Minister and Ms Seares (as well
as Mr Davis at the
hearing) on behalf of Ms Williams. The case presented unprecedented problems and
matters of some complexity. However,
the Tribunal concluded that given the
overwhelmingly positive progress and predicted behaviour of Ms Williams, and
particularly the
low level of risk to herself and to others which the extended
leave might occasion, the order for seven nights unsupervised overnight
should be granted.
47. However, it was considered appropriate to add a number of further
measures, to ensure that Ms Williams retains a degree of the
necessary structure
for her continued recovery. Those measures were particularly directed to
ensuring that Ms Williams is closely
monitored in relation to any drug and
alcohol intake, which as has been pointed out, is a known and serious risk
factor for the decompensation
of her mental state and behaviour.
48. Accordingly, the Tribunal made the following additional
order for 7 nights unsupervised overnight leave to expire in 6 months of the
date of the order;
Williams is to attend personally at [A Unit] twice a week (for the first 3
months) with recommendation that the team conduct drug
screens and breathalyser
when appropriate;
Ms Williams subscribe to an amended Unsupervised Overnight Leave Management Plan
(the original version of which was signed by
Ms Williams on [date]) which allows
[A Unit] staff to conduct home visits “at reasonable times” in place
reasonably requested”.
49. Dr A on behalf of the treating team, undertook to have the amended
Management Plan signed by Ms Williams. The Tribunal determined
the case of Ms Williams in six months.
Dated 11 May 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (386 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter