URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Robs Extreme Construction Pty Ltd v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (icare) [2025] NSWPICPD 67; (24 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Robs Extreme Construction Pty Ltd v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2025] NSWPICPD 67
Robs Extreme Construction Pty Ltd
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (icare)
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Hassan Saleh
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W7429/23
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
24 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appeal is dismissed.
Certificate of Determination dated 14 February 2025 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – the onus of proof in applications pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
– application of
Raniere Holdings Pty Ltd v Daley
[2005] NSWCA 121
66 NSWLR 594
Granny Flats v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2023] NSWPICPD 69
appeals pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
application of
State of New South Wales v
[2025] NSWCA 157
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129
Eppinga v Kalil
[2023] NSWCA 287
May v Costaras
[2025] NSWCA 178
; credit finding where witness gave deliberately untrue evidence
Malco Engineering Pty Ltd v Ferreira
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 117
appealable error should be material –
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty
[2002] HCA 22
209 CLR 478
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer
Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
, 419, quoted in
Trazivuk v Motor
Accidents Authority of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 287
; weight of evidence
– notes of treating medical practitioners – application of
Container Terminals Australia Ltd v Huseyin
[2008] NSWCA 320
South Wales Police Force v Winter
[2011] NSWCA 330
[2009] NSWCA 227
ET-China.com International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
[2021] NSWCA 24
388 ALR 128
J & E Vella Pty Ltd v Hobson
[2023] NSWCA 234
Paric v John Holland Constructions Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
59 ALJR 844
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr M Robinson, counsel
Trump Lawyers
First Respondent:
Mr S Harris, solicitor
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
Second respondent:
Mr L Morgan, counsel
Martin Bell & Co
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Robs Extreme Construction Pty Ltd v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2025] NSWPIC 47
Mr G Whiffin
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
14 February 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Saleh (the second respondent/worker/Mr Saleh) was employed by Robs Extreme
Construction Pty Ltd (the appellant/employer) as
a labourer. The employer
concedes the issue of ‘worker’, and concedes the occurrence of
injury on 18 November 2020 involving
the right foot/ankle, but does not concede
injury to multiple other body parts that are
The employer concedes it
did not, at the date of injury, have a policy of insurance in force in respect
of its liabilities pursuant
to the workers compensation legislation. Mr
Saleh’s claim for workers compensation in respect of the injury was met by
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (the first respondent/Nominal Insurer).
The Nominal Insurer issued a notice pursuant to
Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act), requiring reimbursement by the
employer of the sum of $91,724.88 which it had paid to Mr Saleh. In these
proceedings
the employer seeks determination of its liability in respect of that
reimbursement, pursuant to s 145(3) of the 1987 Act.
application was heard by Member Whiffin. The hearing proceeded over three days,
on 19 March 2024, 21 May 2024 and 22 July 2024.
Evidence was taken from Mr
Saleh, Mr Sader (the principal of the employer) and Mr Baccouni (Mr
Sader’s brother-in-law, who
worked in the same business). Mr Gaitanis,
counsel, appeared for the employer, Mr Harris, solicitor, appeared for the
Nominal Insurer
and Mr Morgan, counsel, appeared for Mr Saleh. The Nominal
Insurer elected not to provide written submissions. Written submissions
lodged by the other parties.
Commission issued a Certificate of Determination dated 14 February 2025,
accompanied by 72 pages of
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
parties agreed the issues in dispute were:
(a) whether on 18 November 2020, in addition to injury to the right ankle (which
was conceded) Mr Saleh also injured his right knee,
right foot, right lower
extremity, right hip, groin, lower back, lumbar spine with radiculopathy, middle
back, thoracic spine with
radiculopathy, right shoulder and right upper
extremity, as well as anxiety and depression;
(b) what is the correct calculation of Mr Saleh’s ‘pre-injury
average weekly earnings’ (PIAWE), said by the employer
to be $450 per
week, and alleged by Mr Saleh to be $808.50 per week, and
(c) what was Mr Saleh’s ‘current work capacity’ between 3
March 2021 and 15 August 2023 in relation to the right
ankle injury, as
well as any other injuries found to have been sustained on 18 November
Member noted he granted leave for cross-examination of Mr Saleh, Mr Sader and
Mr Baccouni. The Member said there were inconsistencies
in the statement
evidence and he considered cross-examination would assist him in understanding
the evidence.
Member summarised the evidence contained in Mr Saleh’s statements dated
8 December 2022, 14 December 2023 and 12 March 2024.
He was introduced to
Mr Sader by a family friend. Mr Saleh said he worked five days per week,
typically 6.30 am to sometime from
3.30 to 5.30 pm. He was usually paid $1,250
per week. He did not work for anybody else, he was paid cash. He usually drove
Baccouni’s house, Mr Baccouni would drive him to Mr Sader’s
house, and Mr Sader would drive them all to the relevant
job site. Mr Saleh
identified five job sites, of which he had photographs, at Bangor, Tempe,
Queenscliff, Erskineville and
He said he was injured
at the Erskineville site. A bathroom was being demolished. He was required to
carry the rubbish from demolished
gyprock walls, which still had tiles attached,
downstairs to a carpark, where he threw the demolished pieces of wall onto a
He was carrying multiple boards with tiles attached, which were
cumbersome. One of these boards slipped and struck his right knee
and ankle; he
fell on the stairs and the remaining sheets in his hands fell on top of him. He
said there was a blow to the right
shoulder, and injury to the low and middle
back, groin, right hip, right knee and right ankle. He also jarred his
Saleh said he called out, following which Mr Sader and Mr Baccouni arrived,
removed the gyprock boards from him, wrapped his right
ankle with a shirt to
stem the bleeding and carried him to Mr Sader’s truck. Mr Sader drove him
to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
and helped him in; Mr Saleh said that Mr Sader
did “all the talking” at the hospital. Mr Saleh underwent surgery to
right ankle and was an inpatient for four days. The reasons record Mr Saleh
was “adamant that ‘[he] did not say [he]
was not otherwise
injured’.” He said he also injured his right groin, right knee,
right hip, lower back, middle back,
neck and right shoulder. The reasons record
Mr Saleh first saw Dr Sarian on 27 January 2021 and complained of other
injuries, additional
to that to the right ankle. Mr Saleh stated he saw
Mr Sader on 8 March 2021 and gave him a certificate of capacity from Dr
dated 3 March 2021, which said he was unfit for
Saleh’s second statement took issue with statements that had been provided
by Mr Sader and Mr Baccouni. Mr Saleh maintained
that he worked for
the employer five days per week (Mr Sader and Mr Baccouni stated shorter
periods). Mr Saleh said he was paid $250
per day (rather than $150 as stated by
Mr Sader). Mr Saleh also referred to other symptoms involving the right
elbow, left knee,
left shoulder, right hip, fractured ribs, right groin and
calf, right scapular, fingers and anxiety. Mr Saleh’s third statement
included his description of his examination with Dr Allen, an appointment
arranged by the employer in connection with his
Member summarised two statements given by Mr Sader. In the first, dated 25 May
2021, Mr Sader said he did not employ workers,
but “hires workers when
needed on a subcontract basis”. He described the worker as “just
labour hire”, who
“worked only one or two days a week when
needed”. He said he started Mr Saleh on $150 per day, and Mr Saleh said he
happy with that. Mr Saleh was paid cash and there were no records. Mr Sader
said he asked Mr Saleh for invoices but these were not
supplied. There was no
written contract. There was no record of the days Mr Saleh worked, it was
“around ten days all up”.
Mr Sader said Mr Saleh “was lucky to
work fifteen (15) hours per week”. Mr Sader said the accident was at the
Erskineville
site. Mr Sader stated he was “sitting in the courtyard area
and [he] was on the phone. Hassan Saleh and Hanna Baccouni were
rubbish downstairs”. Mr Sader said Mr Saleh was “walking with one or
two bits or villa board with tiles on
them”. He stated, “a piece of
villa board broke off and it fell towards the ground, [Mr Saleh] obviously using
his reflexes
tried to catch it with his foot and it cut his right foot”.
Mr Sader said there were no injuries other than that to the right
foot. He said
the pieces of villa board “weighed no more than 5 to 10 kg, and the piece
of broken ceramic tile that struck
his foot was ‘no bigger than half a
dinner plate’”. Mr Sader described Mr Saleh’s description of
the accident
as “a complete
Member also summarised Mr Sader’s second statement dated 15 December 2023.
Mr Sader said Mr Saleh, when injured, was carrying
gyprock boards, rather
than villa board. Mr Sader conceded there may have been weeks when Mr Saleh
worked four days, but not five.
He said the gyprock boards being carried at the
time of the accident would not have weighed 40 kilograms, it would be
“physically
impossible”. Mr Sader said the questions asked by the
medical staff at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital were answered by Mr Saleh,
“alert, conscious and aware”. Mr Sader said injury to the right
ankle was the only injury Mr Saleh complained
of at the hospital, while Mr Sader
was with him. Mr Sader said he was sitting on a concrete ledge taking a
telephone call when Mr
Saleh was injured and he could clearly see where the
accident occurred. Mr Sader referred to two photographs which he included in
statement. The Member said his impression was that, from where Mr Sader was
seated, there would have been a clear view of the
place marked as where the
accident occurred. There was also a photograph of the stairs that led from the
courtyard to the carpark.
His impression was that the stairs were not unusually
steep. There were nine steps leading to a reasonably sized landing, then another
six steps to a larger landing, then another two steps to the
Member summarised the statement of Mr Baccouni (Mr Sader’s brother-in-law)
dated 25 May 2021. Mr Baccouni performed labouring
duties for the employer
for which he received $20 to $30 per hour. Mr Baccouni said Mr Saleh worked
Mr Sader over four or five weeks. Mr Baccouni said
Mr Saleh left the bathroom that was being renovated “carrying a small
of villa board which had tiles attached”. He said Mr Saleh
dropped the villa board on his right foot, which he used to try
falling. It would have weighed about six kilograms. He said there were no other
visible injuries and Mr Saleh did not
complain of other injuries. Mr
Baccouni said Mr Saleh walked to Mr Sader’s truck, to be driven to
hospital. Mr Baccouni denied
Mr Saleh was going down the stairs when he was
injured and denied that villaboards fell on Mr
Member, in his reasons at [64] to [70], briefly summarised the contents of
statements from Ms Turkmen, a mutual acquaintance of
Mr Sader and Mr Saleh. Ms
Turkmen said she introduced the two men and Mr Saleh was informed Mr Sader had
work available. Ms Turkmen
also described visiting Mr Saleh after his
accident and being told he had sustained a major cut to his right foot (she did
not mention
other injuries). The Member referred to a statement from Ms Hanna, a
solicitor employed by those who acted for Mr Saleh, dealing
with Dr Sarian
and the production of documents. The Member also referred to a statement from Mr
Saleh’s mother that confirmed
his statement regarding his appointment with
Member referred to “[o]ther factual evidence”. This included various
text messages. The Member summarised the contents
of Mr Saleh’s
compensation claim form dated 20 March 2021. The description of the
accident recounted that the gyprock boards
that slipped struck Mr Saleh’s
right knee and then his right ankle. It described the remaining sheets falling
on Mr Saleh and
injuring his low back, middle back, groin, right hip and
right knee and ankle, with a severe gash to the right ankle. The Member
the claim form denied any other injury, condition or claim relating to the
current one. The claim form stated that Mr Saleh
worked full-time for the
employer and was paid cash by Mr Sader for his work. It stated Mr Saleh
worked 45 hours per week for which
he was paid $1,250 per week net. The Member
referred to Mr Saleh’s taxation returns. The “only relevant
for the financial year 2021, which showed earnings from the
employer of $9,250. The given reason for the amended return was that
client forgot to report one salary income that was not reported by employer to
ATO”. The Member also referred to
an ASIC search that showed a person with
the same name as Mr Saleh holding an Australian Business Number (ABN). The
Member said he
accepted this person was not the
Member summarised a medicolegal report from Dr Bodel, an orthopaedic surgeon
qualified by the worker’s solicitors, dated
Dr Bodel concluded Mr
Saleh “suffered a serious injury principally to his right foot and ankle
but also to the neck and the
back, the shoulders and hips and knees as a result
of the incident that occurred at work on 18 November 2020”. The
doctor described
Mr Saleh’s prospects of returning to any form of paid
work as “very poor”.
Member summarised a medicolegal report from Dr Millons dated 29 September
qualified by the Nominal
Insurer. Dr Millons considered Mr Saleh to be unfit for any work while awaiting
treatment, and only ever
likely to be “suited to work of a light
semi-sedentary nature now in an office-based environment”. He was
“permanently
unfit for work as a
Member summarised a report of Dr Allen, an orthopaedic surgeon qualified by the
employer, dated 30 January 2024.
Dr Allen described Mr Saleh as a “hostile attendee” who
“cooperated poorly”. Dr Allen said his examination
“complicated by voluntary restriction in motion and poor
cooperation”. The doctor referred to the absence of any
complaint of injury, other than to the right ankle, in the records of the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital where Mr Saleh was
admitted after his accident. The
doctor said there was “insufficient objective evidence” to confirm
any injuries other
than that to the right ankle, on 18 November 2020. The doctor
considered the right ankle injury would have prevented Mr Saleh from
working for two to six weeks, after which he could have resumed full labouring
duties. He said there was no incapacity for employment
as a consequence of the
ankle injury.
Member turned to the reports from Mr Saleh’s treating doctors. He referred
to Dr Sarian, the general practitioner who Mr
Saleh consulted after the
accident, on 27 January 2021.
Dr Sarian referred Mr Saleh to multiple specialists. The Member said that
Dr Sarian consistently described Mr Saleh’s injuries,
in his letters of
referral, as “traumatic injuries to right anterior ankle + lacerations to
tibialis anterior and injuries
to right knee + right hip joint + right shoulder
and to lumbar and cervical
referred to Dr Popoff, who treated Mr Saleh from 20 September 2021. Dr Popoff on
that date recorded:
“[Mr Saleh] injured his right shoulder,
ankle, knee, hip and back in an incident on 18/11/2020. He was carrying gyprock
with tile applied to it down some stairs. A sheet of the tiles came
adrift, struck his ankle, lacerating it. He then fell backward
heavily with the
sheets on top of him.
Regarding his right shoulder, it was immediately painful and has been painful
MRI scan of the right shoulder revealed a labral tear. Dr Popoff performed
arthroscopic stabilisation of the right shoulder on
Member referred to Mr Saleh’s treatment with Dr Rosenberg, who he first
saw on 23 September 2021, in connection with his
back. His history was
consistent with that recorded by Dr Popoff. Dr Rosenberg referred to the
radiology as demonstrating “annular
tears at L4-5 and L5-S1”. Dr
Rosenberg said the L4/5 disc was symptomatic and it was “reasonable to
assume he has injured
it in the manner described”. Dr Rosenberg did not
then see Mr Saleh again until 1 August 2023, when he recorded Mr Saleh
worse with respect to his back”. On 31 October 2023
Dr Rosenberg reported that an MRI scan revealed protrusion and annular
at L4-5 and “very slight” protrusion and annular tear at
Member referred to treatment with Dr Della Torre, another orthopaedic surgeon
who Mr Saleh first saw on 5 October 2021. The doctor
recorded a history of
“He reports carrying 40-50kg of Gyprock boards with
tiles down steps where he hit his knee and ankle and fell backwards. The
and tile sheets fell on his leg sustaining a complex laceration to anterior
right lower leg, which resulted in an 80% laceration
of tibialis anterior tendon
which was repaired at Royal Prince Alfred
Della Torre saw Mr Saleh again on 30 November 2021, when he recommended
non-operative treatment.
Member referred to Dr Zicat, who reported on 28 July 2023 and recorded the
following history of injury:
“He had injuries predominantly to
his right side, after a load of gyprock he was carrying landed on his leg and he
backwards. He did have a laceration of his right leg including to his
tibialis anterior tendon, and this was treated with repair
at Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital. Since then, he has had ongoing difficulty with pain in his
right shoulder, back, right hip, right
knee and ankle. He is being seen by Geoff
Rosenberg for his
Zicat saw Mr Saleh again on 3 November 2023 following receipt of radiology which
the doctor had recommended. The doctor described
hip radiology as
“unremarkable”. He referred to right knee symptoms as “all on
the lateral aspect of his knee”,
which “images entirely normally on
his MRI”. He suspected the symptoms were “either radiculopathy from
[the] lumbar
spine, or some generalised weakness leading to iliotibial band
irritation”.
Member also referred to Dr Chang, a foot and ankle surgeon, who reported on
1 November 2023 and initially encouraged a return
to full activities. In a
second report, dated 9 January 2024, Dr Chang referred to intermittent
discomfort and clicking in the right
ankle joint. On this occasion she
recommended surgery involving arthroscopy, tendon exploration and some
reconstruction of the joint.
Member also referred to a report from Dr Kuljic, a psychiatrist, dated 4 October
2023. The doctor diagnosed major depressive disorder
resulting from
“chronic pain, limited mobility and changes in lifestyle”. The
doctor recommended cognitive behavioural
therapy and
medication”.
Member referred to the notes from Royal Prince Alfred
The Member said these
documents “detail[ed] little more than ‘dropped piece of marble onto
foot’”. The treatment
recorded was to the right foot and ankle,
there was no record of other injuries received in the accident. The observations
only to the right foot and ankle, apart from which Mr Saleh was recorded
as being “otherwise well”. The records recorded
“No” to a question “Did the patient present to the hospital
with a fall?”. They said Mr Saleh
“works as [a] builder” and
that there was no insurance covering the hospital treatment. The records cover a
four days until Mr Saleh’s discharge on 21 November 2020. There
were no complaints of pain other than to the right foot and
Member referred to the notes from Dr
On 1 December 2020 and 15
December the complaints related only to the right ankle. On 14 January 2021 the
notes related to the right
ankle, but additionally to the right gluteal region
and the right groin. The Member noted Dr Swid’s notes included
from Dr Lee dated 16 June 2011 and 18 July 2011. The earlier of these
referred to Mr Saleh “‘popping’ his left
shoulder about a year
ago” and having instability since. The second of these confirmed lesions
associated with the dislocation
and said the shoulder could be treated
surgically.
Member referred to notes from Dr Nguyen, another general
practitioner.
The references
noted by the Member referred to complaints over a period from 23 March 2010 to
18 August 2020. These involved the
right elbow, left knee, left shoulder (with
recurrent dislocations), left ribs, work stress at the Commonwealth Bank, left
and right ankle pain after falling off a “bush bike” (sic),
right thigh and calf pain, an inguinal hernia, right hand
and right scapular
Member referred to notes from Dr
The Member described
these as “surprisingly brief” considering the long history of
consulting with the doctor. Many categories
of the documents from Dr Sarian were
referred to by the Member as only relating to the injuries allegedly sustained
on 18 November
Member summarised Mr Saleh’s oral
The Member made some
comments that were relevant to credit. The Member said Mr Saleh was
“reticent” in providing information
regarding his consultation with
Dr Nguyen on 18 August 2020, and whether on that day he consulted the doctor
Member described him as giving “confusing evidence” regarding
complaints of right ankle pain prior to 18 November
Member referred to Mr Saleh’s evidence regarding reporting the accident at
the hospital on 18 November 2020. Mr Saleh initially
said he was not involved in
that reporting, but later conceded he was involved and he had confirmed what Mr
Sader said. Mr Saleh
“eventually conceded” he told the hospital that
he was “otherwise fit and healthy”. Mr Saleh conceded he
reported the right ankle injury, although he had pain in other body parts. He
said the ankle was his “main concern”
and he thought the other pains
were bruising that would go away. Mr Saleh said that he would have answered
truthfully at the hospital
if asked whether he had had a fall. He said that if
the hospital records said he had not fallen, this was not a true representation
of what occurred.
Member noted that Mr Saleh, in cross-examination, agreed he did not inform Mr
Sader of any injuries, other than that to the right
ankle, until “around
March 2021”, although he had pain from those injuries from immediately
after they occurred. The
Member also noted Mr Saleh’s evidence that
his accident was not witnessed, that Mr Sader had remained in the bathroom and
Baccouni was following him (Mr Saleh) “but not
immediately”.
Member summarised Mr Sader’s oral
Mr Sader confirmed the
contents of his two statements. Mr Sader confirmed that he “directly
saw” Mr Saleh’s accident
on 18 November 2020, in the courtyard,
while he (Mr Sader) was seated on a concrete ledge. He said Mr Baccouni was
few feet” behind Mr Saleh at the time. Mr Sader said he had
requested invoices from Mr Saleh and had paid him notwithstanding
the invoices
were not provided. The Member described Mr Sader’s evidence as confusing,
regarding whether Mr Saleh worked for
him and whether he had an ABN. The Member
said Mr Sader denied awareness of his obligations to deduct taxation from
payments made
to the worker, and of his obligations to the Australian Taxation
Office. The Member described the evidence of Mr Sader about specific
at Bangor, Tempe and Queenscliff as “exceptionally vague and unconvincing
evidence as to the nature of those jobs”.
The Member said it was put to
Mr Sader that he lied about the employer’s relationship with Mr
Saleh, to protect the employer
from the possibility of having to pay moneys. The
reasons stated that “[Mr] Sader denied lying, but his evidence was not
convincing”.
Member summarised Mr Baccouni’s oral evidence. Mr Baccouni confirmed Mr
Sader was his wife’s brother. The Member described
Mr Baccouni’s
evidence regarding the company’s work practices on the day of the accident
as “often unresponsive
or confusing, and punctuated with statements that
he could not remember the processes exactly, but that they ([Mr] Sader, [Mr
and himself) were all ‘working
together’.”
reasons at [185] read:
“When questioned as to when he had last
spoken to [Mr] Sader about the second respondent’s accident, his evidence
initially unresponsive although he admitted that he had spoken to [Mr] Sader
when he knew that he was to give evidence, as [Mr] Sader
then told him that
there was ‘a court case’. However, later he said ‘we
didn’t talk about it but I received
a letter from the
parties’ submissions before the Member are described in some detail in the
reasons. I will not seek to summarise them at
length. The employer was
critical of the Nominal Insurer for accepting the claim. It submitted Mr Saleh
“was not credible in
his oral evidence and should not be accepted”.
It submitted the evidence of Messrs Sader and Baccouni should be preferred.
submitted Mr Saleh’s version was not supported by the notes from Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital or other contemporaneous records
– there was no
record of “cuts, bruises or abrasions” to Mr Saleh, which would have
been noticed by hospital staff
if Mr Saleh’s version were accepted. It
submitted Mr Saleh’s version of how he moved the “gyprock boards
30–40 kg” from the bathroom to the carpark was implausible.
It was submitted to be uncontroversial that Mr Saleh’s
evidence contained
lies – he denied suffering previous injury to the body parts the subject
of this claim. The employer submitted
corroboration would be required to make
findings based on his evidence. Reference was made to
Malco Engineering Pty
Ltd v Ferreira
The employer
submitted the evidence of Messrs Sader and Baccouni was not compromised in
cross-examination, both insisted they were
present when the accident
employer’s submissions dealt with the medical evidence. The hospital notes
did not mention injury other than that to the
right ankle and did not mention Mr
Saleh falling. Reference was made to the notes of Dr Swid, who referred only to
injury to the
right foot and ankle. The employer referred to
regarding the weight
to be given to contemporaneous evidence. The employer referred to the clinical
records from treating doctors.
Mr Saleh denied injuring his right hip and
shoulder prior to 18 November 2020. The employer submitted there were
inconsistencies
in his evidence regarding his left shoulder, his oral evidence
in this regard was “utterly
implausible”.
criticism by the employer, of the persuasiveness of the worker’s medical
case, was referred to in the reasons at [204]
Member summarised the submissions made on behalf of Mr Saleh. Mr Saleh’s
submissions argued the employer bore the onus of
proof, referring to
Holdings Pty Ltd v Daley
There was criticism of the evidence of Mr Sader, on the basis he was not a
truthful witness and sought to protect his own financial
interests. It was
submitted Mr Sader’s statement evidence, that Mr Saleh identified a
specific ABN to him, was “clearly
untruthful”. It was submitted Mr
Sader’s evidence in his statement dated 25 May 2021, that Mr Saleh
was “in the
business of working as a labourer for hire”, was clearly
untruthful; he knew Mr Saleh had previously worked with the Commonwealth
Mr Saleh’s submissions identified various aspects of Mr Sader’s
evidence, about the events on the date of injury,
that were contradicted by Mr
Baccouni’s evidence. Mr Saleh submitted the most credible version of the
events on the date of
injury was that Mr Sader and Mr Baccouni operated
tools and the like, while Mr Saleh shuttled between the bathroom and the truck
removing debris. Mr Saleh referred to his statement, claim form and
photographs.
Member’s reasons turned to the issue regarding recording of the medical
Mr Saleh referred
to cases dealing with the weight to be given to medical histories and
“The [Commission] would accept that busy medical
practitioners in a major public hospital in the middle of a pandemic are likely
to look to deal with the issue at hand rather than record every complaint by a
patient, particularly in circumstances where their
concern is with the surgical
treatment or impact of an obvious frank
Member referred also to the employer’s submissions in reply. It challenges
the neutrality of Ms Turkmen as a witness. It
submits Mr Sader, on the date of
the incident, was overseeing and coordinating the job, he was not involved in
the stripping process
or the removal of debris. It submits the evidence of Mr
Baccouni and Mr Sader is generally consistent, and any discrepancies relate
minor details. It challenges Mr Saleh’s reliance on cases such as
as “speculative, implausible and without substance”. It
lists 15 examples of Mr Saleh’s evidence that “cannot
be accepted
untruthfulness”.
Member commenced his consideration of the matter by stating that the employer
company bore the onus “to prove that it had
no liability in relation to
the payments made to [Mr Saleh] by the [Nominal Insurer], as recorded in the
reimbursement notice”.
Member said:
“[The employer] asks me on a number of occasions
not to make factual findings in favour of the [worker] as I should not feel
necessary persuasion in accordance with
v Cosmopolitan
] to make those
findings. However, it is not the responsibility of the [worker] to prove any
fact in these proceedings. It is instead
the responsibility of the [employer] to
persuade me in accordance with
that it is not liable for the
payments made by the [Nominal Insurer] and referred to in the reimbursement
Member described the issues before him:
“In my opinion
therefore, for the [employer] to be successful (either in whole or in part) in
the proceedings, it has the onus
to prove one or more of the following:
(a) the [worker] did not suffer injuries to his neck, back, right shoulder,
right hip, and right knee on 18 November 2020 –
noting that the [employer]
has already conceded liability for a right ankle injury on that date –
these are the injuries accepted
by the [Nominal Insurer] and in relation to
which it has compensated the [worker], as advised in its letter to the [worker]
11 May 2023 (see paragraph 73(b) above);
(b) the [Nominal Insurer] paid weekly benefits compensation to the [worker]
pursuant to an incorrect PIAWE;
(c) the [worker] had current work capacity during the period between 3 March
2021 and 15 August 2023 – so that the payments
made to him by the [Nominal
Insurer] during this period were excessive, and
(d) the [worker] did not require medical treatment costing
Member quoted from the reasons of McDougall J (McColl and Bell JJA agreeing) in
where his Honour said:
“Hodgson J ... [writing
extrajudicially said] ‘if, on the basis of adequate material concerning
circumstances of a particular
case, the tribunal [of fact] believes that an
event has occurred, with the strength of that belief being at least such as
indicated by a probability in excess of 50%, then the civil onus is
discharged’. Thus, his Honour adhered to the requirement
of a feeling of
actual persuasion. But he made it plain that, once the feeling has been
obtained, it is sufficient for it to lead
to the conclusion that the event in
question is more likely than not to have occurred, with ‘a probability in
excess of 50%’.
In my view, that is the approach that should be adopted in the resolution of
disputed questions of fact. It is something of particular
significance where a
resolution of the disputed question depends upon the drawing of inferences from
entirely circumstantial evidence.
It also accommodates the requirement that
attention be paid to the seriousness of the fact in issue, or the consequences
that it has
Member described an acceptance of Mr Sader’s evidence as
“crucial” if he were to be persuaded to make the findings
employer seeks. He referred to Mr Sader’s statements dated 25 May 2021 and
15 December 2023. The Member said that
at the time of the earlier statement he
knew there was an investigation into the worker’s compensation claim, in
statement would be used. He knew the employer was uninsured and
acceptance of the claim would have financial consequences for it.
“a serious situation” and Mr Sader would be expected to ensure the
accuracy of his earlier statement. The Member
referred to the
(a) Mr Sader said Mr Saleh gave him a specific ABN. The number was in fact owned
by another person with the same name. The Member
said it was a reasonable
inference that someone searched the ABN register without sufficient care and
assumed the specific ABN was
owned by Mr Saleh, the second respondent in these
proceedings. Mr Sader said in his evidence that he did not know how the number
“got there”. The Member said the earlier statement was clearly
untruthful and Mr Sader was still willing to sign it.
(b) Mr Sader said Mr Saleh worked for him one to two days per week,
“around 10 days in all”. Mr Saleh, in his statement
December 2022, provided photographic and documentary evidence that he “at
the least worked on 14 different days”,
excluding the date of injury.
The Member says Mr Sader then changed his evidence to say Mr Saleh worked, on
average, three days per
(c) Mr Sader in his earlier statement referred to Mr Saleh carrying villa board
on the date of accident, in his later statement he
said it was gyprock boards.
(d) The Member described Mr Sader’s evidence in his earlier statement as
“highly unsatisfactory” and said it “significantly
affects his
Member identified “other unsatisfactory aspects” of Mr Sader’s
evidence regarding his relationship with Mr Saleh:
(a) Mr Sader produced two text messages informing Mr Saleh work was unavailable
on a particular date. Mr Sader claimed in his evidence
that he advised Mr Saleh
by phone or in person as to available work. The two text messages were in the
negative, informing Mr Saleh
when work was not available rather than when it
was. The Member said this suggested a full-time employment relationship where Mr
Saleh would be expected to be available unless otherwise advised.
(b) Mr Sader did not produce telephone records to clarify when he telephoned
Mr Saleh. While he was under no obligation to do so,
he did bear the onus
(c) Mr Sader did not produce other business records regarding the jobs on which
Mr Saleh worked, what was their nature and how long
they went for. Again,
the employer carried the onus. Similarly, Mr Sader did not produce the
employer’s quotation for the job
on which Mr Saleh was working on the date
of injury, which may have contained relevant information.
(d) Mr Sader did not produce any records regarding Mr Saleh’s pay rate,
said to be $150 per day. Mr Sader’s explanations
were “unconvincing
from an accounting perspective”. A similar observation can be made
regarding Mr Sader’s failure
to deduct taxation payments from moneys paid
to Mr Saleh, which was also unconvincing from a legal perspective.
(e) Mr Sader said he could not have afforded to pay Mr Saleh $1,250 per week,
but there are no records regarding Mr Sader’s
financial position and he
bore the onus of proof.
(f) Mr Sader was aware Mr Saleh previously worked for the Commonwealth Bank,
which is incongruous with Mr Sader’s allegation
that Mr Saleh had an
Member said there was “one (admittedly crucial) relevant matter” on
which Messrs Sader and Baccouni were in “clear
agreement”. This was
that Mr Saleh’s accident occurred “in the courtyard rather than on
the stairs leading to the
car park”, and that it “did not involve
[Mr Saleh] falling (but just a gyprock board falling onto his right ankle),
him to walk unassisted to [Mr] Sader’s truck”. The Member
said the employer submitted that Mr Sader’s version was
corroborated
by Mr Baccouni, but on closer inspection there were “many
inconsistencies”. The Member, at [239] of his
reasons, identified eight
matters on which there was inconsistency between the evidence of Mr Sader and Mr
Baccouni regarding events
on the date of
I will not recite these
for current purposes.
Member referred to a submission made on Mr Saleh’s behalf, which was
summarised at [210(f)] of the reasons, and which the
Member said he
“[Mr] Sader’s evidence ‘beggars belief’
that on the date of [Mr Saleh’s] accident, he ‘simply
around the job site observing’, in circumstances where the [employer] was
busy enough to engage the services of both
[Mr Saleh] and [Mr] Baccouni,
and was aware that the second respondent had ‘no skills other than his
physical capacity’.”
Member said:
“In order to assess the evidence of [Mr] Sader, I
had the opportunity to not only witness him give his oral evidence, but I
had an opportunity to review a recording of that oral evidence. The recording
confirmed my initial view that the evidence was
often confusing or self-serving.
He was especially not convincing regarding his account of how [Mr Saleh] was
employed by the [employer],
and in relation to the [employer’s] general
work practices. His demeanour was concerning.
I am not persuaded by [Mr] Sader’s evidence. There were untruths told,
as well as evasive, inconsistent, and implausible evidence
given. The evidence
needs corroboration in accordance with
Engineering
Member said he was “not persuaded” that the evidence of Mr Baccouni
provided the necessary reliable corroboration
to Mr Sader’s evidence. The
Member referred to the inconsistencies in Mr Baccouni’s, evidence
identified in the Member’s
reasons at [239]. He referred to Mr
Baccouni’s “clearly incorrect evidence” that the worker only
worked for the
employer “on about 10–12 days”. He referred to
Mr Baccouni’s “clearly close relationship” with
Mr Sader, his
brother-in-law. He referred to Mr Baccouni’s evidence regarding whether he
had discussed the proceedings with
Mr Sader, described by the Member as
“initially unresponsive and then potentially contradictory”. The
Member referred
to Mr Baccouni’s recollection of the events of the date of
injury. Mr Baccouni said he had not refreshed his memory, by reading
statement dated 25 May 2021, before giving evidence, and “during his oral
evidence on numerous occasions that he could
not remember certain
matters”. The Member said there were doubts regarding whether Mr
Baccouni’s statement was correctly
interpreted to him. The Member said he
found Mr Baccouni's oral evidence “often unresponsive, regularly
confusing, and at times
inconsistent”.
Member concluded he was not persuaded that the accident on 18 November 2020 did
not occur in the manner described by Mr Saleh.
He said the employer had not met
its onus of proof in this regard. The Member said that, to the contrary, he was
actually persuaded
that the accident occurred as described by Mr Saleh. He said
Mr Saleh had been consistent, his oral evidence regarding the accident
compelling and was not affected by cross-examination. There was consistent
evidence in Mr Saleh’s
and his claim form
dated 20 March 2021.
said there was consistent reporting to Dr
Dr Sarian’s referrals to various
specialists.
Member referred to submissions made by the employer, summarised at (a), (e) and
(f) of the reasons at [196]. The Member described
these submissions as
“speculative” and said Mr Saleh’s evidence was “by
implausible”.
Member said he had reviewed a recording of Mr Saleh’s oral evidence. He
said this confirmed his initial view that the evidence
was “given in a
forthright, consistent and reliable manner”. He said there were issues
with the recollection of medical
consultations prior to 18 November 2020,
but “the cross-examination was otherwise unremarkable, and did not cause
question [Mr Saleh’s] version of how his accident ...
occurred”. This was particularly so given that the Member was not
impressed with the evidence of Messrs Sader and Baccouni on this
the topic of medical consultations prior to 18 November 2020, the Member found
Mr Saleh’s evidence to be “occasionally
evasive”. The
Member noted matters from the prior medical history that were initially denied
(complaints to the right hip,
right shoulder and right ankle) and
“recurrent left shoulder complaints for many years” were conceded,
after some questioning”. The Member expressed concern
regarding Mr Saleh’s denial of right shoulder complaints (this
August 2020, three months before the date of injury: reasons at [38]). The
Member concluded it was a single complaint to the
right shoulder, in records
going back to 2010.
Member concluded this did not otherwise affect Mr Saleh’s general
credibility as a witness. He said that although the recollection
medical consultations, before the subject injury, was “not entirely
satisfactory” it did not reach “the
intentional perjury standard
discussed in
Malco Engineering
”. The Member said he exercised
“extra care” when assessing the entirety of Mr Saleh’s
evidence. This was
“entirely different” to his view of the evidence
of Messrs Sader and Baccouni.
Member referred to the submissions going to the lack of complaint, in the
material from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and Dr Swid,
of injuries other than
the right ankle occurring on 18 November 2020. Additional injuries to the right
shoulder, back, neck, groin,
right hip, right knee and right ankle were referred
to when Mr Saleh consulted Dr Sarian on 27 January 2021. The Member said Mr
proffered three reasons for this:
(a) he was waiting to see Dr Sarian, which he could not do until 27 January
(b) he did not wish to cause issues for Mr Sader, who was uninsured and had
requested Mr Saleh not advise the accident had occurred
during his employment,
(c) he was more concerned about his right ankle injury.
Member said “these three reasons seem to be satisfactory”. He
specifically accepted the second of the above reasons,
saying Mr Sader’s
first statement showed he was attempting to avoid liability for the
Member quoted from the decision of
dealing with the
importance of contemporaneous medical histories in personal injury matters. He
also quoted from the decision of
Basten JA in
dealing with the need
for caution in dealing with the clinical records of medical practitioners. The
Member said the clinical records
from Royal Prince Afred Hospital were
“brief and inaccurate”. They referred to Mr Saleh being struck by a
piece of marble
(rather than a gyprock board). The records did not describe the
accident as being work-related. The Member noted 18 November 2020
was during the
COVID-19 pandemic, Mr Saleh described the hospital as “chaotic”, and
Mr Saleh’s surgery was twice
delayed due to parts of the hospital being
isolated due to the arrival of COVID-19 patients. The Member said he was
as to the accuracy of the notes regarding the presence of
injuries other than the right ankle. He was also cautious of the accuracy
recording that no fall occurred on 18 November 2020, which involved a one-word
answer, “No”.
Member said he considered Mr Saleh’s reporting of the full extent of his
injuries to Dr Sarian on 27 January 2021 to be
sufficiently contemporaneous
in the circumstances. He rejected the proposition that delay in undertaking
x-rays affected Mr Saleh’s
credit. He was waiting for a claim number, and
for Dr Sarian to give him a referral. This was an “understandable
explanation”
as Dr Sarian had been his treating general practitioner for
many years.
“Overall, in analysing both the statement and oral
evidence given by [Mr] Sader, [Mr] Baccouni, and [Mr Saleh], I feel the
necessary in accordance with
to accept the evidence of
[Mr Saleh], as opposed to the evidence of [Mr] Sader and [Mr] Baccouni, in
relation to how his accident
on 18 November 2020 occurred. I find his
credit to be much less affected than the credit of [Mr] Sader and
[Mr] Baccouni.”
“My finding will be that on 18 November 2020, [Mr Saleh] sustained
injuries to his neck, right shoulder, back, right hip, right
knee, and right
ankle. These are the injuries accepted by the [Nominal Insurer] (see paragraph
73(b) above), and the [employer] has
failed in its onus of proving that they did
not occur.”
“Having considered the entire medical evidence presented before me, I
am satisfied that the second respondent suffered injury
to his right ankle,
right knee, right hip, back, neck, and right shoulder on 18 November 2020, in
the course of his employment with
the [employer] pursuant to s 4 of the 1987
Act, and to which his employment with the [employer] was a substantial
contributing factor
pursuant to s 9A of the
Member referred to Dr Allen’s report. He said he did not “afford
much weight to Dr Allen’s opinions”.
He said it was clear there
had been a “significant disagreement” between Mr Saleh and Dr Allen
during the consultation.
Whoever was at fault, it affected the doctor’s
ability to provide “a complete and reliable report”. The Member
there were mechanisms, such as s 119 of the
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) that could have been used to
require Mr Saleh to attend a further consultation with Dr Allen or a different
These mechanisms were not used. The Member referred also to the
employer’s complaint regarding the adequacy of documents produced
Sarian. The Member said that, again, there were mechanisms to compel compliance,
such as r 49 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
, that were not
Member referred to the prior complaints of right hip pain (once) and right
shoulder pain (once) prior to 18 November 2020. He
noted Mr Saleh then performed
labouring work with the employer and stated he had no physical restriction when
he commenced. The Member
said Mr Saleh would not have been able to perform that
work if his previous complaints had been anything other than
Member dealt with the issue of Mr Saleh’s PIAWE, calculated by the Nominal
Insurer at $808.50. He approached the issue by
asking whether the employer had
proved that calculation to be wrong. The Member said that, for that onus to be
discharged, it would
be necessary that he accept Mr Sader’s statement and
oral evidence, accept that Mr Saleh worked, on average, only three days
week, and accept that he was paid $150 per day. The Member did not accept these
propositions. He referred to his earlier criticism
of Mr Sader’s
evidence. He accepted it would not have been financially viable for Mr Saleh to
leave his position with the Commonwealth
Bank to work with the employer if he
was only being paid $450 per week. He said it was highly unlikely Mr Saleh would
have had an
ABN given his previous employment was at the Commonwealth
Member referred to Mr Saleh’s detailed information regarding the sites
where he worked; he had photographic and documentary
proof of work on 14
different days, in addition to the date of accident. Mr Sader produced two text
messages that indicated there
were two days, 26 and 27 October 2020, when Mr
Saleh was not required to work. The Member said that, for him to accept Mr Saleh
worked on 15 days, he would need to be satisfied that Mr Saleh did not work
at all over the period 22 October 2020 to 17 November
2020 (Mr Saleh did
not have photographic evidence during this period). The Member said the employer
had produced no business records
to indicate why it did not require
Mr Saleh’s assistance over this period. The Member said additionally
there was a text message
produced by Mr Saleh consistent with him working on 24
September 2020, which was a day additional to those otherwise proved by
photographic
and documentary evidence. The Member noted Mr Baccouni’s
evidence that Mr Saleh worked for a total of only 10 to 12 days was,
view, incorrect. The Member noted Mr Saleh’s amended taxation return was
consistent with his evidence that he worked
full-time being paid $250 per day.
The Member said he did not find Ms Turkmen’s evidence of much
assistance.
Member said the evidence of each of Mr Sader and Mr Saleh contradicted that of
the other. He said he had found Mr Sader’s
evidence to be unreliable and
the credit of Mr Saleh to be strong. The employer had not produced business
records to corroborate
Mr Sader. The Member said the employer had not
discharged its onus of proving the PIAWE calculated by the Nominal Insurer of
was wrong. He said that, if anything, it should have been calculated at
a higher rate.
Member turned to the issue of Mr Saleh’s current work capacity between 3
March 2021 and 15 August 2023, having regard to
both the right ankle injury and
the other injuries which he had found. Dr Sarian’s certificates certified
there was “no
current work capacity at all”. Dr Millons
considered Mr Saleh was unfit for any work when he examined Mr Saleh on
27 September
2023. Dr Bodel, examining Mr Saleh on 1 August 2022,
considered him to be totally and permanently incapacitated for work, with very
poor prospects of returning to any form of paid work. The Member referred to
reports from treating specialists who did not specifically
deal with incapacity,
but whose opinions were consistent with those expressed by Drs Sarian, Millons
and Bodel. The Member said the
employer relied on Dr Allen, whose opinion was
that the right ankle injury would have been incapacitating for two to six weeks.
Member said Dr Allen’s comments did not assist in determining work
capacity. The Member said the employer had not discharged
its onus of proving Mr
Saleh had work capacity during the relevant
Member referred to the inclusion in the reimbursement notice of $242.50 pursuant
to s 60 of the 1987 Act. The notice did not indicate
what the treatment was
or who it was paid to. The Member noted s 145(5) of the 1987 Act provided that
inclusion in the notice was
proof that the payment was made “to or in
respect of an injured worker”. The Member said particulars could have been
sought by the employer, which bore the onus. The Member said s 145(5) of the
1987 Act required a party attempting to evade reimbursement
to “positively
prove that the payment was not made ‘to or in respect of an injured
worker’”. The Member said
this onus was not
discharged.
Member made the following findings and orders:
“292. I find
that the [employer] has failed to discharge its onus of proving that
[Mr Saleh] did not suffer injuries to his
neck, back, right shoulder, right
hip, and right knee on 18 November 2020.
find that on 18 November 2020, [Mr Saleh] suffered injury to his neck, back,
right shoulder, right hip, right knee, and right ankle,
pursuant to ss 4 and 9A
of the 1987 Act.
find that the [employer] has failed to discharge its onus of proving that the
[Nominal Insurer] paid weekly benefits compensation
to [Mr Saleh] pursuant to an
incorrect PIAWE of $808.50.
find that the [employer] has failed to discharge its onus of proving that
[Mr Saleh] had current work capacity during the period
between 3 March 2021
and 15 August 2023.
find that as a result of [Mr Saleh’s] injury on 18 November 2020, he had
no current work capacity during the period between
3 March 2021 and 15 August
2023. During that period, he was therefore entitled to weekly benefits
compensation in accordance with
ss 36(1) and 37(1) of the 1987 Act, his
entitlement being calculated by the first respondent in accordance with a PIAWE
of $808.50.
find that as a result of [Mr Saleh’s] injury on 18 November 2020, he
required medical treatment costing $242.50.
find (with the agreement of the [employer]) that it was not insured in respect
of its liability to compensate [Mr Saleh] in accordance
with the 1987 Act,
regarding his injury on 18 November 2020.
find that the [Nominal Insurer] has compensated [Mr Saleh] in relation to his
entitlements, as described in paragraphs 293–294
above. The [Nominal
Insurer] has made a total payment of $91,724.88 in this regard. It has issued a
valid notice dated 5 September
2023 to the [employer], in accordance with
s 145(1) of the 1987 Act, requiring the [employer] to reimburse that amount
find the amount of $91,724.88 paid by the [Nominal Insurer] in this regard
reflects the valid and legitimate entitlements of [Mr
Saleh] to compensation
with respect to his 18 November 2020 injury. I find the payment made to be both
necessary and appropriate.
therefore find that pursuant to s 145(3) of the 1987 Act, the [employer] is
liable in respect of the payment made of $91,724.88.
[employer’s] request for an order from the Commission pursuant to s 145(3)
of the 1987 Act, that it is not liable to reimburse
the amount of $91,724.88 to
the [Nominal Insurer], is as a result refused.
[employer] is to pay the first respondent the amount of
$91,724.88.”
ON THE PAPERS
52(3) of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the 2020 Act)
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
appellant, in its pro forma appeal document, responded to a question “Can
the appeal be decided solely on the basis of the
written application and any
written notice of opposition lodged?”, by marking the box
“No”. In its written submissions
accompanying the appeal the
appellant stated the appeal:
“May be determined on the papers,
but not until such time as the appellant receives the official transcript of the
proceedings,
and serves, in accordance with [33] of Procedural Direction WC3,
supplementary
submissions.”
appellant lodged supplementary submissions dated 10 April 2025, which addressed
the transcript in detail, following its issue.
The first respondent, the Nominal
Insurer, lodged submissions dated 16 April 2025 which simply stated that it
neither opposed nor
consented to the orders sought in the appeal. The Nominal
Insurer had not otherwise made submissions on the appeal. The second respondent,
Mr Saleh, submitted the appeal could be determined on the
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties, I am satisfied
that I have sufficient
information to proceed ‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that
this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
pursuant to s 352(3) of the 1998 Act have been
appeal was lodged within time. The second respondent’s Notice of
Opposition was lodged on 6 May 2025, outside the period
specified in s 352(4) of
the 1998 Act and r 124 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
filed Notice was accompanied by submissions apologising for the lateness and
seeking an extension of time. The second respondent’s
submissions referred
to an administrative error with respect to the service of primary submissions
and stated that counsel had been
delayed in finalising the submissions. The
second respondent’s submissions were accompanied by a copy email from his
to those acting for each of the appellant and the first respondent,
seeking consent. The Nominal Insurer consented to the late document.
no sign of a response on behalf of the appellant.
Direction of the President’s delegate dated 17 March 2025 provided that
the respondents were to lodge Notices of Opposition
by 21 April 2025 and to
serve the Notices by 28 April 2025. No party makes active opposition to the
extension of time sought by the
second respondent. There is no suggestion of
prejudice. There is some explanation for the delay. The time for lodgement of
respondent’s Notice of Opposition is extended to 9 May 2025,
the date on which it was registered. This is consistent with the
‘objects’ set out in s 3 of the 2020 Act, and with the
‘guiding principle’ in s 42 of the 2020 Act. It is
appropriate in
the interests of justice.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant raises the following grounds of appeal:
(a) The Commission erred as to a matter of law in finding, at [133] [sic,
[233]], that an acceptance of the evidence of Mr Sader
was crucial in order to
make the factual findings contended for by the [appellant]. In reasoning to a
conclusion, the [appellant]
was capable of discharging its onus even if the
evidence of Mr Sader was not accepted. Among other reasons, the contemporaneous
records and the evidence of Mr Baccouni was sufficient for the
[appellant] to discharge its onus. (Ground No. 1)
(b) The Commission erred, as to a matter of fact in finding, at [264], that the
second respondent’s delay in undertaking x-ray
imaging of his various
alleged injuries in addition to his right lower limb injury did not affect his
credibility, including because
that finding was supported by a finding that the
second respondent was “waiting for ... Dr Sarian to refer him ... as the
had been his treating general practitioner for many years.” The
second respondent had earlier seen a different general practitioner
of his workplace injury, and there was no legitimate basis upon which to require
Dr Sarian to refer him for imaging. (Ground
(c) The Commission erred as to a matter of fact in finding, at [269], that the
second respondent’s version of events “was
consistently given to the
applicant’s [sic] treating medical practitioners”. That finding
(presumably, intended to refer
to the “second respondent’s treating
medical practitioners” was contrary to the evidence in circumstances where
the contemporaneous records in the two months after the injury to the right
lower limb were inconsistent with the second respondent’s
events. (Ground No. 3)
(d) The Commission erred as to a matter of mixed fact and law, at [271], by
discounting the reliability of Dr Allen’s opinion,
and in otherwise not
finding the opinion of Dr Allen to provide a basis upon which to doubt the
reliability of the second respondent’s
[account], because:
a) “his history of the second respondent’s accident is brief and
does not include a fall onto stairs”. The Commission’s
reasoning was
circular, and proceeds on the basis that the second respondent’s account
was truthful, and thus the failure of
Dr Allen to obtain a history in accordance
with it was evidence of its unreliability.
b) he relies upon there being insufficient objective evidence to confirm that
the second respondent suffered any injury other than
to his right ankle on 18
November 2020 – despite the overwhelming supportive medical evidence from
the second respondent’s
treating medical practitioners”. This
reasoning is circular. (Ground No. 4)
(e) The Commission erred, as to a matter of mixed fact and law, in failing to
regard the evidence of the second respondent to be
“compromised” in
respects other than his recollection of his consultations with doctors prior to
18 November 2020. (Ground
(f) The Commission erred, as to a matter of mixed fact and law, in regarding the
second respondent as a credible witness. (Ground
(g) With respect to the clinical records of Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, the
Commission erred as to a matter of mixed fact and law,
at [259]–[261]:
a) In regarding the records as “brief and inaccurate”.
b) In regarding the records as containing “a lack of observations of any
other injuries”, when in fact they identified
that the second respondent
had “nil other injuries”.
c) In considering caution to be necessary in an acceptance of the records for
reasons expressed in
Mason v Demasi
[2009] NSWCA 227
, notwithstanding
is factually analogous and ought to be distinguished.
d) In considering caution to be necessary in an acceptance of the records
because of the use of a single word answer to record whether
a fall had occurred
(‘no’), notwithstanding that no ambiguity attended that answer and
positively excluded the account
provided by the second respondent. (Ground No.
THE SCOPE OF THE APPEAL
should be noted at the outset that the appellant accepts it is liable to the
Nominal Insurer in respect of payments relating to
the injury to the
worker’s right ankle, but not the other body parts that were found to have
been injured in the incident on
18 November 2020. If the appellant succeeds, it
seeks orders that the matter be remitted to determine the quantum of its
assessed on that more limited
THE ONUS OF PROOF
Tobias JA (Hodgson JA and Stein AJA agreeing)
“That the employer’s liability to reimburse the
Fund in respect of the amount of any payment made to the injured worker
the Scheme is a reference to its liability to pay the injured worker
compensation under the Act is, in my opinion, confirmed
by the terms of s
145(5). That subsection provides for the admissibility of a certificate executed
by the Authority certifying firstly,
the amount of any payment made to the
injured worker and, secondly, that the person named in the certificate (the
employer) was in
the opinion of the Authority
‘liable at the relevant time to pay to or in respect of the injured
worker compensation under [the] Act.’
Such a certificate becomes evidence of the matters stated in it. However, it
is not conclusive and
it is open to the employer to prove
that at the
relevant time it was not liable to pay compensation to the injured worker under
A1 Granny Flats v Workers Compensation Nominal
Phillips P quoted
from the above passage and said:
“In short, it is the employer
who bears the onus of proof in such circumstances as present in this
Member in his reasons at [227] said that the employer bore the onus of proving
that it was not liable for the sums recorded in
the reimbursement notice. This
proposition is not challenged in the grounds of appeal.
SUBMISSIONS DEALING WITH THE DECISION OF STATE OF NEW SOUTH
decision of the Court of Appeal in
was issued on 17 July 2025,
after the parties had lodged their submissions in the current appeal. The
Commission issued a Direction
to the parties dated 31 July 2025. The direction
addressed the question of the correct approach to the
nature of an appeal pursuant to s 352 of the 1998 Act. It invited the parties
provide any supplementary submissions with respect to
effect on the current appeal. Further submissions were lodged by the appellant
(dated 7 August 2025) and the second respondent
(dated 14 August 2025).
The appellant’s further submissions
appellant, in its further submissions dated 7 August 2025,
“3. It is now clear that the correct test is not
whether the first instance finding was merely ‘open’ or
‘available’.
Instead, the Presidential Member must conduct a review
of the evidence, weigh the factual challenges properly, while still affording
due regard to any advantage the original decision-maker may have enjoyed, and
determine whether a different conclusion on a question
of fact ought to have
been reached. In such a case, the Presidential Member ‘should not shrink
from giving effect to [a different
conclusion]’ (at [91]).
in mind the correct test, in the [a]ppellant’s submission it is clear that
the conclusions as to fact reached by the
Member should not have been reached.
Accordingly, on appeal, the Presidential member should have no hesitation in
giving effect to
a different factual finding. Having regard to the nature of the
grounds of appeal, Grounds 2, 3 and 7 ought to now receive particular
attention.”
The second respondent’s further submissions
second respondent refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Family Investments Pty Ltd trading as Bede Murray Racing Stables v
an appeal which was
listed in the Court of Appeal shortly after the decision in
which was applied. The second respondent submits:
summary, the Court of Appeal in
confirmed that the correct
approach to appeals under s 352 in the [Commission], as identified in
, was the previously adopted approach being that taken in
Warren v Coombes
[1979] 142 CLR 531
[1979] HCA 9
Fox v Percy
[2002] 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22.
Court of Appeal’s summary of the effect of the above in
that it would require the presidential member to determine whether, after giving
appropriate deference to the member’s
factual advantage, a different
conclusion should have been reached rather than deciding whether the finding was
second respondent submits the Member’s conclusions were reached after
“an exhaustive analysis of the evidence ...
where all witnesses were cross
examined.” It refers to the reasons at [230] where the Member summarised
the matters in issue
on which the appellant carried the onus. The second
respondent quotes from the reasons at [233] to [236] in which the Member was
critical of Mr Sader’s evidence and concluded the evidence of
Mr Sader required corroboration consistent with the decision
Engineering
(see [47] above). The second respondent quotes from the reasons
at [244] to [247] in which the Member criticised the evidence of Mr
Baccouni and
said the evidence of Messrs Sader and Baccouni did not persuade him the accident
occurred other than as the second respondent
described. The Member said the
second respondent’s oral evidence was “compelling and not affected
by cross examination”;
it was consistent with other evidence in the
second respondent submits the approach suggested by the appellant “would
require a complete abandonment of the [M]ember’s
assessment of the
credibility of witnesses”. The second respondent refers to
House v The
from which it quotes
the following:
“It is not enough that the judges composing the
appellate court consider that, if they had been in the position of the primary
judge, they would have taken a different course. It must appear that some error
has been made in exercising the discretion. If the
judge acts upon a wrong
principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him,
if he mistakes the facts,
if he does not take into account some material
consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court
exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials
for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge
has reached the result
embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly
unjust, the appellate court may
infer that in some way there has been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in the court of first
APPLICATION OF THE DECISION IN CULHANA
appeal is brought pursuant to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act, which
“An appeal under this section is limited to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such
error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
Court of Appeal in
specifically rejected the construction of s
352(5) which had been adopted in
Raulston v Toll Pty
and in subsequent
decisions which accepted the correctness of
The correct
approach to such appeals is that set out in the decision of the Court of Appeal
, in which Leeming JA (Bell CJ, Kirk, McHugh and Free JJA
agreeing) quoted the following passage from
“Within the constraints marked out by the nature of
the appellate process, the appellate court is obliged to conduct a real
of the trial and, in cases where the trial was conducted before a judge sitting
alone, of that judge's reasons. Appellate
courts are not excused from the task
of ‘weighing conflicting evidence and drawing [their] own inferences and
conclusions,
though [they] should always bear in mind that [they have] neither
seen nor heard the witnesses, and should make due allowance in
respect’. In
Warren v Coombes
, the majority of this Court
reiterated the rule that:
‘[I]n general an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial
judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from
facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
the trial judge. In deciding what is
the proper inference to be drawn, the
appellate court will give respect and weight to the conclusion of the trial
judge but, once
having reached its own conclusion, will not shrink from giving
effect to it.’
As this Court there said, that approach was ‘not only sound in law, but
beneficial in ...
operation’.”
(citations omitted).
Leeming JA said:
“No one doubts that questions
of law must be determined afresh by a Presidential member if it is said that the
member erred.
Nor is it doubted that where the member has seen the applicant or
other witnesses and made findings of fact based on their evidence,
will be in a position of advantage over a Presidential member who will, in the
ordinary case, determine the appeal on
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply the approach in
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate deference is to be
given to members where their findings are based on evidence in respect of which
they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it is
not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was
‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury and there was
some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential member, after making
appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a
different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink from
giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
the plurality said:
“A court of appeal is
bound to conduct a ‘real review’ of the evidence given at first
instance and of the judge’s
reasons for judgment to determine whether the
trial judge has erred in fact or law. Appellate restraint with respect to
interference
with a trial judge’s findings unless they are
‘glaringly improbable’ or ‘contrary to compelling
inferences’
is as to factual findings which are likely to have been
affected by impressions about the credibility and reliability of witnesses
formed by the trial judge as a result of seeing and hearing them give their
evidence. It includes findings of secondary facts which
are based on a
combination of these impressions and other inferences from primary facts.
Thereafter, ‘in general an appellate
court is in as good a position as the
trial judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from facts which are
undisputed or
which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
(excluding references)
Eppinga v Kalil
the Court of Appeal (Payne JA, Kirk and Stern JJA
agreeing) quoted from
“In the present
appeal, the findings of fact under challenge are based
on credit findings ‘likely to have been affected
impressions about the credibility and reliability of witnesses formed
by the trial judge as a result of seeing and hearing [the
give their evidence’. To set those findings of
fact aside, this Court must be persuaded
the findings were ‘glaringly
improbable’ or ‘contrary to compelling
inferences’. I am not so persuaded.
I have concluded that it was well open to his Honour to form the view
that he did of the credit of both Ms Eppinga and
That view was formed based on a number
of matters, including the manner in which both
witnesses gave evidence. The primary judge
that Ms Eppinga was combative and defensive;
Ms Eather was measured and prepared to make appropriate
concessions. These were
essentially demeanour-based credit
GROUND NO. 1 – WHETHER MR SADER’S EVIDENCE WAS
Appellant’s submissions
Member’s reasons at [230] are quoted at [41] above. The appellant refers
to the reasons at [233] which read:
“An acceptance of [Mr]
Sader’s evidence is crucial if I am to be persuaded by the [employer] to
make factual findings
as discussed at paragraph 230 above.”
appellant refers to other evidence which it submits would support a finding that
the worker did not injure body parts (other than
the right ankle) in the
incident on 18 November 2020. The other evidence referred to is predominantly
that of Mr Baccouni and the
clinical notes from Royal Prince Alfred
The appellant
additionally refers to an absence of contemporaneous complaint to
“treating doctors” and to the report
appellant also refers to other matters raised in [230] of the reasons, not of a
medical nature: PIAWE, current work capacity and
treatment costs. The appellant
submits Mr Sader’s evidence “had little, if anything, to do with
factual findings”.
appellant submits it follows that the Member’s findings were
“necessarily the result of an improper process of reasoning
and must be
set aside”.
Second respondent’s submissions
second respondent refers to the matters described in the reasons at [230], to
which Mr Sader’s evidence was said to be “crucial”.
notes this references the nature of the proceedings, a claim seeking to recover
compensation paid on behalf of an uninsured employer.
second respondent states the appellant’s position was that the only injury
suffered by the second respondent was to his
right ankle, which accorded with Mr
Sader’s evidence, he claiming to be a direct witness to the incident. The
Member did not
accept Mr Sader’s evidence on this point. The second
respondent submits the Member then looked elsewhere for corroborative
of the injury in respect of which compensation was paid. The Member dealt with
Mr Baccouni’s evidence but found it
also to be unreliable. In those
circumstances the Member accepted the worker’s evidence in concert with
clinical material which
he identified. The second respondent submits this
involved a clearly defined path of reasoning which did not disclose
Consideration
Member’s reasons should be read as a
The appellant’s
submissions on this ground specifically rely on the reasons at [233], in which
the Member observed that “acceptance
of [Mr] Sader’s evidence is
crucial if I am to be persuaded by the [employer] to make factual findings as
discussed at paragraph
[230] above”. Mr Sader was the principal of the
appellant, which disputed the worker’s version of the accident, to which
Mr Sader said he was a witness. The dispute regarding how the accident occurred
was of clear relevance to whether the Member accepted
the worker’s
version, and to whether the other injuries (beyond the right foot and ankle)
resulted from the accident or not.
Clearly, evidence from Mr Sader on this
topic was of critical importance in resolving the injury and causation issues
going to the
other body parts allegedly injured. I cannot see how the
Member’s use of the word “crucial” in the circumstances
amounted to error. The reference in the appellant’s submissions on this
ground, to PIAWE and work capacity, are not significant
to the main issues
between the parties and are something of a distraction.
submissions of the appellant placed understandable emphasis on the notes from
the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and Dr Swid, in
arguing that the only injury
sustained by the worker on 18 November 2020 was to his right ankle. The Member
quoted from
, which dealt with the importance of contemporaneous
evidence in personal injury cases. The Member also quoted from
which dealt with the caution required of a court (or a tribunal) in approaching
“apparent inconsistencies” in accounts
recorded by health
professionals. The Member discussed the probative force of the notes, from the
hospital and Dr Swid, at [259]
to [263] of the reasons.
is apparent there was evidence from which it could arguably be inferred that the
worker injured only his right ankle in the incident
on 18 November 2020. The
Member was clearly aware of this evidence and dealt with it. The Member
specifically referred to the notes
from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He
observed that the notes referred only to injury to the right foot and ankle,
they did not record
other injuries and the worker was described as being
“otherwise well”. The notes recorded “No” in answer
the question “Did the patient present to hospital with a fall?”. The
Member referred to Dr Swid’s notes; the
Member noted that, on two
consultations in December 2020, Dr Swid recorded complaints that related only to
the right ankle. Dr Swid’s
notes on 14 January 2021 additionally referred
to the right gluteal region and groin (see [26] to [27] above).
Member’s reasons at [253] to [263] dealt with the notes from the hospital
and Dr Swid. He referred to the “brief nature
of the notes”. The
Member referred to an inaccuracy in the hospital notes, which referred to the
worker being struck by a “piece
of marble (rather than a gyprock
board)”. On this point I accept that the worker, in cross-examination,
agreed that he had
used the word “marble” when he gave a history at
the hospital.
hospital notes included a history of injury: “Dropped piece of marble onto
correctly observed that the hospital notes did not refer to the accident as
being work-related. I agree with the Member’s
observation that it would be
“rare for hospital staff not to ask such questions”. The Member
noted 18 November 2020 was
during the COVID-19 pandemic and hospital staff were
under considerable pressure. He said the worker had described the hospital as
matters were consistent with the point made by Basten JA in
regarding the need for caution in dealing with “apparent
inconsistencies” in notes recorded by health professionals
authorities discussed below in the consideration of Grounds Nos. 5, 6 and 7).
Member’s reasons at [255] set out the worker’s reasons for why he
did not report the “full extent of his injuries”.
One of these was
that he did not wish to cause issues for the appellant, who was uninsured and
had requested that the worker not
say the accident had occurred during
employment. Other reasons were that he was more concerned about his right ankle
injury and that
he was waiting to see Dr Sarian. The Member described these
reasons as “satisfactory”. He specifically accepted the first
reasons listed above, on the basis Mr Sader’s first statement was
consistent with him attempting to avoid liability
for the accident. The Member
did not, on the basis of the medical material raised in this ground, conclude
that the worker’s
only injury was that to his right foot and ankle.
appellant’s submissions also referred to the evidence of Mr Baccouni whose
account, regarding where and how the accident
occurred, was generally supportive
of Mr Sader’s evidence that the worker’s injury was restricted to
the right ankle
(see [11] above). In the reasons at [244] the Member described
Mr Baccouni’s oral evidence as “often unresponsive, regularly
confusing, and at times inconsistent” (see [48] above). The reasons at
[239] identified multiple inconsistencies between the
evidence of Mr Sader and
Mr Baccouni. The Member concluded that Mr Baccouni did not provide “the
necessary reliable corroboration”
of Mr Sader’s evidence. This is an
apparent reference to the Member’s analysis of Mr Sader’s credit in
the reasons
at [233] to [243], in which he described Mr Sader’s evidence
as needing “corroboration in accordance with
Engineering
]”. It is appropriate to quote from
Engineering
in which Handley JA, referring to the credit of a party who was
found to have given evidence involving deliberate lies,
“This did not necessarily require the trial Judge to
reject the whole of his evidence. Nor on the other hand was the trial Judge
entitled to simply accept the whole of his evidence except those parts that the
respondents had established was false.
In my opinion the perjury by the worker required the trial Judge to carefully
assess the rest of his evidence in order to determine
its honesty and
reliability. Some of his evidence may have been acceptable because it was
confirmed by other independent or objective
evidence. However where the
worker’s evidence was not independently supported it clearly had to be
assessed with great care
to determine whether it could properly be accepted as
proof of any matter that was in issue in the
proceedings.”
appellant’s submissions on this ground allege error on the Member’s
part, in describing acceptance of Mr Sader’s
evidence as
“crucial”, when there was evidence from the medical notes and Mr
Baccouni which could, in any event, lead
to the conclusion that the
worker’s injury was restricted to his right ankle. For reasons referred to
above, the Member rejected
the argument that the medical notes and Mr
Baccouni’s evidence led independently to this conclusion. It was, in those
circumstances,
logical that the Member treat Mr Sader’s evidence as
“crucial” in dealing with the issue. In my view Mr Sader’s
evidence on the point, he being a principal of the appellant and an alleged
eyewitness to the accident, could fairly have been described
“crucial” in any event.
Member also referred to the report of Dr Allen (see [16] above), a matter to
which the appellant referred in its submissions on
this ground. The Member said
he did not “afford much weight” to Dr Allen’s report for
reasons given at [271] to
[273]. Dr Allen does not assist the appellant’s
argument that there was some error in the Member’s description of
Sader’s evidence as “crucial” to whether he accepted
the employer’s case. The probative force of Dr Allen’s
further discussed below in dealing with Ground No. 4.
note additionally that the appellant does not identify how this alleged error
raised in Ground No. 1 was
No. 1 fails.
GROUND NO. 2 – THE DELAY IN ARRANGING X-RAYS
Appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the reasons at [264], where the Member
“Further, I reject the proposition that the second
respondent’s delay in undertaking x‑rays affects his credit.
explained (see paragraph 158 above) that he was waiting for a claim number and
for Dr Sarian to refer him. This is an entirely
understandable explanation as
the doctor had been his treating general practitioner for many years.”
appellant, as part of the ground, states: “The second respondent had
earlier seen a different general practitioner in respect
of his workplace
injury, and there was no legitimate basis upon which to require Dr Sarian to
refer him for imaging.” The appellant
submits the assertion that the
worker “was dependent on a referral from Dr Sarian [was] nonsense”.
The appellant submits
the worker, in cross-examination, could not explain why he
did not obtain x-rays earlier, and then “vaguely asserted”
was waiting for a referral. It submits the worker could not explain why he did
not seek a referral earlier, having seen doctors.
It submits his evidence was
“utterly unpersuasive and ought to have detracted from his
appellant quotes from the transcript of the cross-examination of the
which is imperfect
and contains various passages that are “not transcribable”. The
passage from which the appellant quotes
concludes with the worker saying he did
not get x-rays done until August 2021, because he was waiting on referrals from
The appellant
refers to listening to the audio of the worker’s evidence and submits it
was “entirely unpersuasive, lacking
in clarity, conviction and
credibility”. The appellant submits the worker’s explanation that he
was “waiting on
referrals” was “so absurd that it ought to
have been found to affect the [worker’s] credibility in a material
It submits the delay in arranging x-rays was nine months from the
date of injury. It submits the records do not suggest he sought
a referral in
the intervening period. It submits the explanation for the lack of radiology
over that period was that the injuries,
other than that to the right ankle, were
not caused by the fall on 18 November
Second respondent’s submissions
second respondent addresses Grounds Nos. 2, 3, 5 and 6 together, on the basis
they deal with “acceptance of the worker’s
credibility/evidence with
reference to medical records”. The second respondent’s submissions
at [26] to [27] deal with
Ground No. 2. The second respondent refers to the
appellant’s description, of the second respondent’s evidence, as
“nonsense”.
The second respondent submits the
“appellant’s opinion [of] the [worker’s] evidence is hardly
determinative of
the appeal nor is its analysis of the coherence of the
[worker’s] evidence relevant”. The second respondent submits the
Member heard the evidence, including the cross-examination, and was “best
placed to make a judgment call on the store to [attach]
Consideration
worker gave oral evidence and was cross-examined at some length. The Member
dealt specifically with his impression of the worker’s
credibility at
[248] of the reasons:
“In relation to the oral evidence given
by the second respondent, I have had an opportunity to review a recording of
evidence. The recording confirmed my initial view (from my witnessing
of the evidence being given) that the evidence was given in
a forthright,
consistent, and reliable manner. There were issues with the second
respondent’s recollection of his consultations
with doctors prior to 18
November 2020, but his cross-examination was otherwise unremarkable, and did not
cause me to question his
version of how his accident on 18 November 2020
occurred, especially considering that I was not impressed with the evidence
by [Mr] Sader and [Mr] Baccouni as to how it occurred.”
Member dealt with the evidence and credibility of Mr Sader in the reasons at
[233] to [237]. The Member referred to Mr Sader’s
statement dated 25 May
2021, which he said he would have expected Mr Sader to ensure was correct before
he signed it. The Member
at [235] of the reasons referred to matters in the
statement that the Member said were not true. One of these matters regarded Mr
Sader’s evidence, in his earlier statement, that the worker provided him
with an ABN which was owned by another person with
the same name as the worker.
The Member described Mr Sader, in his oral evidence, saying that he did not know
how the specific ABN
“got there”. The Member referred to Mr
Sader’s statement dated 25 May 2021 and its description of how often
worker worked with the appellant. Mr Sader said this was “1–2
days per week with the [employer], and would have worked
around 10 days in
all”. The Member said the worker provided “photographic and other
documentary proof that he at the
least worked on 14 different days”, not
including the accident date. The Member said that Mr Sader then changed his
and said the worker worked for the employer “three days per week
on average”. The Member referred to Mr Sader, in his
statement dated 25
May 2021, describing the worker carrying “villa board” on 18
November 2020, and changing this to “gyprock
boards” in his
statement dated 15 December 2023.
[242] to [243] of the reasons the Member specifically dealt with his impression
of Mr Sader’s credibility as a witness:
order to assess the evidence of [Mr] Sader, I had the opportunity to not only
witness him give his oral evidence,
but I also had an opportunity to review a
recording of that oral evidence. The recording confirmed my initial view that
the evidence
was often confusing or self-serving. He was especially not
convincing regarding his account of how the second respondent was employed
the [appellant], and in relation to the [appellant’s] general work
practices. His demeanour was concerning.
am not persuaded by Sader’s evidence. There were untruths told, as well as
evasive, inconsistent, and implausible evidence
given. The evidence needs
corroboration in accordance with
Engineering
Member dealt with Mr Baccouni’s evidence at [244]. The Member referred to
various inconsistencies. The Member said, “I
found his oral evidence to be
often unresponsive, regularly confusing, and at times inconsistent.” The
Member at [245] to [246]
of the reasons concluded on this
“245. Having considered in detail the evidence of [Mr]
Sader and [Mr] Baccouni, I do not feel the persuasion necessary in accordance
v KAB Seating Systems Pty
] to find that the
second respondent’s accident on 18 November 2020 did not occur in the
manner described by him. The [employer]
has not met its onus of proof in this
I am reasonably satisfied and actually persuaded that the 18 November 2020
accident occurred in the manner described by
the second respondent. He has been
consistent in that explanation and I found his oral evidence regarding how the
accident occurred
to be compelling and not affected by cross examination.”
appellant submits that, listening to the audio of the worker’s evidence,
it was “entirely unpersuasive, lacking in
clarity, conviction and
credibility”. The appellant makes multiple submissions on this ground that
the manner in which the
worker gave his evidence created an unfavourable
impression. It refers to the worker’s “tone, delivery, hesitations,
and pauses; features which are of particular significance in this case”.
The appellant submits the worker’s “delivery
was slow and halting,
punctuated by long pauses, frequent stuttering, and incoherent or unresponsive
The appellant also refers to the worker’s
explanation, that he was “waiting on referrals”, as “an
explanation
so absurd that it ought to have been found to affect the
[worker’s] credibility in a material
note the worker lodged a claim form with icare in March 2021, and liability was
denied (at that time) on the basis he was not a
worker or a deemed worker. He
had “no weekly money coming in” and “no medical bills being
paid”. The worker
said it was during this period that he was “trying
to make contact” with Dr Sarian, his “family doctor for over
years”. His evidence was that he remade contact with Dr Sarian, his family
doctor in whom he had confidence. The worker
described Dr Sarian as not
“easy to get hold of” at that
The referral of a
patient to a specialist (or specialists) typically involves an exercise of
judgment, on a general practitioner’s
part, in determining what is
reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances. I do not accept the
appellant’s submission that
the worker’s explanation was “so
absurd” that it adversely affected the worker’s credibility.
appellant submits that, listening to the audio of the worker’s evidence,
it was “utterly unpersuasive and ought to
have detracted from his
credit”. I have listened to the recorded evidence. There were occasions
where the worker’s evidence
was hesitant and occasions when he had
apparent difficulty in understanding and responding to some questions. I did not
form an adverse
view of the worker’s credibility simply from listening to
him give evidence. I reject the submission to the contrary. The Member
dealt specifically with the view he formed of the credibility of each of the
three witnesses who gave evidence.
Member made specific findings, discussed above, regarding his assessment of the
credibility of Mr Sader, Mr Baccouni and the worker.
He found Mr Sader’s
evidence to be “often confusing or self-serving”. Mr Sader’s
demeanour was “concerning”.
There were “untruths told”
as well as “evasive, inconsistent and implausible evidence”. The
Member described
Mr Sader’s evidence as requiring corroboration,
consistent with the decision in
Malco Engineering
(see the reasons at
[242] to [243]). The Member was also critical of the evidence of Mr Baccouni,
which he did not accept (see [244]
to [245] of the reasons). The Member
described the worker’s evidence as being given in a “forthright,
consistent and
reliable manner”. He described the worker’s evidence
of medical consultations prior to 18 November 2020 as “not
satisfactory”. He said he exercised “extra care” in assessing
the worker’s evidence, but this was
the only evidence of the worker that
he found to be “compromised”. He said this was “entirely
to his view of the evidence of Messrs Sader and Baccouni.
Member’s findings under attack in Ground No. 2 relate to credit. For
reasons given above, Ground No. 2 fails. Additionally,
the relevant findings are
dependant, at least in part, on the Member seeing and hearing the witnesses give
their evidence. Consistent
with the passage from
at [62] it is necessary, in the circumstances, that I act with
“[a]ppellate restraint with respect to interference with a trial
judge’s [or member’s] findings unless they are ‘glaringly
improbable’ or ‘contrary to compelling inferences’.”
am not persuaded the relevant findings can be categorised in that way. I note in
May v Costaras
Court of Appeal dealt with a challenge to the credibility of a party/witness
where it was argued that the primary judge had erred
in making a finding as to
the credibility of that party. The parties accepted this challenge was subject
to the principles in
Fox v Percy
. Payne JA (Bell CJ and McHugh JA
agreeing) dismissed the challenge on the basis the finding had not been shown to
be “glaringly
improbable”.
the appellant has not demonstrated that the Member’s findings, on the
credit of the three witnesses who gave evidence,
were glaringly improbable or
contrary to compelling inferences. Ground No. 2 fails.
GROUND NO. 5 – THE WORKER’S CREDIBILITY
NO. 6 – REGARDING THE WORKER AS A CREDIBLE WITNESS
GROUND NO. 7 –
THE HOSPITAL CLINICAL NOTES
grounds deal with the credit issue and associated factual findings that arise
from the worker’s evidence, the clinical
notes from Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital and the notes of Dr Swid. It is convenient to deal with them
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits the Member found the worker’s evidence was
“compromised” only in respect of his recollection
consultations prior to the work injury on 18 November 2020. The appellant
submits this did not take account of the hospital
notes (which did not record a
history of a fall or of injuries other than the right leg) or of Dr Swid’s
notes on 1 December
2020, 15 December 2020 and 14 January 2021 (which
referred to the injury to the right leg only). The appellant additionally refers
to the worker’s demeanour during cross-examination, of which it is
critical, and the alleged inadequacy of the worker’s
explanation for not
undergoing x-rays until August 2021. It submits the finding that the worker was
generally “a witness of
credit” was
unavailable.
appellant submits the Member erred in treating
as supporting a need
to approach the hospital records with caution. It submits
distinguished; in that case there were material omissions in the history taking.
It submits in the current matter there was
no evidentiary basis to find the
history taking was incomplete and “it is nonsense to think such error
occurred”. It
submits the hospital records do not support the
worker’s version of events because that version “is
appellant repeats its criticism of the worker’s “delay” in
undergoing x-rays after 18 November 2020. It criticises
the worker’s
evidence regarding his appointment with Dr Allen. It refers to the
worker’s evidence regarding a motor vehicle
accident in February 2017. It
submits listening to the recording of the worker’s evidence on this
“critical”. The appellant submits the audio recording of the
worker’s evidence should cause doubt regarding
his credit.
appellant submits the worker incorrectly denied prior complaints in body parts
that were allegedly injured on 18 November
The appellant submits
the finding that the worker was a credible witness cannot stand, the
worker’s evidence was compromised.
It submits the Member’s findings
on credit were “glaringly improbable” and “contrary to
compelling inferences”.
It submits there is “little evidence that
the Member’s findings on credit reflected advantages in seeing and hearing
[the worker]”. It submits the findings do not appear to be based on
demeanour, and I am in as good a position as the Member
to draw inferences from
proven facts and the evidence as a whole. It submits the worker was not a
credible witness.
appellant submits, dealing with Ground No. 7, that
distinguished. The appellant repeats its submission that the Member erred in his
assessment of the probative force of the
hospital notes. The appellant repeats
its submission based on the hospital notes, on the basis the notes do not
contain complaints
beyond the right foot and ankle. The submissions contain a
table, which I will not reproduce here, that sets out various complaints
recorded in the notes. The appellant has placed emphasis on the complaints
Foot v marble block
Dropped piece of marble onto
Otherwise fit + healthy
other injuries
Large marble slab fell onto top of
”. The complaints recorded in the table do not refer to
injury other than to the right foot and ankle.
appellant describes it as error for the Member to characterise the notes as
“brief and inaccurate”. It submits they
are notes of a kind
“routinely relied upon in forensic assessments of injury”. The
appellant submits the description
of the item that struck the worker as
“marble” was consistent with the history given by the worker at the
appellant submits there was no evidence of failure by hospital staff to record
an adequate history. It submits that to do so would
be a breach of their
obligations in treating the worker and it is “nonsense to think such error
occurred”. The appellant
submits the records do not support the
worker’s version because that version is false. The appellant submits the
worker could
not “give a sensible explanation for why the records of RPAH
read as they did”. When asked in cross-examination whether
anything to doctors and nurses at the hospital “about your injuries at any
time” he responded, “Can’t
recall”. The appellant refers
to evidence from the worker, when asked whether he would answer truthfully if
asked by a doctor
or nurse whether he had had a fall, to which he said
“Yes.” The appellant submits this response in the evidence of the
worker should be
Second respondent’s submissions
second respondent submits:
“Despite having previously raised
the argument, which was dealt with and determined by the [M]ember in his
reasons, the appellant
seeks to reagitate the same issue which it [then]
traversed further in the fifth and sixth grounds of appeal as the basis for an
alternative outcome to that arrived at by the [M]ember.
It is clear from the [M]ember’s reasons that he engaged with the
appellant’s disquiet relative to the asserted discrepancies
clinical reporting, expressed vociferously at first instance, he identified the
argument, and provided a clear path of reasoning
as to why he preferred an
alternative
with the hospital notes the second respondent submits:
appellant ignores a central issue to the [Member’s] analysis of the Royal
Prince Alfred (RPA) records; the manner
in which they were created (see reasons
par 263(b)).
Again, the appellant elevates the RPA's records to a level, from an
evidentiary point of view, that the Courts ... have consistently
The [M]ember at paragraph 263 was at pains to explain why he had taken a more
cautious approach to the records as far as their place
in the overall
evidentiary picture was
concerned.”
Consideration
worker’s demeanour under cross-examination has been discussed above. The
challenge to the worker’s credit, based on
his explanation for not
undergoing x-rays until August 2021, has been discussed above. The issue of
whether the audio of the worker’s
evidence casts doubt on his credibility
has been discussed above.
is necessary to deal with
. There is a well-known line of authority,
is part, regarding the weight to be attached to the notes
of treating medical practitioners. In
Container Terminals Australia Ltd v
“In the present case the appellant sought to challenge
the acceptance of oral testimony of the plaintiff in part on the basis
inconsistent histories given to medical practitioners. The apparent
inconsistencies were put to the plaintiff in cross-examination,
obtaining any significant concession. Her Honour was entitled to discount the
inconsistencies, for reasons which might have
been repeated, but which are too
commonplace to require repetition. They include the following:
(a) the medical practitioner who took the history was not cross-examined about
the accuracy of what was recorded (often, for good
reason, because it is
unlikely that he or she will have any real recollection of the circumstances in
which the record was made);
(b) medical histories were taken in furtherance of a purpose which is not
identical with the purpose of establishing liability in
(c) the histories did not make reference to the questions which elucidated the
(d) the material recorded was a summary of answers rather than a verbatim
recording, and
(e) there may be a range of factors, including fluency in English, the
practitioner’s knowledge of the background circumstances
of the accident
and the patient’s understanding of the purpose of the question, which will
affect the content of the
New South Wales Police Force v Winter
Campbell JA (Giles JA and Handley
AJA agreeing) said:
“It is important to remember that clinical
notes are rarely (if ever) a complete record of the exchange between a patient
a busy general practitioner. For this reason, they must be treated with some
Nominal Defendant v Clancy
[2007] NSWCA
Davis v Council of the City of Wagga
[2004] NSWCA 34
[2007] NSWCA
Basten JA said:
“First, the trial judge was
invited to discount the appellant’s oral testimony on the basis of
accounts given to various
health professionals, which appeared inconsistent
either with each other, or with her oral testimony, or both. The difficulties
this kind of exercise should be well-understood; as explained in
Container Terminals Australia Ltd v Huseyin
[2008] NSWCA
, such apparent inconsistencies may, and often should, be
approached with caution for the following reasons, amongst others:
(a) the health professional who took the history has not been cross-examined
(i) the circumstances of the consultation;
(ii) the manner in which the history was obtained;
(iii) the period of time devoted to that exercise, and
(iv) the accuracy of the recording;
(b) the fact that the history was probably taken in furtherance of a purpose
which differed from the forensic exercise in the course
of which it was being
deployed in the proceedings;
(c) the record did not identify any questions which may have elucidated
(d) the record is likely to be a summary prepared by the health professional,
rather than a verbatim recording, and
(e) a range of factors, including fluency in English, the professional’s
knowledge of the background circumstances of the
incident and the
patient’s understanding of the purpose of the questioning, which will each
affect the content of the
appellant submits
can be distinguished, as that case involved
“material omissions due to limitations in the medical history
taken”. It submits
that, in the current case, the notes expressly recorded
“nil other injuries”. It submits there is no evidence of medical
staff failing to take an adequate history in the current matter. It submits
there was unambiguous evidence denying a fall.
authorities referred to above do not rely on specific evidence of deficiencies
in the history taking in individual cases (although,
if present, this could
obviously be relevant). The range of factors identified by Basten JA in
were not specific to the circumstances of those
cases. What the decisions point out is the potential limitations of such
having regard to its source, and the associated care that should be
taken in considering its acceptability and weight. It is appropriate
regard to the context in which such documentary evidence was brought into
the current matter, the Member identified a number of factors that could be
relevant to the weight to be given to the evidence
from Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital (see [56] above). One of these (the inaccurate reference to the worker
being struck by marble)
should be left aside, bearing in mind the worker, in
cross-examination, conceded having said this to hospital staff. The other
mentioned were valid. The hospital attendance was during the COVID-19
pandemic. The hospital was described as “chaotic”.
worker’s surgery was twice delayed due to the arrival of COVID-19
patients. The recorded history at the hospital failed
to refer to whether the
incident was work-related, something that is typically recorded in such
histories. The Member considered
the weight of the hospital notes by reference
to the discussion in
, an approach which was available, consistent
with authority and appropriate.
appellant submits the Member’s findings were not based on demeanour. The
Member made an adverse credit finding regarding
Mr Sader at [242] to [243] of
the reasons which was clearly based on his observations of Mr Sader giving
evidence, and which specifically
referred to Mr Sader’s demeanour. The
Member made a generally positive assessment of the worker’s credibility
with some reservations) in his reasons at [246] to [252]. At [248] the
Member said the worker’s evidence was given in “a
forthright,
consistent and reliable manner”, this based on the Member’s
“witnessing of the evidence being given”.
The Member said his
initial view was confirmed on reviewing a recording of the oral evidence.
at [55] refers to the need for appellate restraint in
respect of:
“... findings unless they are ‘glaringly
improbable’ or ‘contrary to compelling inferences’ is as
factual findings which are likely to have been affected by impressions about
the credibility and reliability of witnesses formed
by the trial judge as a
result of seeing and hearing them give their evidence. It includes findings of
secondary facts which are
based on a combination of these impressions and other
inferences from primary facts.”
do not accept the submission that the Member’s credibility findings were
not based on demeanour.
appellant refers to Dr Swid’s consultations on 1 December 2020, 15
December 2020 and 14 January 2021. It submits the notes
of these visits referred
only to the right ankle injury. The Member accepted the worker’s
explanation for the lack of complaint
to Dr Swid, of injury to body parts
additional to the right foot and ankle. This was that he was waiting to see Dr
Sarian, that he
did not wish to cause trouble for Mr Sader who was uninsured,
and that his primary concern was the right ankle injury (see the Member’s
reasons at [253] to [256]).
Swid’s clinical notes on 1 December 2020, 15 December 2020 and 14 January
2021 (like the hospital notes) did not mention
that the injury occurred at work.
The notes dealt largely with practical treatment of the serious ankle injury. On
1 December 2020,
the worker was using crutches and Endone was prescribed. On 15
December 2020, the worker was mobilising with crutches, sutures were
the wound was cleaned and dressed, the worker was advised on the use of a
‘camboot’ and Endone was prescribed
at a reduced rate. On the last
of these consultations, on 14 January 2021, there was a complaint of skin
tenderness and scratching
in the right gluteal region. The worker was using
crutches and a camboot and told the doctor he had attended a clinic at the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital on 8 January 2021, where there was physiotherapy and
Endone was not given. The notes are consistent with the
third of the reasons
(set out in [135] above) that the Member accepted in respect of the initial lack
of complaint of matters other
than the right ankle. They are not inconsistent
with the first and second of those reasons. They do not significantly assist the
appellant’s challenge to the worker’s credibility.
appellant refers to an entry in the hospital notes on 18 November 2020, which
recorded the worker did not present to the hospital
with a fall and had not
fallen within the past two
The note appears
beneath a heading “Screening for Risk”. There is a list of matters
which range from “Pregnancy
Status” and
“Breastfeeding/Lactation”, through “Major surgery or
Trauma”, “Neurological Deficits”
and “Severe
Illness”, to whether the patient has a history of smoking, drinking
alcohol or recreational drug use. The
responses were prepared by a named
registered nurse. Other matters listed included whether there was a history of
presenting “to
hospital with a fall”, having “fallen within
the past 2 months”, and “vision issues, blurred vision, eyeglasses
etc”. This part of the notes then gave a “Falls history score”
and an “OMS Falls Risk” (each of “0”).
The note went on
to assess the falls risk in additional categories, which included
“Confused?”, “Disorientated?”,
Agitated?”,
“Vision”, “Glaucoma” and “Toileting”.
of the factors referred to in
, as relevant to the weight to be
afforded to histories recorded in the notes of treating practitioners, was the
purpose for which
such a history was recorded. This will often differ from the
use for which the history is deployed in the proceedings. This section
notes produced a “Discharge Risk Assessment” which dealt with
whether the patient was likely to have self-care
problems, the patient’s
living arrangements, caring responsibilities and current community services.
This aspect of the notes
is consistent with a purpose different to that for
which the appellant seeks to employ the history. One would not expect it to
necessarily
provide a clear history of the mechanics of the worker’s
injury on 18 November 2020. The Member said he exercised “significant
caution in the weight” that he gave to the hospital records and the notes
of Dr Swid, relying on
which the Member dealt with this evidence was consistent with
related authorities. It did not, in my view, involve error.
have not accepted the various submissions raised in support of Grounds Nos. 5, 6
and 7. Those grounds fail.
GROUND NO. 3 – THE FINDING REGARDING CONSISTENT
Appellant’s submissions
The appellant refers to the finding at [269] of the reasons. It is necessary to
read that paragraph with [268] which precedes it:
have accepted that the second respondent’s accident on 18 November 2020
occurred in accordance with his evidence
that he dropped a gyprock board onto
his right knee and then onto his right ankle while he was descending stairs, and
then fell backwards
onto the stairs, injuring his back, neck and right hip,
while other gyprock boards fell onto his right shoulder.
discussed, this evidence was consistently given to the [second
respondent’s] treating medical practitioners, as well as
to Dr Millons.
Their opinions were therefore given in a ‘fair climate’ in
accordance with
Paric v John Holland (Constructions) Pty Limited
Paric v John Holland (Constructions) Pty Limited
NSWLR 505. Dr Bodel’s history however was that the second respondent fell
down the stairs, and it is questionable
therefore whether his opinion as to the
injuries caused was given in a ‘fair climate’.”
appellant submits there was not consistent reporting, in that the worker failed
to report the injury to body parts other than
the right leg. It refers to
and the need for a factfinder to be persuaded of the occurrence of
a fact. It refers to
appellant submits that if the worker “
had a fall down the stairs
with debris falling on top of him or along with him” he “would have
revealed same to the hospital staff” (emphasis
added). It submits
“[n]o such history ever appears”. The appellant refers to
Dr Swid’s notes which do not include
a history of injury other than
to the right leg. The appellant submits there was not consistent reporting to
the treating doctors.
It submits this should have raised serious doubts
regarding the worker’s
credibility.
Second respondent’s submissions
second respondent describes this ground as being related to Ground No. 2. The
second respondent submits the Member thoroughly
analysed the issues, typified by
the observation at [261] of the reasons:
“The brief nature of
the notes is understandable in the circumstances, and for the reasons enunciated
, I am cautious as to their accuracy regarding their lack of
observations of any injuries other than to the second respondent’s
ankle. I am also cautious as to their accuracy of recording that no fall
occurred on 18 November 2020, especially as that recording
is a one-word answer
of ‘No’ (see paragraph [127]
Consideration
appellant’s submissions on this ground are framed on the basis the
worker’s version of the injury was that he suffered
with debris falling on top of him” (emphasis added). The
worker’s version of the accident was set out in the reasons
at [154] to
“154. He said that the accident occurred around the
fourth-fifth step shown in the photograph.
He did not fall down the steps,
but landed on them.
At the time, he was carrying four or five gyprock sheets
with tiles attached to them. He had collected the sheets from the bathroom
[Mr] Sader and [Mr] Baccouni were working. He picked up around two sheets, and
[Mr] Sader loaded others on to him. He was carrying
the sheets with both arms in
a cradled position. The total weight of the load that he was carrying would have
been 40–50 kg.
The sheets varied in size and shape.
one of the gyprock sheets came loose while he was walking down the steps, and it
struck his ankle. He was not sure how the sheet
came loose. He
backwards onto the steps
, and gyprock sheets fell on top of him. He landed
on his back and right arm, and the sheets hit his right shoulder and his right
groin, but not his neck, back, left shoulder, or right hip. Some of the sheets
then went further down the steps, but not to the bottom
of the steps.
felt his back ‘slam’ onto the steps, and he also hurt his neck when
he fell back onto the steps.” (emphasis
Member specifically found that the accident happened “in the manner
described by the second
respondent”.
to the appellant’s submissions, the worker’s accepted evidence was
not that he suffered a fall down the stairs.
Contrary to the appellant’s
submission, one would not have expected a history that he fell down the stairs
when his given history
was that he fell backwards on the steps landing on his
back and right arm.
appellant’s submissions refer to the history recorded at the hospital
going to whether the worker had a fall. This has been
discussed above. The
appellant raises Dr Swid’s notes regarding the consultations on 1 and 15
December 2020 and 14 January
It raises the absence
of recorded complaint to the hospital and to Dr Swid of complaints other than
those relating to the right foot
and ankle. The date of injury was 18 November
2020. The worker was discharged from hospital on 21 November 2020. The
appellant’s
challenge to the consistency of the history recorded by Dr
Swid, on the three consultations that followed the accident, is dealt
at [135] to [138] of these reasons. I did not conclude that this aspect of the
Member’s reasons involved appealable
Member at [269] of his reasons referred to the consistency of histories in the
Paric v John Holland Constructions Pty
authority that deals with the need for an expert medical opinion to be based on
admissible evidence, and the effect of a lack
of correlation, between the
provable facts and the assumed history, on the weight of such expert evidence.
Whether the evidence on
which the worker relies, for expert medical opinion,
correlates appropriately with the proven facts depends on the version of the
contested facts which is accepted. The history for which the appellant advocates
is that which it argues may be inferred from the
hospital records, together with
Dr Swid’s notes from 1 and 15 December 2020 and 14 January 2021. The
appellant’s reliance
on this material is more as evidence of fact
(regarding the injury suffered by the worker) rather than medical opinion
It may be accepted that, if the only injury suffered by the worker on
18 November 2020 was to the right ankle region, the later medical
dealing with other injuries would potentially be deprived of persuasive force.
This is consistent with
Member described the history of multiple injuries, set out at [268] of his
reasons, as having been “consistently given to
the [second
respondent’s] treating medical practitioners, as well as to Dr
Millons”. I would not describe the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital as a
“treating practitioner”. The history recorded at the hospital has,
in any event, been discussed
at some length above. The various doctors consulted
by the worker, after discharge from the hospital, were given the history of
complaints, with the exception of Dr Swid. To this extent, the Member
misstated the history recorded by Dr Swid. The Member was clearly
aware of that
history, he dealt with it in his reasons at [253] to [255], and [259] to [263].
The Member accepted the worker’s
given reasons for not mentioning the
multiple other injuries, in both the histories recorded at the hospital and by
Dr Swid. Reading
the reasons as a whole, the Member did not proceed on any
misapprehension regarding the true state of the medical histories. To the
to which the Member misstated the history recorded by Dr Swid, there is no basis
to regard this as material
No. 3 fails.
GROUND NO. 4 – DR ALLEN’S OPINION
Appellant’s submissions
Allen was qualified on the appellant’s behalf. The appellant submits the
Member erred in not finding the doctor’s opinion
provided a basis to doubt
the worker’s reliability. Two specific reasons are given in support of
this submission:
(a) The Member described Dr Allen’s history of the accident as
“brief and [it] does not include a fall onto stairs”.
The appellant
submits this reasoning is “circular”, it assumed the truthfulness of
the worker’s account and thus
argues that the doctor’s history was
unreliable because it was different to the worker’s evidence.
(b) The Member relied on insufficient objective evidence to confirm injury on
18 November 2020, other than that to the right ankle.
The Member said this
was despite “overwhelming supportive medical evidence from the
[worker’s] treating medical practitioners”.
This reasoning is
submitted to be circular.
appellant submits Dr Allen (unlike Drs Bodel and Millons) was provided with the
entirety of the medical evidence. The appellant
submits the worker’s
statement dated 12 March 2024 gives an untrue account of events on the day of Dr
Allen’s assessment.
The appellant submits the worker’s statement is
consistent with the doctor, without cause, becoming agitated, refusing to
a formal examination and abandoning the assessment. The appellant
submits “the
available inference” (emphasis in original)
is that the worker did not wish to be interrogated about his injuries and
an explanation to excuse his behaviour. It submits it was error that the
Member accepted the worker’s evidence on this point,
worker’s evidence should have affected his credibility
appellant states the Member, in the reasons at [271(a)], said he did not
“afford much weight to Dr Allen’s opinions
as (a) his history of the
[worker’s] accident is brief and does not include a fall onto
stairs”. The appellant submits
this is circular reasoning, it assumed a
fall onto stairs when it was the appellant’s case that there was not a
fall onto stairs.
The appellant submits there was a similar difficulty with the
Member’s reason at [271(d)] of the reasons – Dr Allen considered
there was insufficient evidence to confirm any injury beyond that to the right
ankle, despite overwhelming support for that proposition
from the worker’s
treating medical practitioners. The appellant submits the Member
“faulted” Dr Allen for reaching
a different conclusion, rather than
engaging with Dr Allen’s opinion and reasoning. It submits this was not a
reasoned determination
appellant also disputes that there was “overwhelming supportive
evidence” of the injuries other than the right lower
limb. It submits that
for two months the treating records were silent with respect to any such
injuries. The appellant submits the
Member erred in not regarding Dr
Allen’s opinion as a basis to reject the credibility of the
appellant additionally has lodged supplementary submissions dated 10 April 2025.
The appellant in these quotes from Dr Allen’s
report dated 30 January
The appellant also
quotes from the transcript of 19 March 2024, in which the worker was
cross-examined about the examination with
The appellant quotes
the following from Dr Allen’s report:
“Mr Saleh was a
hostile attendee.
Mr Saleh attended for an assessment today, but cooperated poorly with the
assessment.
Despite being advised that there was no recording to be undertaken Mr Saleh
nevertheless attempted to record the assessment today
and refused to cooperate
with the physical examination.
His interview and assessment of the history was generally uncooperative and
during the examination an attempt to assess the various
joints was complicated
by voluntary restriction in motion and poor cooperation.
When the inconsistencies in examination were noted to him his cooperation
deteriorated further and the examination was abandoned.
Furthermore, he refused to allow me the opportunity to review his X-rays
which he brought with him and insisted on taking them out
of the room with
Owing to the lack of cooperation a full examination could not be undertaken
and the following report constitutes the total of the
assessment available.
The assessment was terminated by joint
the transcript of his evidence the worker denied being “entirely
uncooperative” and not happy to be there. The worker
denied refusing to
let the doctor review his x-rays. The worker agreed that he was not prepared to
leave the x-rays with the doctor
and when asked why the worker responded,
“Because he was telling me to get out of the room ...”. It was put
to the worker
that Dr Allen was “never angry with [him]”, which the
worker said was “not correct”. The worker agreed the
doctor told him
that he was “purposely not trying”. The worker said he responded
that he was happy to do whatever was
asked of him. He agreed the doctor said,
“Put your clothes on, we’re finished”. The cross-examination
of the worker
included the following:
“Q. And the reason you
didn’t want Dr Allen to examine you was because there was nothing wrong
with your back or your
neck or your shoulders in relation to this incident in
November 2020, is that right?
appellant submits the evidence of the doctor and the worker was “utterly
irreconcilable”. It submits this should have
caused doubts about the
worker’s reliability. It submits the Member erroneously discounted the
reliability of Dr Allen’s
account with circular reasoning, which
presupposed the accuracy of the worker’s account. It submits Dr
Allen’s report
was “not given due
Second respondent’s submissions
worker submits the appellant’s position is that the Member should have
relied on Dr Allen’s evidence as a basis to
reject the worker’s
evidence. The worker submits the Member’s analysis approached the issue
from the perspective of the
appellant’s onus. He submits the
appellant’s position is that the Member should have relied on Dr
Allen’s opinion
of the worker’s credibility, in making his own
determination of the worker’s credibility, which is described as a
worker submits the Member dealt with Dr Allen’s report at some length and
explained his reasons for preferring other evidence,
there was no
Consideration
with the first of the specific points raised by the appellant (see [149] above),
the Member’s finding of injury, in
a vigorously contested case, was made
on the whole of the evidence. The Member discussed (at some length) the credit
of the witnesses
who gave oral evidence (in his reasons at [233] to [265]). He
made specific findings on the mechanics of the injury, consistent with
acceptance of the worker’s evidence, at [268] of his reasons. This
included a finding that, after dropping a gyprock board
onto his right leg, the
worker “fell backwards onto the stairs, injuring his back, neck and right
hip, while other gyprock
boards fell onto his right shoulder”.
appellant submits Dr Allen was provided with the entirety of the medical
evidence. Dr Allen’s report, under the heading
“History Of
Presenting Complaint”, described the following:
date in question, being 18 November 2020 he was at work when a piece of gyprock
fell and lacerated the front of his
right ankle.
He went to hospital where the laceration was treated and sutured and he
remained in hospital on an intravenous drip for four days.
X-rays were taken and demonstrated no fractures.
The only injury noted at the time was the injury to the right ankle.
The admission notes from hospital at the time note the laceration of the
ankle and its treatment.
There was no other injury noted.
In particular, there is no injury to his spine, neck, shoulders, knee or any
other parts of the body. Though Mr Saleh remained in
hospital for a few days,
there is no reference at all to any other injuries over and above the ankle
laceration.
Mr Saleh subsequently claimed an injury to his back, neck, right shoulder and
right knee for which he had some investigations in 2021.
These are not injuries
which are noted at the time of his initial assessment and are considered
therefore entirely independent of
the injury sustained which was a laceration to
the right ankle.
He has had investigations for these various conditions, has been treated with
physiotherapy and has also now been recommended a surgery
on his right shoulder.
None of these treatments can be attributed to the reported accident.
Of note is that he has been taking Endone and Panadeine Forte continuously
for the last three
history set out above is consistent with being compiled from the medical
evidence, in particular the notes from Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital. It is quite
unlikely it represents a history furnished by the worker to the doctor. Dr
Allen’s above assessment of
the ‘injury’ issue
(unsurprisingly) took no account of the many factors, involving legal issues and
findings on credit,
that led the Member to reach the conclusion which he did.
The submission that the Member assumed the truthfulness of the worker’s
account is incorrect. Following an extensive consideration of the evidence and
the credibility of the witnesses, the Member made
a finding, for which he gave
reasons, that he accepted the worker’s evidence of how the injury took
place. Dr Allen plainly
rejected the truth of the worker’s account,
referring to the hospital notes and the notes of Dr Swid, which had been
to him. The worker submits, in my view correctly, that the
appellant’s position is that the Member should have accepted Dr
Allen’s opinion on the worker’s credit and the injury issue. These
were not simply medical issues. They were issues which
had to be decided on the
whole of the evidence, including consideration of the credit issues.
second specific point made by the appellant is that there was insufficient
objective evidence of injury on 18 November 2020 to
body parts other than the
right ankle. This submission appears to relate to the delay in documented
complaints of the other body
parts, additional to the right ankle. The period
during which the other complaints were undocumented was identified by the Member
as running from 18 November 2020 to 27 January 2021, when the worker
consulted Dr Sarian (see the reasons at [262] to [263]). This
submission was
raised, in varying ways, in the multiple grounds of appeal discussed above.
Ultimately, the Member accepted the worker’s
explanation for not voicing
such complaints before he saw Dr Sarian (see the Member’s reasons at [263]
to [265]). The Member
did so in circumstances where he heard the worker, Mr
Sader and Mr Baccouni give evidence. The Member specifically accepted the
reasons for not having reported “the full extent of his
injuries to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital or Dr Swid” (see the
Member’s reasons at [255]).
is clear there was friction between Dr Allen and the worker. The worker’s
statement dated 12 March 2024
indicates the doctor prevented the worker’s mother from accompanying him
into the examination. The worker states the doctor
had apparently read the
medical file prior to the appointment and at the outset said, “We are here
to discuss your ankle injury.”
The doctor accused the worker of attempting
to record the assessment, which the worker denied. The doctor said the worker
“cooperated
poorly” with the physical assessment, which the worker
denied in his statement. The doctor said the worker refused to let him
the x-rays, which the worker denied.
is little to be gained from attempting to weigh up the merits of each
party’s submissions dealing with Dr Allen’s
assessment, which would
inherently involve speculation. The Member, in my view correctly, said it was
clear to him that there was
a significant disagreement between the worker and
the doctor during the consultation, which affected the doctor’s ability to
provide a complete and reliable report. This was plainly accurate. The appellant
submits the Member simply accepted the worker’s
evidence regarding the
attendance on Dr Allen, when Dr Allen’s evidence should have affected the
worker’s credibility.
The Member, in my view rightly, did not make credit
findings adverse to either Dr Allen or the worker. The Member observed
were mechanisms, such as s 119 of the 1998 Act, which were not used, and
which could have been used to require the worker to attend
consultation, with Dr Allen or another doctor. This specific finding is not
challenged on appeal.
is necessary that I apply the principles discussed in the passages quoted at
[83] to [87] above. The Member was in a “position
of advantage” over
mine in making the factual findings which he did, based on seeing the worker, Mr
Sader and Mr Baccouni give
evidence. I am not persuaded that the Member’s
findings were “glaringly improbable” or “contrary to
inferences”.
No. 4 fails.
various grounds of appeal have failed.
appeal is dismissed.
Certificate of Determination dated 14 February 2025 is
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
24 September 2025
Transcript of preliminary
conference, 7/2/24 (T1), T1
Robs Extreme
Construction Pty Ltd v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (icare)
(reasons) [8].
Reasons, [8].
Insurer’s Reply, pp
Insurer’s Reply, pp
Application
to Admit Late Documents (AALD), 27/2/24, pp
[93]–[100].
Worker’s reply,
[101]–[112].
[113]–[116].
Worker’s reply, p 126.
Reasons, [117]–[119].
Worker’s reply, p 95.
Reasons, [120]–[122].
Reasons, [123]–[124].
Reasons, [125].
27/2/24, pp 147–246.
Reasons, [126]–[129].
AALD 27/2/24, pp
[133]–[134].
27/2/24, pp 247–279.
Reasons, [135].
27/2/24, pp 294–442.
Reasons, [136]–[137].
Reasons, [138]–[174].
Reasons, [142].
[149]–[151].
[158], [167].
[175]–[179].
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 117
Malco Engineering
Reasons, [192]–[198].
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
[200]–[203].
Reasons, [208]–[212].
Reference is made to
Davis v Council of the City of Wagga Wagga
Mason v Demasi
[2009] NSWCA 227
Winter v New South Wales Police Force
[2010] NSWWCCPD
Reasons, [215].
[219]–[225].
[2008] NSWCA 246
[234]–[236].
[238]–[239].
[242]–[243].
[153]–[157].
[249]–[252].
[253]–[256].
Lloyd’s Rep 403
[257]–[264].
[265]–[266], [275].
Reasons, [271]–[274].
Reasons, [276].
[277]–[279].
[279]–[282].
[283]–[290].
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
[2023] NSWPICPD 69
A1 Granny Flats
A1 Granny Flats
[2025] NSWCA 157
Second respondent’s further submissions,
House v The
House v The
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
Fox v Percy
[2019] HCA 28
[2023] NSWCA 287
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
Appellant’s
supplementary submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
v Government Insurance Office (NSW)
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
appellant’s supplementary submissions,
RPAH clinical
notes, Second respondent’s Reply, p
[259]–[260].
Malco Engineering
See generally,
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 22
209 CLR 478
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA
, 419, quoted in
Trazivuk v Motor Accidents Authority of New South
[2010] NSWCA 287
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
Transcript, 19/3/24 (T2), T2
73.29–76.10.
75.30–76.4.
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
NSWWCCPD 10.
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
Transcript, 21/5/24 (T3), T3
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
T2 17.34–20.00.
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
12.33–13.09.
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
40.10–27, appellant’s supplementary submissions, [28]–[35].
T2 38.01–06,
appellant’s supplementary submissions, [37]–[42].
respondent’s submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
[2011] NSWCA 330
ET-China.com International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
[2021] NSWCA 24
, [28]–[29];
J & E Vella Pty Ltd v Hobson
[2023] NSWCA 234
AALD 27/2/24, pp
204–5, 217.
[261]–[263].
[1995] NSWCA 497
49 NSWLR 315
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
[1985] HCA 58
59 ALJR 844
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
, 419, quoted in
Trazivuk v Motor Accidents Authority of
New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 287
Appellant’s
preliminary submissions,
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
Appellant’s preliminary submissions,
27/2/24, pp
47.15–49.25.
27/2/24, pp 119–120.
Appellant’s supplementary submissions,
respondent’s submissions,
27/2/24, pp
12/3/24, pp 1–5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.41 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter