URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/292.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Warren v Director General Department of Attorney General and Justice (NSW Trustee and Guardian) [2013] NSWADT 292 (19 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Warren v Director General, Department of Attorney General and Justice (NSW
Trustee and Guardian)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 292
Hearing Date(s):
11 December 2013
Decision Date:
19 December 2013
Equal Opportunity Division
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
The respondent's application for the applicant's complaint to be
summarily dismissed is refused
Catchwords:
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION - application for summary dismissal - relevant test -
applicant's evidence to be taken at its highest - complaint
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Cases Cited:
Carter v Linuki Pty Ltd trading as Aussie Hire & Fitzgerald (EOD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 40
Fricke v Corbett Research Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADT 128
Jones v Trad
[2013] NSWCA 389
Linnell v Seachem Australia Pty Ltd
Margan v University of Technology, Sydney
[2003] NSWADTAP 65
Nicholls and Nicholls v Director General, Department of Education and
Training (No 2)
[2009] NSWADTAP 20
Interlocutory applications
Damian Warren (Applicant)
Director General, Department of Attorney
General and Justice (NSW Trustee and Guardian) (Respondent)
Representation
Ms P Lowson (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Mr D Warren (Applicant in person)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Director-General, Department of Attorney General and Justice (the respondent)
has applied to the Tribunal to summarily dismiss
Mr Warren's complaint of
victimisation under the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(AD Act). Mr Warren
is employed as a Principal Client Property Officer in the Client Assets Branch
of the NSW Trustee and Guardian
(NSWT&G). He complains that the Chief
Executive Officer, Ms Dodds, suspended him on full pay in May 2012 because he
had provided
information and a statement in support of a complaint of disability
discrimination by Ms Bozinovska, a Senior Legal Officer in the
Legal Branch of
the NSWT&G. Ms Bozinovska is Mr Warren's partner. Her complaint was against
an Assistant Director of the NSWT&G,
Mr von Schill.
Minns, who is Mr Warren's direct supervisor, acted as Mr Warren's support person
during these proceedings.
have decided not to dismiss the application. The basis for the respondent's
application is a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence available to
support Mr Warren's complaint. Such an application would most usually be made
only after his case has been
heard and, even then, subject to the reasonable
apprehension of what might be revealed in the respondent's case. The
respondent's
application is premature because the complaint is not so obviously
untenable that it cannot possibly succeed.
Principles for summary dismissal
respondent submitted that the victimisation complaint should be dismissed
because it is misconceived and lacking in substance:
AD Act, s 102 and s
92(1)(a)(i). The discretion to summarily dismiss a complaint is to be exercised
with extreme caution:
Fricke v Corbett Research Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADT 128
(29 June 2004) at [41] and [42]. The Tribunal must take the applicant's case at
its highest and determine whether, on the basis of
that evidence, he or she
could possibly substantiate the complaint.
Margan v University of Technology, Sydney
[2003] NSWADTAP 65
, the Appeal
Panel set out the scope of the summary dismissal power in relation to s 111 (the
former, relevantly identical, provision
in the AD Act) at [9], [10] and
[9] The words "frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance"
were interpreted, in a slightly different but analogous
context, by Hunt J in
Langley v Niland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104.
At 107 Hunt J held that those words
relate to the "insufficiency or to the absence of merit of the factual basis for
the allegations
made in the complaint rather than to whether the complaint is
one within the provisions of the Act at all."
[10] . . . The rule gives the Court a discretionary power to dismiss the
plaintiff's case when it is so weak that to permit the proceedings
trial would be futile:
Peter Kent Developments Pty Ltd v Australia & New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(SC (NSW), Hunt J, 6 May 1980, unreported).
Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure NSW
(Peter Taylor SC ed, Butterworths
1984) notes at 2325 that "The test to be applied has variously been described as
whether the matter
is `so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed',
`manifestly groundless', `so manifestly faulty that it does not admit
argument', one which `the court is satisfied cannot succeed', one where under no
possibility can there be a good cause of action'",
or one which `would involve
useless expense' (
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Pannizutti v Trask
(1987) 10 NSWLR 531
Rajski v Powell
(1987) 11 NSWLR 522
Brimson v Rocla Concrete Pipes Ltd
[1982] 2 NSWLR 937
[15] The Tribunal has warned that extreme caution must be exercised when
determining a s 111(1) application prior to the substantive
hearing. In
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2000] NSWADT 150
Tribunal rejected a party's request to deal with the s 111 application prior to
the hearing, on the basis that there was no evidence
or agreed facts on which
the Tribunal could base its decision. Similarly, the Tribunal in
Tafe Commission of New South Wales
[2000] NSWADT 187
expressed the view that
particular caution is necessary in cases where a s 111(1) application is made
prior to the adducing of the
applicant's evidence at the substantive hearing. We
agree, but the warning warrants refinement. It is the case that when the s 111
application is, in effect, a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence
available to support the complainant's version of events,
the application would
most usually be made only after the complainant's case has been heard and, even
then, subject to the reasonable
apprehension of what might be revealed in the
respondent's case, as we discussed above.
Victimisation
Warren complains of victimisation. Section 50 of the AD Act states
(1) It is unlawful for a person ("the discriminator") to subject another
person ("the person victimised") to any detriment in any
circumstances on the
ground that the person victimised has:
(a) brought proceedings against the discriminator or any other person under
(b) given evidence or information in connection with proceedings brought by
any person against the discriminator or any other person
under this Act,
(c) alleged that the discriminator or any other person has committed an act
which, whether or not the allegation so states, would
amount to a contravention
of this Act, or
(d) otherwise done anything under or by reference to this Act in relation to
the discriminator or any other person,
or by reason that the discriminator knows that the person victimised intends
to do any of those things, or suspects that the person
victimised has done, or
intends to do, any of them.
order to substantiate his complaint of victimisation, Mr Warren would have to
prove that NSWT&G, as Ms Dodds' employer, subjected
him to a 'detriment' 'on
the ground' that he had done one of the things listed at s 50(1)(c) and/or (d).
The detriment which Mr Warren
identifies in his complaint to the
Anti-Discrimination Board and in his Points of Claim is Ms Dodds' decision to
suspend him on full
pay for approximately six months from 15 May 2012. The
respondent accepts that Ms Dodds made that decision although it was the then
Director General of the Department, Mr Glanfield, who signed off on it. The
respondent did not submit that the complaint should be
summarily dismissed
because Mr Warren had not identified a relevant detriment, that is being
suspended even on full pay.
Warren identified several other detriments in the material he filed with the
Tribunal in relation to this application. I have not
assessed his complaint on
the basis of those further detriments. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to
determine the complaint as referred
by the President of the Anti-Discrimination
Board: AD Act, s 95. Mr Warren has not applied to amend his complaint to allege
alternative
detriments: AD Act, s 103.
respondent's case is that the complaint should be dismissed firstly because, on
the evidence as it currently stands, Mr Warren
will not be able to establish a
connection between his actions in supporting Ms Bozinovska's complaint and being
suspended on full
pay. Secondly, Mr Warren will not be able to establish that
his support of Ms Bozinovska's complaint amounts to:
(1) an allegation that any person has committed an act which would amount to a
contravention of the AD Act; or
(2) doing something under or by reference to the AD Act.
Causal connection?
with direct discrimination, the phrase 'on the ground that' in s 50 means that
whatever Mr Warren did (in this case provided file
notes and statements in
support of Ms Bozinovska's complaint) must be at least one of the 'real',
'genuine' or 'true' reasons that
he was suspended:
Nicholls and Nicholls v
Director General, Department of Education and Training
NSWADTAP 20
approved in
Jones v Trad
[2013] NSWCA 389
the Points of Claim, Mr Warren lists the circumstantial evidence on which he
relies in relation to his claim that there is the
necessary connection between
his support of Ms Bozinovska and the decision to suspend him.
the basis of Mr Warren's evidence as currently filed, some of the material facts
that he says support a causal connection are:
(1) on 29 September 2011, Mr von Schill referred to Ms Bozinovska as "the hard
of hearing girl in the city" and Mr Warren reported
this to Ms Bozinovska that
(2) on 30 September 2011, Ms Minns told Mr Warren that Mr von Schill had
mimicked Ms Bozinovska's hearing disability and Mr Warren
reported that to Ms
Bozinovska;
(3) on 14 November 2011, Ms Bozinovska lodged a formal grievance about those
(4) on 16 November 2011, Mr Warren prepared a file note about Mr von Schill's
conduct and gave it to Ms Bozinovska;
(5) on 28 November 2011, Ms Dodds requested the Director of the Office of the
Public Guardian, Mr Graeme Smith, to undertake an internal
investigation of Ms
Bozinovska's complaint;
(6) on 5 December 2011, the Director General approved a submission from Human
Resources and Ms Dodds to appoint Ms Woodhouse of Woodhouse
Consultancy, to
review the NSWT&G Assets Branch;
(7) on 5 December 2011, Mr Smith interviewed Ms Bozinovska about her
(8) on 12 December 2011, Ms Dodds announced a Workplace Review of the Client
Assets Branch;
(9) on 19 January 2012, at a meeting with Ms Bozinovska in relation to the
complaint against Mr von Schill, Ms Dodds allegedly said,
"You acted on hearsay.
You were not there." A similar comment was also made in a letter from Ms Dodds
to Ms Bozinovska dated 17 January
2012, that is, ". . . you have acted on
hearsay in accepting the advice of third parties in relation to Mr von
(10) on 23 January 2012, Mr Warren provided Ms Bozinovska with a signed
statement about Mr von Schill's conduct;
(11) on 27 January 2012, Ms Woodhouse interviewed Mr Warren as part of the
(12) around 1 February 2012, an unnamed member of staff reported to Mr Warren
that during her interview with Ms Woodhouse she asked
whether or not Mr Warren
or Ms Minns had bullied them;
(13) on 6 February 2012, Mr Warren wrote to Mr Baldi expressing concerns about
the way Ms Woodhouse was conducting the Workplace
(14) on 9 April 2012, Ms Woodhouse delivered two reports to Ms Dodds, the main
report in response to the terms of reference and a
supplementary report
containing allegations against Mr Warren and Ms Minns;
(15) on 11 May 2012, Mr Warren received a letter from the Director General
advising that he has been suspended and that an investigation
will commence into
his conduct.
respondent submits that there can be no causal connection between Mr Warren's
support of Ms Bozinovska and the decision to suspend
him because, among other
(1) employees of the respondent did not become aware until 16 November 2012 that
Mr Warren had made allegations about Mr von Schill's
(2) the timing of the allegations and the decision to suspend do not suggest a
connection;
(3) the reason for the suspension was a supplementary report prepared by Ms
Woodhouse. (That report detailed allegations made by
7 staff of the Client
Assets Branch about three staff members including Mr Warren. Ms Dodds decided to
obtain an independent disciplinary
investigation into those allegations and to
suspend Mr Warren and Ms Minns pending those
investigations.);
(4) there are several events which intervened between Mr Warren making the
statement in relation to Mr von Schill's conduct and the
decision to suspend, in
particular, the decision to conduct a review and the findings of the review;
(5) there is direct evidence of the reason for suspension in the supplementary
report whereas Mr Warren must rely on inferences to
support his theory that
suspension was because of the statement he made in support of Ms Bozinovska's
respondent does not submit that Mr Warren's complaint fails to disclose a
contravention of the AD Act. Rather, the respondent's
application for summary
dismissal is a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence available to support
Mr Warren's contention that
there is a link between two events. That contention
must be 'so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed'. While the
is circumstantial and the respondent has put forward other reasons for
the suspension which it says are more plausible, the complaint
cannot be said to
be so lacking in substance that it should be summarily
Did Mr Warren make an allegation that comes within s 50(1)(c) or
trigger for the detriment to which Mr Warren was subjected is said to be the
fact that he alleged that Mr von Schill committed
an act which, whether or not
the allegation so states, would amount to a contravention of the AD Act, or
otherwise did something
under or by reference to the AD Act in relation to the
discriminator or any other person: s 50(1)(c) and (d).
aspect of the respondent's application is that Mr Warren's complaint does not
disclose a contravention of the AD Act because
the allegations he made about Mr
von Schill do not come within s 50(1)(c) or (d). The submission does not relate
to the sufficiency
of the evidence.
Warren's allegation under s 50(1)(c) is that "a person" (Mr von Schill)
committed two acts: referring to Ms Bozinovska as "the
hard of hearing girl in
the city" and mimicking Ms Bozinovska's hearing disability. One issue for the
Tribunal if this matter goes
to hearing would be whether those allegations, if
proved, would amount to a contravention of the AD Act.
to the respondent, Mr Warren has not alleged that Mr von Schill has committed an
act that would amount to a contravention
of the AD Act. Rather Mr Warren has
provided an account of something said by Mr von Schill in his presence and an
account of another
incident involving Mr von Schill that Ms Minns witnessed. As
Ms Bozinovska was not present on either 29 or 30 September, when Mr
was alleged to have made the comments, she cannot have been discriminated
contravene the AD Act, Mr von Schill's alleged conduct would have to come within
s 49D(2)(a) or (d) of the AD Act:
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of disability:
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
definition of direct disability discrimination is in 49B(1)(a) of the AD
49B What constitutes discrimination on the ground of disability
(1) A person (
the perpetrator
) discriminates against another person
the aggrieved person
) on the ground of disability if the perpetrator:
(a) on the ground of the aggrieved person's disability or the disability of a
relative or associate of the aggrieved person, treats
the aggrieved person less
favourably than in the same circumstances, or in circumstances which are not
materially different, the
perpetrator treats or would treat a person who does
not have that disability or who does not have such a relative or associate who
has that disability,
is authority for the proposition that the person (in this case Mr von Schill)
has to "treat" the aggrieved person (in this case
Ms Bozinovska) in some way
before the aggrieved person can prove a contravention of the AD Act. If the
aggrieved person is not present
when the alleged discrimination or harassment
occurred, then that person is less likely to be able to prove that he or she has
'treated' in a particular way:
Carter v Linuki Pty Ltd trading as Aussie
Hire & Fitzgerald
[2005] NSWADTAP 40
Seachem Australia Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWADT 61
(25 March 2011) at [33]. Mr
Warren will have to persuade the Tribunal hearing his case that these
authorities are not relevant or
should not be followed. But the question of
whether the allegations against Mr von Schill, if proved, would amount to a
contravention
of the AD Act, is not so obviously untenable to warrant summary
Warren did not specify what else he had done by reference to the AD Act which
would bring his allegations within s 50(1)(d).
The respondent's application for the applicant's complaint to be summarily
dismissed is refused.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (157 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter