URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MURRAY, Nigel Peter [2019] NSWMPSC 1 (4 February 2019)
H17/9432 : DD18/61923
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Nigel Peter Murray MED0001191860 344685
Date/s of Inquiry:
27 & 28 November 2018
Committee members:
A/Professor Diane Robinson, Legal Chair Dr Larissa Burke, General
Practitioner VMO Dr Russell King, General Practitioner
Ms Jeanette Barker, Lay member
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Emma Bayley, Legal Officer
Appearance for Dr Nigel Peter Murray:
Mr Aitken of counsel instructed by Ms Francesca Davis from Avant Law.
Date of decision:
4 February 2019
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand Dr Murray and impose conditions on
registration.
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 25 of this decision for details of non- publication
REASONS FOR DECISION THE COMPLAINT
May 2015 the family of Patient A made a complaint to the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the Commission) in relation to Dr Murray’s
care of Patient A
during her admission to Corowa Hospital in January 2015.
13 December 2017 the Commission made a formal complaint alleging that Dr Murray
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
That Complaint is now being
prosecuted before this Professional Standards Committee.
summary, the Complaint alleges that Dr Murray failed to provide adequate care
and treatment to Patient A by giving telephone orders
for various medications,
including substantial doses of Morphine, without attending the patient; by not
assessing the patient after
being advised of a significant change in her
condition and by failing to immediately transfer Patient A to a larger hospital
he did assess her. It is also alleged that Dr Murray failed to make
adequate progress notes in relation to Patient A.
Complaint contains several Particulars and is set out in full in Annexure A to
this decision.
LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law NSW
(National Law (NSW)), as, amongst other things,
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
by the practitioner in the practice of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2010 sets out
certain requirements relating to the information to
be included in medical
139B of the National Law (NSW), relevant provisions of the Health Practitioner
Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2010
and other relevant legislative
provisions are set out in Annexure B to this decision.
STANDARD OF PROOF
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Dr Murray is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaint is the civil standard so
the Committee must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of
the matters alleged against Dr Murray. Given the seriousness of the allegations
and the nature of their
consequences, the Committee needs to be comfortably
satisfied that the Complaints have been established on the Briginshaw principles
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336).
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
Amended Complaint
the commencement of the hearing the Commission sought leave to amend the
Complaint to correct a typographical error in Particular
5. No objection was
raised and leave was granted.
Committee has considered the documents provided by the parties. The Commission
provided two volumes of documents tabbed 1 to 66.
Dr Murray provided a one
volume of documents tabbed 1 to 10.
Murray made several admissions in relation to the factual aspects of the
Complaints. He also admitted that certain aspects of his
conduct were
significantly below the appropriate standard.
Non-publication order
non-publication direction was made preventing disclosure of the name, address
and any information which might identify the patient
referred to as Patient A in
the Complaint.
following people gave evidence to the Committee:
Dr Howle, rural
general practitioner and expert witness for the Commission.
Longmire, retired registered nurse. Ms Longmire gave evidence by conference
issues to be determined by this Committee are:
if any, of the Particulars of the Complaints are proven to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Committee.
the proven conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The
Committee can look at all the conduct found
proven either separately or
cumulatively when making a determination as to whether the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
Duncan v Medical Disciplinary Committee
[1986] NZCA 465
[1986] 1 NZLR 513
at 545, 546 and 547)
such a finding is made the Committee must decide whether orders or directions
made pursuant to Part 8 Division 3 Sub-division 3
of the National Law are
appropriate.
Dr Nigel Murray
Murray graduated MB BS from Monash University in 1997. He was an intern at Alice
Springs Hospital and then a resident medical officer
at The Bendigo Hospital in
Victoria. He began general practice training in 2000 working in Victoria,
Western Australia and New South
Wales. He became a Fellow of the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners in 2002. He received a Graduate
Diploma in Rural
General Practice in 2004 and a Fellowship in Advanced Rural
General Practice in 2007.
2004 and 2012 Dr Murray practised as a general practitioner (GP) in rural
Victoria. In 2012 he moved to practise at the Corowa
Medical Centre, where he is
still employed. He has also had a VMO appointment to Corowa Hospital since 2012
and he is a visiting
anaesthetist there.
Murray was first registered to practice medicine in Australia on 10 February
1999. He has had general and specialist registration
in general practice and is
currently registered without conditions.
8 January 2015 at around 8.15 pm Patient A, a 79 year old woman, presented to
Corowa Hospital Emergency Department. She had recently
had her first dose of
chemotherapy for the treatment of breast cancer. In the Emergency Department she
presented with a skin rash,
dry tongue and mucus membranes and a temperature of
37.4. She had felt unwell for three days with diarrhoea, nausea, loss of
and weakness in her legs.
A was assessed by Dr Murray. She was admitted overnight for monitoring and for
tests to be done. A full blood count and electrolytes,
including a white cell
count, was ordered to be done the next morning. Her temperature was to be
monitored and intravenous fluids
were administered.
the early morning, around 1.25 am, on 9 January 2015 Patient A experienced
abdominal pain. Dr Murray was telephoned. He prescribed
Buscopan and Morphine.
Buscopan was administered at 1.30 am and 7.5 mg of Morphine was administered at
2.15 am and again at 4 am.
Murray was telephoned a second time at around 4.50 am when Patient A’s
pain became severe. At this time she had a distended
abdomen and difficulty
passing urine. 12 mg Morphine was prescribed by Dr Murray.
A became distressed and increasingly confused. Dr Murray saw Patient A on the
ward around 7 am on 9 January 2015. Her fluid
administration rate was increased
and a catheter inserted. An abdominal X-ray was ordered, but not performed.
Additional Morphine
was prescribed and administered around 8.15
8.55 am Dr Murray asked for an ambulance to be organised to transfer Patient A
to Albury Base Hospital. The ambulance was called
at 9:08 am. A short time
later, Patient A became pale and unresponsive, with shallow and rapid breathing.
Oxygen therapy was initiated
and Naloxone administered.
A was discharged at 10.20 am and taken by ambulance to Albury Base Hospital,
where a laparotomy was performed. Patient A died
at 2.55 pm on 9 January
COMPLAINT 1
1 deals with clinical issues and alleges Dr Murray is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct as he failed, in various
ways, to provide appropriate care
and treatment to Patient A.
Particular 1
Between about 01:25 and 01:30 on 9 January 2015, the
practitioner failed to provide appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he gave a telephone order for Buscopan and 7.5 mg Morphine in circumstances
practitioner had assessed Patient A at about 20:52 on 8 January 2015 (“the
initial assessment”);
practitioner was aware during the initial assessment that Patient A had
undergone her first dose of chemotherapy for breast cancer
previously;
practitioner had observed during the initial assessment that Patient A had a
rash on her skin, a dry tongue and mucous membranes
and a temperature of
practitioner was aware during the initial assessment that Patient A complained
of being unwell for three days with diarrhoea,
loss of appetite, nausea and
weakness in her legs;
registered nurse telephoned the practitioner between about 01:25 and 01:30 on 9
January 2015 (“the first call”) during
registered nurse told the practitioner that Patient A was experiencing abdominal
practitioner did not elicit further symptoms or ask for vital
pain had not been reported to the practitioner during the initial
assessment;
pain was a new symptom with an uncertain cause;
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner did not attend Patient A before giving the telephone
Dr Murray’s evidence
Murray initially assessed Patient A when she presented to the Emergency
Department on the evening of 8 January 2015. In his statement
dated 24 September
2018, Dr Murray says his impression was that she may have been suffering from
dehydration due to vomiting and
diarrhoea which may have been a reaction to her
first round of chemotherapy.
said he thought she needed further investigations to rule out infection. Dr
Murray said he considered the diagnosis of febrile
neutropenia, but didn’t
consider it very likely, as the patient was not febrile. He could not make
definitive diagnosis at this point and his plan was to admit her overnight for
monitoring and to get tests done. Fluids were administered
to treat dehydration
and staff were to watch for the development of fever which might suggest
1 relates to Dr Murray’s conduct at the time he received the first phone
call around 1.25 am on 9 January 2015. Dr
Murray admits the facts alleged in
Particulars 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 1e(i), 1f and 1i. He did not personally attend the
patient but gave
a telephone order for Buscopan and 7.5 mg
relation to Particular 1 e (ii) Dr Murray said the nurse who telephoned him did
not provide information about the patient’s
signs and symptoms. Dr Murray
said that he usually asks questions about a patient’s symptoms, and
conceded he could have elicited
further information and it would have been
prudent to do so.
oral evidence, Dr Murray indicated he was unaware of the location of Patient
A’s pain or whether there was guarding or bowel
sounds. He could not
recall if the nurse told him about Patient A’s heart rate or provided
information about her fluid balance.
He agreed he did not decide to increase the
frequency of the observation of Patient A’s vital signs. Dr Murray also
that at this time he was not aware of the specific chemotherapy drugs
Patient A had recently been given. Blood gas and lactate test
results were not
available and he was not sure of the patient’s exact
Murray acknowledged that the patient did not complain of pain at the initial
assessment. In his oral evidence he agreed that the
abdominal pain was a new
symptom. He saw it as being connected to Patient A’s gastrointestinal
symptoms and consistent with
his working diagnosis. In his written statements Dr
Murray stated that in this context the development of abdominal pain does not
necessarily suggest a deteriorating patient. However he acknowledged in cross-
examination that it could indicate a serious condition
and be a symptom of
asked about prescribing Morphine, Dr Murray said he did not consider oral
analgesia to be an option as Patient A had been vomiting.
When asked about
prescribing a dose of 7.5 mg of Morphine, Dr Murray said he decided to give
Patient A a decent dose rather than
trial a lesser pain killer. He said he gave
the Morphine subcutaneously because it would have a slower onset and a longer
Dr Murray also said that dehydration reduces tissue perfusion so the
absorption of the morphine is reduced and in these circumstances
a higher dose
relation to Particular 1 Dr Murray concludes,
“I made a telephone order ..., which is not unusual
however I agree with the benefit of hindsight that in this case, it does
demonstrate a high level of care and attention on my part. I accept it is below
the standard expected of me, however I do not
believe it is significantly below
Dr Howle’s evidence
his report dated 3 February 2017, Dr Howle states,
“Assuming Dr Murray was aware that the patient may have
been neutropenic, a new symptom (the abdominal pain) should have alerted
him that the clinical situation had changed and may be deteriorating. So
it should have been reasonable for the doctor to elicit further
symptoms, as
well as asking for the vital signs (Pulse rate, blood pressure, temperature,
respiratory rate and fluid balance) before
deciding on any further
treatment..........
As Dr Murray did not personally assess the patient, I am
unsure as to what his diagnosis was, and so why he decided on prescribing
Buscopan (an antispasmodic) and Morphine.
I think for both these reasons, lack of assessment, and
ordering strong medication without reviewing the patient personally, his
was significantly below the standard expected and so invites strong
criticism.”
Howle told the Committee that the abdominal pain which Patient A developed
during the night could have several possible causes,
including constipation and
intestinal cramping or it could be caused by an issue separate to her presenting
gastrointestinal symptoms.
Patient A was unwell on arrival, and the development
of this new symptom could signify a serious condition.
Howle said that the nature of the pain and any change to it needed to be
assessed. He agreed that abdominal pain could be consistent
Murray’s working diagnosis, however he said he would expect that pain to
be relatively mild and not require treatment
with Morphine.
Howle told the Committee that the starting dose for Morphine varies depending on
the presentation of the patient. Factors such
as age, frailty, dehydration and
how haemodynamically stabile the patient is, are all relevant considerations. He
said generally
the starting dose is lower in elderly patients. Dosage also
depends on the patient’s weight and previous use of opioids. If
unclear, it should be assumed that the patient is opioid naïve. Dr Howle
said that the more elderly and dehydrated a
patient is, the greater the
likelihood of side effects from Morphine.
cross-examination Dr Howle conceded that it is important to try to alleviate a
patient’s pain, but stressed it is essential
to understand why the patient
is experiencing pain. He said that the cause of pain is very significant in
determining Morphine dosage.
Howle acknowledged that in 2015 the relevant Guidelines referred to febrile
neutropenia rather than neutropenic sepsis. It was
suggested to him that as
Patient A’s temperature was generally normal, it was reasonable for Dr
Murray not to focus on this
diagnosis. Dr Howle said that while temperature is
one of the indicators, in an elderly patient fever may not be the prominent
of neutropenia.
Other evidence
Committee also had written statements from Dr Michael King, dated 21 March 2016
and Dr Hamish Steiner, dated 30 May 2015. Other
than a general comment that it
is not unusual for doctors to sort things out over the phone at night, Dr
Steiner does not comment
on Dr Murray’s conduct around the 1:25 am phone
King states,
“The development of abdominal pain is a
significant change in her history. This should be reassessed by the medical
Giving significant analgesic should suggest then may be another
diagnosis. Giving morphine is appropriate if the pain severe (8/10)
cause of the pain had not been defined at this time.”
Murray has made significant admissions in relation to the factual matters
alleged in Particular 1. Based on the available evidence
and Dr Murray’s
admissions, the Committee is satisfied that Particular 1 is
Committee considers that prescribing for Patient A over the telephone in the
circumstances described in Particular 1 was not appropriate.
Patient A was an
elderly, frail woman who had recently had her first chemotherapy treatment and
who was exhibiting a new and potentially
significant symptom on a background of
feeling unwell for several days. Dr Murray stated that he had considered the
possibility of
infection and specifically neutropenic sepsis, but when alerted
to a new symptom, which he acknowledged could indicate a serious
condition, he
did not assess Patient A. He did not attend and examine her and there is no
evidence that he attempted an assessment
Murray submitted that it is not the case that there was no assessment of Patient
A. He said the registered nurse who phoned Dr
Murray had assessed Patient A as
having pain and cramping, which is why Buscopan and Morphine were prescribed.
The Committee does
not accept this submission. At this time Dr Murray had only
seen Patient A in the Emergency Department. The clinical notes indicate
limited initial clinical assessment had been performed. No blood test results
were available, he had no knowledge of the chemotherapy
agents she had been
given, he was unaware of basic information such as the patient’s heart
rate and fluid balance.
Committee concurs with the views of Dr Howle and Dr King that in this clinical
context Patient A needed to be assessed before
being prescribed Morphine.
prescription of Morphine carries risks and was potentially harmful in the
absence of any clinical assessment at that time. It
is also an unusual choice of
pain relief in a patient with suspected dehydration as a result of
gastrointestinal symptoms. In addition,
the dosage was high given the clinical
context, specifically that Patient A was elderly, opiate naïve and unwell.
Dr Murray’s
assertion that a higher dose of morphine is required when a
patient is dehydrated, given the effect of dehydration on tissue perfusion,
an unusual view, which is unlikely to be generally accepted as a justification
for high doses of Morphine for a patient such as
Murray acknowledges that his conduct did not demonstrate a high level of care
and attention and was below the expected standard.
The Committee agrees, but
finds, for the reasons stated above, that his conduct was significantly below
that standard.
Particular 2
At about 04:45 to 04:56 on 9 January 2015, the
practitioner failed to provide appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
he gave a telephone order for 12mg Morphine in circumstances where:
practitioner had already received the first call;
nurse supervisor telephoned the practitioner between about 04:45 to 04:56 on 9
January 2015 (“the second call”);
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had been given Buscopan
since the first call;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had been given Morphine
twice since the first call;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner during the second call that Patient A was
experiencing abdominal pain;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A’s pain was
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had a distended
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A was unable to pass
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A was distressed;
distension and difficulty passing urine had not been reported to the
practitioner during the initial assessment or during
the first call;
distention and difficulty passing urine were further new symptoms with unknown
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner did not attend Patient A before giving the telephone
Dr Murray’s evidence
Murray accepts that he had already received the first telephone call at 1:25 am,
when he received the second call at around 4.50
a.m. and that the nurse
supervisor told him Patient A had been given Buscopan and
Murray disputes that he was told Patient A had been given two doses of Morphine
since the first call. He says he understood she
had only received one dose of
7.5 mg Morphine. Dr Murray denies ordering 7.5 mg Morphine PRN, although this is
what is recorded in
the medication chart.
Murray acknowledges that he was told Patient A was experiencing abdominal pain,
which he understood was moderate to severe. He
does not believe he was told of
the patient’s distended abdomen. He cannot recall being told of her
difficulty passing urine,
but accepts he might have been given this information.
Dr Murray acknowledges that he should have been aware that the patient was
deteriorating. He accepts that he was asked to attend the patient, but did not
attend and gave another telephone order for 12 mg
of Morphine.
Murray accepts that he should have attended the patient in person and not
prescribe additional Morphine over the telephone. He
accepts that the need for
more Morphine should have triggered a clinical review at this time. He
“I admit that failing to attend when told of a
change in condition of the patient, or in circumstances where I should have been
more alert to the possibility of a change in condition, is a significant failure
of standards on my part.”
Ms Longmire
Longmire is a retired registered nurse who was the night supervisor at Corowa
Hospital on the night when Patient A was admitted.
She told the Committee that
she recalls telephoning Dr Murray around 4:50 am and asking him to come and see
Patient A, who was experiencing
severe pain. She said she told him that Patient
A had already had two doses of Morphine and Buscopan without pain
Longmire stated that she called Dr Murray as she was concerned about the
patient’s pain and also her abdominal symptoms.
Patient A had not
presented with this pain and it was escalating. She stated that she informed Dr
Murray that Patient A’s abdomen
was distended and she had difficulty
passing urine.
Longmire said that Dr Murray told her to try 12 mg of Morphine and that he would
see the patient ‘in the daylight hours’.
She did not recall Dr
Murray asking her any questions about the patient.
Longmire stated that she felt it was appropriate that she, as the nurse
supervisor, make the call to Dr Murray. She said she had
been a senior member of
the nursing staff at Corowa Hospital for 15 years and the doctors trusted her
judgment and were receptive
to her requests to attend. She said the purpose of
the call was to ask Dr Murray to review Patient A because of her severe pain and
given the fact she had not had pain on admission.
Howle states that Dr Murray’s decision not to attend, in spite of a
request to attend from a RN, a patient in whom they had
been several hours of
undiagnosed abdominal pain, classified as severe and now with a distended
abdomen is significantly below the
expected standard and invites strong
criticism. Dr Howle said that even if Dr Murray was unaware of the abdominal
distention, he
remained critical of his conduct as Patient A’s overall
clinical picture was very concerning.
Howle explained the possible causes for a distended abdomen and difficulty
passing urine. He said that without a clinical examination
the cause of these
problems remained uncertain, however serious possibilities, such as intra-
abdominal problems or internal obstructions,
needed to be considered. It is
important to examine the patient to determine the type of pain and its location,
to enable necessary
clinical findings.
stated that to order more Morphine before assessing the patient and making a
diagnosis is also significantly below the expected
standard and invites his
strong criticism.
Howle said that Dr Murray’s conduct in prescribing 12 mg of Morphine
approximately 2 ½ hours after prescribing 7.5 mg
of morphine PRN may be
appropriate, if a definitive diagnosis had been obtained and the gradual
escalation of the Morphine dose was
required to control pain. By way of example
he stated that providing a patient with two doses of 7.5 mg of Morphine followed
mg of morphine might be appropriate in a clinical situation where the
patient was receiving palliative care. Otherwise he said it
uncommon to increase the Morphine dose so quickly. Dr Howle emphasised that he
would only condone Dr Murray’s style of Morphine
prescribing if it was
supported by a diagnosis and management plan.
Other evidence
King states that the ongoing severity of the abdominal pain, requiring
increasing doses of Morphine, necessitates an assessment
by the medical officer.
The medical officer should initiate this assessment without necessarily being
prompted by the nursing staff.
Steiner states that in his experience it would be very unusual for a doctor to
be asked to come to the hospital to see a patient
and decline to do so. In these
circumstances he would expect the registered nurse to make a note of this
is a factual dispute about the content of the telephone conversation between Dr
Murray and RN Longmire at around 4.50 a.m. on
9 January 2015. Nurse Longmire
impressed the Committee as a frank and open witness. Although the clinical notes
did not greatly assist
her (the notes were not made by RN Longmire but by
another nurse to assist her), she was firm in her conviction that she could
the details of the conversation with Dr Murray. Her evidence was
consistent with her earlier statements dated 27 July 2015 and 15
October 2015
and her interview with staff from the Murrumbidgee Local Health District on 30
October 2015.
Murray told the Committee that he did not have a clear recollection of the
details of the conversation. In his written statement
dated 19 October 2018 Dr
Murray stated that he does not recall exactly what was reported to him in the
conversation. However in his
oral evidence he was firm in his belief that he was
not told about Patient A’s abdominal distension. He also asserts that he
was unaware of the second dose of Morphine administered to Patient A at 4
Murray’s evidence was not always consistent. For example, in his statement
to the Local Health District on 12 August 2015,
in referring to his conversation
with Nurse Longmire, he said,
“My recollection is that I
was not directly requested to attend immediately and I was not given any
specific information that
suggested this was necessary.”
his September 2018 statement Dr Murray again says he does not recall being asked
to attend Patient A, however in his oral evidence
he said he was asked to attend
and review the patient. When this apparent inconsistency was put to him, Dr
Murray confirmed that
Nurse Longmire had asked him to attend to review the
balance the Committee accepts the evidence of Nurse Longmire and finds
Particular 2 proven on its facts. The Committee also accepts
the evidence of Dr
Howle and Dr King that Dr Murray’s conduct in this instance is
significantly below the appropriate standard
Murray demonstrated a degree of recklessness in prescribing Morphine as he did
for a patient whom he had not adequately assessed.
He prescribed a large dose of
Morphine after having already prescribed a substantial dose some hours
previously. He did this without
obtaining adequate
information
and assess the patient personally. Dr Murray acknowledges
that his failure to
attend Patient A was a significant failing on his behalf and the Committee is
comfortably satisfied that Dr Murray’s
conduct in this regard constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 3
Between about 04:56 and 07:00 on 9 January 2015, the
practitioner failed to provide appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he did not assess Patient A before about 07:00 on 9 January 2015 in
circumstances where:
practitioner had already received the first call;
the second call:
Nurse Supervisor told the practitioner about Patient A’s Buscopan and
Morphine, severe abdominal pain, abdominal distension,
inability to pass urine
and distress;
Nurse Supervisor asked the practitioner to assess Patient A;
practitioner told the Nurse Supervisor that he would assess Patient A in the
daylight hours;
practitioner was the rostered on-call medical
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner had not seen Patient A since the initial
assessment;
Hospital had no on-site pathology or
Dr Murray’s evidence
Murray admits most of the factual allegations in Particular 3. He does not agree
that he was informed of the patient’s abdominal
distention, but he admits
he was the on-call medical officer, the nurse supervisor asked him to assess the
patient and he told her
he would do so in two hours time.
Murray told the Committee that between 4.56 am and 7 am on 9 January 2015, he
was in the hospital, in the on-call room, a short
distance from Patient
A’s ward. He acknowledged he had the ability to attend the patient.
Murray also explained that the potential side-effects of Morphine, as well as
relieving pain, are low blood pressure, a reduced
level of consciousness and
depressed respiration. He acknowledged there was a risk period of 20 to 30
minutes after administration
of the Morphine and he should have reviewed Patient
A after prescribing Morphine at 4:56 am. He said he now regretted his decision
not to do so.
his statement, dated 24 September 2018, Dr Murray states,
“I admit that failing to attend is a significant
failure of the standard of practice expected of me and that I should have been
more alert to the possibility of the patient deteriorating and needing
his second statement Dr Murray acknowledged that he failed to exercise
appropriate clinical skill and judgment.
“I admit that failing to attend the
hospital when called a second time was a significant failure on my part to
exercise the
care, skill and judgment that was reasonably expected of me, and I
agree with the HCCC expert peer that it was significantly below
the standard of
a GP VMO in my position. That is in response to those allegations in Complaint
1.2(l) and 1.3(d) that both relate
to the failure to attend the patient after
the phone call at 4:56.”
Howle told the Committee that after escalating a dose of Morphine it is
important to monitor the patient to check pulse, respiration,
blood pressure and
level of consciousness. After giving the order for 12 mg of Morphine at 4:56 am,
he would expect Dr Murray to
have reviewed the patient. He did not feel that
leaving such a review until 7 am was appropriate as Dr Murray was unaware of the
nature of Patient A’s condition or the cause of her pain. He felt that at
the time of the second phone call, given the constellation
of symptoms Patient A
was experiencing, it was not possible to be sure what was causing her
Howle comments,
“Unless Dr Murray was clear in his own mind
of the diagnosis, translated that information clearly to the nursing staff, and
felt confident that his further management was correct, (it is not obvious for
the documentation that he have formed an opinion about
the diagnosis), not to
attend was significantly below the expected standard and invites strong
criticism.”
Committee finds Particular 3 proven. The Committee agrees with Dr Murray’s
assessment that he failed to exercise appropriate
clinical skill and judgment in
not attending and reviewing Patient A shortly after prescribing 12 mg of
Morphine at 4:56 am.
Committee accepts the evidence of the expert witness that Dr Murray’s
conduct is significantly below the appropriate standard.
The Committee considers
it constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 4
Between about 07:00 and 07:32 on 9 January 2015, the
practitioner failed to provide appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he failed to immediately transfer her to a larger hospital when he attended
on her (“the second assessment”) in
circumstances where:
practitioner saw Patient A during the initial assessment;
practitioner had received the first call;
practitioner had received the second call;
practitioner had access to Patient A’s progress notes which indicated
abdominal discomfort at 00:54, abdominal pain at 01:20,
abdominal pain and
distention at 04:14, restlessness at 05:01 and confusion at 05:39;
practitioner had access to the bladder scan;
the second assessment, the practitioner recorded that Patient A had abdominal
pain, had not passed urine since admission and
had increasing
abdominal pain and low to nil urine output were persistent symptoms with unknown
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
Hospital had no on-site pathology or radiology
Dr Murray’s evidence
Murray admits the factual matters alleged in Particular 4 but he does not admit
that between 7 am and 7.32 am there was a need
for an immediate transfer. He
acknowledges there was a need to transfer Patient A, but not an immediate need
to do so at 7:30 am.
He did request an ambulance be called to transport Patient
A to Albury Base hospital at 8:55 am. The ambulance was called at 9:08
arrived at Corowa Hospital at about 9:50 am.
Murray said that having had the morning handover he was aware of Patient
A’s deterioration. He reviewed her around 7 am and
was aware that her
clinical picture had changed. He had access to her clinical records and was
aware of her level of pain, nil urine
output, increasing confusion and other
symptoms. His clinical notes around 7.30 am refer to a plan for Patient A to
have an indwelling
catheter, an abdominal X-ray, an increase in fluids and
“consider transfer to Wodonga Private under K. Clarke.”
Murray told the Committee that X-ray facilities became available between 8 am
and 8:30 am and he originally planned to keep Patient
A at Corowa Hospital while
awaiting the results of the abdominal x-ray, however it became clear that this
was not reasonable.
stated that after reviewing Patient A he attempted to get information from her
treating oncologist, Dr Clarke which he felt would
assist with her future
management. He could not recall exactly when he had attempted to contact Dr
Clarke but believes it was between
7:30 am and 9 am.
asked whether he had taken any steps to facilitate a transfer immediately after
reviewing Patient A, he stated that his only
action was to call the oncologist.
He also noted that he had to deal with other patients around this time. Dr
Murray later indicated
that there were 2 or 3 other inpatients, none of whom
were as unwell as Patient A.
Murray told the Committee he knew Patient A had something serious happening in
her abdomen but he didn’t fully appreciate
what it was. When he wrote to
Dr Chaffey at Albury Base Hospital to provide an update following Patient
A’s collapse prior
to transfer, he wrote,
“It is hard to say
whether this was a reaction to the morphine on the background of dehydration or
whether she has something
else is going on. She has been afebrile at all
Dr Murray said that when he wrote to Dr Chaffey he was not
confident enough to suggest a diagnosis, but he had considered whether
missed neutropenic sepsis or a bowel perforation.
Howle says Dr Murray’s plan around 7 am was reasonable in that he
recognised the patient has been anuric for 11 hours and
had some sort of acute
abdominal problem. However, he notes there was no documented assessment of her
pain or other symptoms or a
provisional diagnosis. He
“When one looks at the situation of the
clinically deteriorating patient over the previous six hours, then one is
critical of
this assessment and plan. The patient had been getting increasing
undiagnosed abdominal pain which was increasing in intensity, had
a persistent
low to nil urine output, and the hospital had limited resources for
investigation and intensive management.
The plan should have included arrangements for immediate
transfer to a larger facility.”
Howle told the Committee that in general it is important to contact a
patient’s treating specialist, in this case Patient
A’s oncologist
Dr Clarke. However, when a patient is acutely unwell the priority should be
immediate transfer to a hospital
with the equipment and medical staff to
diagnose and treat an emergency. Dr Howle told the Committee that the
information that Dr
Clarke might provide was not necessary to a decision about
the transfer of the patient.
Howle’s view is that Dr Murray’s failure to organise an immediate
transfer is significantly below the expected standard
and invites his strong
Other evidence
King commented on Dr Murray’s management plan as
“There is no appreciation of the acuity of the
patient’s illness..... the diagnosis of the pain and distention has not
been defined, and the medical officer commenced investigation in the face of
severe abdominal pain, distention and the associated
hypotension, tachypnea and
tachycardia. At this stage I believe the patient required urgent transfer to a
higher acuity facility.”
Steiner commented
“This is a small hospital. It doesn’t
have pathology services available after hours which makes managing cases like
difficult. In a bigger centre the patient would have got a blood test for
FBC quite quickly, this may have changed management, but
it also may have been
relatively normal.”
7 am and 7:32 am Dr Murray increased Patient A’s fluid administration
rate, ordered an abdominal x-ray and considered
transfer to another hospital.
The action he took in relation to that transfer consisted of calling Patient
A’s oncologist sometime
between 7:30 am and 9 am in an attempt to obtain
additional information about her chemotherapy treatment, which he felt might
with future management.
A was elderly and very unwell. Her condition had significantly deteriorated
overnight and no definitive diagnosis of her condition
had been made. While it
is understandable that additional information about her recent chemotherapy
treatment would be helpful, by
7.30 am it should have been apparent that her
condition was such that transfer to a facility where her condition could be
fully investigated,
managed and treated was essential.
Committee accepts Dr King’s assessment that Dr Murray did not appreciate
the acuity of Patient A’s illness. To initiate
further investigations
plan to keep her at Corowa Hospital while they were undertaken reveals a
considerable lack of clinical judgement.
Committee is comfortably satisfied that Particular 4 is proven. The Committee
appreciates the difficulties that can confront a
VMO in a small rural hospital,
particularly when he is responsible for multiple patients who are acutely
unwell. However Dr Murray’s
2 or 3 other patients were not as unwell as
Patient A. He understood that Patient A required a transfer to a larger
hospital, but
failed to understand the urgent need for a transfer despite his
assessment that something serious was happening in her abdomen.
Committee accepts the evidence of Dr Howle and Dr King in relation to Particular
4 and considers that Dr Murray’s conduct
amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 5
At about 08:15 on 9 January 2015, the practitioner
failed to provide appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in that he
Morphine 12.5 mg in circumstances where:
is no documented diagnosis to support the prescription;
A had already been administered 7.5mg morphine at about 02:15, 7.5mg morphine at
A had an undiagnosed condition;
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A was
Dr Murray’s evidence
Murray agreed that he had not reached a definitive diagnosis at 8.15 am and that
the clinical records showed Patient A had been
administered Morphine during the
night. Dr Murray told the Committee he was only aware of two previous doses of
Morphine, one of
7.5 mg and one of 12mg. He said he knew what he had ordered but
not what the patient had been given, despite acknowledging he could
have checked
the clinical records.
Murray had received a handover from the registered nurse on duty and he had
examined and assessed the patient. He said he had a
fuller understanding of
Patient A’s situation and an appreciation that she was deteriorating and
Murray said he prescribed Morphine 12.5 mg as he was trying to relieve Patient
A’s pain. In his written statements Dr Murray
accepts that the
administration of Morphine in this dose at this time may not have been an
exercise in good judgment. He accepts
that greater caution should have been used
but does not accept that his conduct was significantly below the expected
his report dated 3 February 2017, Dr Howle states that there is no mention in Dr
Murray’s clinical notes of the reason or
need for Morphine 12.5 mg at this
time, nor is there any documented diagnosis to support this intervention. He
also stated that the
fact the patient responded to acute
resuscitative measures, including an injection of Naloxone, suggests the
prescription of further Morphine at 8:15 am may have been
inappropriate.
oral evidence Dr Howle stated that his criticism of Dr Murray’s
prescribing was not based entirely on the patient’s
response to Naloxone.
He criticised Dr Murray because he was prescribing Morphine without a diagnosis:
“the prescribing of the morphine in an undiagnosed condition in an
unstable patient .....is significantly below the expected
standard and invites
strong criticism.”
Steiner does not comment on the prescription of Morphine by Dr Murray. Dr King
is not necessarily critical of the dose of morphine
prescribed but states the
problem is that there is no working diagnosis to explain the pain.
8.15 am Dr Murray prescribed Morphine 12.5 mg (4
dose) when the
clinical notes indicated Patient A had already had 7.5 mg Morphine at 2.15 am,
7.5mg Morphine at 4 am and 12 mg Morphine
at 4.50 am.
Committee accepts Dr Howle’s evidence. Dr Murray prescribed a high dose of
Morphine, in the knowledge that previous doses
had been given, to a
deteriorating elderly patient when he was aware that she had almost no urine
output and without a clear diagnosis
of her underlying condition or the cause of
Dr Murray was attempting to manage Patient A’s pain he did so without
considering a number of important factors, such as
the amount of Morphine she
had already been administered and the risks to her from a further high dose of
Committee considers that Dr Murray failed to provide appropriate care and
treatment to Patient A in these circumstances and finds
Particular 5 proven. The
Committee is comfortably satisfied that Dr Murray’s conduct as described
in Particular 5 constitutes
unsatisfactory professional
Complaint 2
2 relates to proper medical record keeping. It is alleged that Dr Murray is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
as a result of contravening
provisions of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation
“Between about 07:00 and 07:32 on 9 January 2015, the
practitioner contravened clause 7(1) and Schedule 2(2) of the Health
Practitioner
Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2010 in that he did not
record in Patient A’s progress notes information known him
relevant to the patient’s diagnosis or treatment namely that he:
not record any physical examination of Patient A’s abdomen;
not record a working diagnosis.”
7 (1) of the Regulation provides that a medical practitioner must make and keep
a record for each patient and Schedule 2 (2)
sets out the requirements as to the
content of such records, providing, “
A record must include sufficient
information concerning the patient’s case to allow another medical
practitioner to continue
management of the patient’s
Dr Murray’s evidence
his statement dated 24 September 2018 Dr Murray acknowledges that he did not
record his physical examination of Patient A’s
abdomen when he made his
notes around 7:30 am. He states however that his findings from the examination
were recorded in the letter
he wrote to Dr Chaffey at Albury Base Hospital.
Further examination findings were recorded in the electronic medical records
made at 11:01 am and also recorded in a second letter to Dr
Murray stated that a working diagnosis was recorded and a definitive diagnosis
was not reached.
Murray accepts that his clinical record keeping was below the relevant standard
but he does not consider it was significantly below
that standard.
his first report Dr Howle states that Dr Murray’s clinical notes are
incomplete especially with respect to the documentation
of examination findings
and a working diagnosis on which to formulate a management plan. He states that
Dr Murray’s record
keeping, at 7.30 am on 9 January 2015, in relation to
Patient A’s abdominal pain is significantly below the expected
his supplementary report, dated 6 October 2018, Dr Howle modifies his criticism.
“I do accept that the two letters to Dr Chaffey
at Albury Base Hospital do contain some extra details of Dr Murray’s
at about 0700 hours on 9 January 2015....... So there is some
documentation within the clinical file with respect to his examination
patients at this time”
oral evidence Dr Howle agreed that the first letter to Dr Chaffey appears to
reproduce the examination results relating to the
initial examination of Patient
A in the Emergency Department on 8 January 2015. The letter also refers to
‘guarding and absent
bowel sounds’ and Dr Howle agreed it was
unclear when the examination, which gave rise to those findings, took place. He
agreed that the medical records relating to the assessment of Patient A at
7:30 am on 9 January 2015 do not contain information about
examination. However in cross-examination Dr Howle maintained the view he
proffered in his supplementary report, that
Dr Murray’s medical records
are below, but not significantly below, the relevant
Howell remains critical of the fact that no provisional or differential
diagnosis was made for Patient A, particularly when transfer
considered.
progress notes recorded by Dr Murray at 7.32 am on 9 January 2105
“Had a bad night, developed abdominal pain that did not
settle with buscopan then morphine
Felt the urge to open bowels but empty rectum has not passed urine since
admission increasing confusion
bladder scan 0400 hours. 174 mls
Plan - IDC, AXR, increase IV fluid rates when catheter In to 500 ml/hr,
consider t/f to Wodonga Private under K Clarke.”
Committee is satisfied that Complaint 2 is established on its facts. Dr
Murray’s notes do not record any physical examination
of Patient A’s
abdomen nor is any working diagnosis recorded. No possible explanations for the
severe abdominal pain are listed.
No explanation for the cause of her
deterioration is offered.
Murray’s notes at 7.32 am are cursory and several key details are omitted.
He has not recorded a clear history of abdominal
symptoms and does not mention
the patient’s level of consciousness or mental
Committee appreciates that Dr Murray may have later supplemented his notes by
writing to Dr Chaffey at Albury Base Hospital, but
it is unclear if these
letters form part of the Corowa Hospital records as Dr Murray stated that his
first letter went with the patient
during the transfer. In any event it remains
unclear whether the examination referred to in the first letter relates to the
examination
performed around 7:30 am.
Committee is satisfied that Complaint 2 is established and that Dr
Murray’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional
Dr Murray’s additional evidence
Murray is a GP at the Corowa Medical Centre. He is also a VMO at Corowa
Hospital. He told the Committee that as a VMO he is on
the after hours roster
one night per week. This means he works during the day at the Medical Centre, is
then on-call overnight and
works again the following day at the Medical Centre.
When he is on-call he generally sleeps at the hospital, as his home is a
significant
distance away. There is a second VMO on call, but only in a
secondary capacity, if additional help is required.
Murray told the Committee that he did not contact the second on-call VMO despite
being aware that Patient A was very unwell. He
stated that the other on- call
VMO was not a senior practitioner but someone with experience equivalent to his
Murray said there was an iSTAT machine on site but he didn’t use it. He
was unable to explain why he hadn’t used the
iSTAT machine and said it
would be the first thing to do”.
Murray told the Committee he has undertaken further education since the
complaint. He said he has educated himself about the effects
of chemotherapy on
cancer patients and arranged for an oncologist from Albury Base Hospital to talk
to the practice on this subject.
He has undertaken further training in emergency
medicine, including the management of abdominal emergencies. He has undertaken
Emergency Medicine Masterclass in November 2017 and an Emergency Care
workshop in May 2018. He completed the “Between the Flags”
program around 12 months ago. He said he lobbied the hospital to purchase an
ultrasound machine and is in the process of
learning how to operate this
Murray has not undertaken any formal training in relation to recordkeeping or in
relation to prescribing opioids. However he said
he has done a course on
clinical communication skills.
Murray told the Committee that he has made a number of changes to his practice
since Patient A’s case. He has changed his
approach to prescribing
morphine. He said he gives an initial dose and if necessary a further dose,
based on the patient’s
response. Dr Murray said he understood why there
was criticism of his morphine prescribing.
Murray also said he has changed the way he handles telephone calls. He said in
the past he was protective of his time. He felt
that if he was tired it might
impact on patient care. He says he now has a low threshold to attend and will
respond to telephone
requests to attend. If he is tired he will cancel his
afternoon shift at the Medical Centre.
Murray also said it is now his practice to ask a registered nurse calling him
for more details about the patient’s signs
and symptoms. He doesn’t
make notes of this information, but he said his threshold has changed and he
makes more enquires.
Murray also said he is now more diligent in relation to medical
recordkeeping.
Murray said he has considerable experience with patients on chemotherapy and he
has seen three cases of neutropenic sepsis in his
career. He also said he
recently managed a patient in similar circumstances to Patient A and organised
that patient’s transfer
to Albury Base Hospital.
Murray has expressed regret for his actions. In one letter to the Director of
Clinical Governance, Murrumbidgee Local Health District,
dated 1 August 2016, Dr
Murray stated that he was very sorry for the distress Patient A’s family
has gone through and he was
sorry for Patient A. He said he took himself off the
VMO after-hours roster following the complaint about Patient A so he could do
some ‘soul-searching’. He has now resumed after-hours work as he
considers it is his ethical obligation as a medical
practitioner in a rural town
to assist in this capacity.
Committee asked Dr Murray why he did not attend Patient A when requested to do
so. He said he had struggled with this issue and
cannot explain the reasons for
his conduct. He said he made a decision, in error, and with catastrophic
consequences. He said he
had thought a lot about it and could not really explain
why he did not attend, other than he did not make a rational decision when
Does the proven conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional
Committee has found all the Particulars of Complaint 1 proven and is satisfied
that Dr Murray’s conduct as described in
each of the Particulars
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Committee has found the Particulars of Complaint 2 proven and is satisfied that
Dr Murray’s conduct as described in Complaint
2 constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Are orders or directions pursuant to Part 8 Division 3
Sub-division 3 of the National Law appropriate?
General considerations
is well established that the jurisdiction exercised by a Professional Standards
Committee is protective, not punitive. Disciplinary
proceedings against members
of a profession are intended to maintain proper professional standards,
primarily for the protection
of the public but also for the protection of the
profession. (Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield (1997) 41 NSWLR
Committee also has a role in maintaining public confidence in the profession,
and maintaining the reputation of the profession
and orders of the Committee may
operate to have a general deterrent effect for other members of the profession.
(Prakash v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA
relation to the relevant protective orders to be made, the Committee notes that
the powers available to it in this regard are set
out in section146 (B) of the
National Law which provides as follows:
A Committee may do one or more of the following:
or reprimand the practitioner;
that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising of the
practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling;
that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the times,
in the way and to the persons specified by the
that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the
practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by the
Submissions
Commission submits that the Committee should reprimand Dr Murray. They note that
Dr Murray made not one but several inappropriate
clinical decisions in relation
to Patient A and in light of the serious nature of his conduct a reprimand is
Murray’s counsel indicated in submissions that if the Committee finds Dr
Murray guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct,
then a reprimand is not
Commission also submits that a number of conditions should be placed on Dr
Murray’s registration, relating to further education
and restricting his
overnight on-call practice.
Murray submits that he has addressed the issues arising from his management of
Patient A’s care and given his efforts at
remediation, there is no need
for conditions to be placed on his registration. Dr Murray’s counsel also
referred the Committee
to the references Dr Murray provided which attest to the
high regard in which he is held by his peers.
the evening of 8 January 2015 and the morning of 9 January 2105, Dr Murray made
a number of seriously inappropriate decisions
in relation to the care and
treatment of Patient A.
he received the first telephone call around 1:25 am Patient A had developed a
new symptom, abdominal pain, which could signify
a serious condition but Dr
Murray made no adequate inquiries about the nature of this symptom nor the
patient’s clinical status,
nor did he attend, examine or review the
patient before making a decision to prescribe a significant dose of
the second telephone call Dr Murray was made aware that the patient was
deteriorating with pain now moderate to severe and nil
urine output. He was
asked to attend and review the patient but declined to do so. He remained
unaware of the cause of her pain at
the time he prescribed a higher dose of
Morphine. Patient A was an elderly, dehydrated patient who was opiate naïve
had experienced a significant period of undiagnosed pain. Despite being
a short distance away in the on-call room at the hospital,
Dr Murray did not
attend or assess the patient before or immediately after prescribing more
7 am on 9 January 2015, Dr Murray did attend and review Patient A. It was clear
to him that she had significantly deteriorated
and ‘something serious is
going on’. Nevertheless rather than organising an immediate transfer to a
facility better equipped
to treat and manage Patient A, he organised further
investigations and attempted to contact her oncologist. Also at 8.15 am he
a further higher dose of Morphine.
7 am and 7.32 am Dr Murray made clinical notes which were brief and inadequate.
He did supplement those notes later in letters
to Dr Chaffey at Albury Base
Hospital. However, the notes written around 7:30 am remained deficient in their
lack of information
of a possible diagnosis.
Committee has found Dr Murray’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct and given the nature and seriousness
of his professional
shortcomings, considers it appropriate to reprimand Dr Murray.
as a rural medical practitioner and providing medical care after hours can be
very stressful and requires a high level of
commitment. Dr Murray has provided
this care for many years and continues to do so. Dr Murray impressed the
Committee as a dedicated
doctor and a valued and valuable member of his
community. He has made changes to his practice and efforts to address the
issues arising from Patient A’s case. However, even if his
conduct in relation to Patient A was an aberration, it is important
both for Dr
Murray and for the health and safety of the general public that he undertakes
additional educational activities to ensure
he meets appropriate professional
Commission has recommended Dr Murray complete a number of educational courses.
The Clinical Decision-Making Course organised by
Carrawar Education focuses on
participants being aware of the critical thinking processes that are important
for clinical decision-making
in an acute context. The medical records course
organised by Avant Mutual is designed to build knowledge and experience in the
of health records.
Committee considers, in the light of Dr Murray’s conduct, that it is
appropriate for him to undertake both of those courses.
Dr Murray should also
provide information to the Medical Council which indicates how his record
keeping practices have improved.
Commission also submits that a condition be placed on Dr Murray’s
registration requiring him to complete the Clinical Communication
organised by the Cognitive Institute. In light of the specific findings made by
the Committee in relation to the Particulars
of the Complaints, it is not
considered appropriate to place such a condition on Dr Murray’s
registration.
Nevertheless,
the Committee strongly recommends to Dr Murray that he undertake the Cognitive
Institute Communication Course. Some
of the Particulars of Complaint 1 reveal
communication issues between Dr Murray and nursing staff and the Committee notes
Dr Murray’s
failure to attend and communicate with Patient A during the
night of 8 January 2015. Dr Murray stated that he has completed a communications
course, although the details of that course are not known. The Cognitive
Institute program provides a comprehensive course, which
the Committee considers
would assist Dr Murray with his professional communications in the future.
Commission also submits that limitations should be placed on the number of
on-call overnight shifts Dr Murray is able to work.
The Committee is not
convinced of the utility or need for such a condition. Dr Murray did remove
himself from the on-call roster
for a period, but has resumed those duties and
apparently performed them without incident for some time. The extent to which Dr
on-call shift work contributed to his unsatisfactory professional
conduct remains unclear. Given the nature and location of Dr Murray’s
practice the public interest is not served by the imposition of the proposed
restriction.
Committee recognises the long hours often worked by rural practitioners and
acknowledges that fatigue can increase the risk of
errors of judgment. The
Committee considers the importance of self care for rural medical practitioners,
including Dr Murray, cannot
be over-emphasised and Dr
Murray is strongly encouraged to take active measures to ensure that he has
adequate breaks after nights and weekends on call.
addition, the Committee reminds Dr Murray of his professional obligations under
the Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia published
by the Medical Board of
Australia. Clause 6.3 refers to practitioners’ responsibilities in
relation to recognising and taking
steps to minimise the risks of fatigue and
seeking appropriate advice if necessary.
section 146B(1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the Committee reprimands the practitioner.
Practice conditions
section 146B(1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the Committee directs that the following Conditions be imposed on the
practitioner's registration:
complete within 6 months of 4 February 2019 the following courses:
Decision-Making course organised by Carramar Education; and
the record: medical records and documentation eLearning course organised by
Avant Mutual;
3 months of 4 February 2019 he must provide evidence to the Medical Council of
NSW of his enrolment in the abovementioned
3 months of completing the abovementioned courses, he is to provide documentary
evidence to the Medical Council of NSW that
he has satisfactorily completed the
the event that any of the abovementioned courses are unavailable, he must
propose to the Medical Council of NSW for approval a
similar course to be
undertaken and satisfactorily completed by him within 6 months of 4 February
provide the Medical Council of NSW within 6 months from 4 February 2019 with the
summary prepared by him of the relevant legislation and guidelines on the
keeping of good medical records. This summary must describe
the information to
be included in a patient record.
overview of the steps he has taken to ensure that he is creating and keeping
good medical records.
copy of the records of 15 patients he has attended since 4 February
Notifying current employers
forward evidence to the Medical Council of NSW within 14 days of [date of
decision], that he has provided a copy of this decision
to any place that he
works (including any locum agencies and hospitals).
Information exchange
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and Medicare Australia for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with
these conditions.
bear all costs arising out of compliance with these conditions.
appropriate review body for the purpose of a review under section 163 -163C of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
is the Medical Council of
NSW when the practitioner has a principal place of practice in NSW.
125 and 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply while the practitioner’s principal place of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than NSW, so that a review
of these conditions can be conducted
by the Medical Board of Australia.
APPEAL AND REVIEW RIGHTS
Dr Murray has the right to
appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of the date of these
written reasons.
Dr Murray also has the right to seek a review by the Medical Council of NSW of
the Committee’s order to impose conditions.
Should Dr Murray’s
principal place of practice be anywhere other than NSW at the time of seeking a
review of conditions, Dr
Murray may make an application for review to the
National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The non-publication order made on 10 October 2018 in
respect of Patient A continues so that the name and address of this person in
this written statement of decision are not to be published.
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We will provide a copy of this written statement of our
decision to Dr Murray, the Commission and the National Board.
Diane Robinson Chairperson
4 February 2019
AMENDED COMPLAINT
21 November 2018
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
Executive Officer Medical Council of NSW Punt Road
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Medical Council
New South Wales in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(‘the National Law’)
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr Nigel Murray of 61-63 Guy Street, Corowa NSW 2646, being a
medical practitioner registered under the National Law (“the
practitioner”),
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by
the practitioner in the practice of medicine is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
of training or experience.
Each of the particulars of the Complaint in itself justifies a
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct. In the alternative,
when two or
more of the particulars are taken together, a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct is justified.
BACKGROUND OF COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner was first registered as a medical practitioner on 10 February
At all relevant times, the practitioner was the Visiting Medical Officer at
Corowa Hospital. Corowa Hospital is located in a rural
community in southern
NSW, 57km from Albury Base Hospital.
At about 20:15 on 8 January 2015, Patient A, a 79 year old woman, presented at
Corowa Hospital Emergency Department and at about
20:52 on 8 January 2015, the
practitioner assessed Patient A and gave orders for the management of the
The practitioner remained on call during the night of 8 January 2015 and the
early morning of 9 January 2015 and gave telephone orders
for medication without
attending the patient when contacted by nursing staff at about 01:25 to 01:30
hours and again at about 04:45
to 0456 hours.
Between about 07:00 and 07:32 on 9 January 2015, the practitioner assessed
Patient A and at about 08:15 on 9 January 2015, the practitioner
medication.
At about 09:50 on 9 January 2015, paramedics arrived at Corowa Hospital to
transfer Patient A. Prior to transfer, Patient A’s
blood pressure dropped,
she had difficulty breathing and became unresponsive. Patient A was resuscitated
and then transferred to
Albury Base Hospital.
At about 1455 on 9 January 2015, Patient A died.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he gave a telephone order
for Buscopan and 7.5 mg Morphine in circumstances where:
practitioner had assessed Patient A at about 20:52 on 8 January 2015 (“the
initial assessment”);
practitioner was aware during the initial assessment that Patient A had
undergone her first dose of chemotherapy for breast cancer
previously;
practitioner had observed during the initial assessment that Patient A had a
rash on her skin, a dry tongue and mucous membranes
and a temperature of
practitioner was aware during the initial assessment that Patient A complained
of being unwell for three days with diarrhoea,
loss of appetite, nausea and
weakness in her legs;
registered nurse telephoned the practitioner between about 01:25 and 01:30 on 9
January 2015 (“the first call”) during
registered nurse told the practitioner that Patient A was experiencing abdominal
practitioner did not elicit further symptoms or ask for vital
pain had not been reported to the practitioner during the initial
assessment;
pain was a new symptom with an uncertain cause;
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner did not attend Patient A before giving the telephone
appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in that
he gave a telephone order
for 12mg Morphine in circumstances where:
practitioner had already received the first call;
nurse supervisor telephoned the practitioner between about 04:45 to 04:56 on 9
January 2015 (“the second call”);
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had been given Buscopan
since the first call;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had been given Morphine
twice since the first call;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner during the second call that Patient A was
experiencing abdominal pain;
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A’s pain was
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A had a distended
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A was unable to pass
nurse supervisor told the practitioner that Patient A was distressed;
distension and difficulty passing urine had not been reported to the
practitioner during the initial assessment or during
the first call;
distention and difficulty passing urine were further new symptoms with unknown
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner did not attend Patient A before giving the telephone
appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he did not assess Patient A
before about 07:00 on 9 January 2015 in circumstances where:
practitioner had already received the first call;
the second call:
Nurse Supervisor told the practitioner about Patient A’s Buscopan and
Morphine, severe abdominal pain, abdominal distension,
inability to pass urine
and distress;
Nurse Supervisor asked the practitioner to assess Patient
practitioner told the Nurse Supervisor that he would assess Patient A in the
daylight hours;
practitioner was the rostered on-call medical officer;
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
practitioner had not seen Patient A since the initial assessment;
Hospital had no on-site pathology or radiology.
appropriate care and treatment to Patient A in
that he failed to immediately
transfer her to a larger hospital when he attended on her (“the second
assessment”) in
circumstances where:
practitioner saw Patient A during the initial assessment;
practitioner had received the first call;
practitioner had received the second call;
practitioner had access to Patient A’s progress notes which indicated
abdominal discomfort at 00:54, abdominal pain at 01:20,
abdominal pain and
distention at 04:14, restlessness at 05:01 and confusion at 05:39;
practitioner had access to the bladder scan;
the second assessment, the practitioner recorded that Patient A had abdominal
pain, had not passed urine since admission and
had increasing confusion;
abdominal pain and low to nil urine output were persistent symptoms with unknown
practitioner was aware, or should have been aware, that Patient A may be
deteriorating;
Hospital had no on-site pathology or radiology.
care and treatment to Patient A in that he prescribed
circumstances where:
is no documented diagnosis to support the prescription;
A had already been administered 7.5mg morphine at about 02:15, 7.5mg morphine at
A had an undiagnosed condition;
practitioner
was aware, or should have been aware,
that Patient A was unstable.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 139B(1)(b) of the
National Law
the practitioner has contravened a provision of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2010
BACKGROUND OF COMPLAINT TWO
As for Complaint One.
PARTICULARS
OF COMPLAINT TWO
7(1) and Schedule 2(2) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South
Wales) Regulation 2010
in that he did not record in Patient A’s
progress notes information known him that was relevant to the patient’s
or treatment namely that he:
not record any physical examination of Patient A’s abdomen;
not record a working diagnosis.
Dated December 2017
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings Health Care Complaints Commission
139B Meaning of
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” of registered health
practitioner generally [NSW]
(1) "Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission)
(i) a condition
to which the practitioner’s registration is subject; or
undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on behalf
of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or reward
(i) referring
another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending
another person use any health service provided by the health service provider or
consult with the health service
provider in relation to a health
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or reward
for the person-
(i) referring
another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending
to another person that the person use a health service provided by the
practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or
(i) another
health service provider; or
(ii) a health
service; or
(iii) a health
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest
in giving that referral or recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the
of the interest to the person before or at the time of giving the
referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with the
practitioner’s professional practice) who
is not a registered health
practitioner to
attend, treat or perform operations on patients
in respect of matters requiring professional discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health practitioner has
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to which the
referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the practitioner
holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular class.
(4) In this section-
means money, property or anything else of
"recommend"
a health product includes supply or prescribe
the health product.
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel etc
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following in relation to a relevant
health practitioner the subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or
reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising
of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be imposed on
the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to,
psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at
the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction may still
be given under this section but has effect only
so as to require the conditions
concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order or directs that any
condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the
Committee may order that a contravention of the order or condition will result
in the health practitioner’s
registration in the health profession being
(4) The order or condition concerned is then a
compliance order or condition"
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.29 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter