URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CJA v Secretary (Department of Education) [2025] NSWPICPD 68; (25 September 2025)
PRESIDENTIAL DECISION
(Workers Compensation Division)
CJA v Secretary (Department of Education)
[2025] NSWPICPD 68
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Secretary (Department of Education)
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Recruitment Solutions (A Division of Chandler Macleod) Pty Limited
FIRST RESPONDENT’S INSURER:
Allianz TMF
SECOND RESPONDENT’S INSURER:
RGF Staffing ANZ Pty Ltd
FILE NUMBER:
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
DATE OF PRESIDENT’S DECISION:
25 September 2025
to r 6 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
, I dispense with the
requirement in r 132(3)(c) that this application be made within seven days of
the decision being issued. I extend
time for the applicant to make application
under r 132 to 19 September 2025.
to r 132, I direct that the names of the applicant and the three lay witnesses
referred to by the Member in the 2 September
2025 decision be
de-identified. I direct that each be identified by pseudonyms.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Application for redaction or de-identification
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms R Sutton, solicitor
Mills Oakley
First Respondent:
Mr D Khoshaba, solicitor
Bartier Perry Lawyers
Second Respondent:
Mr E Brawn, solicitor
Holman Webb Lawyers
applicant worker brought proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) alleging that he suffered a psychological
injury while in the
course of his employment with the Department of Education (first respondent),
which was aggravated or exacerbated
when the applicant was later employed by
Recruitment Solutions (A Division of Chandler Macleod) Pty Ltd (second
respondent).
matter was heard before Commission Member Mr J Turner. The Member issued a
Certificate of Determination (COD) and attached reasons
dated 2 September
which found in favour of the
applicant, with orders being made against both respondents. The COD and reasons
were published seven
(7) days later, in accordance with the Commission’s
stated, longstanding practice of publishing decisions as required by s
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the 2020 Act).
letter dated 19 September 2025, the applicant makes an application pursuant to r
132 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
(Rules) for the redaction of
his name from both the COD and the reasons. This application is based upon a
medical opinion from his
treating psychologist dated 15 September 2025.
respondents have been apprised of this application and neither oppose the orders
THE APPLICATION
applicant’s application is made under r 132. In particular, the applicant
points to the psychologist's opinion of the potential
significant threat to the
applicant’s health and safety in establishing the ground to make the order
under r 132(4)(c) of the
LEGISLATION
58(1) of the 2020 Act
Publication of
(1) The Commission must cause details of the following to be published
in accordance with the Commission rules—
(a) decisions of the Commission,
(b) decisions of merit reviewers under Division 7.4 of the
Accident Injuries Act 2017
(c) decisions of review panels for merit reviewers under Division 7.4
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(d) decisions of Appeal Panels for medical assessments under
Chapter 7 of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(e) decisions of review panels for medical assessments under
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
or Division 7.5 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(f) any other decisions prescribed by the Commission rules.”
132 of the Rules
De-identification or redaction
of publishable decisions
(1) The Commission or the President may, of their own motion or on the
application of a relevant person, direct either or both of
(a) that all or part of a publishable decision be de-identified before
it is published,
(b) that part of a publishable decision be redacted before it is
(2) An application for a direction may be made during, or after the
completion of, the proceedings in which the publishable decision
(3) An application for a direction is to be made to—
(a) for proceedings being heard by the Commission that have not been
completed—the Commission, or
(b) for other proceedings that have not been completed—the
President, or
(c) for proceedings that have been completed—the President within
7 days after the publishable decision is issued.
(4) In determining an application for a direction, the Commission or
the President is to have regard to the following matters—
(a) the objects of the PIC Act and enabling legislation and, in
particular, the object that the Commission be open and transparent
(b) the prevention of prejudice to the proper administration of
(c) the safety, health and wellbeing of a person affected or named by
the publishable decision,
(d) the views of any other party to the proceedings,
(e) whether it is necessary in the public interest for the direction to
be given and whether the public interest in giving the direction
significantly
outweighs the public interest in open justice.
(5) If the Commission grants an application for a direction under
subrule (3)(a), the President may, despite the direction of the
Commission,
direct that the publishable decision be published without the de-identifications
or redactions directed by the Commission
or with different de-identifications or
redactions.
(6) In this rule—
publishable decision
means a decision details of which are
required to be published by section 58 of the PIC Act.
relevant person
, in relation to an application for a direction,
(a) a party to the proceedings in which the publishable decision is
(b) a person named in the publishable decision, or
(c) another person the Commission or the President considers to have a
sufficient interest to make the application.”
6 of the Rules provides:
Dispensing with
requirements of Rules
(1) The Commission may, by order, dispense with a requirement of these
Rules in relation to particular Commission proceedings if
satisfied it is
appropriate to do so.
(2) The President may, by order, dispense with a requirement of these
Rules in relation to particular applicable proceedings, or
particular kinds of
applicable proceedings, if satisfied it is appropriate to do so.
(3) The power given to the President by subrule (2) extends to a
requirement of Part 5 of the Act applied to applicable proceedings,
than Commission proceedings, by a provision of these Rules.
(4) A requirement may be dispensed with under this rule before or after
the occasion for compliance with the requirement arises.”
CONSIDERATION
Member’s decision is clearly a publishable decision requiring publication
by virtue of s 58 of the 2020 Act.
132 gives some relief from this requirement by enabling the President, or
Commission, to redact or de-identify all, or part of
a publishable decision.
power under r 132, on its face, however, applies to allow a direction to be made
the decision is
132(2) contemplates an application for redaction or de-identification being made
during, or after the completion of proceedings.
Rule 132(3) provides for who the
application is to be made to and determined by, depending on the stage the
proceedings are up to.
In this case, the application has been made after
proceedings have been completed. Rule 132(3)(c) contemplates that in this
an application is to be made to the President within seven (7) days
of the publishable decision being issued to the parties.
such application was made to me within that seven (7) day period and as such,
the decision was published in accordance with the
Commission’s statutory
132 of the Rules therefore does not respond to the circumstance in this
application.
pursuant to r 6 of the Rules, I have broad powers to dispense with the
application of the Rules if I am satisfied that it
is appropriate to do so. Even
though there is no application before me seeking r 6 relief, the use of that
power is not dependent
upon the making of an application, rather it depends upon
whether I am satisfied that it is appropriate to do so.
have read the treating psychologist’s report. For the purposes of this
decision, it is not necessary that I set out in terms
the reasons and opinions
expressed therein. However, I unreservedly accept the opinion that the
identification of the applicant in
the published decision “represents a
significant threat to both his health and safety” for the reasons
expressed by the
psychologist.
the circumstances, I am satisfied that it is appropriate for me, pursuant to r 6
of the Rules, to dispense with the requirement
that the application for a
direction be made to me within seven (7) days of the decision being issued
as required by r 132(3)(c),
and before the decision is published (r 132(1)). I
extend the time for the application to be made to 19 September 2025.
the application only seeks the redaction of the applicant’s name, I have
read the decision and in my view this application
does not go far enough. The
decision names other persons. If their names were published, that could
potentially have a tendency to
identify the applicant by person(s) who are
familiar with the second respondent’s operations. This could adversely
protective nature of the orders I will make. I will therefore widen
the orders I make to not only apply to the applicant, but also
three (3) lay witnesses in the employ of the second respondent who are
named in the decision. There is no need to de-identify
any of the expert medical
is yet another example of an application being made under r 132 after a decision
has been published. Practitioners, especially
in cases involving applicants
suffering from mental illnesses, should be alive to making an application under
r 132 before the Member
at the hearing
. The decision was already
published before this application was made, which means that the applicant does
not receive the full benefit
of the orders of a protective nature that
I will make.
to r 6 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
, I dispense with the
requirement in r 132(3)(c) that this application be made within seven (7) days
of the decision being issued.
I extend time for the applicant to make
application under r 132 to 19 September 2025.
to r 132, I direct that the names of the applicant and the three (3) lay
witnesses referred to by the Member in the 2 September
2025 decision be
de-identified. I direct that each be identified by pseudonyms.
Judge Phillips
25 September 2025
[2025] NSWPIC
See Rule 132 (1) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.42 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter