URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/433.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd [2025] NSWDC 433 (29 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 433
Hearing Date(s):
15 October 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Russell SC DCJ
(1) JBS Australia Pty Ltd was convicted on 15 October
(2) The appropriate fine is $440,000 but that will be
reduced by 25% to reflect the early plea of
(3) Order JBS Australia Pty Ltd to pay a fine of
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
(NSW) that 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
(5) Order JBS Australia Pty Ltd to pay the
prosecutor’s costs agreed in the amount of $44,242.31.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW – prosecution – work health and safety –
duty of persons undertaking business – risk of death
SENTENCE – objective seriousness – mitigating
factors – aggravating factors – plea of guilty – general
deterrence – specific deterrence – capacity to pay appropriate
COSTS – prosecution costs
worker struck by forklift – worker on foot using forklift door –
failure to enforce forklift door being
in “automatic” mode –
failure to enforce personnel door as the only means for workers on foot to enter
failure to provide adequate supervision – failure to undertake
inspections and audits to verify adequate controls of the risk
implemented
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
cll 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 214, 215
Cases Cited:
Baumer v R [1988] HCA 67; (1988) 166 CLR 51
Bulga Underground Operations
Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338
[2011] NSWCCA
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Nash v Silver
City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited; Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling
(NSW) Pty Limited [2017] NSWCCA 96
R v McNaughton
[2006] NSWCCA 242
66 NSWLR 566
R v Wilkinson (No. 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
Unity Pty Limited v
SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
164 CLR 465
SafeWork NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDC 678
NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2023] NSWDC 473
R v McNaughton
[2006] NSWCCA 242
SafeWork NSW v Deicorp Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC 194
Texts Cited:
Australian Standard AS 2359.2-2013 Powered industrial trucks -
Safe Work Australia, General Guide for Workplace Traffic
Management, July 2014
Safe Work Australia, Traffic management: Guide for
warehousing, April 2021
SafeWork NSW, Code of practice - Managing the risks
of plant in the workplace, August 2019
SafeWork NSW, Forklift Safety Guide
for Employers, 14 February 2020
SafeWork NSW, Incident Information Release
Forklift Truck Tip Over Fatality, 25 May 2022
SafeWork NSW, Working with or
around mobile plant safety alert, 30 January 2014
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
JBS Australia Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
C Magee (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Department of Customer Service
(Prosecutor)
Norton Rose Fulbright (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/227973
Australia Pty Ltd (JBS) operates a feedlot, farm and processing facility where
Mr William Gaynes was employed as a cold-stores
attendant. On 14 July 2022 Mr
Gaynes was performing duties in the chilled stack-down area of the facility when
he was struck by a
reversing forklift. The forklift ran over Mr Gaynes’
left leg and he suffered serious injuries.
has pleaded guilty to an offence that as a person who had a work health and
safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(the WHS Act) it failed to comply with that duty and thereby exposed Mr Gaynes
to a risk of death or serious injury contrary
to s 32 of the WHS Act.
maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,860,843.
risk described in par 12 of Annexure A of the Amended Summons is as follows:
“The risk was the risk of workers, in particular Mr Gaynes, suffering
serious injury or death as a result of being struck and
run over by a forklift,
whilst undertaking work in the chilled stack-down area at the site.”
Reasonably Practicable Measures
13 of Annexure A of the Amended Summons pleads particulars of the
defendant’s failure to comply with the duty under
s 19(1) of the WHS Act
as follows:
“The defendant failed to ensure so far as was reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of workers, in particular Mr Gaynes,
in that it failed to take
one or more of the following reasonably practicable measures to eliminate the
risk to the health and safety
of the workers, or, alternatively, if it was not
reasonably practicable to eliminate the risk, to minimise the risk to the health
and safety of the workers:
(a) Enforce a requirement that the rapid close door was placed in the
“automatic” mode and unobstructed at all times
that work was being
conducted in the chilled stack-down area.
(b) Enforce a requirement that the personnel access door was the only means
permitted for workers to enter and exit the chilled stack-down
(c) Provide adequate supervision to workers, including by adequately training
supervisors in their roles.
(d) Undertaking inspections and audits of the site to verify that adequate
controls had been implemented to manage the risk, including
the controls set out
at paragraph 13(a) – (c) above.”
parties presented an Amended Statement of Facts (ASOF) and this material is
summarised below.
operates Australia's largest meat and food processing business. JBS has a number
of workplaces in Australia, including processing
facilities, feedlots, and
distribution centres.
operates a feedlot, farm and processing facility in Yanco NSW (the site).
The site is known for its production of grain-fed ‘Riverina Black
Angus Beef’ and is one of Australia's two integrated
feedlot and
processing facilities. The feedlot has a capacity for 46,000 head of beef
meat processing work at the site involves cattle being slaughtered and broken
down before being chilled and packaged and put through
a chiller tunnel. The
chilled product is then taken via conveyor belts to a palletising area known as
the “chilled stack-down
area” (also known as palletizing area 37A).
The site processes a number of different beef products with distinct product
Layout of the chilled stack-down area
the time of the incident, the chilled stack-down area included the
(1) Various doors, including:
(a) a personnel access door; and
(b) a rapid roller door which has a blue curtain.
(2) Two conveyor lines.
(3) Two machines, being a "Mercer'' machine and a "Fibre King" packaging
machine. The Fibre King machine is used to put lids on boxes
of product before
they travel down a conveyor line. The Fibre King machine includes a spiral
(4) At least 8 mobile tables (spring loaded, pallet lift tables) with moveable
discs on top, which were used to stack pallets.
(5) Red painted lines on the ground within which pallets were to be stacked.
load-out area was adjacent to the chilled stack-down area.
points to the chilled stack-down area included:
(1) the personnel access door, being the door that workers were required to use
to enter and exit the chilled stack-down area from
the load-out area; and
(2) the rapid roller door which was used to allow entry and exit of forklifts
from the load­out area to the chilled stack-down
area. The rapid roller
door also served to keep the chilled stack-down area cool.
forklifts (and not pedestrians) were permitted to use the rapid roller door to
enter and exit the chilled stack-down area from
the load-out area. This was
communicated to workers via signage.
to the rapid roller door inside the chilled stack-down area, there was a control
panel which allowed the door to be placed
in manual or automatic mode. If the
rapid roller door was in manual mode, it could be opened and closed using the
control buttons
on the control panel. The location of the control panel was on
the wall on the right-hand side of the rapid roller door.
the rapid roller door was in automatic mode, the door would be activated (ie
opened) by a forklift travelling over an electromagnetic
sensor in the ground,
known as an induction loop sensor. There were two induction loop sensors located
on either side of the rapid
roller door - one in the load out area, and one in
the chilled stack-down area. As soon as any part of the forklift crossed onto
the sensor, amber lights would flash and the rapid roller door would go up. The
sensor could not be activated by a person walking
over it. When the rapid roller
door was in automatic mode, it therefore served as a control measure for traffic
management to limit
the ability for pedestrians to move between the chilled
stack-down area and load out area using the rapid roller door, rather than
personnel access door.
addition to the induction loop sensors, once the rapid roller door was opened by
the forklift, there was another sensor that would
detect if there was anything
(a person or an object) directly under the curtain of the rapid roller door. If
a person or object was
directly under the curtain of the rapid roller door, the
rapid roller door would remain open until the person or object was no longer
underneath the curtain.
the rapid roller door was open, provided that the forklift was no longer
activating the induction loop sensors and there was
nothing directly underneath
the curtain of the rapid roller door, the rapid roller door would then close
within a few seconds.
the left-hand side of the control panel, there was a sign with instructions on
the manual operation of the door, under the heading
OPERATION”. Above these instructions the sign said: “CAUTION
PEDESTRIANS - AUTOMATIC HIGH SPEED DOOR-STAY
the load out area, there was also a button to the right-hand side of the rapid
roller door which could be pressed to open the rapid
roller door (for example,
in an emergency).
the day of the incident, the rapid roller door was in manual and not automatic
mode, and was left open.
Work being undertaken in the chilled
stack-down area
products entered the chilled stack-down area via conveyor belt, pallets were
stacked with products labelled with the same product
code. These were then
removed by forklift and placed on the floor to be scanned. The forklift operator
then placed an empty pallet
responsible for scanning would then scan the pallet labels and cartons within
the pallet using a hand-held scanner gun. The
hand-held scanner gun required
batteries which usually needed to be replaced two or three times a night. Those
batteries were located
in the office of the load-out area, which was adjacent to
the chilled stack-down area. Once scanned, the pallets were transported
forklift to the load-out area.
a product with a different product code was loaded onto the conveyor belt, the
workers were required to perform a “changeover”
which involved
pallets stacked with the previous product being moved off to make way for an
empty pallet to stack the incoming product.
was usually one forklift operating in the area moving and collecting
following workers worked in the chilled stack-down area:
(1) Mr William Gaynes - who had been employed by JBS as a cold-stores attendant
since February 2020;
(2) Mr David Hammond - who was employed by JBS as a forklift operator;
(3) Mr Chad Dhari - who was employed by Labour Solutions Australia to work at
the conveyor; and
(4) Mr Erik Leigh Jenssen - who had been employed by JBS as a leading hand since
Jenssen was the supervisor of Mr Gaynes, Mr Dhari and Mr
Events leading up to the incident
14 July 2022, Mr Gaynes and Mr Dhari commenced their shift at 3pm. Mr Hammond
arrived at the site at about 2:30 pm and clocked
on at about 2.50pm. Mr Jenssen
arrived at the Site at around 1:45pm.
Gaynes' roster did not indicate which area of the processing facility he was
working in every day. Instead, Mr Jenssen would give
him instructions at the
beginning of every shift to identify the area of the processing facility where
he was to undertake work.
Though Mr Jenssen was Mr Hammond's supervisor, he did
not provide specific directions to Mr Hammond in respect to the performance
his work, as most workers knew what work they were required to perform when they
arrived at the site.
14 July 2022, after arriving at the site, Mr Jenssen got changed, signed in and
went to see human resources to find out who would
be at the site for the day. Mr
Jenssen made the decision to assign Mr Gaynes to the role of scanning the pallet
labels and cartons
with the hand-held scanner gun at the start of the shift,
because another worker who would often perform that task was not at work
day. Mr Jenssen considered that Mr Gaynes was experienced at scanning.
Gaynes was scanning at the site when the battery on the hand-held scanner ran
move pallets for a changeover.
the day of the incident, an orange plastic bollard with a yellow chain attached
to its top was stored near to the personnel access
door. This did not block the
personnel access door.
The incident
14 July 2022, prior to 4:55pm, Mr Gaynes walked out of the chilled stack-down
area through the rapid roller door to collect batteries
for the hand-held
scanner from the office in the load out area.
14 July 2022, prior to 4:55pm, Mr Hammond operated the forklift to pick up an
empty stack of pallets within the chilled stack-down
area. He then placed the
empty stack of pallets on the ground underneath the curtain of the rapid roller
Hammond then continued to operate the forklift in the chilled stack-down area
outside of the range of the induction loop sensor.
approximately 4:55:15pm, Mr Gaynes walked back into the chilled stack-down area
through the doorway of the rapid roller door. As
Mr Gaynes walked through the
doorway, the forklift operated by Mr Hammond remained outside the range of the
induction loop sensor,
and outside the vision of the CCTV camera (apart from the
blue halo lights).
Gaynes was looking and gesturing in the direction of his right-hand side as he
walked through the door, in the opposite direction
to the position of the
approximately 4:55:16pm, Mr Hammond was reversing the forklift and struck Mr
Gaynes and ran over his left leg. Mr Gaynes sustained
tibia and fibula fractures
to his left leg.
the time of the incident, Mr Jenssen, Mr Dhari and the other packers were in the
work area. Mr Jenssen did not see the incident
because he was around the other
side of the chilled stack-down area.
Gaynes was transported by ambulance to Wagga Wagga Base Hospital where he was
admitted to the emergency department.
left leg below-knee amputation operation was performed.
the operation, Mr Gaynes' left leg developed stump necrosis, and above­knee
amputation was performed on 18 July 2022.
27 July 2022, Mr Gaynes was transferred to Narrandera Hospital to continue his
rehabilitation.
Systems of work before the incident
had management and control of the forklift being operated by Mr Hammond at the
time of the incident.
forklift had a series of safety features including:
(2) Reverse flashing beacons.
(3) Reverse beeper.
(4) Side mirrors.
(5) Blue halo lights, reaching two and a half metres around the back and sides
of the forklift.
(6) Seatbelt, which needed to be engaged for the forklift to move.
access code was required to operate the forklift. Access codes were only given
to workers that were licensed and verified as competent
to operate the
Hammond was a licensed forklift operator as at the date of the incident. He
first obtained his forklift licence in around September
forklift had been serviced on 4 July 2022.
rapid roller door had been serviced at regular intervals prior to the incident,
most recently on 27 June 2022.
were provided with induction and other safety related training relevant to their
role. In particular:
(1) Mr Hammond completed PRC 13 Forklift driver training on 16 June 2022.
(2) Mr Gaynes was deemed competent in CS10_V3 - Scanner operator on 17 May
(3) Mr Gaynes completed PRC 05 Forklift awareness training on 12 July 2021.
content of the PRC 05 Forklift awareness training and PRC 13 Forklift driver
training included the following:
(1) All people working in areas where forklifts operate must wear high
visibility vests at all times.
(2) Pedestrians must be aware of where forklifts are operating and not encroach
in the forklift work area.
(3) Forklifts MUST give way to pedestrians at all times, but pedestrians should
never assume that the forklift operator can see you;
always exercise caution.
(4) Safety signs are in place as a reminder of hazards and contain instructions
designed to stay safe.
(5) Forklift driver MUST BEEP HORN when approaching a known blind spot to alert
pedestrians they are in the area.
(6) Pedestrians must be aware of the many blind spot areas on plant (around
corners, opening doors into chillers or freezers).
(7) You must always follow signage and look and listen for forklifts that may be
approaching from a blind spot.
talks were periodically held with workers. Toolbox talks held included the
(1) On 25 June 2020 a toolbox talk was held with workers (including Mr Gaynes).
Points covered included:
(a) NO pedestrian access through the Forklift door.
(b) ONLY enter or exit the room through the door via the designated walkway
across the forklift alleyway.
(c) Pedestrians MUST stay on the designated walkway at ALL times when in loadout
and on the dock.
(d) You cannot take a short cut across the dock forklift or scanning/pallet area
to another part of the dock.
(e) The scanner operator can walk across the area BUT only when performing
scanning duties.
(f) The forklift operator can walk across the area but ONLY for access to and
from the forklift.
(g) Failure to comply will result in disciplinary action.
(2) On 30 June 2020 a toolbox talk was held with workers (including Mr Gaynes).
Points covered included:
(a) This toolbox is being held to re-enforce forklift safety in the plate
freezer area & on the dock.
(b) NO pedestrian access through the Forklift door.
(c) ONLY enter or exit the room is through the door via the designated walkway
across the forklift alleyway.
(d) Pedestrians MUST stay on the designated walkway at ALL times when in loadout
and on the dock.
(e) You cannot take a short cut across the dock forklift or scanning/pallet area
to another part of the dock.
(f) The scanner operator can walk across the area BUT only when performing
scanning duties.
(g) The forklift operator can but walk across the area ONLY to access to and
from the forklift.
(h) Failure to comply will results in disciplinary action.
(3) On 12 May 2022, a toolbox talk was held with workers (including Mr Gaynes
and Mr Dhari and Mr Jenssen). Points raised in the
toolbox included:
(a) Under no circumstances can any pedestrian or exit door be blocked in any way
or by pallets or any equipment.
(b) Not complying with these safety rules will result in disciplinary action.
(4) On 9 September 2021 a toolbox talk was held with workers (including Mr
Jenssen and Mr Gaynes) to re-enforce road and forklift
area safety. Points
raised in the toolbox included:
(a) You must only use designated pathways on site.
(b) At all times you are to remain on the designated walkways in any forklift
(c) Do not take a short cut & walk across forklift only zone areas.
(d) Do not enter through rapid doors / forklift entries to areas that have
employee entry doors.
(e) Not complying with these safety rules will result in disciplinary action.
inspection of the forklift after the incident, SafeWork Inspector Howie observed
that the left hand mirror was positioned so that
when she was standing at the
rear of the forklift she could not be observed as it was pointing toward the
ground. Inspector Howie
could be seen in the right hand mirror when standing at
the rear of the forklift.
the investigation conducted by SafeWork, Mr Gaynes stated he could not hear the
reverse beeper of the forklift because there
was a big fan above the
forklift had a manufacturer's operator manual in the back pocket of the
to the incident, there were signs on the wall and metal frame leading into the
chilled stack-down area from the load-out area
including a:
(1) “Forklifts operating in this area” sign on the wall;
(2) “Safety first - sound your horn” sign on the wall;
(3) “No Pedestrians - forklift access only - Exit through door only”
sign on the left­ hand side of the metal frame
(and an equivalent but
ripped sign on the right-hand side of the metal frame).
to the incident, there was also a sign in the chilled stack-down area on the
wall to the right-hand side of the rapid roller
door stating: “CAUTION
SOUND HORN Pedestrian & Fork Truck / Vehicle TRAFFIC AREA”.
was also a sign to the left-hand side of the control panel next to the rapid
roller door which stated: “CAUTION PEDESTRIANS
- AUTOMATIC HIGH SPEED DOOR
- STAY CLEAR”.
to the incident, JBS had the following documented systems in place in relation
to the chilled stack-down area:
(1) The JBS
Procedural Statement for Cold Stores
relevantly provided:
(a) the “blue light on the forklift is an exclusion zone”;
(b) “[a]t no point should any operator working around the forklift be in
between the blue light exclusion zone and the forklift”;
(c) workers “must be vigilant of forklifts at all times when working in
the cold stores area”;
(d) workers must not “place anything in front of any doorway or emergency
access evacuation paths”;
(e) “Forklift operators must exercise proper operating procedures as per
your licence attainment”;
(f) “Listen for reversing beeps and horns at all times”;
(g) “Always exercise extreme caution when on or around
forklifts”;
(h) “Always stick to designated walkways”; and
(i) “Be cautious when walking around shared zones”.
(j) “You must abide by safety signage at all times.”
Procedural Statement for Cold Stores
was issued to relevant
workers prior to the incident, including Mr Gaynes on 24 February 2020, Mr
Hammond on 14 June 2022 and Mr Jenssen
on 13 November 2018.
(2) The JBS
Task Description Operating Electric Pallet Jack
under the heading “Hazard Identification and Management”:
(a) “High Visibility clothing must be worn so you are easily seen by
forklift drivers”;
(b) “You MUST only enter or exit the plate freezer palletising work area
through the designated entry & personnel door”;
(c) “Palletising operators are to remain in their designated work area
between conveyor and pallets”;
(d) “You must listen for horns & reversing beeps from the forklifts
when entering, exiting & working in any forklift
(e) “You must always be mindful of the blue light that forklifts emit to
alert you they are in close vicinity”; and
(f) “NEVER enter or exit the plate freezer palletising work area via the
forklift access door or the forklift passage”.
Task Description Operating Electric Pallet Jack
was issued to
relevant workers prior to the incident, including Mr Gaynes on 16 March 2021 and
Mr Jenssen on 11 March 2021.
(3) The JBS
Work Health & Safety Policy
(January 2021) provided
that JBS' commitment to work health & safety is demonstrated through
(amongst others):
(a) “Understanding our risk profile and seeking to eliminate or reduce our
risk through implementing effective hazard and risk
processes”;
(b) “Allocating adequate resources to plan for and maintain a safe,
healthy and supportive working environment, including suitably
qualified and
competent persons to support and deliver JBS Australia's safety
commitment”;
(c) “Providing safe systems of work and maintaining equipment and
machinery that is safe”; and
(d) “Ensuring our people are trained to conduct their work safely through
the provision of innovative and high quality training
programs which meet the
diverse needs of our businesses.”
(4) The Riverina Beef Traffic Management Plan dated October 2016 provided
internal traffic flow plans for the Site.
the time of the incident, relevant workers including Mr Gaynes, Mr Hammond, Mr
Jenssen and Mr Dhari understood that they were required
to access the chilled
stack­down area from the personnel access door and not the rapid roller
Relevant legislation and guidance material
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (the Regulation)
requires a duty holder to manage risks to health and safety by:
(1) Identifying reasonably foreseeable hazards that could give rise to risks to
health and safety (cl 34);
(2) Eliminating risks to health and safety so far as is reasonably practicable
and, if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate
risks to health and
safety, minimise those risks so far as is reasonably practicable (cl 35);
(3) Ensuring a control measure that is implemented to eliminate or minimise
risks to health and safety is, and is maintained so that
it remains, effective,
including by ensuring that the control measure is and remains:
(a) Fit for purpose, and
(b) Suitable for the nature and duration of the work, and
(c) Installed, set up and used correctly (cl 37); and
(4) Reviewing and revising, as necessary, control measures implemented so as to
maintain, so far as is reasonably practicable, a
work environment that is
without risks to health or safety (cl 38).
39 of the Regulation requires a duty holder to provide suitable and adequate
information, training, and instruction to a worker,
having regard to the work
carried out by the worker, the nature of the risks associated with the work, and
the control measures implemented.
The duty holder must ensure that the
information, training, and instruction is provided in a way that is readily
understandable to
any worker to whom it is provided.
214(d) of the Regulation requires a person with management or control of powered
mobile plant at a workplace to manage, in
accordance with Part 3.1, risks to
health and safety associated with the plant colliding with any person or
215(4) of the Regulation specifically requires a person with management or
control of powered mobile plant at a workplace to
ensure that the plant does not
collide with pedestrians or other powered mobile plant.
to the incident, the following industry guidance material had been published and
was available to JBS:
(1) Safe Work Australia's
General Guide for Workplace Traffic Management
(SWA Guide) was published in July 2014 and relevantly provides:
Information, training, instruction and supervision
Before mobile plant is used in your workplace you must provide anyone who will
use it with the information, training, instruction
or supervision necessary to
protect them and others from the risks associated with traffic in a
You should provide supervision to ensure safety procedures are being followed,
particularly if you are relying on administrative
control measures to minimise
(2) SafeWork NSW's
Code of practice
Managing the risks of plant
in the workplace
(August 2019) (SWNSW Code)
provides as follows in
relation to powered mobile plant:
Powered mobile plant
The person with management or control of powered mobile plant must manage risks
to health and safety associated with the following:
- the plant colliding with any person or thing”
(3) The SWNSW Code also provides as follows in relation to information,
training, instruction and supervision:
1.4. Information, training, instruction and supervision
The WHS Act requires that a PCBU ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, the
provision of any information, training, instruction
or supervision that is
necessary to protect all persons from risks to their health and safety arising
from work carried out as part
of the conduct of the business or undertaking.
Before a PCBU's workers or other persons use the plant in a workplace, a PCBU
must, as far as is reasonably practicable, provide
them with information,
training, instruction and organise ongoing supervision as necessary to protect
them from risks arising from
the use of the plant.
Supervisors should take action to correct unsafe work practices associated with
plant as soon as possible. Otherwise workers may
think unsafe work practices are
acceptable.”
(4) Safe Work Australia's
Traffic management: Guide for warehousing
(SWA Warehousing Guide)
which was published in April 2021 further
1.2. Information, training, instruction and supervision
A PCBU must provide any information, training, instruction or supervision
necessary to protect all persons from risks to their health
and safety, so far
as is reasonably practicable.
A PCBU should provide supervision to ensure safety procedures are being
followed, particularly if they are relying on administrative
controls to
minimise risks.
1.5. Loadshifting equipment
Loadshifting equipment can include powered mobile plant like forklifts, ride-on
pallet movers, walkie stackers and manual equipment
(e.g. pallet jacks and
Where forklifts are used, the best way to minimise the risk of forklift-related
injuries is to separate pedestrians and forklifts.
If this is not possible consider:
- implementing and enforcing pedestrian and forklift exclusion zones.”
(5) Australian Standard AS 2359.2-2013
Powered industrial trucks
Part 2: Operations
(AS 2359.2)
was published on 13 February 2013
and provides under “3.4 General Rules for Users and
Supervisors”:
“Users and supervisors shall ensure that the following rules are
(b) All personnel in the vicinity of operating trucks shall be made to be aware
of and observe safe working procedures including
minimum pedestrian safety
requirements and separation distances.”
(6) SafeWork NSW's
Forklift Safety Guide for Employers
(SWNSW Forklift
Safety Guide) was published on 14 February 2020 and relevantly provides:
“Eight simple safety tips:
6. Supervise your workers and ensure you give them feedback on how safe they are
7. Value and reward safe behaviour”
(7) SafeWork NSW's
Incident Information Release Forklift Truck Tip Over
(SWNSW Incident Information Release)
published on 25 May
2022 relevantly provides:
“Businesses must...
- ensure workers and all other people on site adhere to the traffic management
plan and site safety rules”
(8) SafeWork NSW's
Working with or around mobile plant safety alert
(SWNSW Safety Alert) was published on 30 January 2014 and relevantly
ACTION REQUIRED
PCBUs must also provide workers and others with adequate information, training,
instruction or supervision to protect persons from
plant-related risks.
SPECIFIC CONTROL MEASURES
Part 3.1 of the WHS Regulation specifies the manner in which risks to health and
safety in the workplace must be managed. This applies
to managing the risk of
mobile plant, which can be done using the following risk management process.
- Maintain and review control measures. Control measures need to remain
effective, particularly if the workplace is changing. Systems
should be in place
3. Ensure workers are implementing control measures correctly”
Systems of work after the incident
18 July 2022, Inspector Howie issued Improvement Notice 7-422145 to JBS
requiring it to undertake a review of the activity being
undertaken at the time
of the incident and implement and train workers in the procedure for that
18 July 2022, Inspector Howie also issued Improvement Notice 7-422149 to JBS
requiring it to eliminate or, where not practicable,
minimise the risk, so far
as is reasonably practicable, associated with workers/pedestrians being struck
by a reversing forklift.
19 August 2022, at about 11.40am, Inspector Howie visited the Site to enquire if
JBS had complied with the improvement notices.
19 August 2022, at about 5.00pm, JBS emailed Inspector Howie to confirm the
steps taken by JBS to comply with the improvement notices.
The email confirmed
that the following steps were taken (or scheduled to be undertaken) in response
to the improvement notices:
(1) Improvement Notice 7-422145
(a) The rapid roller door was placed in automatic mode on 18 July 2022.
(b) Workers in the chilled stack-down area were given instructions on 18 and 19
July 2022 which re-enforced the procedures in the
area (including the
requirement that rapid doors remain in automatic mode and that pedestrians used
designated walkways and doors),
and that serious disciplinary action would be
taken if safety procedures are not followed. The initial instructions were
via toolbox talks conducted by the Plant Manager and Safety Advisor and
follow-up toolbox talks conducted by supervisors and HSRs.
(c) The instructions on the procedures for workers were reinforced through the
installation of 60 cm x 40 cm custom signs to the
rapid door area - scheduled to
be completed on 20 August 2022.
(d) Additional line marking of pedestrian exclusion zones at the rapid roller
door to provide additional warning to workers - scheduled
to be completed on 20
August 2022. This was completed using red painted diagonal lines.
(2) Improvement Notice 7-422149
(a) JBS engaged Liftek Australia Pty Ltd to attend the site on 1 August 2022 to
undertake a review of the reversing beepers on all
the forklifts at the site.
(b) The review found that all forklift beepers were within specification and
were functioning correctly.
22 August 2022, at about 1.00pm, Inspector Howie issued Inspection Report 10-
136333 to JBS, which confirmed the compliance status
of both improvement notices
as “complied”.
Evidence for the Defendant
Damien Lynes affirmed an affidavit on 8 October 2025. Mr Lynes is employed by
JBS in the role of Safety Operations Manager for
the Northern Division of JBS.
He has held this role since about July 2023, a year after the incident the
subject of this prosecution.
Qualifications and
Lynes set out his extensive qualifications and experience related to Work,
Health and Safety.
The JBS Group
operates in conjunction with a range of other corporate entities which is
referred to as “the JBS Group”.
JBS Group is a global meat and food processing business with operations in
Australia. In Australia, the JBS Group exports meat
products to over 50
countries and maintains significant market share in domestic beef, lamb and pork
markets in Australia.
JBS Group employs about 15,620 employees in Australia including about 3,939
employees in New South Wales. JBS employs about 9,555
employees in Australia
including 1,362 employees in NSW.
The JBS Business
JBS meat processing operations are divided into a Northern and a Southern
Division. The Northern Division encompasses feedlots
and meat processing
facilities across locations in New South Wales and Queensland. It includes the
Riverina Plant and Riverina Feedlot.
Mr Lynes’ Role at
Lynes reports to the Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the Northern Division, Mr
Brendan Tatt. Mr Tatt reports to the CEO of the
JBS Group in Australia, Mr Brent
Lynes set out a detailed statement of his current responsibilities at
Statement of Remorse
Lynes exhibited to his affidavit a statement of remorse signed by Mr Eastwood
and Mr Tatt.
The Riverina Plant
currently employs about 491 employees at the Riverina Plant and about 77
employees at the Riverina Feedlot.
Riverina Plant operates five days per week, from Monday to Friday, from 5.30am
to 11.30pm.
operations of the Riverina Plant include slaughtering, boning, packing,
palletisation and rendering as well as maintenance.
Personnel Employed by the JBS Group in Australia
are about 77 safety and injury management professionals employed by the JBS
Group in Australia.
Safety Systems of the JBS Group in
Lynes set out an extensive summary of JBS Group’s corporate safety systems
in Australia at the time of the Incident.
Safety at the Riverina
Lynes summarised the current safety systems in place at the Riverina
Systems to Manage People and Plant Interaction Risks at
the Time of the Incident
the time of the Incident, JBS had a range of systems in place to manage forklift
and pedestrian interaction risks in the load out
area and chilled stack-down
area of the Riverina Plant. These systems are described in further detail in
pars 40 to 57 of the Amended
Statement of Facts.
Actions Taken
Following the Incident
Lynes set out further actions taken by JBS at the Riverina Plant since the
Incident that were not in the ASOF. These included:
(1) Painting additional yellow and white lines on the ground to mark the pathway
to the pedestrian access door to the chilled stack-down
area. These painted
lines lead to a pedestrian only walkway. The walkway is painted in green and is
also guarded by yellow painted
barricades. At the time of the Incident, racking
was installed alongside this wall, which was removed to allow installation of
green walkway and yellow painted barricade.
(2) New login codes were issued to licensed forklift drivers to operate to the
forklifts, to give each driver an individual code.
(3) Internal traffic management lines at the site were recently re-painted.
External traffic management lines have been scheduled
for re-painting in
December 2025.
(4) Additional toolbox talks were provided to workers in the loadout and chilled
stack-down areas to reinforce requirements concerning
use of the rapid roller
Smart Camera Project
trialled the use of surveillance cameras at the Riverina Plant and Riverina
Feedlot to monitor implementation of various safety
control measures. There was
a reduction in the number of safety breaches detected by the cameras over the
course of the trial. After
the trial JBS decided to install the surveillance
cameras across its Northern Division operations.
Support Provided
provided support to Mr Gaynes and other workers following the Incident. JBS
employees visited Mr Gaynes in hospital and have kept
in contact with him since
the Incident. JBS supported Mr Gaynes’ return to work process and engaged
a rehabilitation consultant.
Mr Gaynes remains employed with JBS at the Riverina
Plant. He is currently working three days a week printing
Industry and Community Contribution
Lynes provided details about JBS’ community support and donations,
diversity and inclusion, and sustainability.
Co-operation with
Investigation
and its employees co-operated with SafeWork during its investigation of the
Consideration
have had regard to the objects in s 3 of the WHS Act
and the purposes of
sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (CSP Act).
Objective Seriousness of the Offence
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
; (1988) 164 CLR 465 at 472, 485-6,
490-1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective circumstances” was
used to describe
the circumstances of the crime. The gravity of the offence was
assessed by reference to its objective seriousness:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
task requires the court to consider where in the range of conduct covered by the
offence the conduct of the offender falls:
[1988] HCA 67;
(1988) 166 CLR 51 at 57. This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate
range of sentences available which
will reflect the objective seriousness of the
offence committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to
the criminality
of the offender will lie:
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Court said:
“The objective seriousness of an offence is to be assessed without
reference to matters personal to a particular offender or
class of offenders. It
is to be determined wholly by reference to the nature of the offending.”
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610 at
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
court must identify all the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discuss
their significance and then make a value judgment
as to what is the appropriate
sentence given all the factors of the case:
. This approach to
sentencing, known as the “instinctive synthesis” approach, involves
the making of a global judgment
without any attempt to state precisely how any
given factor has influenced the judgment.
Court of Criminal Appeal has examined the sentencing process with regard to the
WHS Act in the matter of
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
NSWCCA 96. Justice Basten at [34], under the heading “Assessment of
Risk” said:
“The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the proposition
that ‘greater culpability attaches to the failure
to guard against an
event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the occurrence of
which is extremely unlikely’.
However the truth of that proposition
depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential consequences of
the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the availability of steps
to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative culpability depends
on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the [event] which
occurred might not be expected to occur
often, the seriousness of the
foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be taken to avoid it,
which were not even assessed,
were straightforward and involved only minor
inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the WHS Act, saying:
“It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk of
the consequence, to the extent that a worker is in
fact injured, but is the risk
arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring. To discount
the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct in
is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries, whether
or not they are
likely to materialize. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which mitigating
steps could have been taken.”
findings about the defendant’s level of culpability are based upon the
(1) The risk was known to and foreseen by JBS. While the JBS safety system was
designed to minimise such risk, the system was not
enforced and the automatic
door was switched to manual.
(2) There was a significant likelihood of the risk occurring, once the JBS
safety system was ignored.
(3) The potential consequences of the risk were death or serious injury.
(4) There were steps available to eliminate or minimise the risk. Those steps
were taken immediately after the incident.
(5) There was no burden or inconvenience of implementing those steps.
(6) The harm caused to Mr Gaynes was most serious, resulting in an above-knee
amputation.
(7) The maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,860,843, which reflects
the legislature’s view of the seriousness of
the offence.
find that the level of culpability of JBS is in the mid
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
Employers must take the obligations imposed by
the WHS Act very seriously. The
community is entitled to expect that both small and large employers will comply
with safety requirements.
General deterrence is a significant factor when safety
obligations are breached:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338 at
penalty must reflect the need for specific deterrence. JBS is still conducting
a very extensive business. Its operations involve
meat and food processing and
the continuing engagement of workers. They work in an industry which is
dangerous, if businesses do
not discharge their safety
Aggravating Factors
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
21A(2)(g) CSP Act.
for SafeWork conceded that while JBS had been convicted in 2020 and in 2023 in
this court of offences under s 19(1) and s
132 of the WHS Act, these convictions
did not rise to the level of an aggravating feature under s 21A(2)(d) of
the CSP Act. The earlier
conviction related to a fire incident;
SafeWork NSW
v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDC 678.
The later conviction referred to
the failure to carry out a risk assessment on a stack of hay bales:
NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 473.
for SafeWork submitted that while the prior convictions did not constitute an
aggravating factor under the CSP Act, the existence
of those convictions meant
that JBS was not entitled to leniency as if it were a first offender. This
proposition was accepted by
counsel for JBS.
convictions are relevant to decide where, within the boundaries set by the
objective circumstances, a sentence should lie;
R v McNaughton
[2006] NSWCCA 242
SafeWork NSW v Deicorp Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC 194
per Strathdee DCJ.
Mitigating Factors
for SafeWork did not dispute the following submissions made by counsel for
is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f) CSP Act. The steps which it took
after the incident demonstrate this. It has been
a good corporate citizen. JBS
Group acquired the business of Australian Meat Holdings in 2007 so it has been
in business for 18 years.
has good prospects of rehabilitation: s 21A(3)(h) CSP Act. It has taken positive
steps to guard against the risk of an incident
such as this ever happening
again. It has brought its documentation and its procedures into line with those
which, on all the evidence,
should have been in place before this incident
has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i) CSP. It has provided evidence
that it has accepted responsibility for its actions
and has acknowledged that
the injury to Mr Gaynes was caused by its actions.
entered a plea of guilty: s 21A(3)(k) CSP Act. The court must take into account
the fact that the offender has pleaded guilty,
when the offender pleaded guilty,
and the circumstances in which the offender indicated an intention to plead
guilty: s 22(1) CSP
Act. It is appropriate to give JBS a 25% discount for an
early plea.
gave assistance to law enforcement authorities: s 21A(3)(m) CSP Act. It
cooperated at all times with the prosecutor and provided
all documents requested
in a prompt fashion.
Capacity to Pay a Fine
am required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) before
imposing a fine. Where an offender seeks to have a fine reduced on the basis of
a limited capacity to pay, it bears
the evidentiary onus of convincing the court
that it should exercise its discretion to limit the amount of the fine. The
capacity to pay is relevant but not decisive:
Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
. A substantial fine may
still be warranted as a result of the seriousness of the offence and the need
for general deterrence.
Unity Pty Limited v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal said:
“First, and more generally, questions of specific deterrence should take
into account the size and scope of the operations
of the defendant; a fine which
may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a
large corporation. The maximum penalty for the offence
is undoubtedly set having regard to such a factor. Secondly, the Court is
required to have regard to ‘the means’ of the defendant, pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
was no submission about capacity to pay, so this issue does not
Victim Impact Statement
defendant was convicted at the sentence hearing on 15 October 2025.
Division 2 of the CSP Act
deals with Victim Impact Statements. The
provisions apply to an offence being dealt with summarily by the District Court
offence results in the death of, or actual physical bodily harm to,
any person – s 27(2)(a).
s 28(1) a primary victim may prepare a statement that contains particulars of
the following suffered as a direct result of the
(1) Any personal harm.
(2) Any emotional suffering or distress.
(3) Any harm to relationships with other persons.
(4) Any economic loss or harm that arises from any matter referred to in (1)
– (3) above.
Victim Impact Statement may be tendered to the court only by the prosecutor
– s 30A(2). A court must accept a Victim Impact
Statement tendered by a
prosecutor if the statement complies with the requirements of the Division
– s 30B. A victim to whom
a Victim Impact Statement relates may read out
the whole or part of their Victim Impact Statement – s 30D(1).
court to which a Victim Impact Statement has been tendered must consider the
statement at any time after it convicts but before
it sentences, and may make
any comment on the statement that the court considers appropriate – s
prosecutor tendered the Victim Impact Statement of Mr Gaynes, dated 22 September
2025 (PX 2).
Gaynes is 57 years old. He has acquired a significant amount of experience
performing factory work, landscaping, hospitality and
aged/disability care
throughout his 38 year working career.
Immediately
after the incident he caught a glimpse of his “badly mangled leg”.
Mr Gaynes was thankful for the assistance
provided by his supervisor (Mr
Jenssen) and the First Aid Officer (Ms Sue Blackburn). He credits them with
saving his life. Mr Gaynes
has no recollection of the paramedics who attended
the scene because he was in a state of shock.
Gaynes described the extensive rehabilitation he has undertaken since the
incident. He can mobilise in a wheelchair and with his
prosthetic leg. He lives
alone and can do most household tasks, though some take longer than before the
Gaynes is a resilient, hardworking and determined man. He is concerned that he
may difficulties securing employment in the future
if he stopped working with
JBS, where he has returned to work for 20 hours per week printing labels for
meat products. As he is renting
his property, Mr Gaynes is also concerned about
the provision of suitable and affordable accommodation in the future.
Gaynes is concerned about his personal safety because of his physical
vulnerability. He becomes upset more easily since the incident
and reported
reduced patience and tolerance with others. He also has depressing and sad
thoughts about his disability. Mr Gaynes
tries to be grateful for his
circumstances and focus on what he can do rather than what he
will be an order that the defendant is to pay the prosecutor’s
orders are:
(1) JBS Australia Pty Ltd was convicted on 15 October 2025.
(2) The appropriate fine is $440,000 but that will be reduced by 25% to reflect
the early plea of guilty.
(3) Order JBS Australia Pty Ltd to pay a fine of $330,000.
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) that 50%
of the fine is to be paid to the prosecutor.
(5) Order JBS Australia Pty Ltd to pay the prosecutor’s costs agreed in
the amount $44,242.31.
31 October 2025 - par 107 amended 'did rise' to 'did not rise'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (386 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter