URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/655.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mara Pty Ltd v Arlington Property Group Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 655 (23 December 2013)
Mara Pty Ltd v Arlington Property Group Pty Ltd (Home Building)
[2013] NSWCTTT
(23 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
APPLICATION NO:
HB 13/29433
Mara Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Arlington Property Group Pty Ltd
APPLICATION:
application pursuant to s 43 of the
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
Applicant/owner
alleging default in specific performance order requiring order for
APPEARANCES:
For the applicant – Mr A Carolyn of Counsel
respondent – Mr C McFadzean - Solicitor
2 July 2013 at Sydney
LEGISLATION:
Trader & Tenancy Tribunal Act
complying with timetable
involvement of legal supervision in building work
Original breach
of contract
respondent, Arlington Property Group Pty Ltd is to pay the applicant, Mara Pty
Ltd, the amount of $22,054.00 immediately.
applicant and the respondent are each to file and exchange, by 24 January
2014 their submissions on costs of the renewal
proceedings.
REASONS FOR DECISION
present application is brought pursuant to a renewal order made as part of a
consent agreement in HB 11/52038, the initial application
brought by the
applicant pursuant to the
substantive application was settled by way of consent orders on 2
October 2012. Those orders relevantly provided as
respondent is to carry out the work specified in Annexure A in a proper and
workmanlike manner in the period from 11 February
2013 to 3 March 2013.
the respondent does not complete the work specified in annexure A in a proper
and workmanlike manner by 3 March 2013, the applicant
has leave to renew the
proceedings by 3 June 2013.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or
A to the orders was in effect a Scope of Works detailing four specific areas of
defective building work involving tiling
defects, a ceiling defect, drainage and
damage to the laundry area, and lastly a skylight leak in the main bathroom.
present proceedings were commenced by the issue of a Renewal Application filed
with the Tribunal on 29 May 2013.
THE EVIDENCE
was provided in affidavit form by both parties. The applicant’s evidence
was made up of the following:
Declaration of Clive Raymond Hartz, declared 28 June 2013, attached to which
were 39 annexures which was tendered and marked
report of Steve Alexander, architect, dated 27 June 2013 – ex.
further Statutory Declaration of Mr Hartz dated 1 July 2013, with attached
annexures – ex. C.
behalf of the respondent, an affidavit of Mr Tomas Simpson sworn 2 July
2013 with 48 pages of attachments was tendered
and marked exhibit
submissions were provided by the legal representatives of both parties.
have read and considered all of the documentary evidence tendered by both
parties and have had regard to submissions made during
the course of the hearing
of this application. In the event that my reasons do not refer to any specific
piece of evidence or submission,
it should not be construed that serious
consideration has not been afforded to those matters.
noted, the original building dispute, after being settled by way of consent to
specific orders in October last year, came back
before the Tribunal some nine
months later pursuant to s 43 of the
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
(the CTTTA), which is in the following
43 Enforcement of certain
(1) If the Tribunal
makes an order in relation to any proceedings,
the Tribunal
may, when the order is made or later, give leave
to the person in whose favour
the order is made to renew the proceedings
if the order is not complied with within the period specified
by the Tribunal.
(2) If an order has not been complied with within the period specified by
the Tribunal,
the person in whose favour the order was
made may renew the proceedings
to which the order relates by lodging a notice with the Tribunal,
within 12 months after the end of
the period, stating that the order has not
been complied with.
(3) The provisions of this Act apply to a notice lodged in accordance with
subsection (2) as if the notice were an application made
in accordance with
section 24.
(4) When proceedings
have been renewed in accordance with this section, the Tribunal:
(a) may make any other appropriate order under this Act as it could have
made when the matter was originally determined, or
(b) may refuse to make such an order.
(5) This section does not apply if the operation of an order has been
(6) A notice under this section must be in the form prescribed by the
regulations.
original consent orders were made subsequent to a claim brought on behalf of the
owner for breach of statutory warranties pursuant
to s 18B of the HBA. The
substantive building defects claim was one of comparatively modest dimension. It
was dealt with efficiently
and was settled subsequent to a conclave of experts.
The underlying basis of the settlement was an acceptance by Arlington Property
Group Pty Ltd (the builder) that it had, as alleged, breached the terms of its
construction contract, more specifically the implied
statutory warranties under
s 18B of the HBA.
A to the consent orders allowed for the owner’s nominated architect, a Mr
Steve Alexander, to be involved in two aspects
of the work. Firstly, it was to
be his sole opinion and determination whether the ordered replacement tiling,
once completed was
a consistent match with the existing tiling. Secondly, a
drainage system, which was to be designed by the builder, had to be approved,
his absolute discretion, by Mr Alexander. As it turned out however, during the
currency of the rectification work what seemed
to be a limited involvement by
the owner’s architect became more extensive. For whatever reason, noting
that the original building
dispute had ostensibly been settled, the scheduling
for the work and communication between the owner and the builder was performed
by their solicitors. The initial contact on behalf of the builder was made
through Mr Simpson, however as the owner had previously
retained a firm of
solicitors to act on his behalf in the original dispute, he did so as well
concerning the administration of the
remedial building works. Inexorably, chains
of emails emanating from all parties, contributed to time quickly ebbing away.
the timetable could not be commenced as ordered, because the owner had
a particular difficulty which put it back one week. It is
not necessary for me
to go into every issue and every day of delay, only to say that the involvement
of lawyers, as a generalization,
did not hasten the process.
was not until the 3 April 2013 that a design for the roof drainage system was
ultimately agreed. Although not allowed for in the
Scope of Works, the owner,
through his solicitor, insisted on having a hydraulic engineer approve of the
design. That led to the
builder involving an expert of similar qualification.
unreasonable amount of time was devoted to obtaining the precise wording of a
contract of insurance in which the owner had to be
noted as being an interested
person. Although a document titled “
Confirmation of Cover”
was provided by the builder on the 27 February 2013, it was not until some
nine days later that the owner’s solicitor’s
requirements were met
by the provision of the appropriate documentation from an insurer, not just an
insurance broker. The largest
component of the remedial work, the tiling defects
were eventually completed on 15 April 2013. There had certainly been however,
delay on the part of the builder in getting this work done, complicated by the
relevant tiling contractors failing to protect furniture
including a valuable
antique painting from being affected by dust and other building consequences.
to the certification by the owner’s architect that the tiling had been
completed in a proper workmanlike manner on
or about 15 April 2013, the builder
sent an email to the owner’s solicitor on 17 April 2013 attaching, as
requested, an updated
program for the completion of the outstanding
rectification work. On 19 April 2013, a letter was sent by the owner’s
advising that the updated program was not acceptable. The letter,
apart from noting the anticipated period of delay, then went on
to recite a
series of alleged defaults on the part of the builder, and then proposed that
the owner would be prepared to consider
an extension of time to complete the
rectification works on certain terms, one of which was that, “
parties reach agreement on the payment of our client’s costs in accordance
with order 3 of the orders.”
The costs referred to, were those which
were included as part of the consent orders of 2 October 2013.The
builder’s solicitor
responded by email of 19 April 2013, and in referring
to what was alleged to be the large amount of legal costs claimed on behalf
the owner for the substantive proceedings, suggested that the owner,
“needs to identify what it really expects to recover”
letter of 24 April 2013 in its response, the owner’s solicitor referred to
various matters concerning the proposed program,
commented upon from an
historical perspective the alleged poor workmanship and performance by the
builder, but maintained the legal
cost issue as a continuing part of the
negotiating process aimed at getting the remedial building work back on track.
The final two
paragraphs of the letter of 24 April 2013 are instructive as to a
factor that resulted in the remedial work process becoming derailed.
“Our client has the benefit of a cost order made by the CTTT under
which, failing agreement, our client will have its costs
assessed. However, the
issue of costs cannot be progressed until your client indicates its position in
respect to the costs that
have been presented by our client.
Again we note that the Updated Program does not provide for any work to
occur until 1 May 2013. We trust that your client will be
able to respond to
our letter dated 26 November 2012 before 1 May 2013.”
Notwithstanding
further emails of 29 April 2013 and 10 May 2013, the builder and its solicitor
remained mute. The builder’s
updated program remained a proposed timetable
and one that was not met with any agreement from the owner or its solicitor.
initial specific performance order made on 2 October 2012 was made pursuant to s
48O of the HBA which is in the following terms:
48O Powers of
(1) In determining a building
claim, the Tribunal
is empowered to make one or more of the following orders as it considers
appropriate:
(a) an order that one party to the proceedings pay money to another party or
to a person specified in the order, whether by way of
debt, damages or
restitution, or refund any money paid by a specified person,
(b) an order that a specified amount of money is not due or owing by a party
to the proceedings to a specified person, or that a
party to the proceedings is
not entitled to a refund of any money paid to another party to the
proceedings,
(c) an order that a party to the proceedings:
(i) do any specified work or perform any specified service or any obligation
arising under this Act or the terms of any agreement,
(ii) do or perform, or refrain from doing or performing, any specified act,
matter or thing.
(2) The Tribunal
may make an order of a kind referred to in subsection (1) (a) or
(b) even if the applicant asked for an order of a kind referred to in
subsection (1)
(3) The provisions of
Claims Act 1998
apply, with any necessary modifications, to and in
respect of the determination of a building
Tribunal, at the time that the consent order was proposed, considered it
appropriate within the terms of the section, to order
that the builder perform
specified work to rectify the conceded defective building work. Section 43 of
the CTTTA is activated under
sub-section 2 if the Tribunal is satisfied that
“an order has not been complied with within the period specified by the
Tribunal ....”
is clear that the builder has not complied with the order. The builder submits
that it has been frustrated by the acts of the owner
and its solicitor in
delaying, and failing to allow it to complete the remedial works. As submitted
by the owner, I accept that there
have been delays by the builder, which
together with consequential damage to the owner’s home occasioned in the
course of carrying
out rectification works, have in my view contributed to the
remedial works program being suspended throughout May 2013 by the builder.
would also seem that the builder was carrying out the relevant works on a
sequential basis, finishing the tiling work first before
moving on to the other
items that needed rectifying, a process which was inconsistent with an original
three week work program. I
am of the view that after the early part of March
2013, a significant part of the delay can be attributed to the inaction on the
part of the builder, to some extent aided and abetted by often over cautious
requirements imposed on the builder by the owner. The
involvement of a hydraulic
engineer and the demand for an independent certification of the drainage design
complying with the Australian
Standard, are two such requirements that fell
outside of the original Scope of Works, Annexure A to the initial orders of
primary breach of contract was that of the builder. There has been delay that
can be attributed to the builder and there is, in
my view, the persuasive
evidence that damage was caused to the owner’s property in the course of
remedial works.
the building claim comes before me,
“as if the notice were an
application made in accordance with section 24,”
originating process, I am entitled to exercise a discretion in accordance with
ss 43(4)(a) of the CTTA, replicating a
similar discretion contained within s 48O
of the HBA. It is, in my view having regard to all of the evidence, a situation
is inappropriate for there to be a continuation of the relationship of
the respondent and the applicant as owner and builder. The
outstanding issues of
the remaining defective work will be assessed on the basis of the relevant costs
of rectification.
are three items of defective building work which have not been remedied, where
the cost of rectification is not in issue. They
Ceiling repair
Box gutter and
internal water damage repair $12,380.00
Skylight repair
Total outstanding remedial work $17,420.00
reject the owner’s claim for a further $1,500.00, relying upon the opinion
of Mr Alexander set out in his report of 27 June
2013, relating to a claimed
allowance for anticipated contingencies. I accept the submission made by the
builder that all such issues
were canvassed at the conclave, and that an
allowance of a 60% margin on the estimated rectification costs, was sufficient
for margins, overheads, profit and administration. I accept that
contingencies are fairly included within that loading. Such a discrete
contingency allowance, could and may have been agitated at the conclave, however
it was certainly neither referred to nor
noted as agreed in the conclave report.
owner also makes a claim with regard to damage to his furniture and other items,
including a valuable piece of artwork, that was
caused during the course of the
builder being on site at various times during March and April 2013. The
respondent, in relation to
three items, cleaning of dust, damage to a laundry
wall, and damages to leather chairs, does not admit that it caused the alleged
damage, but for commercial reasons has decided not to contest the amounts that
are claimed, namely a total sum of $1,254.00. I have
considered the evidence in
relation to all three claims and am satisfied that they are justified. A further
claim is evidenced in
the second Statutory Declaration of Mr Hartz, namely the
specialized cleaning of a large valuable piece of art. I have been provided
a quotation in relation to this item and am of the view that the owner’s
claim is justified. I allow a further amount
of $1,650.00 with regard to this
specialized cleaning.
have noted previously that the Scope of Works, Annexure A, contemplated the
limited role for the owner’s architect, Mr Alexander.
His last report of
27 June 2013 records that he was regularly on site. His invoice of the same date
records some 14 hours of attendance
and services at the property on 12 days
between 28 February 2013 and 27 June 2013. Certainly the first, last and
penultimate items
of hourly charge, could not be related to the limited Scope
obligations, nor am I of the view that all of the further time incurred
Alexander would be required for the limited Scope obligations. It is the
builder’s submission that the orders, and Annexure
A, do not require
supervision. This submission is correct, and in my view the owner’s
architect has taken on a supervisory
role at the direction of the owner. I am of
the view that the limited responsibility ascribed to the owner’s architect
by Annexure
A, should be evaluated at 50% of his total bill, an amount of
reject the claim for a hydraulic consultant, it was not provided within the
Scope, and can only be described as a matter of prudence
by the owner.
Accordingly
I order that the builder, Arlington Property Group Pty Ltd, pay to the owner,
Mara Pty Ltd, the sum of $22,054.00 immediately.
I direct that the parties file
and exchange submissions on the issue of costs not later than 24 January 2014.
Richard F Buckley
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter