URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/266.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
El Chami v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2025] NSWCATAD 266; (28 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
El Chami v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 266
Hearing Date(s):
26 August 2025
Date of Orders:
28 October 2025
Decision Date:
28 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J Sullivan, Senior Member
The matter is remitted to the Respondent for
determination in
accordance with paragraph 82 of
these reasons.
Catchwords:
TAXATION AND REVENUE – duty on transfer of residence between married
couple – transfer intended to meet exemption conditions
in s 104B –
error in transfer documents lodged – penalties and interest
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Duties Act 1997
Real Property Act 1900
Taxation Administration Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Bayton Cleaning Co Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Downer EDI Engineering Pty
[2020] NSWCA 126
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Incise
Technologies Pty Ltd & Anor (RD)
[2004] NSWADTAP 19
Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue v Incise Technologies Pty Ltd & Anor (RD)
[2004] NSWADTAP
Coles Myer Limited v Commissioner of State Revenue Victoria (1998) 98 ATC
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ryan
Golden Age & Hannas the Rocks v Chief Commissioner of State
[2024] NSWSC 249
Levitch Design Associates Pty Ltd ATF Levco Unit
Trust v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2014] NSWCATAD 21
Nhem v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWCATAD 9
Qualweld Australia Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2014] NSWCATAD 227
Re Floridia
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2012] VCAT 1574
Melteal Pty Ltd and Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2010] NSWADT 116
Enterprises Pty Ltd ATF the R M O’Mara Family Trust v Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue
[2004] NSWADT 64
Trethowan v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWSC 576
O’Neill Tyres Gateshead Pty Ltd & Cessnock
Tyres Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2020] NSWCATAD 314
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Marvett El Chami (Applicant)
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Gryphon Lawyers (Applicant)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00088483
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
El Chami is the Applicant. She is disputing a reassessment to duty on a transfer
to her, by her husband, of their residence
at Punchbowl. Penalties and interest
were also imposed.
intended transfer was of a 50% interest within the exemption under
Duties Act 1997
originally assessed as being exempt under that section on the basis of documents
prepared and lodged by the Applicant’s
solicitor, Mr Chanthivong of
Gryphon Lawyers (who also represented her in these proceedings).
the transfer form incorrectly stated that it was a transfer of the whole
property. The Applicant says no duty should be payable,
because it was done in
error. It is not in dispute that a second transfer a few days later resulted in
the Applicant holding a 50%
interest in the property as was intended.
an investigation, the Applicant was reassessed to ad valorem duty on 11 October
2024 (the “Reassessment”) on
the first transfer. The Reassessment
was based on an estimated dutiable value of the Property of $1,960,000, and
totalled $125,955.95.
This amount comprised:
(1) ad valorem duty of $90,855.00;
(2) penalty tax (calculated at 30% of the duty) of $27,256.50; and
(3) interest (at full market and premium rates) of $7,844.45.
Respondent says the first transfer was a valid and dutiable transaction which
transferred a 100% interest in the Property. It
was liable for duty and not
exempt, but now on a revised dutiable value of $1,075,000. The Respondent also
says the penalty should
be reduced from 30% to 25%, but no further remission of
penalty or interest is warranted.
What are the issues?
are three issues:
(1) Whether the first transfer is liable to duty (the second transfer is not in
(2) If so, what is the dutiable value; and
(3) If so, whether penalties and/or interest should be remitted.
Materials before the Tribunal
provided to the Tribunal before the hearing were the Applicant’s
application to the Tribunal filed (within time) on
28 February 2025 (A1);
documents filed by the Respondent on 1 July 2025 required by
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (“ADR Act”)
(R1); the Applicant’s submissions and attachments filed on 12 May 2025
(A2); Respondent’s
bundle of evidence filed on 1 July 2025 (R2);
Respondent’s submissions filed on 1 July 2025 (R3); and Applicant’s
submissions
in reply filed on 21 July 2025 (A3).
the hearing:
(1) the Respondent provided a Tribunal Book (which I will refer to as
“TB”) containing all the materials listed in par
above (R4), and a
bundle of authorities (R5); and
(2) the Applicant provided a document setting out their oral submissions (A4),
and an email to the Tribunal attaching the full Duties
Notice of Assessment
dated 27 October 2023 (A5) to replace the incomplete notice at TB 13.
evidence included:
(1) for the Applicant (TB 102-104): three statutory declarations dated 17
October 2024 - of the Applicant, her husband Joseph El
Chami, and Mr Chanthivong
(the solicitor); and
(2) for the Respondent (TB 126-177): an affidavit of George Boulougouris with an
annexed Valuation Report for the Property (as at
27 October 2023).
witnesses were required for cross-examination.
The Statutory
parties accepted that:
(1) the property was land in NSW and “dutiable property” for the
purposes of the
(s 11(1)(a))
(2) for a transfer effected by an instrument, liability for duty arises when the
instrument is first executed
; and an electronic registry
instrument is taken to be first executed on the date the instrument was first
digitally signed by the
(s 12(4)(a))
(3) duty is payable by the transferee
, and is to be paid within 3
months after the liability to pay the duty arises, or a tax default occurs
Exemption provisions in the
, which was the exemption sought by the Applicant, says:
104B Exemption—transfer of residential land
(1) No duty is chargeable under this Chapter on a transfer, or an
agreement for the sale or transfer, of residential land if—
(a) as a result of the transfer or agreement, the property is or will
be held by a married couple or de facto partners as joint
tenants or as tenants
in common in equal shares, and
(b) the residential land—
(i) is land on which there is a dwelling that, when the transfer of
dutiable property occurs, is used as the principal place of
residence of the
married couple or de facto partners, or
(ii) is a parcel of vacant land, or land on which there is a building
under construction, and the married couple or de facto partners
intend to use
the residential land as the site of a dwelling to be used as their principal
place of residence, and
(c) the residential land is used solely for residential purposes and
not for any other purpose (such as a commercial, industrial
or professional
purpose), and
(d) both the transferor and the transferee are the married couple or
one of them or the de facto partners or one of them and no
other person is a
party to the transfer, and
(e) in the case of de facto partners, the parties to the relationship
have lived in the relationship for at least 2 years before
the date of the
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) (c), the use of not more than one
room on the land for a non-residential purpose is to be
disregarded, if the use
relates to a business or undertaking that is primarily conducted elsewhere.
(3) Land may be the subject of an exemption under this section even if it
is partly held by another person who is not a part of
the married couple or one
of the de facto partners.
discussed in the reasons below are the following two sections in the
which exempt or exclude a liability for duty:
Section 50A
which says:
50A Cancelled transfers of dutiable property
(1) A transfer of dutiable property that is effected by an instrument is
not liable to duty under this Chapter if the Chief Commissioner
is satisfied
(a) the transfer instrument has been cancelled and the dutiable
property has not been transferred to the transferee, and
(b) the transfer was not cancelled to give effect to a subsale.
(c) (Repealed)
(2) If duty has been paid on a transfer of dutiable property that is not
liable to duty under this Chapter because of this section,
Commissioner must reassess and refund the duty if an application for a refund is
made within 5 years of the initial assessment.
(3) The transfer instrument in respect of which the application is made
must be surrendered to the Chief Commissioner unless the
Chief Commissioner
dispenses with that requirement.
(4) In this section,
includes abandoned.
(Exemptions from duty) which provides an exemption for
correction of an error at subsection (14) and says:
Correction of error
No duty is chargeable under this
Chapter on a transfer of dutiable property made to correct an error in a
previous transfer of the
same dutiable property if—
(a) no additional consideration is paid or payable, and
(b) the beneficial interests in the property change only to the
extent necessary to correct the error.
Section 293
which says:
Reassessments—failed instruments
(1) An instrument that fails in its intended operation and becomes useless
is not chargeable with duty under this Act.
(2) The Chief Commissioner must make a reassessment of duty in respect of
such an instrument if an application for a reassessment
is made within—
(a) 5 years after the initial assessment, or
(b) 12 months after the instrument has failed,
whichever is the later.
(3) The instrument in respect of which the application is made must be
produced to the Chief Commissioner unless the Chief Commissioner
dispenses with
its production.
(4) This section does not apply in respect of an instrument that effects a
transfer of dutiable property.
Real Property Act 1900
Real Property Act
Real Property Act
were also referred to by the
Respondent in their submissions and are set out below:
Dealings not effectual until recorded in
(1) No dealing, until registered in the manner provided by this Act, shall
be effectual to pass any estate or interest in any land
under the provisions of
this Act, or to render such land liable as security for the payment of money,
but upon the registration of
any dealing in the manner provided by this Act, the
estate or interest specified in such dealing shall pass, or as the case may be
the land shall become liable as security in manner and subject to the covenants,
conditions, and contingencies set forth and specified
in such dealing, or by
this Act declared to be implied in instruments of a like nature.
(2) (Repealed)
Estate of registered proprietor paramount
(1) Notwithstanding the existence in any other person of any estate or
interest which but for this Act might be held to be paramount
priority, the registered proprietor for the time being of any estate or interest
in land recorded in a folio of the Register
shall, except in case of fraud, hold
the same, subject to such other estates and interests and such entries, if any,
as are recorded
in that folio, but absolutely free from all other estates and
interests that are not so recorded except—
(a) the estate or interest recorded in a prior folio of the Register
by reason of which another proprietor claims the same land,
(a1) in the case of the omission or misdescription of an easement
subsisting immediately before the land was brought under the provisions
Act or validly created at or after that time under this or any other Act or a
Commonwealth Act,
(b) in the case of the omission or misdescription of any profit
à prendre created in or existing upon any land,
(c) as to any portion of land that may by wrong description of
parcels or of boundaries be included in the folio of the Register
or registered
dealing evidencing the title of such registered proprietor, not being a
purchaser or mortgagee thereof for value, or
deriving from or through a
purchaser or mortgagee thereof for value, and
(d) a tenancy whereunder the tenant is in possession or entitled to
immediate possession, and an agreement or option for the acquisition
tenant of a further term to commence at the expiration of such a tenancy, of
which in either case the registered proprietor
before he or she became
registered as proprietor had notice against which he or she was not
Provided that—
(i) The term for which the tenancy was created does not exceed three
(ii) in the case of such an agreement or option, the additional term
for which it provides would not, when added to the original
term, exceed three
(iii) (Repealed)
(2) In subsection (1), a reference to an estate or interest in land
recorded in a folio of the Register includes a reference to
an estate or
interest recorded in a registered mortgage, charge or lease that may be directly
or indirectly identified from a distinctive
reference in that folio.
(3) This section prevails over any inconsistent provision of any other Act
or law unless the inconsistent provision expressly provides
that it is to have
effect despite anything contained in this section.
Interest and rights of transferor pass to
Upon the registration of any transfer, the estate or interest of the transferor
as set forth in such instrument, with all rights,
powers and privileges thereto
belonging or appertaining, shall pass to the transferee, and such transferee
shall thereupon become
subject to and liable for all and every the same
requirements and liabilities to which the transferee would have been subject and
liable if named in such instrument originally as mortgagee, chargee or lessee of
such land, estate, or interest.
Taxation Administration Act
Valuation of Property
17A of the TA Act, which was inserted in 2023, relates to the valuation of
property for the purpose of making an assessment.
It provides:
Valuation of property
(1) The Chief Commissioner may, for the purpose of making an assessment of
the tax liability of a taxpayer—
(a) require the taxpayer, by written notice, to provide evidence of
the value of property that the Chief Commissioner considers
appropriate, or
(b) obtain a valuation of property from a person the Chief
Commissioner is satisfied is suitably qualified to provide evidence of
of property, or
(c) rely on a valuation of property prepared for any purpose by a
person the Chief Commissioner is satisfied is suitably qualified
evidence of the value of property.
(2) The Chief Commissioner may recover from the taxpayer the cost of
obtaining a valuation of property under subsection (1)(b) if—
(a) the value of the property in the valuation obtained by the Chief
Commissioner differs from the value of the property provided
by the taxpayer by
at least 10%, or
(b) the taxpayer fails to comply with a written notice given to the
taxpayer under subsection (1)(a) within 60 days after the notice
Penalty tax
27(1) of the TA Act prescribes the rate of penalty tax. The default rate
of 25% is the rate the Respondent now submits is
appropriate.
taxpayer (or a person acting on behalf of the taxpayer) took reasonable care to
comply with a taxation law, s 27(3)(a) allows
for a determination
that no penalty tax applies. Grounds for such a determination may
also arise if a tax default occurred solely
because of circumstances
beyond the taxpayer’s control (s 27(3)(b)).
33 is a wide discretion which allows for the remission of penalty
tax. Section 33, as it applies from 1 February
2024, says:
33 Remission of penalty tax
(1) The Chief Commissioner may, in such circumstances as the Chief
Commissioner considers appropriate, remit penalty tax by any
(2) The imposition or remission of interest is not relevant to the
imposition or remission of penalty tax.
ss 21 and 22 of the TA Act, the general rule is that interest accrues (at
both the premium and market rate) on an unpaid amount
of tax when there has been
a tax default, on a daily basis on the unpaid amount of tax from the date the
tax was liable to be paid
until it is paid.
is a discretion to remit interest under s 25 of the TA Act. That section
was amended on 1 February 2024, and says:
25 Remission of Interest
(1) The Chief Commissioner may remit interest.
(2) The Chief Commissioner may issue guidelines setting out how
interest must be remitted under this division.
(3) If guidelines are issued, interest must be remitted only in
accordance with the guidelines.
(4) The imposition or remission of penalty tax is not relevant
to the imposition or remission of interest.
Relevant facts
October 2010, the Applicant’s husband became the sole proprietor of the
Property (TB 11).
Respondent accepts, and I find, that the Property was the principal place of
residence of the Applicant and her husband at all
The first transfer
first transfer is the subject of these proceedings.
The intended
have had regard to the Statutory Declarations declared on 17 October 2024. It is
not relevantly in dispute, and I find, that:
(1) on or about 23 October 2023, the solicitor was instructed by the
Applicant’s husband to “effect a transfer of the
property to include
his wife on title as joint tenants”;
(2) the solicitor advised his clients that that the proposed transfer would be
exempt from duty under
as they were married, it
was their principal place of residence, and they were to be on title as joint
find that the transfer was intended to satisfy the requirements for the
exemption from duty in
transfer that occurred
27 October 2023, an agreement for transfer was entered into by the Applicant and
her husband. The transfer instrument (TB 12) prepared
by the solicitor
contained an error. It mistakenly recorded an agreement for the transfer of 100%
of the Property from the Applicant’s
husband to the Applicant:
(1) The Solicitor signed for both the Transferor (Joseph El Chami) and the
Transferee (the Applicant).
(2) The tenancy of the Transferee was listed as “Sole
Proprietor”.
(3) The consideration for the transfer was stated to be $1.00.
(4) In signing the document, the Solicitor certified (inter alia) that:
“4. The Certifier has taken reasonable steps to ensure
that this Registry Instrument or Document is correct and compliant
with relevant
legislation and any Prescribed Requirement.”
on 27 October 2023, Gryphon Lawyers, on behalf of the Applicant, assessed the
first transfer via Electronic Duties Return (“EDR”)
as exempt under
, resulting in the issue of a “nil”
Duties Assessment Number (DAN) the same day (A5). This was explained by the
to the Respondent as follows (TB 46):
“...due to a genuine mistake the initial transfer was incorrectly done
which on the face of it would invoke normal duty. Notwithstanding
this technical
error, EDR permitted the incorrect attempt at a transfer under
completed confirming exempt duty as evidenced by DAN 10763400-001. As a result
of this and the honest oversight on our part,
we took it as a valid transfer and
proceeded to completing the transfer on Pexa. Indeed, had the transfer been
rejected on EDR for
not complying with the requirement for a 50/50 transfer or
shown duty payable then we would have been alerted to the error and arguably
avoided the mistake but that is not the case.”
appears the following details were submitted via EDR on 27 October 2023 and
recorded on the accompanying “Duties Statement”
(at A5, my emphasis
in italics):
“Transaction Details
Document type Transfer of
real property
Execution date 27 Oct
Dutiable amount $1.00
Transfer duty assessed EXEMPT
Purchaser/Transferee name(s)
Marvett El Chami
ID(s) D1157158/2
Exemption type 104B
Related Duties Assessment Number
Transfer Duty Details
Duty assessed EXEMPT
0 Duplicate $0.00
0 Transfer $0.00
Assessment details:
on Transfer
This duty statement is a summary of the transaction submitted to the Revenue
NSW. This duty statement confirms that the transaction
has been assessed by the
Revenue NSW
information lodged then reflected the “nil” EDR assessment which
issued on 27 October 2023 (A5/T 13) with DAN 10763400-001
and stating
then effected the registration of the transaction with the NSW Land Registry,
which occurred on 30 October 2023 with the instrument
assigned the dealing
number AT557701 (TB 178 and TB 179). This recorded the transfer of a
100% interest in the Property for a consideration
second transfer
Applicant’s husband stated the following in his statutory declaration
“...there must have been an error as I found out after a title search was
conducted that the property had been transferred
solely to Marvett. I informed
our solicitor [Mr Jack Chanthivong of Gryphon Lawyers] of this and understand
that he attended to rectifying
the mistake in early November. The title is now
in both our names as was originally intended.”
find that on 2 November 2023, a further transfer form was executed for the
Applicant to transfer a 50% interest in the property
to her husband for
consideration of $1.00, such that the property would be owned by the Applicant
and her husband as joint tenants:
“nil” assessment issued to the husband on 7 November 2023, claiming
an exemption. The assessment, and the Duties Statement,
were issued to Gryphon
Lawyers: TB 18-20.
transfer was registered on 7 November 2023: TB 17.
of Investigation and Reassessment
29 July 2024, the Respondent issued a Notice of EDR Investigation (“the
NOI”) to the Applicant’s solicitor in
order to verify whether the
first transfer (DAN 10763400) had been correctly assessed(TB 21).
Attachment B set out documents to be
provided for that transaction and a link to
the webpage regarding the information required for specific transactions.
solicitor uploaded Purchaser/Transferee Declarations for each of the Applicant
and her husband (I note that both were dated 30
July 2024), in which:
(1) the Applicant declared she had been the transferee in a dutiable transaction
for the Property with a date of 27 October 2023,
with a dutiable value of
$1,400,000; and
(2) the Applicant’s husband declared he had been the transferee in a
dutiable transaction for the Property with a date of 7
November 2023, with a
dutiable value of $1,400,000.
31 July 2024, the Respondent requested that form ODA 067 be uploaded, being part
of the evidentiary requirements for a “section
transaction”.
31 July 2024, the solicitor provided a letter and attached Form ODA
(1) The letter said (TB 37) (my emphasis):
“We acted for the Proprietor on title and incoming proprietor. Our clients
are married.
When the initial transfer was done on 27th October 2023 from Joseph El Chami to
include his wife Marvett El Chami on title for their
principal place of resident
[Property address], the transfer document on Pexa
was mistakenly done as a
100% transfer to the wife
. Once this was apparent,
we corrected this
error by doing another transfer to include both parties as joint tenants as
originally intended
. This was completed on 7th November 2023.”
(2) Two Forms ODA 067 (“Exemption from Duty – Transfers between
Married Couples and De Facto Partners”) were provided
Audit Report dated 10 October 2024 noted (TB 53):
“[The solicitor] stated that he should not be responsible as our system
allowed him to transfer 100% of the property without
bringing up an error. If
our system provided a error notice he would have realised that the ownership %
was incorrect.
On 4th September [the solicitor] received the form al response advising that we
will require the valuation and that he will be provided
the opportunity to lodge
an objection and request a payment plan with the Tax Debt department.
On 5th September [the solicitor] called to advise he was unhappy with the
response to his letter and that he would not be providing
a valuation and taking
the matter to NCAT.”
Reassessment issued on 11 October 2024 (TB 57), was objected against on 18
October 2024 (TB 65), and the objection was disallowed
by the Respondent on
9 January 2025 (TB 82).
noted above, the Applicant applied to the Tribunal for administrative review on
28 February 2025.
Findings regarding the transfers
(1) It was intended that the Applicant would be transferred a 50% interest in
the Property (holding it as joint tenants with her
(2) On that basis the solicitor advised that no duty was payable.
(3) The solicitor made an honest error on the transfer form.
(4) The form showed an agreement to transfer a 100% interest in the Property
from the husband to the Applicant (for consideration
of $1.00) entered into on
27 October 2023;
(5) The solicitor signed the form on behalf of both parties, and certified it
was correct.
(6) A “nil” duties assessment issued (via EDR) based on the claim
for a s 104B exemption as lodged by the solicitor.
(7) The transfer was registered on 30 October 2023.
(8) A few days later, the error was discovered by the Applicant’s husband,
who told the solicitor.
(9) Upon realising the error, the first transfer was neither cancelled, nor
(10) Rather, the solicitor sought to “correct” the error by
preparing a second transfer, whereby the Applicant (who owned
100%) would
transfer a 50% interest to her husband, with both holding the property as joint
(11) No duty was payable on the second transfer because it met the requirements
for the s 104B exemption. A “nil” assessment
was issued via the
EDR on that basis and that transaction is not in dispute.
(12) There is no evidence that the solicitor contacted or sought assistance from
the Respondent or from the NSW Land Registry in
respect of correcting the
(13) There is no evidence regarding duties advice provided by the solicitor
specifically in respect of the error. I find that no
concerns regarding duty
were communicated by the solicitor to the Applicant (or her husband), and that
they assumed he was “fixing
it” such that no duty was payable.
Applicant’s submissions
Applicant’s original grounds (on the administrative review application
form lodged with the Tribunal on 28 February 2025)
“The decision by NSW Revenue does not take the whole
circumstances/intentions of the parties into consideration which is the
issue in the matter. In summation:
1. There was a mistake;
2. The instrument of transfer failed in its intended operation
due to the mistake;
3. The transfer that was actually intended would not have
attracted duty.”
Applicant submitted that no duty was payable because:
(1) An honest mistake was made by the solicitor in the preparation of the PEXA
transfer form, which was inconsistent with both the
intention of the Applicant
and her husband as well as their attempt to seek an exemption from duty pursuant
(2) That honest mistake was acknowledged by the Respondent in correspondence
throughout 2024 and 2025 (at TB 48, 52-54 and 82-85).
(3) No individual is impervious to making mistakes. Yet the Respondent’s
demand for payment in those circumstances is “unjust
and breathtakingly
opportunistic”; it was also contrary to the motto and statement of
objectives of Revenue NSW, being a “
and prosperous NSW”.
The following analogy was given:
“If I earn $2,000 a year which is exempt from income tax as it is below
the threshold and mistakenly put $200,000 in my tax
return which would incur
significant income tax, would the income tax payable pursuant to that honest
mistake be upheld and enforced
notwithstanding my true income and entitlement to
exemption? The answer would be a definitive no. Similarly, common sense and the
application of justice would also suggest that such redress would apply to the
circumstance at hand.”
(4) Neither the Applicant or her husband obtained any benefit from correcting
the first mistake; they were eligible for, and intended,
a transfer under
of a principal place of residence.
(5) As the electronic duties record (“EDR”) exemption from duty
application was submitted listing the exemption type as
”, the Respondent’s system should have noticed the
error on the form and rejected it, rather than processing a nil assessment.
(6) The instrument of transfer failed in its operation due to the honest
(7) The Applicant pointed to the
Taxation Administration Act 1996
(NSW) (“TA Act”), notably s 101 (power to confirm or revoke
assessment, or make an assessment or other decision in its
s 100(2) (not limited to grounds stated in the objection); submitting that
the Tribunal clearly had the power to “correct
the injustice”
arising from the error.
the event that duty was found by the Tribunal to be payable, the
(1) does not dispute the Respondent’s revised dutiable value of
$1,075,000; and
(2) points to the wide remission discretions, submitting that in the
circumstances of the clear and honest mistake made, “a
complete waiver of
penalty and interest would be warranted” (TB 184).
Respondent’s submissions
Respondent submitted that the transfer in dispute (the first
(1) was effected in accordance with its terms, being a 100% transfer of the
Property to the Applicant from her husband;
(2) was not exempt from duty under s 104B, as it was not a 50% transfer;
(3) was not exempt under s 293, as the instrument was registered, had
effected a valid transfer of the property, and did not fail
in its intended
operation (citing
Re Melteal Pty Ltd and Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2010] NSWADT 116 (
Re Floridia Enterprises
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2012] VCAT 1574
(4) was not exempt from duty under s 50A, as it was registered and had not
been deregistered or cancelled: cf
Trethowan v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWSC 576
”). The property was
transferred to the Applicant upon registration of the first transfer, pursuant
Real Property Act
(and citing
Coles Myer Limited v
Commissioner of State Revenue Victoria
(1998) 98 ATC 4537 (“
(5) did not meet the requirements for an exemption under
was not a subsequent transfer.
was no warrant for a further remission of penalty or interest, although it
should be recalculated based upon the revised duty
amount (per the expert
valuation report).
Tribunal has jurisdiction to review the Reassessment. The Reassessment was the
subject of an objection, and the Applicant applied
to the Tribunal for review
within the time period prescribed: s 96 of the TA Act,
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (“NCAT Act”)
and s 9 of the ADR Act.
noted by the Applicant, s 100(2) of the TA Act provides that neither the
Applicant nor the Respondent are limited in the present
application to the
grounds of the objection.
Nonetheless,
the Applicant has the onus of proving her case in this review: TA
Act, s 100(3). That means she must prove all matters
necessary for the
Tribunal to answer the statutory question(s)
in her favour:
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue (RD)
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.
– Liability to duty of the first transfer
first to the exemption in
, there is no dispute
that the first transfer met the requirements of
s 104B(1)(b)
, (c) and (d).
the first transfer did
satisfy the requirement in
s 104B(1)(a)
, because as a result of
transfer, the property was
not held by a married couple as joint tenants or as tenants in common in equal
requirement was not met because there was a valid (and registered) transfer of a
100% interest in the property to the Applicant
by her husband. Contrary to the
submissions of the Applicant, the powers granted to the Tribunal under
s 101 of the TA Act to “make
another assessment in place of the
assessment” do not override the terms of exemption provisions. Absent a
discretion in the
relevant section, there is no ability for the Tribunal to
waive the statutory requirements even if the outcome is fair or unjust.
Court of Australia rejected such a proposition in
Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Ryan
(2000) 201 CLR 109
relation to other provisions of the
, I find as follows:
Section 50A
does not apply to exempt the first transfer from duty
because I am not satisfied that the transfer instrument in respect of the first
transfer has been cancelled as required under
s 50A(1)(a).
I agree with the
submissions of the Respondent that there was no deregistration or cancellation
of the first transfer to remove the
dealing from the Register: compare
at [43]-[45]. It was an effective transfer under which a 100%
interest in the Property passed to the Applicant from her husband.
undone. Rather, the validity of the first transfer was the “starting
point” for the second transfer under
which a 50% interest passed from the
Applicant to her husband.
(2) It follows from my finding above (that there was an effective transfer) that
does not exempt the first transfer from duty, because the section
doesn’t apply “in respect of an instrument that effects
of dutiable property”:
And although it may not have been
the transaction intended, the registration also meant that the first transfer
also did not meet
the requirement of being “an instrument that fails in
its intended operation
and becomes useless
” for the purpose of
Section 65(14)
does not assist the Applicant, because it also does not
apply. It applies to “a transfer of dutiable property made to correct
transfer of the
dutiable property”,
and also requires that no additional consideration is paid or payable.
other relevant exemption provision was raised in the submissions or at the
Accordingly,
I find that the first transfer was liable to ad valorem
Issue 2 - value of the Property
is not disputed that the Valuation Report of Mr Boulougouris reflected the
unencumbered value of the property as at 27 October
challenge to that evidence was made by the Applicant, nor did they present any
other evidence.
therefore find that the unencumbered value
of the dutiable
property was $1,075,000 (per the expert report). I also find that this was the
“dutiable value” of the
property, in substitution for the estimated
dutiable value of $1,960,000 upon which the Reassessment was
Issue 3 - Penalty tax and Interest
penalty tax and interest will be required to be reassessed in light of the
change to the dutiable value.
addition, I must consider whether the penalty and interest should be further
find there is no basis for a reduction of the penalty to nil
, I am not satisfied that the solicitor (as agent of
the Applicant) took “reasonable care to comply with a taxation law”
for the purpose of
s 27(3)(a).
(1) “Reasonable care” is not defined, but it has been held to
require a determination of whether a person exercised the
care that a reasonable
person would be likely to have exercised in the circumstances of that person
(including in respect of enquiries
made and advice sought or received): see
Qualweld Australia Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
NSWCATAD 227
RVO Enterprises Pty Ltd ATF the R M O’Mara Family
Trust v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2004] NSWADT 64
Levitch Design Associates Pty Ltd ATF Levco Unit Trust v Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue
[2014] NSWCATAD 21
also the instructive Supreme Court decision of Richmond J in
Golden Age &
Hannas the Rocks v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWSC 249
Golden Age”
) at [70] and [111].
(2) Although I accept that a genuine error was originally made by the solicitor,
there is no evidence that he engaged at that time
with the Respondent (or the
Land Registry) to ensure that the error was appropriately corrected. Rather,
upon realising the error,
he did not seek to deregister or cancel the
transaction but, rather, effected a second, also valid, transfer which took as
its starting
point full ownership of the Property by the Applicant. The result
was two separate transactions, each of which was separately recorded
registered, and required to be separately considered in respect of its liability
to duty. Each was a valid and binding transaction
upon registration: see
at [17], [18] and [21]-[22]; also
some concerns I have regarding striking similarities in wording of the three
statutory declarations, I accept that the Applicant
(together with her husband)
took reasonable care for the purpose of
by relying upon her
solicitor in respect of the original advice, and because a reasonable person
would have anticipated that he would
inform her/them of any issues or
consequences arising from his error or his attempts to correct it. Nonetheless,
I am not obliged
to exercise the discretion under that provision to reduce the
penalties to nil, having regard to the totality of all actions of the
when considered together. As stated in
Nhem v Chief Commissioner of State
[2024] NSWCATAD 9
(at [63]-[64]):
“An additional justification for a refusal to exercise the
discretion in those circumstances is obtained by having regard to
the combined result of the behaviour (the acts and
omissions) of the taxpayer and the person acting for them.
If that combined result
is that the Chief
Commissioner is unable to make a proper assessment of
duty because the relevant behaviour includes
a failure to
take reasonable care (as
here) or a failure to provide complete and accurate
information (as here) then, whether or not it was the
intention of either of the relevant parties to mislead (and there
was none established here), the Tribunal
may be justified
in refusing to interfere with the Chief Commissioner’s decision
not to exercise the
section 27(3)
discretion.”
with the reasoning in that case, I decline to exercise the discretion in
to reduce the penalties to nil.
, I find that the prerequisite(s) for the exercise of
the discretion to remit penalties to nil under
are not satisfied
because the tax default did not occur
because of circumstances
beyond either the Applicant’s control or of a person acting on her behalf
– being her solicitor.
The nil EDR assessment was issued as a result of
the information input by the solicitor, as explained above. Ultimately, this was
a electronic self-assessment system, and I find that the cause of the problem
was the error of the solicitor, notwithstanding a manual
assessment system may
have produced a different result.
next provision to consider is
which provides a broad discretion to
remit penalty tax. The discretion under that provision is not subject to the
limits set out
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v
Downer EDI Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA
Nevertheless, that discretion should not be exercised in a way that
defeats the fundamental legislative objectives of the penalty
scheme. Ward
CJ in Equity (as she then was) has said that except in “special
circumstances”, the general discretion under
should not be
exercised beyond the limits in
circumstances giving rise to a remission under s 27(3) of the TA
Act have not been made out (
Bayton Cleaning Co Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State
[2019] NSWSC 657
absence of reasonable care on the part of the solicitor, though not
determinative, is a relevant matter going against the exercise
of a discretion
under s 33. Nonetheless, in the current case, I think it is warranted to strike
a balance between the actions of
the solicitor and those of the Applicant. From
the Applicant’s perspective, they sought to enter into a transaction where
advice was that no duty at all was payable, the error was subsequently
identified and – to her understanding (and expectation)
corrected without being notified of any adverse duty consequences. She received
no advice to the contrary from the solicitor.
In combination, I find that these
were circumstances out of the ordinary that justify a 50% reduction in the
penalty (from 25% now
proposed by the Respondent, to 12.5%), and that this
remains consistent with the general legislative purpose.
, duty is to be paid within 3 months of the
liability arising or a tax default will occur. The liability for duty, in this
case, arose
at the time the first transfer was executed on 27 October 2023.
Accordingly, the duty was required to be paid by 27 January 2024
and interest
commences to run from that date.
is, however, a broad discretionary power to remit interest under
Respondent may issue guidelines setting out how interest must be remitted.
Although TAA001: Remission of Interest Guidelines”
have been issued with
effect from 1 July 2025, the Respondent confirmed that they don’t apply in
this case because the objection
was lodged by the Applicant before that date.
find no warrant to remit the market rate component of interest. It is well
accepted that the market rate component should rarely
if ever be waived, because
to do so would be to devalue the amount of tax payable:
Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue v Incise Technologies Pty Ltd & Anor
NSWADTAP 19
Incise Technologies
at [60]. I see no
reason to depart from this principle in the present case in light
of the matters set out above, in particular because
the tax default
did not occur as a result of circumstances outside the control of the Applicant
or her legal representative. I am
unable to identify any other
grounds for the remission of the market rate of interest.
purpose of the premium rate component of interest differs from that of the
market rate of interest. Premium interest is in the
Southern Cross Community Health Care Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2021] NSWSC
, at [443], per Emmett AJA; see also
Golden Age and Hannas
the Rocks Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWSC 249
Wan v Chief Commissioner of State
[2025] NSWCATAP 54
have had regard to the Respondent’s guidance in Practice Note CPN 024, but
there is no relevant limit on the power to remit
interest in
Commissioner of State Revenue v Downer EDI Engineering Pty
[2020] NSWCA 126
Appeal Panel said,
at [81]–[82]:
“Factors such as whether a taxpayer took reasonable care
or whether there were exceptional circumstances
are not irrelevant
and the Tribunal was entitled to place great
weight on them. Nevertheless, remission of interest is not
an ”all or nothing”
exercise. Further, the degree of
a taxpayer’s culpability is material. An assessment of
the appellant’s culpability is
not limited to whether he
took reasonable care or whether there were exceptional
circumstances.
It follows that by asking only whether there was reasonable care or
exceptional circumstances and not asking whether there were any
personal circumstances of the appellant apparent from the
materials before it, relevant to establishing the degree of culpability
other than the failure to meet his statutory obligations that may warrant
remission, the Tribunal asked the wrong question”.
stated by Richmond J in
“102. In my view it is necessary to approach the
remission question by recognising that the premium component is penal in
and serves the purpose of both imposing a penalty and deterring taxpayers from
delaying payment of duty in what is essentially
a self-assessment regime.
Consequently, the culpability of the taxpayer in failing to pay the duty
liability by the due date is an
important matter in the exercise of the
discretion. I do not accept the Commissioner’s submission that it is a
penalty at the
“low end” of the scale. Depending upon the period of
the delay in payment, the penalty arising from the premium component
can be very
significant as it was in the present case (being 24% of the duty assessed on the
Incise Technologies
, the Appeal Panel
identified ...four cumulative criteria which are relevant to the exercise of the
discretion under
1. All principal tax that is owing and not in dispute has been
fully paid;
2. There has been cooperation by the taxpayer in providing
relevant information to the Commissioner so as to enable the Commissioner
issue assessments;
3. Such cooperation has occurred prior to any investigation
being commenced by the Commissioner or, at the very least, within a
time after the request for information had been made by the Commissioner; and
4. There has been no wilful default by the taxpayer in not
paying tax on time.
104. The Appeal Panel noted in
Technologies
at [63] that the first of these criteria could
be clarified to be “all principal tax that has been assessed and is not in
has been fully paid at the time of the request for remission of
interest” and that while they were all relevant and appropriate
for consideration, they were not exhaustive. That the four criteria are not
exhaustive has been confirmed in subsequent cases,
Antegra Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2021] NSWSC 107
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v E Group
Security Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWCA 259
is also necessary to have regard to the fact that remission of interest is not
an “all or nothing” approach; rather,
it is necessary to assess
culpability and the personal circumstances of the Applicant, i.e. other
matters that may have set her case
apart from the “usual
situation”:
at [86] and [90]
noted above, there was no relevant error made by the Applicant personally. It is
clear to me that she relied upon her solicitor,
and that a reasonable person in
her position would have assumed that he would raise any matters regarding duty
payable with her (given
he had provided duty advice to her).
also note that no concerns were raised by the Respondent regarding the first and
fourth factors in
Incise Technologies
being satisfied.
the Respondent also noted the issues regarding a lack of adequate co-operation
with the Respondent after the investigation
was notified, and the evidence is
unclear as to what, if any, involvement the Applicant had in relation to the
investigation or the
responses provided. Of particular concern is the failure to
respond in a timely way (or comprehensively) to requests for information,
notably the request from the Respondent to the solicitor to provide a valuation
of the Property. As a result, the Respondent
was put to the task of determining
an estimate for the purpose of the Reassessment and, later, the expense of
obtaining the valuation
report filed in these proceedings.
those circumstances, and taking into account my finding above that the Applicant
took reasonable care, I am satisfied that it is
appropriate for the premium rate
to be remitted by 50%.
also do not agree with the Applicant’s submissions that there is any
useful analogy to be drawn between this case and the
over-reporting of income in
an income tax return. This case turns on the particular facts in respect of the
system of land registrations
and transfers, and the consequences that arise upon
application of the specific provisions in the
. Those provisions may
be difficult and complex. Ultimately, as adverted to in
O’Neill Tyres
Gateshead Pty Ltd & Cessnock Tyres Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
[2020] NSWCATAD 314
, it is important to promote attempts at
compliance which are both sincere and careful.
Conclusion and
correct and preferable decision is that:
(1) the first transfer was liable to ad valorem duty, which is to be
recalculated based on a revised dutiable value of $1,075,000;
(2) penalty tax is to be remitted to 12.5% and recalculated; and
(3) interest is to also be recalculated applying the full market rate but
remitting the premium rate by 50%.
therefore make the following order, pursuant to s 101(1)(d) of the TA
(1) The matter is remitted to the Respondent for determination in accordance
with paragraph
these reasons.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (359 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter