URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Iskandar [2024] NSWPICMRP 5; (26 November 2024)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Iskandar
NSWPICMRP 5
Sarkis Iskandar
Insurance Australia Limited trading as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Susan McTegg
Elizabeth Medland
Anthony Scarcella
DATE OF DECISION:
26 November 2024
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
decision of Merit Reviewer (MR) Williams; MR Williams determined gross earnings
of a self-employed person for the purposes
of schedule 1 clause 4(1) was the
gross income of the business before the deduction of any expenses; dispute as to
what is meant
by term “gross earnings” for the purposes of
determining the pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE) under schedule 1 clause
meaning of “proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone
or in partnership with another person”
as per schedule 1 clause 3(2)(b);
where the objects of the Act give rise to range of
conflicting or competing purposes as per Griffiths AJA in
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v The Estate of the Late Summer Abawi
appropriate to
construe schedule 1 clause 4(1) and schedule 1 clause 3(2)(b) by reference to
language of the statute construed as
a whole as per
Project Blue Sky v
; clause 3(2)b) of schedule 1 should be read in conjunction with clause
3(1) which defines loss of earnings as “a loss incurred
or likely to be
incurred in a person’s income from person exertion”; the income from
personal exertion refers to the
claimant’s share of the proceeds of the
business, not the entire proceeds of the business without any deductions; to
weekly gross earnings received by the earner by reference to proceeds
of business but without deductions but before tax would lead
to inconsistent
outcomes when assessing entitlement to statutory benefits under
sections 3.6
and would not give effect to harmonious goals; reading Act as a
whole it was not the intention of legislature to provide an entitlement
statutory benefits which have the potential to significantly exceed the amount
recoverable by way of economic loss at common law;
loss of earnings in schedule
1 clause 3(b) relates to the proceeds of any business resulting from the earners
own personal exertion
and gross earnings as it appears in schedule 1 clause 4
relates to the gross earnings received by the earner after the deduction
business expenses but before the deduction of tax; decision of MR Williams
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
AHS v Allianz Australia Ltd
, AGZ v NRMA Insurance Pty Ltd,
State of Western Australia
Metropolitan Gas Co v Federated Gas
Employees’ Industrial Union
St George Bank Ltd v Federal
Commission of Taxation
Medlin v State Government Insurance
Husher v Husher
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
Panel revokes the decision of Merit Reviewer Williams dated 12 June 2024.
Panel determines for the purposes of Sch 1 cl 4(1) of the MAI Act, the
pre-accident weekly earnings are $531.38.
date of effect is 11 March 2024.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Sarkis Iskandar, the claimant, sustained injury in a motor vehicle accident on
22 January 2024 (the accident).
Iskandar lodged an Application for Personal Injury Benefits dated 10 February
Australia Limited trading as NRMA Insurance is the insurer liable to pay
statutory benefits to the claimant under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act,
21 February 2024, the insurer accepted Mr Iskandar’s claim for statutory
benefits under the MAI Act for 52 weeks from the
date of the accident.
dispute is the amount of the claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings
(PAWE). At the time of the accident Mr Iskandar was
self-employed as a Pest
Control Technician.
insurer concedes Mr Iskandar is an “earner” as defined by Sch 1 cl 2
of the MAI Act.
11 March 2024, the insurer determined Mr Iskandar’s PAWE as $531.38. This
determination is disputed by the Mr Iskandar who
asserts his PAWE should be in
the order of $1,500 to $1,600. On 12 March 2024, Mr Iskandar sought a review of
this determination
and on 26 March 2024, an internal reviewer affirmed the
insurer’s PAWE determination.
dispute centres on what is meant by the term “gross earnings” for
the purposes of the MAI Act. Mr Iskandar contends
that the gross earnings are
calculated by reference to the total business income less the cost of goods
whilst the insurer contends
that gross earnings is a reference to business
income less all deductions including expenses.
Iskandar lodged an application with the Personal Injury Commission (Commission)
in respect of the PAWE dispute.
a certificate dated 12 June 2024, Merit Reviewer Williams set aside the
reviewable decision of the insurer and certified Mr Iskandar’s
insurer has sought a review of the decision of Merit Reviewer Williams.
a decision dated 23 July 2024, the President’s delegate referred the
application for review of the decision of Merit Reviewer
Williams to this Review
Panel (Panel) pursuant to s 7.15 of the MAI Act.
Application for personal injury benefits describes Mr Iskandar as a
self-employed Pest Control Technician earning $6,600 a month
at the time of the
certificate of capacity dated 6 February 2024 diagnoses injury to the neck and
back caused by the accident. Mr Iskandar was certified
unfit for work between 25
January 2024 and 28 January 2024 and capacity for some type of work between
29 January 2024 and 13 February
Report of PKF(NS)
Forensic Accountants
insurer relies on a report of Mr Gwynne of PKF(NS) Forensic Accountants (PKF)
dated 5 March 2024. PKF determined that business
records provided by
Mr Iskandar confirm the claimant receipted $76,963 in business income in
the 12 month period prior to the accident.
provided the following summary of the income and expenses of Mr Iskandar’s
business for the period 21 January 2024 to 21
January 2024:
total income
cost of goods
gross profit
earnings from
self-employment $27,632
expenses included advertising, bank fees, computer expenses, depreciation, tax
expenses, insurance, motor vehicle expenses, rent,
software expenses,
subscriptions, telephone and internet costs, tolls, parking and uniforms.
deducting both the cost of goods and the expenses PKF determined that Mr
Iskandar’s earnings in the 52 week period between
22 January 2023 and 22
January 2024 were $27,632.
the claimant’s earnings from self-employment over 52 weeks PKF assessed
Mr Iskandar’s PAWE to be $531.38.
THE RELEVANT
LEGISLATION
3.3 of the MAI Act deals with an injured person’s entitlement to weekly
payments of statutory benefits.
3.6 and 3.7 set out an entitlement to weekly payments calculated with reference
to the “pre-accident weekly earnings”.
These sections relevantly
3.6 Weekly payments during first entitlement period
(first 13 weeks after motor accident)
(1) An earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident and suffers a
total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the injury
is entitled to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section during the first
entitlement period.
Note — Only a person who was an earner when injured is entitled to
statutory benefits under this section—see Schedule
(2) A weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at
the rate of 95% of the difference between the person’s
pre-accident weekly
earnings and the person’s post-accident earning capacity (if any) for the
first entitlement period.
3.7 Weekly payments during second entitlement period (weeks 14–78
after motor accident)
(1) An earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident and suffers a
total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the injury
is entitled to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section during the second
entitlement period.
Note — Only a person who was an earner when injured is entitled to
statutory benefits under this section—see Schedule
(2) A weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at
the rate of —
(a) in the case of total loss of earning capacity—80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity—85%,
of the difference between the person’s pre-accident weekly earnings and
the person’s post-accident earning capacity (if
any) after the first
entitlement period.
3.8 details the entitlement to weekly payments after the second entitlement
period (after week 78):
3.8 Weekly payments after second
entitlement period (after week 78)
(1) A person who is injured as a result of a motor accident and suffers a
total or partial loss of earning capacity as a result of
the injury is entitled
to weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section after the end of the
second entitlement period,
but only if the person—
(a) is at least 18 years of age (whether or not the person is an earner), or
(b) is under 18 years of age and is an earner.
The person’s age after the second entitlement period is relevant to
determining entitlement to statutory benefits after the
second entitlement
period. A person’s age at the date of the motor accident is not relevant.
Schedule 1 defines when a person
is an earner.
(2) A weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at
the rate of—
(a) in the case of total loss of earning capacity—80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity—85%,
of the difference between the person’s pre-accident earning capacity
and the person’s post-accident earning capacity (if
any) or post-accident
earnings, whichever is the greater, after the second entitlement period.
1 of the MAI Act sets out the definitions relating to “earner” and
“pre-accident weekly earnings”
for the purposes of statutory weekly
payments under Div 3.3.
1, cl 2 of the MAI Act provides:
“Meaning of
A person who is injured as a result of a motor accident is
an earner if the person is at least 15 years of age and who—
(a) was employed or self-employed (whether or not full-time)—
(i) at any time during the 8 weeks immediately preceding the motor accident,
(ii) during a period or periods equal to at least 13 weeks during the year
immediately preceding the motor accident, or
(iii) during a period or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the 2 years
immediately preceding the motor accident,
and, at the date of the motor accident, had not retired permanently from all
employment, or
1 cl 3 provides:
“Meaning of ‘loss of
(1) Loss of earnings means a loss incurred or likely to be incurred in
a person’s income from personal exertion.
(2) A person’s income from personal exertion is—
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
allowances and
retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or in
partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a business.
person’s income from personal exertion does not
(a) interest, unless the person’s principal business consists of the
lending of money, or unless the interest is received
in respect of a debt due to
the person for goods supplied or services rendered by the person in the course
of the person’s
business, or
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick or other leave entitlement.”
1, cl 4 provides:
“Meaning of ‘pre-accident weekly
earnings’--general
(1) ‘Pre-accident weekly earnings’, in relation to an earner who
is injured as a result of a motor accident, means the
weekly average of the
gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which
the motor accident occurred, unless
subclause (2) applies.
(2) In the following cases,
’pre-accident weekly
in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a
motor accident, means--
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning continuously,
but had not been earning continuously for at least
12 months--the weekly average
of the gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during the period from
when the earner started
to earn continuously to immediately before the day of
the motor accident,
(a1) if the earner was employed or self-employed during a period or periods
equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of the
pre-accident period, but
was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during the
pre-accident period--the average
weekly gross earnings received by the earner as
an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) if subclause (3) applies--the weekly average of the gross earnings the
earner received as an earner, or could reasonably have
been expected to receive,
during the 12 months after the change of circumstance referred to in the
subclause occurred,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an arrangement
with an employer or other person to undertake employment
or to commence business
as a self-employed person--the average weekly gross earnings that the earner
could reasonably have been expected
to earn, but for the injury, in employment
under that arrangement.
‘pre-accident period’
, in relation to a motor
accident, is the period of 2 years immediately preceding the motor
(3) This subclause applies if, during the 12 months immediately before the
day of the motor accident, there was, as a result of any
action taken by the
earner, a significant change in his or her earnings circumstances that resulted
in the earner regularly earning,
or becoming entitled to earn, more on a weekly
basis than he or she was earning before the change occurred.
Examples of a change of circumstances to which this subclause
would apply include a change of job, a promotion, a move from part-time
full-time employment, or a pay increase arising from the achievement of
performance standards.
(4) For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if he or
she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on the day
of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6 months
to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the basis
on which the earnings were being provided as at that day.”
1, cl 8(1) defines “post- accident earning capacity” as
“(1) Post-accident earning capacity of an
injured person means—
(a) for the first and second entitlement periods—the weekly amount that
the person has the capacity to earn in the employment
in which the person was
engaged immediately before the motor accident, determined on the basis of the
person’s fitness for
work in that employment, or
(b) for any period after the second entitlement period—the weekly amount
the person has the capacity to earn in any employment
reasonably available to
the person, determined on the basis of the person’s fitness for work in
any such employment.”
DECISION OF MERIT REVIEWER WILLIAMS
Reviewer Williams issued a certificate and reasons for decision dated 12 June
Reviewer Williams reviewed earlier decisions and noted there has been a
divergence in the approach taken by various Merit Reviewers
in determining the
PAWE of self-employed earners.
Panel does not propose to canvass all the earlier decisions reviewed by Merit
Reviewer Williams, other than to refer to two specific
decisions to demonstrate
the prevailing divergent approaches.
Aktop v Allianz Insurance
the Merit Reviewer determined the claimant’s PAWE on the basis that the
ordinary meaning of gross earnings is income adjusted
for the cost of revenue,
and the cost of revenue includes variable costs but not fixed costs. The Merit
Reviewer stated:
“[33] ...the ordinary means of gross earnings
is to be applied to the claimant because it gives effect to the purpose of
compensating
them for their economic loss. To interpret the expression as either
of the parties have submitted do not do so because:
(a) The claimant would receive less than their economic loss if their income
included adjustments for their fixed costs as the insurer
submits. This is
because the claimant would still be required to meet those fixed costs out of
the statutory benefits that they receive
from the insurer.
(b) The claimant would receive more than their economic loss if, as the
claimant submits, no adjustments were made to their income.
In this regard, I
accept the insurer’s submission that not to adjust the claimant’s
income for their variable expenses
would leave the claimant in a better position
than they would have been but for the accident. The statutory benefits that the
receives from the insurer would include an amount for variable costs
that they would not have to meet.”
Walker v QBE Insurance (Australia)
the Merit Reviewer
determined that all business expenses, fixed and variable, are to be deducted
from the gross income of the business
for the purpose of calculating the PAWE.
The Merit Reviewer stated:
“[22] I do not agree with the
claimant’s contention that only ‘variable costs’ should be
deducted, being only
those expenses that would be incurred as part of the
immediate supply of services. Regardless of the nature of the business expense,
the claimant’s gross earnings as an ‘earner’ can only be the
net (but before tax) income of the business, after
deducting all of the business
expenses. That is to say, all business expenses must be deducted in order to
calculate the claimant’s
individual earnings from the business. Whilst
there may be ongoing administrative, maintenance or other ‘fixed’
despite no work being carried out, this is irrelevant as PAWE is
calculated based on pre-accident earnings, when the business was
concern and all expenses had to be paid to run the business.”
Reviewer Williams noted the following comment made in
(and other decisions that followed the same
“[26] It may be that the Merit Reviewer in
was attempting to cure what might be perceived as an unfair
position for small business owners on the face of the legislation where
continue to pay certain business expenses in order to hold on to a business even
though they are not actively trading. However,
as stated by Harrison AsJ in
] at [70], ‘one cannot construe an Act to accommodate a
particular circumstance, no matter how unfair that circumstance may
Furthermore,
the Merit Reviewer went on to say
“[30] ...the quarantining of fixed costs from other
business expenses for the purpose of calculating PAWE in relation to
self-employment
is likely to give rise to enrichment and is therefore
inconsistent with the objects of the MAI Act.”
Reviewer Williams reported the parties agreed the summary of income and expenses
for the period 21 January 2023 to 21 January
2024 in the PKF report was
noted it was agreed Mr Iskandar’s PAWE should be determined in accordance
with Sch 1 cl 4(1) of the MAI Act. This means the
PAWE is the weekly average of
the gross earnings received by Mr Iskandar during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which
the accident occurred.
Merit Reviewer Williams noted the importance of comity to decision makers, he
also noted previous decisions do not establish
any principle and are not
binding, although they may be of persuasive authority as to the interpretation
of any legislative provision.
Reviewer Williams referred to
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting
High Court said:
“The primary object of statutory construction
is to construe the relevant provision so that it is consistent with the language
and purpose of all the provisions of the statute. The meaning of the provision
must be determined by reference to the language of
the instrument viewed as a
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos,
Dixon CJ pointed
out that the context, the general purpose and policy of a provision and its
consistency and fairness are surer guides
to its meaning than the logic with
which it is constructed. Thus, the process of construction must always begin by
examining the
context of the provision that is being construed.”
(citations omitted)
Reviewer Williams noted that there is no definition of “earnings” or
“gross earnings” in the MAI Act.
He relied on the Macquarie
Dictionary definition of “earn” as meaning “to gain by labour
or services” and
“earnings” as the term is used in Sch 1 cl
4(1) to mean income gained in return for labour or services provided by an
Reviewer Williams notes ss 3.6 and 3.7 which provide an entitlement to weekly
payments of statutory benefits give effect to
one of the stated objects of the
Act, that is, to provide early and ongoing financial support for people injured
in motor accidents.
He referred to s 1.3(4) of the MAI Act which states that in
the interpretation of the Act a construction that would promote the objects
the Act or the provision is to be preferred to a construction that does
Sch 1 cl 4(1) includes the word “gross” Merit Reviewer Williams
refers to the Macquarie Dictionary definition of
“...whole, entire, or total, especially without
having been subjected to deduction, as for charges, loss etc,: gross
Reviewer Williams determined at [69]:
“Having regard to the
context, the general purpose and policy of the provision, the gross earnings
received by the earner as
an earner during the 12 months immediately before the
day on which the motor accident occurred means the whole of the income without
any deduction received by an earner in return for labour or services provided by
them as an earner during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which the
motor accident occurred.”
reaching this conclusion Merit Reviewer Williams considered that both classes of
earner, that is, employed or self-employed may
incur expenses in deriving their
earnings, such as insurance, the operational costs of a vehicle, software,
subscriptions, tolls,
parking, uniforms and other working from home expenses.
Where the gross earnings of an employed earner are not reduced on account
expenses when determining gross earnings under Sch 1
cl 4(1) he argues it is
not clear why a different approach would be taken to determining the gross
earnings of a self-employed earner
where the same statutory test applies to both
classes of earner.
Review Williams refers to the separate definition of “pre-accident weekly
earnings for self-employed people” included
Transport Accident
(VIC) and argues that if Parliament intended that the gross
earnings of self-employed earnings was to be determined by a different
methodology, provisions to that end could have been included in the MAI Act.
the task of statutory construction must begin with a consideration of the text
itself, as per
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
Merit Reviewer
Williams notes the language used in Sch 1 cl 4(1) does not support determining
the PAWE of a self-employed earner
on the basis of gross earnings less all
expenses where the provision specifically refers to “gross
Reviewer Williams declined to follow those decisions where the gross earnings of
a self-employed person for the purposes of
Sch 1 cl 4(1) have been found to be
the gross income of the business less all expenses.
Reviewer Williams noted Mr Iskandar conceded it was appropriate to assess his
gross earnings based on the income of his business
less the cost of goods. He
found the income earnt during the 12 months immediately before the day on which
the accident occurred
was $76,963. The cost of goods during the same period was
$14,706. Accordingly, the gross earnings received by Mr Iskandar during
months immediately before the day on which the accident occurred were $62,257
and the weekly average of the gross earnings
in the same period were $1,197.25.
Merit Reviewer Williams found the claimant’s PAWE was
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s submissions, 1 May 2024
insurer provided submissions in respect of the dispute before Merit Reviewer
insurer noted that “gross earnings” is not defined in the MAI Act.
Whilst the MAI Act does not refer to “gross
business income” (before
expenses) or “net business income” (after expenses), the insurer
relies on the certificate
of Merit Reviewer Boyd-Boland in
Australia Ltd
the certificate of Merit Reviewer Sofoulos in
AGZ v NRMA Insurance Pty
where the phrase
“gross earnings” was interpreted to mean the net profit/income
earned by a self-employed claimant after
accounting for all business expenses
incurred to run a business but before tax.
insurer submits that as the claimant is self-employed, his gross earnings refer
to his net profit after accounting for business
expenses but before tax, as
evidenced in the following cases:
ACL v CIC Allianz Insurance
Insurance Pty Ltd
Insurance Australia t/as
submissions in support of the review
insurer provided undated submissions in support of the application for review
and further submissions also undated were uploaded
to the portal on 12 September
Meaning of “gross earnings earned by the
insurer agrees the relevant provision is cl 4 of Sch 1 which refers to the gross
earnings received by the earner as an earner
during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which the accident occurred.
insurer agrees that “gross earnings” is not defined although loss of
earnings is defined in cl 3 of Sch 1.
insurer does not cavil with the suggestion that the word “gross”
should be afforded its ordinary meaning but says
it would be accepted that there
are effectively two ordinary interpretations of “gross” – one
being pre-tax and
the other being pre-deductions.
insurer submits a construction of the word “gross” must either be a
reference to taxation or deductions but cannot
logically be with reference to
certain deductions only. It is argued this would create uncertainty.
insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams erred in proceeding on the basis that a
definition of earnings could be arrived at without
reference to Sch1 cl 3 of the
MAI Act. The insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams failed to interpret the
relevant provision in
a manner internally consistent with the Act in its
entirety, consistent with ordinary principles of statutory construction.
1 cl 3 (2)(b) defines income from personal exertion to be the proceeds of any
business carried on by the person either alone
or in partnership with any other
person. The insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams failed to consider whether
the definition of
“gross earnings” he adopted was consistent with
the definition in Sch 1 cl 3(2)(b) and had he done so, it would have
that gross earnings in the context of a self-employed person was his pre-tax
business earnings and not his pre-deduction
business revenue.
insurer notes that the claimant’s position was that fixed expenses should
be treated differently to the cost of goods where
he continued to incur those
expenses despite not working for a period.
the insurer’s position is that there is nothing in the Act which suggests
some expenses should be dealt differently
to other expenses.
the insurer argues a claimant may be entitled to payments for the entire 78 week
period but may have ceased to pay those fixed
expenses during that period. The
insurer submits the cost of goods approach fails to account for other
discretionary expenses which
may be job specific, such as the cost of contract
labour, goods and services tax (GST) revenue or mileage expenses.
insurer submits it is not always the case that the costs of goods are incurred
when a person is actively working whilst other
expenses may be incurred despite
a person being off work for a time. In respect of Mr Iskandar, the insurer
submits the “cost
of goods” may relate to goods purchased prior to
each job or goods purchased in bulk quantities.
insurer submits that a definition of gross earnings as the income of the
business without any deductions ignores the balance of
cl 4(1) which requires
the assessed amount to be earned as an earner. The insurer provided the
following examples:
(a) if a business received funds for a job which was then directed to other
employees or contractors then this would be business
income but not the earnings
of the claimant as an earner, and
(b) if a business for the sale of goods purchased goods for $1 and sells the
same goods for $2 the claimant had not earned $2 simply
because it was receipted
into his business account.
insurer submits on this approach income would also include GST collected by the
business but directed to the government. Further,
the insurer argues this
approach would add to the cost of the scheme by artificially placing persons in
top income brackets where
their income is artificially inflated by the cost of
materials charged to clients.
insurer’s position is that pre-accident earnings must be the income
derived less all expenses but before taxation where
it is only the definition
which is consistent with the MAI Act.
insurer submits that Merit Reviewer Williams failed to provide proper reasons
including the legislative foundation for the proposition
that the definition of
“income” is pre-deduction business revenue and not pre-tax earnings.
insurer submits, whilst Merit Reviewer Williams defined earnings as income
gained in return for labour or services provided by
an earner, he did not define
income. Whilst he concluded that the term “profit” is not used and
should not be interpolated
into the provision in place of earnings, the insurer
submits “income” is similarly not utilised in cl 4.
Objects of the MAI Act
insurer agrees the correct approach to statutory construction is that a
construction that would promote the objects of the Act
or the provision is to be
preferred to a construction that would not promote those objects.
insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams confined his reference to the objects of
the Act set out in s 1.3(2)(b) and did not engage
with how the construction
adopted would interact with the balance of the objects.
insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams failed to engage with s 1.3(2)(g) which
is primarily concerned with the early resolution
of claims. The insurer submits
the approach of Merit Reviewer Williams would likely result in payments made in
the first two entitlement
periods significantly exceeding the claimant’s
entitlement to damages for past economic loss and complicate the assessment
common law damages.
insurer submits the approach proposed does not promote the objects of the Act.
The Motor Accidents Injuries Bill 2017 was introduced
into parliament by The Hon
Victor Dominello on 9 March 2017. In the Second Reading Speech it was said that:
“... income benefits will be paid for up to two years for
injured people not mostly at fault. However, if an injured person
has continuing
needs beyond two years and has made a common law claim, income benefits will be
paid for up to three years. Income
benefits will be subject to the injured
persons capacity to earn income.”
insurer submits one of the objects of the Act was to pay injured people the same
as a delayed lump sum at an
earlier stage. The transition from a common law damages scheme with ongoing wage
payments had tax implications
necessitating a claimant being paid weekly
benefits pre-tax. When read with reference to the objects of the MAI Act and the
of the scheme, the insurer submits the consistent interpretation would be
that gross was a reference to payments being pre-tax only.
The insurer submits
this is consistent with the fact that from 78 weeks post-accident weekly
payments are paid nett of tax and deductions.
Interaction
between ss 3.6 and 3.7 of the MAI Act and the definition of gross
insurer submits the claimant’s entitlement to statutory benefits is
governed by ss 3.6 and 3.7 of the MAI Act. The payments
are required to be
assessed with reference to the difference between the claimant’s
pre-accident weekly earnings and his/her
post-accident earning capacity.
insurer submits Merit Reviewer Williams did not address either ss 3.6 or 3.7 or
how those sections interact with the definition
of earnings he proposed.
insurer submits that where a person has a residual earning capacity, an absurd
result may follow from an interpretation of PAWE
that did not account for
deductions because of the way the definition interacts with assessments of
earning capacity within the MAI
Specifically,
ss 3.6(2) and 3.7(2) provide that a claimant is entitled to a percentage of the
difference between the person’s
pre-accident weekly earnings and the
person’s post-accident earning capacity.
insurer refers to the definition of post-accident earning capacity as defined in
cl 8 of Sch 2 (more correctly, cl 8 of Sch 1).
The insurer submits that
earning capacity is not the same as business income where a claimant’s
assessed earning capacity would
ordinarily be significantly less than
“business income including expenses”. The insurer submits a
builder’s business
might receipt $3,000 per week of which $1,000 was spent
on materials and post-accident he commences full-time work with an employer
can accommodate his accident created restrictions, earning $2,000 gross per
week. Taking a gross of expenses approach, the builder
would be entitled to
$1,000 per week in statutory benefits (subject to the statutory reduction) being
the difference between his
pre-accident gross business earnings and his
post-accident earning capacity. Such an outcome would result in the builder
compensated by $1,000. The insurer submits this cannot be the
intention of the compulsory third party (CTP) scheme.
Claimant’s submissions
Iskandar submits that gross earnings in an accounting definition does not mean
net profit.
Iskandar provided submissions which are undated. Mr Iskandar submits that his
PAWE should be determined by reference to the gross
income of his business. He
submits that his business incurs fixed expenses that are not dependent on his
turnover, namely, accounting
costs, depreciation, rent, software expenses,
subscriptions, telephone and internet. These expenses are payable even if he had
work. Mr Iskandar submits that gross earnings are determined by business
income less the cost of goods sold.
Iskandar provided an article titled MYOWNBUSINESS INSTITUTE of Santa Clara
University My Own Business Institute 2020 which describes
fixed costs and
variable costs. Fixed costs include rent and lease costs, salaries, utility
bills, insurance and loan repayments
and some taxes like business licenses.
Variable costs include costs that change such as raw materials, piece-rate
labour, production
supplies, commissions, delivery costs and packaging supplies.
This article is written for an American audience.
Iskandar also relies on an article titled “
Gross Income vs Earned
Income: What’s the Difference?
, by Melissa Horton” published by
Investopedia. This article is aimed at understanding the difference between
gross income and
earned income before filing a tax return. Gross income is
defined as everything an individual earns for one year, both as worker
investor, whilst earned income only includes wages, commissions, bonuses and
business income minus expenses if the person
is self-employed. The article
refers to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and is clearly written for an
American audience.
Iskandar provides a link to an article titled “Accounting Tools”
published on
www.accountingtools.com/articles/gross-earnings
The article dated 27 December 2023 defines gross earnings as the total earnings
of an individual prior to deductions for income
taxes and other taxes, as well
as any deductions imposed by the employer.
response to a Direction from the Panel, Mr Iskandar uploaded further submissions
on 3 October 2010 including an article headed
“What are Gross
Earnings” from
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/gross_earnings.asp
The definition of gross earnings for a business is defined as the total revenue
less the cost of goods sold. This article references
the IRS and clearly refers
to the American market. He draws attention to the notion that “in the
corporate world, it’s
an accounting convention that refers to a public
company’s gross profit or the amount left from total revenues over a
time period once the cost of goods sold is deducted”.
the Panel understands Mr Iskandar’s submission, that his PAWE should be
determined by reference to the gross income of
his business, the documents he
has provided to support his submissions are, by and large, designed for an
American audience and are
not persuasive in determining how the Panel should
construe the words “gross earnings received by the earner” as they
appear in sch 1 cl 4 of the MAI Act.
SUMMARY OF INCOME AND
4 September 2024, Mr Iskandar confirmed the accuracy of the summary of income
and expenses contained in the PKF report, although
he did not agree with their
conclusion as to the PAWE.
PANEL FINDINGS
parties agree the relevant provision for consideration is cl 4 of Sch 1 which
refers to the weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an
earner during the 12 months immediately before the day on which the
accident occurred.
Statutory construction
The objects of the MAI Act
Panel notes that s 1.3(4) and (5) of the MAI Act state:
In the interpretation of a provision of this Act or the regulations, a
construction that would promote the objects of
this act or the provision is to
be preferred to a construction that would not promote those objects.
(5) In the exercise of a discretion conferred by a provision of the Act or
the regulations, the person exercising the discretion
must do so in a way that
would best promote the objects of this Act or of the provision concerned.”
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) provides:
the interpretation of a provision of an Act or statutory rule, a construction
that would promote the purpose or object underlying
the Act or statutory rule
(whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act or
statutory rule or, in the case
of a statutory rule, in the Act under which the
rule was made) shall be preferred to a construction that would not promote that
or object.”
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
Hayne, Heydon,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ observed:
“This court has stated on many
occasions that the task of statutory interpretation must begin with a
consideration of the text
itself. ... Historical considerations and extrinsic
materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the text. ...
language which has actually been employed in the text of legislation is the
surest guide to legislative intention. ... The meaning
of the text may require
consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and policy of a
provision ... , in particular
the mischief ... it is seeking to remedy.”
(Citations omitted)
it is true that the correct approach to statutory construction is that a
construction that promotes the objects of the MAI
Act is to be preferred to a
construction that does not promote those objects, the Panel notes the recent
comments of Griffiths AJA
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v The Estate
of the Late Summer Abawi
where he described the objects of the MAI Act as
reflecting “a range of conflicting or competing
objects of the MAI Act as set out in s 1.3(2) of the MAI Act, are as
(a) to encourage early and appropriate treatment and care to achieve optimum
recovery from injuries sustained in motor accidents
and to maximise their return
to work or other activities;
(b) to provide early and ongoing financial support for persons injured in motor
(c) to continue to make third-party bodily insurance compulsory for all owners
of motor vehicle registered in New South Wales;
(d) to keep premiums for third-party policies affordable by ensuring that
profits achieved by insurers do not exceed the amount that
is sufficient to
underwrite the relevant risk and by limiting benefits payable for soft
tissue injuries and psychological or psychiatric
injuries that are not
recognised psychiatric illnesses;
(e) to promote competition and innovation in the setting of premiums for
third-party policies, and to provide the Authority with
a role to ensure the
sustainability and affordability of the compulsory third-party insurance scheme
and fair market practices;
(f) to deter fraud in connection with compulsory third-party insurance;
(g) to encourage the early resolution of motor accident claims and the quick,
cost effective and just resolution of disputes, and
(h) to ensure the collection and use of data to facilitate the effective
management of the compulsory third-party insurance scheme.
Griffiths AJA commented:
“...given that all the
stated objects reflect a range of conflicting or competing purposes, it is
important to avoid permitting
a purposive approach to dominate and drive the
task of statutory construction, at the expense of the considerations of text and
comments accord with what was said by Gleeson CJ in
Carr v The State of
Western Australia
“In the interpretation of a provision of an Act, a
construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act
be preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object.
... That general rule of interpretation, however,
may be of little assistance
where a statutory provision strikes a balance between competing interests, and
the problem of interpretation
is that there is uncertainty as to how far the
provision goes in seeking to achieve the underlying purpose or object of the
Legislation rarely pursues a single purpose at all costs. Where the problem
is one of doubt about the extent to which the legislation
pursues a purpose,
stating the purpose is unlikely to solve the problem. ...”
Panel notes Merit Reviewer Williams placed emphasis on s 1.3(2)(b) but did not
otherwise engage with the balance of the objects,
including those competing
objects which are designed to ensure the sustainability and affordability of the
scheme. Indeed, in s 1.3(3)(a)
of the MAI Act it is
acknowledged:
“That participants in the third-party insurance
scheme have shared and integrated roles with the overall aim of benefiting all
members of the motoring public by keeping the overall costs of the scheme within
reasonable bounds so as to keep premiums affordable
and of promoting the
recovery and return to work or other activities of those injured in motor
accidents”.
Panel concurs with the obiter comments of Griffiths AJA in concluding that a
purposive approach is of limited value in a statutory
framework such as the CTP
scheme which has competing objects and purposes. As in
the task of
statutory construction cannot be undertaken solely by reference to the objects
of the MAI Act where they lack a common
purpose meaning it is necessary to
ascertain the meaning of the provision “by reference to the language of
the instrument viewed
construction requires the MAI Act to be read as a whole as per
Metropolitan
Gas Co v Federated Gas Employees’ Industrial
and the task is to
construe the language of the statute, not individual words (
St George Bank
Ltd v Federal Commission of
Panel considers it appropriate to construe Sch 1 cl 4(1) and Sch 1 cl 3(2)(b) by
reference to the language of the statute construed
as a whole with the aim of
achieving “that result which will best give effect to the purpose and
language of those provisions
while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions”.
Gross earnings received by the earner
4 of Sch 1 refers to the “gross earnings received by the earner,”
whilst cl 3(2)(b) of Sch 1 defines income from
personal exertion as the proceeds
of any business carried on by the person either alone or in partnership with
another person.
term “gross earnings” as it appears in Sch 1 cl 4 of the MAI Act
gives rise to three possible interpretations:
(a) that gross earnings refers to the income of the business without any
deductions;
(b) that gross earnings refers to the income of the business after deduction of
all expenses but before deduction of tax, and
(c) that gross earnings refers to the income of the business after deduction of
the cost of goods but before the deduction of other
expenses and tax.
Panel has already commented on the divergent approaches taken by Merit Reviewers
in interpreting the meaning of “gross earnings
received by the
Panel notes the insurer agrees the word “gross” should be given its
ordinary meaning but does not consider the Macquarie
Dictionary definition
relied upon by Merit Reviewer Williams of “whole, entire, or total,
especially without having been subjected
to deduction” can be relied upon
to conclude that gross income refers to the income of the business without any
deductions.
Merit Reviewer Williams assessed the gross earnings based on income less the
cost of goods, he did so having regard to the
consent of Mr Iskandar that it was
appropriate to deduct the cost of goods but not fixed expenses, which Mr
Iskandar submitted he
would incur whether his business was trading or not. The
Panel finds the approach taken by Merit Review Williams has created uncertainty.
the Panel agrees with Merit Reviewer Williams that determining the weekly
average of the gross earnings of a self-employed
earner is a question of fact to
be determined on a case by case basis, the Panel does not agree that a differing
approach should
be adopted because of the type of self-employment in which an
earner was engaged. Merit Reviewer Williams considered a different
approach to
the determination of the PAWE may be applied where the earner was self-employed
in a partnership or where an earner was
employed through a company structure.
The Panel considers the current lack of comity demonstrated by the various
decisions referred
to by Merit Reviewer Williams demonstrates the uncertainty
such an approach may engender.
Panel is troubled by the idea that income from personal exertion as defined by
Sch 1 cl 3(2)(b) means the proceeds of any business
carried on alone or in
partnership and not solely the personal income of the claimant from his personal
exertion in the business.
Mr Iskandar was a sole trader, the provision also relates to the proceeds of any
business carried on by a person in partnership.
Partnerships can involve
multiple partners who earn income for the business, albeit the business is
conducted as a partnership. The
proceeds of a business with one or more partners
may be significant and the Panel finds it unlikely that the legislature intended
that the proceeds of such a business without any deductions could constitute a
person’s “income from personal exertion”.
Indeed, it would be
the proceeds of a business arising from the personal exertion of two or more
has been said about fixed costs. Whilst it may be the case that a sole trader
such as Mr Iskandar may be disadvantaged where
he continued to incur fixed costs
which are not dependent on his turnover such as accounting costs, depreciation,
rent, software
expenses, telephone, internet and like expenses, a partnership of
two or more people may continue to operate and incur those fixed
notwithstanding the incapacity of one member of the partnership.
3(2)(b) of Sch 1 should be read in conjunction with cl 3(1) of Sch 1 which
defines loss of earnings as “a loss incurred
or likely to be incurred in a
person’s income from personal exertion”. The Panel is of the view
the income from personal
exertion refers to the claimant’s share of the
proceeds of the business, not the entire proceeds of the business without any
deductions.
interpretation of Sch 1 cl 3(2)(b) is consistent with the wording of Sch 1 cl 4
which refers to the “weekly average of
the gross earnings
received by
the earner as an earner
” (emphasis added) and not the weekly average
of the proceeds of any business carried on by the earner.
Panel agrees with the insurer that to assess the gross earnings as the income of
the business without any deductions fails to
take into consideration the
requirement that the earnings be “received by the earner as an
earner”. As submitted by the
insurer, if a business received funds for a
job which was then directed to other employees or contractors then this would be
income but not the earnings of the claimant as an earner.
business income may include GST collected by the business but directed to the
government. Clearly, the recovery of GST as
business income cannot be
“gross earnings received by the earner as an earner”.
Sections 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 of the MAI Act and the definition
of gross earnings
Project Blue Sky
, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ observed at [70]
that a legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that
its provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
injured person’s entitlement to weekly payments of statutory benefits
under ss 3.6 and 3.7 of the MAI Act is calculated by
reference to PAWE which are
determined in accordance with Sch 1 cl 4(1).
Panel agrees with the insurer that any interpretation of the phrase
“pre-accident weekly earnings” must be applied
consistently to any
the first entitlement period (s 3.6(2)) and the second entitlement period (s
3.7(2)), the weekly payment of statutory benefits
is calculated by reference to
the difference between the pre-accident weekly earnings (Sch 1 cl 4(1)) and the
person’s post-accident
earning capacity.
Panel agrees that pre-accident weekly earnings and a person’s
post-accident earning capacity may differ and the difference
between those
figures may be artificially inflated if the weekly gross earnings received by
the earner are calculated by reference
to the proceeds of a business without
deductions but before tax.
after week 78 under s 3.8 of the MAI Act, the entitlement to weekly statutory
payments is not assessed by reference to pre-accident
weekly earnings but by
reference to a loss of earning capacity. If the statutory payments for the first
78 weeks are calculated by
reference to the proceeds of a business without
deductions but before tax, those payments may be much greater than the
entitlement
to statutory payments after the first 78 weeks which would be
assessed as a loss of earning capacity. The Panel considers this approach
lead to inconsistent outcomes in assessing an entitlement to statutory benefits
for those more seriously injured persons with
continuing needs after the first
an outcome would not accord with what was said in the Second Reading Speech when
the Motor Accidents Injuries Bill 2017 was introduced
into parliament by The Hon
Victor Dominello on 9 March 2017 referred to in paragraph 70 above; nor would it
give effect to harmonious
Interaction with common law
is apparent from the MAI Act and the Second Reading Speech that, statutory
benefits for injured persons may be paid up to three
years and thereafter, an
injured person may have an entitlement to common law damages.
entitlement to common law damages is governed by Part 4 of the MAI Act. Under s
4.5 of the MAI Act damages are payable for past
or future economic loss due to
loss of earnings or the deprivation or impairment of earning capacity. In cases
Medlin v State Government Insurance
Husher v Husher
Court has confirmed that the fundamental question to be determined when
assessing damages for economic loss at common law
are whether the claimant has
sustained a loss or diminution in his earning capacity and, if so, whether that
loss or diminution will
result in economic loss.
statutory payments received by a person injured in a motor accident were
calculated by reference to the proceeds of a business
without deductions but
before tax, it would lead to an absurd outcome where the amount received by way
of statutory payments under
ss 3.6 and 3.7 of the MAI Act may significantly
exceed the amount of past economic loss recoverable at common law.
3.40(1)(b) of the MAI Act requires the amount of any statutory benefits already
paid in respect of the injury to be deducted
from any damages to be paid to the
injured person.
Panel finds that, reading the MAI Act as a whole and with the aim of achieving
harmonious goals, it was not the intention of the
legislature to provide an
entitlement to statutory payments which have the potential to significantly
exceed the amount recoverable
by way of past economic loss at common law.
Panel considers business expenses should be deducted from the business income
for the purposes of a PAWE calculation. The Panel
follows the reasoning of Merit
Reviewer Ruschen in the matter of
where at [18] she
“...the earnings of the claimant as an individual as
distinct from the business, are the profits of the business after expenses
the business are paid. In other words, the ‘proceeds’ of the
business the claimant receives as an earner is the net
profit of the business
after accounting for all business expenses incurred to run the business, but
before tax. Business expenses
are not ‘proceeds’ of the business
that make it into the claimant’s hands as his individual gross
Panel finds that, loss of earnings in Sch 1 cl 3(b) relates to the proceeds of
any business resulting from the earners own personal
exertion and therefore, the
term gross earnings as it appears in Sch 1 cl 4 relates to the gross earnings
received by the earner
after the deduction of business expenses but before the
deduction of tax.
Calculation of PAWE
Iskandar’s business earned income totalling $76,963 during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the accident
business incurred the cost of goods totalling $14,706 and expenses totalling
$34,625 during that 12 month period.
income of Mr Iskandar as a self-employed earner during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which the accident occurred
was $27,632.
weekly average of the gross earnings received by Mr Iskandar as an earner during
the 12 months immediately before the day on which
the accident occurred was
PANEL DETERMINATION
Panel revokes the decision of Merit Reviewer Williams dated 12 June 2024.
Panel determines for the purposes of Sch 1 cl 4(1) of the MAI Act, the PAWE are
date of effect is 11 March 2024.
Aktop v Allianz Insurance
[2021] NSWPICMR 33
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2022] NSWPICMR
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
AHS v Allianz
[2019] NSWSIRADRS 206.
AGZ v NRMA Insurance Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDRS MR
ACL v CIC Allianz
Insurance Limited
[2018] NSWDRS MR
ABQ v NRMA Insurance
[2018] NSWDRS MR 043.
AGZ v NRMA Insurance Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDRS MR
Brewer v Insurance
Australia t/as NRMA
[2021] NSWPICMR
Glover v GIO
[2022] NSWPICMR 7.
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
; 260 ALR at
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v The Estate of the Late Summer Abawi
[2024] NSWSC
Carr v The State of
Western Australia
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v The Estate of the Late Summer Abawi
[2024] NSWSC
Metropolitan Gas Co
v Federated Gas Employees’ Industrial Union
[1925] HCA 5
(1924) 35 CLR 449
St George Bank Ltd
v Federal Commission of Taxation
[2009] FCAFC 62
(2009) 176 FCR 424
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
Medlin v State
Government Insurance Commission
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
197 CLR 138.
[2022] NSWPICMR 17
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.31 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter