URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAR v Vanguarde Pty Ltd [2020] NSWWCCPD 71 (9 December 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
CAR v Vanguarde Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCCPD 71
RESPONDENT:
Vanguarde Pty Ltd
icare Workers Insurance
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
31 August 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
9 December 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Section 350(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) – factors to take into account
when determining whether to allow a reconsideration of a decision –
Samuel v Sebel Furniture Ltd
[2006] NSWCCPD141;
[2006] NSWWCCPD 141
applied; s 267
of the 1998 Act – the objectives of the Commission.
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr G Horan, counsel
Turner Freeman
Mr S Grant, counsel
Hall & Willcox
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 31 August 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
CAR (the appellant) was employed by Vanguarde Pty Ltd (the respondent) as a
Senior Property Manager. The appellant’s employment
with the respondent
was terminated on 1 December 2017. The appellant was dismissed after a random
compliance check disclosed irregularities
in the respondent’s trust
account wherein payments from the trust account were made into the
appellant’s personal bank
appellant made a claim for compensation, alleging psychological injury as a
result of an “overbearing workload, feeling
of hostility from other staff
and due to an ordeal in which he accidently misappropriated
The date of injury
was deemed to be 1 December 2017. The respondent initially accepted liability
and paid weekly compensation and
treatment expenses.
4 April 2019, the respondent disputed liability for the injury, raising the
following issues:
(a) the appellant did not suffer an injury pursuant to s 4(a) and s 11A(3) of
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act);
(b) the appellant’s employment was not the main contributing factor to any
disease injury (s 4(b)(i) of the 1987 Act) or to
the aggravation acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of a disease (s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act);
(c) the psychological injury was caused by the reasonable action taken by the
respondent with respect to performance appraisal, discipline
or dismissal and
was therefore not compensable (s 11A(1) of the 1987 Act);
(d) at the time of the injury, the appellant was acting in contravention of
statutory or other regulation applicable to the appellant’s
employment, so
that the injury was solely the result of serious and wilful misconduct in the
form of a fraud (s 14 of the 1987 Act);
(e) treatment expenses were not reasonably necessary, and
(f) the appellant did not give notice of injury or make a claim within the time
prescribed by ss 260 and 261 of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
appellant commenced proceedings in the Commission, claiming ongoing weekly
payment of compensation, treatment expenses and 24%
whole person impairment
pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act.
matter was listed for conciliation and arbitration on 22 November 2019. The
matter did not proceed to arbitration because the
matter was resolved by written
consent orders tendered by the parties.
Consent Orders were made by Arbitrator John Wynyard (the original arbitrator) in
the following terms:
“By and with the consent of the parties,
the determination of the Commission in this matter is as follows:
will be an award for the respondent in respect of the claim for weekly benefits
under s 37 of the 1987 Act from 5 October 2018.
will be an award for the respondent in respect of the claim for medical expenses
under s 60 of the 1987 Act from 22 November
will be an award for the respondent in respect of the claim for permanent
impairment under s 66 of the 1987 Act.
balance of the claim is discontinued and I dispense with the necessity for the
applicant to file a Notice of Discontinuance.
respondent will make the following payments to the applicant on a compromise,
voluntary, without prejudice and without admission
of liability basis as
(i) Pursuant to s 37 of the 1987 Act, $500 gross per week from 25 January 2018
to 4 October 2018 agreed to equal $18,000;
(ii) Pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act, $2,000 incurred up to 22 November 2019
upon production of accounts, receipts and/or Medicare
Notice of Charge.
applicant agrees and admit that:
(i) On payment of the amount of weekly compensation noted in paragraph A of the
notations, the applicant will have received all of
his entitlments to weekly
compensation and medical expenses arising out of his emploment with the
respondent to date.
(ii) From 22 November 2019 the applicant has fully recovered from the effects of
the injuries sustained with the respondent.
(iii) The applicant will be able to earn the same, if not more, than his
pre-injury average weekly earnings with the respondent from
22 November 2019.
settlement is on a compromise, without prejudice and without admission of
liability basis and the respondent makes no admission
by the applicant.
note the Consent Orders signed by the parties, initialled by me and retained by
two days of the matter settling, the appellant took issue with the resolution.
The appellant applied to the Commission to have
the Consent Orders reconsidered.
The application for reconsideration was heard by a different arbitrator, Mr C
Burge. This appeal
concerns the Arbitrator’s refusal to reconsider the
Consent Orders.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content to have the matter determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions
and that the matter does not
require an oral hearing.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties indicating
that the appeal can be
determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed ‘on
the papers’.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE EVIDENCE
is not necessary to refer in detail to all of the evidence that was before the
original Arbitrator when the matter came to conciliation
and arbitration on 22
November 2019. The summary of the evidence that follows is relevant to the
question of whether the Arbitrator
erred in the exercise of his discretion by
refusing to reconsider the Consent Orders.
The factual evidence in relation to injury and the defence
pursuant to s 11A of the 1987 Act
The appellant’s evidence
appellant provided statements dated 10 December
and 13 June
The appellant, a licenced
real estate agent, disclosed a past history of anxiety and depression and
described difficulties in prior
employment related to the former
employer’s business practices. The appellant said he then commenced
employment with the respondent
as a Senior Property Manager and provided details
of his duties in that role.
appellant referred to there being a high turnover of staff, including the
termination of employment of some staff, which put pressure
on him to perform
and made him unpopular. The appellant recounted difficult interactions with the
principal of the company, Mr Timothy
Breckell. He complained of an enormous
appellant said that because of the excessive workload, he was not concentrating
on his work and on the morning of 1 December 2017,
he inadvertently paid some
personal bills from the company account. He said that when he realised, he
transferred the money back
immediately, but the error was made known to Mr
Breckell. The appellant said that he was handed a notice terminating his
employment.
He said he was shocked and shaking and went home, worrying what
would happen and whether the police would become involved.
appellant stated that in April 2018, NSW Fair Trading sent him correspondence
indicating that they had found he had misappropriated
funds (a finding which he
subsequently appealed) and asking him to “show cause” as to why his
real estate licence should
not be cancelled. The appellant said that this event
had changed his life completely and had significantly affected his psychological
well-being.
his second statement, the appellant provided extensive allegations of
difficulties in the workplace, including difficulties relating
reconciliation of the respondent’s bank accounts, which the appellant said
he did not understand. The appellant said
that he was not authorised to perform
all transactions on the accounts, and he could only upload transactions. He said
that, on one
occasion, he found there was an outstanding deposit and was unsure
and confused about that. The appellant said he transferred money
from his own
account to the trust account to remedy that situation. The appellant also
referred to an occasion when he noticed the
account had not been reconciled in
over a month and was out of balance, with unpresented cheques and outstanding
The respondent’s evidence
appellant’s factual allegations of difficult workplace conflict were
challenged by Ms Vicheka Yoeun
and Mr Breckell in statements made by
Breckell also responded to the appellant’s version of events in respect of
the allegations of misappropriation of funds.
Mr Breckell said that he had been
advised by his general manager of the incident on 1 December 2017. He said the
allegations were
not an isolated incident and involved the setting up of fake
accounts and work orders by the appellant using his personal bank account
many occasions, which the appellant meticulously tried to conceal. Mr Breckell
said that, once the allegations were established
to be true, he had no choice
but the terminate the appellant’s employment. Mr Breckell advised that the
appellant had admitted
the allegations, and the fraud was not an innocent
mistake but “was deliberate and purposefully
perpetrated”.
The relevant medical evidence
Dr Christopher Canaris, consultant psychologist
Canaris was asked to examine the appellant and provide a forensic medical
opinion on the appellant’s behalf. He provided
a report dated 8 July
Canaris took a history of what could be described as somewhat toxic relationship
difficulties experienced by the appellant in the
respondent’s workplace.
Dr Canaris also recorded the history of the appellant’s employment being
terminated on 17 December
2017 following allegations of a misappropriation of
funds in the vicinity of a total of $13,000 and the revocation of the
appellant’s
real estate licence for five years. Dr Canaris noted that the
appellant claimed that Mr Breckell had put the money in his bank account
the respondent’s trust account, and the appellant was not in a position to
have made the transfer. Dr Canaris recorded
that the appellant said it had been
asserted that the appellant had misappropriated funds because he needed the
money, but that the
respondent had never looked at his accounts which would have
disclosed that he had funds available. The appellant alleged it was
up” by the respondent’s principal. Dr Canaris further noted that the
appellant was convicted in the Local
Court, fined and sentenced to community
service, which the appellant said occurred because a different solicitor had
appeared on
his behalf. Dr Canaris noted the appellant’s ongoing symptom
complaints, which included the inability to concentrate.
Canaris provided the following opinion:
“I note that his
employer provides a different account as often happens reporting inter alia
difficulties in his relationship
with other employees, some difficulties around
his work practices, difficulties over the importation of his rent roll from his
employer, as well as of course the reported misappropriation of funds
which his employer suggested had taken place over a period
of time and had
involved a range of stratagems.
It is of course not up to me as a psychiatrist to determine which version of
events is to be preferred. However, I note that in his
original statement in
this matter, your client asserts that the misappropriation of funds took place
after he had accidentally paid
some personal bills out of a company account and
that he had rectified the error as soon as he discovered what had taken place.
contrast, he told me that he had been somehow set up by his employer.
Clearly, it is a matter of some significance to determine which
of what appear
to be three versions of events is more likely to be correct. Should his
employer’s account be considered the
more likely, his psychological injury
would clearly fall within the ambit of Section
Mr Chafic Awit, registered psychologist
Awit, who the appellant had attended on 12 occasions, provided a report dated 21
May 2019 for the purposes of proceedings in the
NSW Civil and Administrative
Mr Awit noted that the
appellant had previously been convicted under the
Crimes Act 1900
dishonestly obtaining for himself a financial advantage by deception. Mr Awit
diagnosed the appellant as suffering from anxiety
disorder with persistent
depressive mood.
Awit offered the following opinion:
“[The appellant] has a
long history of suffering Anxiety and Depression. He advised that he has
experienced a number of significant
stressors in his life that range from
personal to work related stressors. ... The writer is of the professional
opinion that there
is a psychological nexus between CAR's condition and the
offence before the court. He advised that he did not weight the consequences
his decision appropriately at the time. He advised that this all started because
he was too fatigued and unmotivated to go withdraw
money from the bank. He
advised that in the lead up to the offending period he allowed a number of
responsibilities and bills to
lapse, because he could not muster the motivation
to deal with it all. CAR advised that he was not thinking clearly when he made
these decisions.”
Dr Yajuvendra Bisht, psychiatrist
Bisht was qualified by the respondent to examine the appellant and provide an
opinion on causation. In his report dated 21 February
“The symptoms of his psychological condition are
primarily caused by the termination
of employment. He did have some symptoms prior to that date, but these
would qualify as a normal emotional response, I believe, as the
worker’s functioning
in various domains of life, was not substantially affected. His functioning
at work was
affected by over work rather than a psychiatric condition, prior to the
termination of
his employment.”
a supplementary report dated 20 August
Dr Bisht reiterated that
“[m]y finding was that the injury occurred predominantly as a result of
the termination of
employment.”
Dr Ercel Ozser, general practitioner
Ozser, who had been the appellant’s general practitioner for 15 years,
provided a report dated 28 August
He diagnosed the appellant
as suffering from major depression with features of anxiety since December 2017,
which was a significant
exacerbation of previous anxiety and depression. Dr
Ozser attributed the exacerbation to the period of the appellant’s
with the respondent “during and following his employment
and was of the
opinion that the appellant’s employment was a substantial contributing
factor to the injury within the meaning
of s 9A of the 1987 Act.
The evidence relied upon in the application for
reconsideration
The appellant’s application for
reconsideration
25 May 2020, the appellant, who was not legally represented at that time, wrote
to the Commission seeking to have the Consent Orders
set aside and orders made
in his favour. The appellant was critical of the original Arbitrator’s
conduct on the day of the
conciliation/arbitration. The appellant said
“On the day of the Conciliation, I did not know what was
going on the whole time I was there. I was so confused and anxious.
feeling well as I am taking Lexapro. When the Arbitrator brought everyone
together in the room, I thought that, that was
the start of the process, as it
turned out. It was not.”
29 May 2020, the appellant forwarded a large bundle of unpaginated documents in
support of his application for reconsideration.
Relevantly, those documents
(a) an email for sent by the appellant’s former solicitor on 22 November
2019 (the day of the conciliation) at 5.28 pm in the
following terms:
“As you are aware, your matter came up for hearing today before
arbitrator John Wynyard.
Based on our advice you settled the case on the basis of you being given a
payment of $20,000 made up of $18,000 for weekly benefits
and up to $2000 for
medical expenses, upon the provision of tax invoices and a Medicare Notice of
We will under separate cover send you a copy of the orders.
We took a view that it was in your best interests to settle the matter on the
above basis.
There were problems with the question of liability.
There were also problems in relation to the question of quantum.
There was a real risk that the arbitrator would have found for the
Respondent.
Indeed he explicitly said so in our presence and he afterwards expressed the
same view to you that there would be an appeal which
by definition means that he
would have found for the Respondent.
The advantage in achieving the settlement is that there will be no published
There was a real risk that if there was a published judgement it would have
contained adverse findings of credit made against you,
which would have
deleterious effects not only on your job prospects but also on your health.
For this reason we were satisfied to recommend a settlement and you correctly
in our view accepted our advice.
There were many other extraneous issues in your case which would have had a
deleterious effect on your workers compensation case,
including but not limited
to, the finding in relation to the section 32 application.
This is effectively brings [sic] to an end your workers compensation
proceedings and entitlements.
You theoretically could bring another claim in the future if there was a
dramatic change in circumstances. This is not likely based
on the present
evidence and your position.
We consider that this was the best result achievable by you.
It therefore follows that effectively this puts an end to your
proceedings.
(b) a response from the appellant responded to his former solicitor’s
email as follows:
Thank you for your email.
I am very disappointed with this outcome and I feel like I was played so that
everybody could go home early.
Not once did we all sit together and discuss the issues with the other
I have been in Residential Tribunals before and both sides should have had a
discussion in front of each [other] and then the Arbitrator
advises on possible
Why didn’t this happen?
The way that you both behaved in regards to the Arbitrator, left me
speechless. It is like you both didn't want to argue with him
to prove my case.
I am still stunned as this is what I was waiting for to begin. Settlement offers
usually come after a discussion
with all parties, not 5 minutes after entering
I made it very clear, numerous times, that I did not come this far to settle.
I told you this when you were sitting next to me and
when all the commotion was
going on where people were walking in & out of the room.
On Monday morning I am going to contact the Workers Compensation Commission
and WIRO and make a formal complaint. I feel that procedures
have not been
followed properly.
I don’t care about the repercussions, I have already lost plenty so
there is nothing else to lose now. The [Arbitrator’s]
conduct was
disgraceful. He was arrogant and very cocky. I will not sign any documents from
the [Insurer’s] Solicitor till
my case is reheard. I will also be
complaining about the phone conference that day in your office and how it was
cut short and the
way that this has dragged on.
EML accreted [sic, accepted] liability till I told Madeline that I was being
sent to a Psychiatrist. I do not understand why you did
not dispute the
Liability decision back in April 2019, I could have still been receiving,
instead you waited for 7 months to do so,
so that you could do the PI Claim
& Liability Claim, all in one go.
I have had no income except $200 pw from Centrelink. My mother is not rich.
She is 74 and had to mortgage the house so that we could
$20K offer is a joke. This won’t even cover any of my expenses that are
all in arrears. I am at the Repossession Stage now for
my Car and my property
will still be in arrears.
I am not fully recovered yet.
Also please note, that on the day of the hearing I had a Certificate of
Capacity which states that I should not have been put into
environment where I
can become stressed. If I knew this was going to happen, I would have brought a
family member with me.”
(c) a letter from the appellant dated 25 November 2019 directed to the President
of the Commission, making the following complaint:
“I refer to my recent experience on 22 Nov 2019 at the Workers
Compensation Commission (Commission).
The Arbitrator was John Wynyard.
I was in attendance for a Conference and Hearing regarding my matter.
The proceedings did not run in accordance with the Commissions guidelines.
I found the whole process confusing and the [Arbitrator’s]
should be called into question.
I had read the [Commission’s] website about the process for today. I
was waiting for the Hearing to begin. I assumed that we
would all meet together
first, acknowledge who we were, then told to have a discussion. If we could not
agree or even try to settle
the matter, we would then separate or just agree to
tell the Arbitrator that we needed his guidance or that he would be involved
all times with our discussions.
Nothing like this happened at all.
There was nobody else in the Conciliation Room, when I arrived with my
Solicitor ... and his Barrister. I was expecting to see the
Respondents
Not long after, a man walks in (who much later, I found out it to be the
Arbitrator). I was asked to leave the room by the Arbitrator
as he wanted to
have a word with my Representatives.
the Arbitrator was gone. I went to sit down and join
my Solicitor and Barrister,
who both told me the following;
The Arbitrator had advised that he had limited time today, he had no
intention of wasting ‘his’ valuable time with a liar
nothing would change his mind. The Determination was already decided by him, in
favour for the Respondent. If they wanted
me to get something, then I should
settle. They told me that he was like a bully and very determined to get his
I was stunned. How is this fair? I was being unfairly treated by the
Arbitrator who already formed an opinion of me.
I was shaking and becoming anxious and couldn’t think. I would have
brought a family member in with me, if I knew that I [was]
going to be in this
frame of mind.
The Arbitrator had already decided the outcome, that I did not suffer any
injury and that there was no point for my Representatives
to present a case.
Isn’t he supposed to be impartial?
As I sat there in disbelief with what I was just told, the Arbitrator, John
walks in and introduces himself to me, stating that he
was there to assist us
today. I didn’t know how to react after what he just told my
Representatives. I noticed that he kept
looking at his watch and then walked out
of the room as quickly as he came in.
10 mins later.... in walks the Respondents who handed the Arbitrator a
It was a Certificate of Determination of Consent Orders.
It was already typed up. It was already prepared.
I had no idea what was going on, so I just sat there. Waiting for the Hearing
Everything was confusing and moving very quickly.
The Arbitrator handed out some papers around the table, everyone seemed to be
signing and it missed me, so I was given a page to sign
and I just signed in the
middle. I later realised that there were two pages. They were not stapled or
marked with Page 1 or Page
I thought we had signed an acknowledgement of attendance for the hearing.
The Arbitrator then read the document as he recorded himself, then turned it
I found this strange as I thought the hearing was already being recorded.
I then turned to my Solicitor and said, “what was going on? Are we
having a break?”
He said, “No, its over”
I was so mad and told what does he mean, he said, “you
“I settled on what?” we had not had any group discussion about
any of the issues or agree[d] to what consent orders were
going to be made. I
don’t recall
I had been waiting for this to happen since we arrived.
I was told that the Arbitrator had already made his decision. When I read
through the Consent Orders, there is no way, I would have
agreed to any of it,
let alone sign it, especially consenting that I had fully recovered and that I
was now able to earn even more
money than before.
As far as I am concerned, the Arbitrator did not follow any ‘Code of
-There were no procedures in place.
-He allowed for consent orders to be made, without both parties being
-Documents were signed and not numbered. There could have been more than two
-The Arbitrator did not act impartial
-The hearing was not recorded.
-There was no other representative of the Commission in the room, as a
witness, like there is at NCAT.
I don’t want to be an inconvenience to anyone, but can I please request
that consideration be given to allow for this matter
to be determined again by a
different Arbitrator.
I have lost so much already and thought that this was over, but the orders
made are going to put me in a worse off position. The Arbitrator
has treated me
unfairly, not understanding me or showing [me] any empathy.
I want justice for what has happened to me, that’s all.
I hope that you will accept my request.”
(d) a response the from the Registrar of the Commission dated 24 Januray 2020,
in which the Registrar observed that:
“Mr Wynyard recalled the sensitive nature of the case. He advised that
he introduced himself and explained how a negotiated
settlement may be in your
best interests and that he invited you to ask any questions about the
proceedings. Mr Wynyard advised that
he wanted to discuss the case with both
barristers to ascertain whether there was any prospect of settling the case or
was required to go to an arbitration hearing. Mr Wynyard then left
the conference room to allow the parties an opportunity to discuss
Mr Wynyard denies that he made any representations to your legal
representatives that he had no intention of wasting his time with
nothing would change his mind, and that he had decided your case in favour of
the respondent.
The allegations are also not supported by your solicitor at the time, ...
[who] reported that the conciliation conference proceeded
in the usual way, and
the parties were able to resolve the claim according to your instructions to
settle the matter and that you
signed the consent orders;”
(e) in the same document, the Registrar dealt with a separate complaint made by
the appellant about the conduct of a different Arbitrator
during a telephone
conference on 21 October 2019. The Registrar determined that he was satisfied,
on the basis of the Arbitrator’s
response which was corroborated by the
response from the appellant’s former solicitor, that the Arbitrator had
conducted herself
appropriately and there had been no beach of the Code of
(f) in an email dared 26 November 2019, the appellant’s former solicitor
advised the Workers Compensation Independent Review
Office (WIRO) that the
appellant’s entire proceedings had been settled for an amount of $20,000,
including an award being entered
in favour of the respondent for the claim for
permanent impairment pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act. The solicitor wrote:
“The client instructed us to accept the offer, but later due to his
medical condition, stated that he was going to complain
..., principally because
of the behaviour of the arbitrator.”
(g) a copy of the Consent Orders bearing the signature of the appellant, his
former solicitor and the solicitor for the respondent
on the second page. The
copy was consistent with the Consent Orders issued by the Arbitrator.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator provided a summary of the steps taken leading up to the issuance of
the Certificate of Determination recording the
relevant Consent Orders. The
Arbitrator noted the terms of the Consent Orders and further noted that the
appellant sought a reconsideration
of the Consent Orders on the basis that those
orders were unjust and were entered into without his proper consent.
Arbitrator reviewed the Commission’s power to reconsider any matter which
had been dealt with, and to rescind, alter or
amend any decision of the
Commission, in accordance with s 350(3) of the 1998 Act. The Arbitrator referred
to the decision of Roche
ADP (as he then was) in
Samuel v Sebel Furniture
and quoted from Roche
ADP’s summary of matters that were relevant to the exercise of the
Commission’s discretion to reconsider
a decision. The Arbitrator observed
that there were a number of Presidential authorities that adopted the same
approach and that
Harrison AsJ cited the decision with approval in
NSW v Registrar of the WCC of
“It is my view that the discretion of the Court, when it
conducts a reconsideration, is wide ranging. Overall, the task of the
to balance the policy requirement of finality of litigation with the obligation
to rectify any clear-cut injustice. One
of the circumstances where a
reconsideration can take place is where there is fresh evidence (as opposed to
more evidence).”
Arbitrator said that there was no issue that the power to reconsider extended to
a reconsideration of consent orders and in fact
there was Presidential authority
to that effect. The Arbitrator also observed that it was established in
that, in an application for reconsideration, it was not necessary
to show that exceptional circumstances existed, and the Commission
exercise its discretion in a beneficial manner.
Arbitrator summarised the submissions made by both parties, noting that the
appellant’s version of the events that transpired
at the original
arbitration was set out in the letter to the President of the Commission dated
25 November 2019. The Arbitrator said
that in the appellant’s application,
the appellant relied heavily on the fact that, at the original arbitration, the
produced consent orders that were already prepared and in typed form.
The Arbitrator observed that where experienced practitioners
appeared in the
Commission, it was quite common that pro forma settlement documents would be
pre-prepared, to which any appropriate
alterations could be made on the day of
settlement. The Arbitrator acknowledged that in the context of contentious
litigation where
the worker suffered from a psychological injury, the production
of such a document might suggest that the legal representatives may
have entered
into the agreement without input from the worker. The Arbitrator said, however,
that it was not suggested that in this
case, the legal representatives had done
so, and it was apparent that it was the appellant’s perception of the
events as to
what had occurred.
Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s submission that the potential claim
which had been brought by the appellant involved
valuable weekly compensation
and that it was not a
that the appellant’s
case would fail. The Arbitrator observed that nonetheless, the nature of
proceedings in the Commission
is such that the parties are aware ahead of the
proceedings of the issues in dispute and, in this case, there could be no doubt
the defence raised by the respondent pursuant to s 11A of the 1987 Act
involved an extremely contentious argument.
Arbitrator concluded that the appellant had failed to demonstrate circumstances
which warranted a reconsideration of the matter.
He provided the following
(a) the appellant was represented at the original arbitration by competent and
experienced counsel and solicitors;
(b) on the day after the Consent Orders were entered, the appellant showed
“remarkable acuity” in lengthy and detailed
letters to various
authorities, including the President of the Commission. This was inconsistent
with the appellant’s claim
that he was in a state of confusion;
(c) there was no contemporaneous evidence about the appellant’s state of
mind and ability to comprehend matters on or around
the arbitration day, and
little weight could be placed on the opinion of Dr Canaris as to the
appellant’s state of mind months
beforehand. In that regard, the only
evidence about the appellant’s state of mind on the arbitration day was
that of the appellant
(d) although the email forwarded to WIRO from the appellant’s former
solicitors suggested that the Arbitrator’s attitude
was less than
diplomatic, there was nothing in the correspondence to various authorities that
indicated that the appellant had not
provided informed consent to the
settlement;
(e) there was no corroboration in that correspondence in respect of the
appellant’s allegation that he was so over wrought
that his state of mind
and emotional state were impaired. Such characteristics would have been likely
to have come to the attention
of the appellant’s legal representatives;
(f) the email from the appellant’s former solicitor indicated that the
appellant had provided instructions to resolve the matter
in the terms reflected
in the Consent Orders and the fact that the appellant subsequently seeks to
resile from the agreement is not
of itself sufficient to warrant a
reconsideration;
(g) the importance of finality in litigation is significant;
(h) the nature and character of the respondent’s defence brought pursuant
to s 11A of the 1987 Act was a significant hurdle
for the appellant to overcome
if he had proceeded to have the matter determined, and
(i) in the light of the inconsistencies in the histories provided to medical
practitioners, together with the somewhat equivocal
opinion of Dr Canaris in
relation to the s 11A defence, the settlement represented a reasonable
compromise of the appellant’s
Arbitrator observed that the actual application for reconsideration was filed
approximately six months after the settlement. He
did not consider that the
delay involved any significant prejudice to the respondent, when the appellant
had flagged his change of
position in correspondence to the Commission just days
after the Consent Orders were entered.
Arbitrator said that, in accordance with the decision in
weighed up the competing principles of finality of litigation and the
requirement to put right any plainly apparent injustice.
He concluded that he
did not consider that the settlement represented any injustice to the appellant.
He reiterated that the matter
was contentious, and there was a real risk that if
the appellant proceeded to arbitration, he would have lost. Further, the
from the appellant’s former solicitor, which the Arbitrator
accepted, showed that the appellant had provided instructions to
resolve his
claim on a compromise basis in a manner consistent with the Consent Orders.
Arbitrator said that in approaching the matter in a beneficial way, the
settlement was a reasonable compromise and the facts did
not establish that an
injustice had occurred. The Arbitrator concluded that he would not exercise his
discretion to reconsider the
matter and, accordingly, refused the application
for reconsideration.
Certificate of Determination issued on 31 August 2020
“The Commission determines:
application for reconsideration is refused.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant’s grounds of appeal are somewhat poorly expressed. The appellant
brings six grounds of appeal, alleging error
on the part of the Arbitrator,
(rephrased by me for clarification purposes) as follows:
(a) Ground One: by failing to properly exercise the
Commission’s discretion whether to grant the reconsideration sought by the
(b) Ground Two: by not referring to and not taking into account the
appellant’s submission in reply as to the appellant’s
understanding and consent to the specialised terms in the Consent Orders and
their meaning, as opposed to the monetary value
of the settlement;
(c) Ground Three: by failing to find whether a durable and properly consented to
settlement had been achieved;
(d) Ground Four: by finding that the solicitor’s email dated 26 November
2019 recounted the provision of instructions to resolve
the matter on the terms
which were entered;
(e) Ground Five: by finding that the settlement did not represent any injustice
to the appellant because the contemporaneous evidence
(which the Arbitrator
accepted) established that the appellant provided instructions to compromise his
claim in a manner consistent
with the Consent Orders, and
(f) Ground Six: by not addressing or not considering
the lack of prejudice to the respondent when exercising his discretion.
LEGISLATION
350(3) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(3) The Commission may
reconsider any matter that has been dealt with by the Commission and rescind,
alter or amend any decision
previously made or given by the
Commission.”
SUBMISSIONS
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that his case in support of the application for
reconsideration was that:
(a) during the conciliation on 22 November 2019, to his mind, the Consent Orders
were presented to him as a
fait accompli
to which he had no input;
(b) he did not properly understand the terms of the settlement;
(c) it could be inferred that the document had not been adequately explained to
him by his legal representatives, and
(d) the terms of the Consent Orders were challenged by him in a timely manner
the next working day following the settlement.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent says it does not understand this ground of appeal, but notes that in
settling his claim, the appellant had the advice
of experienced counsel and
signed the settlement orders. The respondent further notes that the
appellant’s case is that he
did not properly understand the terms of the
Consent Orders, a submission which the Arbitrator did not accept.
appellant submits that the submission merely asserts that the Arbitrator should
have reached a different conclusion and fails
to identify the error of
discretion about which the appellant complains. The respondent submits that, if
the Presidential member
might prefer a different conclusion to the Arbitrator,
that is not a basis upon which to overturn the Arbitrator’s discretionary
conclusion, which was reached after the Arbitrator properly considered the
evidence. The respondent cites
The Queen v
as authority for
that proposition.
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that it was clear from his timely objections to the wording of
the settlement agreement lodged in the Commission
that the appellant did not
agree with the specific terms of the settlement. The appellant contends that a
person who was not closely
involved in the workers compensation jurisdiction
would not be expected to understand those legal specific terms. The appellant
that it was therefore necessary to look behind the terms used, such as
“award for the respondent,” “permanent impairment
pursuant to
s 66” and other terms and specialised phrases used in the orders in order
to determine whether proper consent was
actually provided.
appellant submits that the email dated 26 November 2019 refers only to
instructions to reach “the settlement of $20,000”
and is no more
specific than that. The appellant points out that in fact, the email was in
response to an email from WIRO seeking
clarification as to whether the
“entire proceedings” were resolved. The appellant refers to his
submission to the Arbitrator
that the settlement was more complex than a simple
monetary sum. The appellant says that the evidence shows that the Consent
which the appellant had not previously seen, were presented to the
appellant and his legal representatives for the appellant to sign
at a round table meeting where the Arbitrator and the respondent
were present.
appellant reiterates that his lack of proper consent is borne out by the timely
manner in which he raised his objection to the
complex terms the following
working day.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent refers to the appellant’s submissions and says that it appears
that the appellant alleges error on the part of
the Arbitrator by failing to
refer to, or take into account, the appellant’s submission that while the
appellant gave instructions
to resolve his claim, the appellant did not
understand the technical aspects of the settlement, so that the appellant did
“proper” consent to the resolution.
respondent submits that the appellant was represented by experienced counsel and
signed the Consent Orders. It can therefore be
inferred that the detail of the
terms of the settlement would have been explained in order to make the appellant
aware of the rights
he was foregoing in exchange for $20,000.
respondent says it further relies upon its submissions made in respect of Ground
One, and the appellant’s argument should
be rejected.
Ground Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that, while the Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s
submission as to the Commission’s objectives
of “fairness” and
“durable settlements,” the Arbitrator failed to give weight to that
submission. The appellant
says that the Arbitrator failed to find, in the
circumstances where the worker had objected to the complex and specialised terms
of the settlement the next working day, whether a durable and properly consented
to settlement had been achieved.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent observes that this argument appears to say that a properly consented
to and durable settlement had not been achieved,
contrary to the objectives of s
367 of the 1998 Act because by the next working day, the appellant wanted to
resile from the agreement.
The respondent submits that the fact that the
appellant changed his mind does not indicate that the agreement reached was not
or reached with proper consent. The respondent contends that if that
reason was sufficient to allow a reconsideration, any settlement
unstable and therefore not durable, contrary to the objectives of the 1998 Act
of resolving claims. It would also be against
the public interest and the
concept of finality of litigation.
respondent submits that, in any event, the Arbitrator was entitled to conclude
that the evidence did not support the appellant’s
argument in respect of
his state of mind at the time of settlement. The respondent concludes that the
ground of appeal should be
Ground Four
The appellant’s submissions
appellant reiterates that the Arbitrator erred by observing that the email dated
26 November 2019 “recounts the provision
of instructions to resolve
on the terms which were
added by the appellant). The appellant submits that the email does not refer to
the specialised and complex terms used
in the Consent Orders.
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s observation that “[t]he fact
that the [appellant] now seeks to resile from that
settlement does not of itself
mean it ought to be
reconsidered”
and submits
that the appellant’s objection to the terms was not made “now”
but was made almost instantly on the
day after the settlement. The appellant
contends that the timing of the worker’s objection was most important
because it pointed
to the lack of meeting of the minds. The appellant says that
the Arbitrator, in exercising his discretion, did not sufficiently weigh
appellant points out that the Consent Orders consisted of two pages, but the
appellant only signed the second page. The appellant
asserts that the
“important” terms are on page one, and there is no evidence that the
appellant read page one of the
document before signing it in the rushed
circumstances described by the appellant.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that this ground of appeal appears to be the same allegation
of error made in Grounds One and Two. The respondent
relies upon its submissions
already made in respect of those grounds and submits that this ground of appeal
should also be rejected.
Ground Five
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Arbitrator erred in the exercise of his discretion by
concluding that because the appellant had provided
instructions to resolve his
claim, the settlement did not “in any way” represent an injustice to
the appellant. The appellant
says that there was a real doubt that the
settlement had been properly consented to by the appellant, and the use of the
any way” shows that the Arbitrator did not properly
understand or give regard to the appellant’s submission.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that this ground of appeal again repeats Grounds One, Two and
Four. The respondent submits that the Arbitrator
clearly weighed the issues in
relation to any injustice to the appellant. The respondent points out that the
Arbitrator observed
that the matter was clearly contentious and there was a real
risk that the appellant would have lost had he proceeded to arbitration.
Further, the Arbitrator observed that the evidence disclosed that the appellant
provided instructions to compromise his claim in
the manner recorded in the
Consent Orders.
respondent submits that this ground of appeal should fail.
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the terms used in the Consent Orders such as “Award
for the Respondent” and the admissions
made preclude the appellant from
prosecuting any further workers compensation entitlements. The appellant
reiterates that the solicitor’s
email dated 26 November 2019 does not
support a finding that the appellant consented to those terms of the settlement.
The appellant
contends that, in those circumstances, the appellant’s
timely objection ought to have been afforded more weight and consideration
the Arbitrator because it supports the appellant’s argument that a failure
to reconsider the Consent Orders would amount
to an injustice to the worker. The
appellant submits that to fail to reconsider the orders would depart from the
stated aims of the
workers compensation legislation.
appellant asserts that there was no prejudice to the respondent and the
Arbitrator failed to address or consider that lack of
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that, on the basis that this ground of appeal reiterates the
same ground advanced in Grounds One, Two, Four
and Five, it relies on
submissions already made in respect of those grounds.
respondent points out that the appellant bore the onus of persuading the
Arbitrator to exercise his discretion in the appellant’s
favour. The
respondent submits that the Arbitrator addressed the relevant factors to
consider in the exercise of his discretion,
in accordance with
other relevant authorities. The respondent asserts that no issue is taken by the
appellant as to the correctness of that approach.
respondent contends that, in the context of the Arbitrator’s findings in
relation to the other issues for consideration,
it is irrelevant that the
Arbitrator did not specifically address the issue of prejudice to the respondent
that may, or may not,
have arisen.
respondent submits that the Arbitrator properly considered the relevant factors
in evidence that pertain to an application for
reconsideration and rejected the
appellant’s argument. Accordingly, the appellant’s submission should
be rejected.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks orders that the reconsideration be granted, the orders and
notations dated 22 November 2019 be rescinded and the
matter be determined on
the merits.
respondent seeks to have the appeal dismissed.
CONSIDERATION
order to disturb a decision of an arbitrator, the appellant is required by s
352(5) of the 1998 Act to establish that the Arbitrator
erred in either
fact, law or discretion. The first ground of appeal contends that the Arbitrator
erred in the exercise of his discretion.
The remaining grounds seek to identify
how it was that the Arbitrator committed that error. The purported submissions
made by the
appellant in support of Ground One do not make any allegation of
error and are merely a restatement of the appellant’s case
presented to
the Arbitrator. It is therefore necessary to turn to the other grounds of appeal
and to the submissions made by the
appellant in respect of the remaining grounds
of appeal in order to consider whether error of the kind required is made out. I
will deal with Grounds Two–Six of the appeal, before returning
to Ground One.
Ground Two: Error by not referring to and not taking into
account the appellant’s submission in reply as to the appellant’s
lack of understanding and consent to the specialised terms in the Consent Orders
and their meaning, as opposed to the monetary value
of the settlement
appellant refers to the email from the appellant’s former solicitors to
WIRO dated 26 November 2019 in which the former
solicitor advised WIRO that
the appellant had instructed him to accept the offer, but later, due to his
medical condition, the appellant
complained.
Arbitrator quoted from the relevant part of the email and summarised the
submission made by the appellant at [21]–[30].
The Arbitrator gave
consideration to the submission at [46] of his reasons. He referred to the fact
that the appellant had been represented
by experienced counsel. He remarked
that, despite the appellant’s assertion that he was, at the time of the
settlement, in
a state of confusion, the appellant “demonstrated a
remarkable acuity one working day later in writing lengthy and detailed
to both the President of this Commission and various authorities as to what had
taken place on the
Arbitrator continued to evaluate the submission as to the appellant’s
state of confusion, reasoning that:
“Moreover, absent
contemporaneous medical evidence regarding the applicant’s state of mind
and his ability to comprehend
issues at or around the date of hearing, it is
difficult to place significant weight on that aspect of Dr Canaris’
from months earlier. The only evidence as to the applicant’s state
of mind at or around the hearing date is his own, and there
contemporaneous medical corroboration for
Arbitrator did not expressly find that the appellant’s evidence was
unreliable. However, the appellant’s evidence
disclosed inconsistent
histories in relation to how the misappropriation of funds occurred. There was
also an inconsistency about
what happened at the arbitration and the information
provided to the Registrar, as reported to the Registrar by both the former
and the Arbitrator. It was not surprising that the Arbitrator looked
to surrounding evidence for corroboration of the assertion made
Arbitrator further observed that nothing in the email, or other contemporaneous
correspondence, suggested that the appellant was
in such a state of mind or
failed to provide informed consent of the settlement.
appellant’s allegation that the Arbitrator erred by not referring to and
not taking into account the appellant’s submission
in reply is not borne
out by the Arbitrator’s detailed summation of the submission made to him
and the reasons provided for
not accepting that submission. It follows that this
ground of appeal fails.
Ground Three: The Arbitrator erred by failing to find whether a
durable and properly consented to settlement had been achieved
appellant acknowledges that the Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s
submission as to the Commission’s objectives
of achieving fairness and a
“durable” settlement but did not give the submission weight and
failed to make a finding
s 367 of the 1998 Act, which provides:
367 Objectives of
(1) The Commission has the following objectives—
(a) to provide a fair and cost effective system for the resolution of disputes
under the Workers Compensation Acts,
(b) to reduce administrative costs across the workers compensation system,
(c) to provide a timely service ensuring that workers’ entitlements are
paid promptly,
(d) to create a registry and dispute resolution service that meets worker and
employer expectations in relation to accessibility,
approachability and
professionalism,
(e) to provide an independent dispute resolution service that is effective in
settling matters and leads to durable agreements between
the parties in
accordance with the Workers Compensation Acts,
(f) to establish effective communication and liaison with interested parties
concerning the role of the Commission.
(2) In exercising their functions, the members of the Commission must have
regard to the Commission’s objectives.”
Arbitrator clearly considered the objective of achieving “fairness”
between the parties. He observed:
“Adopting the approach and
test set out in the
decision referred to at [16], I have
weighed up the competing principles of finality in litigation with the need to
rectify any clear-cut
injustice. In doing so, I do not believe the settlement in
anyway represents such an injustice to the applicant. His matter was
contentious,
and there was a very real risk he would have lost had it proceeded.
Moreover, the evidence establishes he provided instructions to
compromise his
claim in the manner set out in the Consent Orders. That evidence from his former
solicitor is contemporaneous and
I accept it.
In accordance with section 350(3) of the 1998 Act, and approaching the matter
in a beneficial manner, I do not propose to exercise
my discretion to reconsider
this matter. In my view, the facts do not establish an injustice having taken
place between the parties.
The settlement is, in my view, a reasonable
compromise between the parties given the issues in the
is implicit in the above passage, together with the Arbitrator’s
observations referred to at [70]–[71], that the Arbitrator
consideration, not only to whether the settlement between the parties was a fair
settlement, but also to whether the settlement
had been properly agreed to and
was therefore “durable”. The Arbitrator also reasoned
“... nothing corroborates the applicant’s
contention his state of mind and emotional state were upset and/or impaired
being over wrought. As Mr Grant submitted, it is in my view unlikely that an
experienced counsel and solicitor would not have
observed such characteristics
in their client. To the contrary, the applicant’s former solicitor’s
email recounts the
provision of instructions to resolve the matter on the terms
which were entered. The fact the applicant now seeks to resile from
settlement does not of itself mean it ought to be reconsidered. The importance
of finality in litigation cannot be
overstated.
of those reasons are sufficiently clear to show that the Arbitrator reached a
conclusion that there was no evidence that the Consent
Orders were not properly
entered into and thus the settlement constituted a fair and durable settlement
in accordance with s 367
of the 1998 Act. The allegation that the
Arbitrator failed to make a finding in relation to whether the settlement was
not made out and Ground Three of the appeal fails.
Ground Four: The Arbitrator erred by finding that the
solicitor’s email dated 26 November 2019 recounted the provision of
instructions
to resolve the matter on the terms which were entered
appellant takes issue with the Arbitrator’s finding that the former
solicitor’s email dated 26 November 2019 “recounts
the provision of
instructions to resolve the matter on the terms which were
The appellant
complains that there was no reference in the email to the appellant’s
consent being given to resolve the matter
“on the terms which were
the email, the appellant’s former solicitor referred to the settlement of
the entire matter, that the settlement included
the appellant giving away any
right he may have to his right to pursue a lump sum claim pursuant to s 66 of
the 1987 Act, and that
the settlement sum totalled $20,000. The former solicitor
then advised that he was instructed to resolve the matter. It is implicit
the former solicitor’s instructions extended to at least a full and final
resolution of the matter. In line with the respondent’s
submissions, which
were accepted by the Arbitrator, it would be extremely unlikely that the
appellant’s experienced legal representatives
would not have made it clear
to the appellant, in terms comprehensible to a lay person, that the settlement
was a full and final
settlement of his claim for compensation. It is also
implicit from the email, and the subsequent correspondence passing between the
appellant and his former solicitor, that the appellant withdrew his consent
after the settlement had been reduced to consent orders.
Arbitrator’s observation and finding as to what was indicated in the email
must also be read in the context of his earlier
his reasons. The Arbitrator had
determined that the appellant had not established that his ability to provide an
informed consent
was impaired. The Arbitrator also observed that the
correspondence from the appellant’s former solicitor directed to various
entities did not suggest that there was any issue in relation to the
appellant’s instructions.
allegation that the Arbitrator fell into error in finding that the instructions
to resolve the matter included a resolution of
the matter on the basis of the
Consent Orders made is not established and this ground of appeal
Ground Five: The Arbitrator erred by finding that the
settlement did not represent any injustice to the appellant because the
contemporaneous
evidence (which the Arbitrator accepted) established that the
appellant provided instructions to compromise his claim in a manner
with the Consent Orders
ground is dependent upon the assertion made by the appellant that the matter
resolved without the appellant’s proper consent.
That assertion has been
discussed under Ground Four and was not accepted. In this ground of appeal, the
appellant asserts that the
Arbitrator’s conclusion that the settlement did
not “in any way” represent an injustice to the appellant discloses
an error in the exercise of the Arbitrator’s discretion.
Arbitrator’s observation must be looked at in the context of his reasons.
The Arbitrator explained that conclusion within
the paragraph in which it is
contained, which is reproduced above at [77]. The Arbitrator took into account
the issue as to whether
proper consent had been given, but he also took into
account the prospects of the appellant succeeding, noted that the matter was
contentious, and that there was a very real risk that the appellant would have
lost if the matter had proceeded. The Arbitrator had
already concluded that, in
his view, the Consent Orders represented a reasonable compromise on the
appellant’s part.
Arbitrator weighed the various factors that may have led to a conclusion that
the appellant would suffer some injustice if the
discretion vested in the
Arbitrator to reconsider the matter was not exercised in favour of the
appellant. None of those factors
fell in favour of the appellant. That is, the
settlement did not, in any of those ways, amount to an injustice to the
is nothing in the Arbitrator’s reasoning process that discloses that the
Arbitrator did not properly understand the appellant’s
case or fail to
give regard to the appellant’s submission. The appellant has not
established error on the part of the Arbitrator
and Ground Five of the appeal
Ground Six: The Arbitrator erred by not addressing or not
considering the lack of prejudice to the respondent when exercising his
appellant’s submissions do not support or explain this ground of appeal.
In any event, the Arbitrator did consider whether
there was any prejudice to the
respondent when he determined that the delay involved in having the application
heard was not a matter
that weighed against the appellant because the appellant
had made his position clear just a few days after the settlement took place.
Elsewhere in this appeal, the appellant refers to the fact that there would be
no prejudice to the respondent because if the Consent
Orders were revoked, the
matter would proceed to arbitration. Such a consideration is not a matter that
should weigh in favour of
the application for reconsideration. If it were, then
the same would be the case in every matter. In any event, the respondent has
paid a sum of money to resolve the claim. If the matter proceeded to arbitration
and the appellant lost, in the usual circumstance
there would be no redress
available to the respondent for having paid the settlement moneys erroneously.
In that scenario, the respondent
would clearly be prejudiced, not the
appellant’s submissions again rely on the purported error on the part of
the Arbitrator in determining that the appellant
had properly consented to the
Consent Orders. Once again, for the reasons expressed above, the alleged error
is not made out.
appellant further submits that the failure on the part of the Arbitrator to
reconsider the Consent Orders would depart from the
stated aims of the
legislation. Presumably, the appellant is referring to the objectives of
fairness and of achieving a durable settlement,
which were the subject of
submissions at the arbitration. Both of these aspects of the Arbitrator’s
decision have been discussed
above. There was no departure from the stated aims
of the Commission. In fact, the Arbitrator, by applying the approach taken in
, determined the matter in a manner consistent with authority and the
legislation.
ground of appeal fails,
Ground One: The Arbitrator erred by failing to properly
exercise the Commission’s discretion whether to grant the reconsideration
sought by the appellant
I discussed in [69] above, this ground of appeal is reliant upon the remaining
grounds succeeding. Those grounds did not succeed.
, Roche ADP observed as follows (citations
“Having regard to the above authorities and the
provisions and objectives of the 1998 Act I believe that the following
are applicable to reconsideration applications under section 350(3)
of the 1998 Act:
section gives the Commission a wide discretion to reconsider its previous
the word ‘decision’ is not defined in section 350, it is defined for
the purposes of section 352 to include “an
award, order, determination,
ruling and direction”. In my view ‘decision’ in section 350(3)
includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, any award, order or determination
of the Commission;
the discretion is a wide one it must be exercised fairly with due regard to
relevant considerations including the reason for
and extent of any delay in
bringing the application for reconsideration;
of the factors to be weighed in deciding whether to exercise the discretion in
favour of the moving party is the public interest
that litigation should not
proceed indefinitely;
reconsideration
may be allowed if new evidence that could not with reasonable diligence have
been obtained at the first Arbitration
is later obtained and that new evidence,
if it had been put before an Arbitrator in the first hearing, would have been
lead to a different result;
the broad power of ‘review’ in section 352 (which was not
universally available in the Compensation Court of NSW)
the reconsideration
provision in section 350(3) will not usually be the preferred provision to be
used to correct errors of fact,
law or discretion made by Arbitrators;
on the facts of the particular case the principles enunciated by the High Court
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
may prevent a party from
pursuing a claim or defence in later reconsideration proceedings if it
unreasonably refrained from pursuing
that claim or defence in the original
proceedings;
mistake or oversight by a legal adviser will not give rise to a ground for
reconsideration, and
Commission has a duty to do justice between the parties according to the
substantial merits of the
is apparent from the Arbitrator’s reasons that his approach was consistent
with the above authority and the various authorities
that followed. The
appellant has not established that the Arbitrator erred in the exercise of his
discretion by refusing to reconsider
the matter. This ground of appeal
of the grounds of appeal brought by the appellant have established error on the
part of the Arbitrator in the exercise of his
discretion and the
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination is confirmed.
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 31 August 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
9 December 2020
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD) Part 4 – Injury
Application to Resolve a Dispute (reply), pp
Breckell’s statement, reply, p 53, [72].
Reply, p 29.
Ozser’s report, ARD, p
Reconsideration request,
[2006] NSWWCCPD 141
[2013] NSWSC 231
[2007] HCA 11
228 CLR 232
CAR v Vanguarde
(4934/19, 31 August 2020) (reasons), [47].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter