URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAMACHO V PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW [2011] NSWPST 1 (30 September 2011)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
CARLOS CAMACHO
MATTER NUMBER: PS 01/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER: PSY
000101822 (AUST) / PS0038335 (NSW)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: Camacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST 1
PARTIES: Carlos Camacho
(Appellant) – in person until one day
prior to the commencement of the Inquiry at which Mr Jeffery Chan, solicitior, M
& Co, solicitors.
Psychology Council of NSW
(Respondent) represented by Ms K Richardson
instructed by Mr I V Knight, Crown Solicitor (Mr Chris Woolard instructing).
FILE NUMBER: PS 01/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Margaret Crowley (Psychologist
Dr Lizabeth Tong (Psychologist Member)
Siew- Foong Liew (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 30 June 2011 and 1 July 2011
DATE OF DECISION: 30 September 2011
DATE OF ORDERS: 30 September 2011
ORDERS (in summary): Noting that the Appellant is currently suspended from
the Register should the Appellant meet all current requirements
for Registration
in accordance with the National Law. The Appellant is reprimanded, his name
restored to the Register with various
conditions as ordered herein
CATCHWORDS: Psychologist – appeal under section 148E national Law
(NSW) from Council Decision to grant provisional registration
– Appellant
convicted of dishonesty offences in the course of the practice of psychology
– Appeal under section 148E
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law)
– s139 B(1),s144(a), s149A(5), s 148E,
s 159, s 290, clause 7 of Schedule 5D;
Crimes Act 1900
ss178BA and
Psychology Act 2001
- s25(a), s26(2)(a), s59(a)
CASES CITED
HCCC v Margiotta [2007]
HCCC v Harper [2008]
HCCC v Harper [2009]
HCCC v Duong
Medical Board [2009]
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Psychology Tribunal (Tribunal) convened at the Health Professionals Registration
Boards (HPRB) Hearing Room in Sydney on 30 June
2011 and 1 July 2011 to conduct
an inquiry (Inquiry) into an Appeal made by Mr Carlos Camacho (Appellant), dated
8 February 2011
in relation to a Decision of the Psychology Council of NSW
(Council) dated 11 January 2010 (Exhibit 11).
Council considered a Complaint dated 15 November 2010 at a Council Inquiry held
on 14 December 2010. The Complaint considered
by the Council Inquiry essentially
related to the Appellant’s criminal convictions (detailed below). It is
the Appeal from
the Decision of the Council Inquiry that is before the Tribunal.
Appellant pleaded guilty and was convicted of 13 counts of obtaining money by
deception (ss178BA and
Crimes Act 1900
) and was sentenced on
1 July 2010. The Appellant was sentenced to 250 hours of community service plus
a fine of $10,000. The sentence
was appealed to the District Court (by
WorkCover) and it appears a custodial sentence was sought. The appeal to the
District Court
was not successful.
Essentially,
the criminal conduct of the Appellant involved the presentation of 260 invoices
to WorkCover for consultations that did
not, in fact, occur for a period in
around 2005 to 2007. The amount received by the Appellant as a result of 248 of
those invoices
being paid amounted to $45,394.00. Payment was not actually made
with respect to the other 12 invoices.
the initial complaint placed before the Council Inquiry was made after the
introduction of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
No86a (National Law) this Inquiry proceeded under the National Law rather than
the Psychology Act 2001 (the Act).
the commencement of the Appeal, submissions were sought on the question of the
nature of the Appeal provided for by the National
Law. At this point the
Appellant was unrepresented. The Tribunal accepted the submissions made by the
Respondent with respect to
the nature of an Appeal under the National Law. The
Tribunal proceeded by way of a hearing de novo. Those submissions are annexed
hereto and marked ‘B’.
The Complaint
Complaint before the Council alleged that the Appellant:
in New South Wales, been convicted of nine (9) counts of obtain money by
deception after a plea of guilty to each count: s144(a)
[National Law].
conduct of Mr Camacho, which was the subject of the nine (9) counts of obtain
money by deception, constituted unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the
meaning of section 139B(1) of the Law (NSW)
[National Law].
In particular,
the conduct demonstrated that the skill or judgment possessed by Mr Camacho was
significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Complaint before the Tribunal alleged that the Appellant:
AMENDED COMPLAINT
in New South Wales, been convicted of nine (9) counts of obtain money by
deception after a plea of guilty to each count: s26(2)(a)
of the Act.
conduct of Mr Camacho, which was the subject of the nine (9) counts of obtain
money by deception, constituted unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the
meaning of s. 25(a) of the Act. In particular, the conduct demonstrated that the
skill or judgment possessed by
Mr Camacho was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
Appearances
Respondent was without representation until the day before the Inquiry. He was
thereafter represented by Mr Chan, solicitor, MJ
Woods & Co Solicitors (this
firm having represented the Appellant at his criminal prosecution and appeal to
the District Court).
The Council was represented by the Crown Solicitor’s
Office, as per the headnotes.
Suppression Orders
Chairperson made a Suppression Order in relation to the names of the clients for
whom the Appellant presented false invoices to
WorkCover in accordance with
provisions of Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law. The Tribunal notes
at this point that some
of the clients named on the invoices lodged by the
Appellant had never actually received any treatment from the Appellant and
the description of ‘alleged client’ may have been more
appropriate. However, from the evidence and the summary set out
below there is
clarity as to this issue and all will be referred to as a ‘client’.
The names as indicated in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked ‘D’
and any information that may identify them is not to be published. Annexure
is attached to the original Reasons for Decision held by the
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto.
Appellant was the only witness called before the Inquiry.
Admissions of the Appellant
Appellant made significant admissions both in the criminal proceedings and
before this Tribunal. He admitted that the conduct
amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and accepted that significant conditions should be imposed
upon his registration
as a psychologist.
Background information
Background of the Appellant
Appellant was born in 1967 and is currently married with four children. After
completing his schooling in both his country of
birth, Uruguay and Australia and
undertaking work in a variety of areas the Appellant completed a Bachelor of
Arts at the University
of Western Sydney (UWS) in 1992 and a Master of Arts
(Psychology) at the same university in 1993. He gained provisional registration
as a psychologist in 1994 and was supervised by Dr Alex Gilandas. The Appellant
was granted registration in 1996, having satisfactorily
met all the
requirements. He became an associate member of the Australian Psychological
Society (APS) in 1994 and maintained that
membership until recently, when
financial difficulties prevented him from renewing the membership.
Appellant married his first wife when he was quite young. He has two children
from this marriage. After this marriage broke down
in around 1998 he spent 10
months overseas. He married again in around March 2008 and has two children from
this marriage. Some of
the offences were committed prior to the time the
Appellant married for the second time and some in the months after he married.
the time of the Inquiry the registration of the Appellant was suspended.
Background of the Complaint
Psychologists Registration Board (the Board) received a letter dated 13 January
2010 (exhibit 1) from WorkCover advising that
the Appellant had pleaded guilty
to charges of deception. The letter enclosed a Statement of Facts that had been
prepared for the
purpose of the criminal prosecution. It also annexed various
Court Attendance Notices documents that set out the details of the
offences (see
summary below).
Ultimately,
the Appellant was sentenced by Chief Industrial Magistrate Hart on 1 July 2010.
His Honour’s remarks on sentence
form exhibit 21. His Honour noted that
13 charges were before the Court relating to the conduct of obtaining money by
His Honour noted that the Appellant had pleaded guilty on each of
these charges. His Honour stated he was satisfied that each of
the offences is
‘in the serious category’. He stated:
The authorities make it clear that offences of this type, being acts of
fraud against the Workers Compensation system, are to be treated
as serious and
also the guidance from the superior courts is that this court must as a starting
point give consideration to a custodial
sentence for such
Honour noted there were 260 separate criminal acts that constituted fraudulent
conduct and so it must be viewed as circumstances
warranting general deterrents.
His Honour formed the view that the Appellant was unlikely to re-offend and,
with the exception of
a very minor charge some 19 years earlier, he had an
impeccable record. His Honour noted the offences occurred between about 2004
and 2007 and that he had gone through a separation and divorce from his first
wife and was ‘somewhat depressed’. His
Honour stated:
I am satisfied that with the assistance of his psychiatric assistance he has
managed to get his life back on track, and taking all
of those things into
account and giving him full credit for his good record prior to 2004 it is
appropriate that I give him the benefit
of the doubt and treat him as a person
who is unlikely to re-offend from now on
matters noted by the Magistrate included:
The Appellant at
all times knew what he was doing was illegal and morally wrong.
There were a
number of subjective mitigating factors.
He accepted the
Appellant was in a depressed state for some of the relevant period, but was of
the view that this could not justify
serious fraud and that the Appellant could
offer no excuse for the offences.
The references
tendered by the Appellant indicated he had great potential to do good for the
The Appellant
indicated contrition and remorse and accepted responsibility for his
The Appellant
had made full reparation
Magistrate sentenced the Appellant to a Community Service Order requiring the
Appellant to provide 250 hours of community service
over an 18 month period, and
to a fine of $10,000.00 in total. At this point the Tribunal notes the maximum
penalty for a charge
for an offence under s 178BA of the
Crimes Act 1900
from 2 years where the amount obtained or attempted to be obtained exceeds
$5.000 down to 12 month imprisonment and/or a fine
of $2,200 where the amount
does not exceed $2,000.
transcript of the remarks on sentence was ultimately made available to the Board
or its successor – the Psychology Council
of NSW (Council). Curiously,
despite the gravity of the criminal conduct occurring within the
‘professional’ practice
of the Appellant the matter was referred
only as a complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct to a Council Inquiry.
this point the Tribunal notes the nature of the heads of complaints that would
usually flow from criminal convictions of this type
(see for example:
HCCC v Harper
HCCC v Duong
It is the view
of this Tribunal that complaints of professional misconduct, unfitness on the
basis of conviction and not of good
character would also have been open on the
factual circumstances in this matter. The Tribunal raised with the parties on
day of the Inquiry the issue of whether a further complaint of
professional misconduct (with the same Particulars as set out above)
made. Had this pathway been taken by the Tribunal transitional matters and
procedural fairness issues would have caused
considerable delay. The Tribunal
balanced the significant obligations placed on it, constituted to protect the
public safety, the
reputation of the profession and the general deterrent effect
of decisions of this nature, against the need for tribunals to act
in a timely
and cost efficient manner.
reserving on the issue of the additional complaint of professional misconduct,
the Appeal proceeded and ultimately the Tribunal
formed the view that the Orders
made herein are appropriate for the circumstances of this particular matter.
This certainly should
not be seen as some precedent regarding the type of
complaints that flow from criminal convictions of this nature. Indeed had a
of professional misconduct been before this Tribunal a finding would
have been so made.
Tribunal also notes at this point that it appears the HCCC chose not to
participate or make submissions to the Council Inquiry
(as recorded in the
transcript of the Council Inquiry – page 2, exhibit 30).
Council forwarded a Notice of Inquiry to the Appellant dated 15 November 2010
setting out the details of the Complaint (see above)
and advised the Inquiry was
to be held on 14 December 2010.
Background of the Appeal
letter dated 9 February 2010 (exhibit 3), the Board informed the Appellant that
it was considering temporarily suspending his registration
as a result of his
recent plea of guilty to a number of Police charges of Obtain Money By Deception
Crimes Act 1900
. The letter noted he was to be sentenced on 18
February 2010 and invited written submissions from the Appellant as to why the
should not be taken. The Appellant replied on 27 February 2010 (exhibit
4). A summary of this letter and the enclosed references
is set out below.
letter dated 11 March 2010 (exhibit 5) the Board advised the Appellant that he
would be suspended from 11 March 2010 to 5 May 2010
and informed the Appellant
that the matter had been referred to the Health Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC) for investigation.
the Appellant made representations to the Board regarding the need to refer on
his patients, the Board amended the suspension
period to 30 March 2010 until 24
May 2010, by letter dated 18 March 2010 (exhibit 11). This letter noted that
his sentencing hearing
was then set down for 28 April 2010. This suspension was
extended in accordance with the
Psychologists Act 2001
by the Chairperson
of the Tribunal in accordance with
from 24 May 2010 until 19 July
letter dated 4 August 2010 (exhibit 24), the Council informed the Appellant
that, in accordance with s290 of the National Law,
his suspension under
Psychologists Act 2001
is taken to be a suspension under s150(1)(a)
of the National Law. A suspension under s150 is an ‘open-ended
Council made a decision with respect to the Complaint on 11 January 2011
(exhibit 31) and the Appellant was informed of this Decision
by letter dated 13
January 2011 (exhibit 32).
Appellant indicated by email dated 8 February 2011 that he wished to appeal the
Council Inquiry Decision (exhibit 34).
Nature of the Appeal
matter was the first occasion on which the nature of an Appeal under section 159
of the National Law (NSW) was considered by
the Psychology Tribunal of New South
Wales. Prior to the commencement of the Inquiry submissions were sought from the
to the nature of the Appeal. The Appellant was not represented and
indicated he was content to rely upon the submissions made on
behalf of the
Respondent and the decision of the Tribunal.
submissions made by the Respondent came in to the evidence as exhibit 43 and is
reproduced at annexure B hereto.
summary, the Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the Respondent and has
proceeded by way of a hearing de novo.
Tribunal makes the following observations on this matter. There is nothing in
the National Law (NSW) to indicate that Parliament
intended for the Tribunal to
have a role in identifying errors in the processes of the Council (previously
the Board). The Tribunal
does not play a ‘supervisory’ role with
respect to the Council.
Tribunal accepts the submission that the nature of an appeal ultimately depends
on the terms of the statute conferring the right
of appeal (see paragraph 6 of
the submission).
terms of section 148E require the Tribunal to make orders as it thinks proper
which indicates that the Tribunal not be constrained
by the need to identify
error on the part of the Council/Board but rather is obliged to give its own
decision on the evidence before
it (see paragraph 8 of the submission).
this point the Tribunal notes some features of the nature of a Board (now
Council) Inquiry. There is no requirement for recording
of the proceedings or
for there to be a legal member sitting, it is not open to the public and there
may not be a contradictor.
looking at the entirety of the scheme created by the National Law (NSW) there is
a clear legislative intent that decisions should
be based on a person’s
current fitness to practise. It cannot be supposed that Parliament intended to
confine the nature of
an appeal – this conclusion is reinforced by a
consideration of the severe consequences that flow from the outcome of such
appeal (see paragraph 12 of the submissions).
appropriate regard to fairness considerations an appeal could not be
conveniently or readily undertaken unless it proceeded
by way of a hearing de
novo. This is particularly so given the administrative nature of the
Board/Council Inquiry as opposed to the
quasi-judicial procedure of the
Tribunal, noting the power of the Tribunal to compel witnesses to attend and
obtain documents (see
paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the submissions).
Tribunal adopts the submissions made at paragraphs 17 to 23 as an accurate
representation of the legislation.
to the factors set out in paragraphs 25 to 40 of the submission that suggest
that the appeal is not de novo the Tribunal makes
the following
observations:
The Tribunal
would not necessarily have the benefit of a transcript of the proceedings of the
Board/Council Inquiry to conduct an
appeal in any fashion (other than de novo)
as it is not a requirement to keep a transcript. This would not be satisfactory
the seriousness of the subject matter of the appeal.
The Medical
Tribunal decisions referred to indicate an inconsistent approach to the nature
of the appeal and in any case they are
not binding precedents on this Tribunal.
Further the Tribunal accepts the distinction made between the decision in
Woolcock v Medical Board
and the other Medical Tribunal
decisions made at paragraph 33 of the submissions.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the Respondent that the Tribunal is to
substitute its own view on a consideration de novo of
the evidence before it
rather than limit its role to detection of error in the decision of the Council.
hearing de novo will also accommodate changes in circumstances that may
significantly impact upon the outcome of a matter, ensuring
that the decision is
contemporaneously appropriate. This may involve the consideration of steps taken
by the practitioner to remediate
deficits their conduct identified or of
additional complaints that have been made. In either case the consideration of
such matters
contribute to the efficient consideration of the matter.
Summary of the Fraudulent Conduct
Appellant submitted false invoices for nine different clients to WorkCover. A
summary of these invoices is set out below.
– the Appellant had no contact with Client A. Client A was a client of a
medical practice at which the Appellant worked on
a part-time basis. The
Appellant issued 27 invoices in the name of Mindcorp, being a trading name he
used in his private practice.
Of these 27 invoices, 24 were paid ($4,359.00)
and three were not paid ($558.00).
– the Appellant had no contact with Client B. Client B was a client of a
medical practice at which the Appellant worked on
a part-time basis. The
Appellant issued 38 invoices in the name of Mindcorp, being a trading name he
used in his private practice.
All of these invoices were paid ($7,144.00).
– the Appellant had no contact with Client C. Client C was a client
of a medical practice at which the Appellant worked on
a part-time basis. The
Appellant issued 27 invoices in the name of Mindcorp, being a trading name he
used in his private practice.
All of these invoices were paid ($4,887.00). The
Tribunal notes one of these consultations was claimed to have occurred whilst
the Appellant was overseas.
– Client D was referred to the Appellant for a medico-legal report by
lawyers acting on Client D’s behalf. The Appellant
was paid $990.00 for
the medico-legal report, thereafter the Appellant issued 15 invoices in the name
of Mindcorp, being a trading
name he used in his private practice. All of these
invoices were paid ($2,790.00).
– the Appellant received a referral from Client E’s treating GP.
Several consultations occurred prior to the Appellant
submitting 47 invoices, of
which 45 were paid ($7,920.00) and two were not paid ($348.00).
– the Appellant had contact with Client F. Client F was referred by a
doctor at the medical practice at which the Appellant
worked on a part-time
basis, for pain management. The Appellant provided treatment to Client E and
issued legitimate invoices, thereafter
the Appellant issued 23 invoices in the
name of Mindcorp, being a trading name he used in his private practice. All of
these invoices
were paid ($4,278.00).
– the Appellant had contact with Client G. Client G was referred by a
doctor at the medical practice at which the Appellant
worked on a part-time
basis. The Appellant provided treatment to Client G and issued legitimate
invoices, thereafter the Appellant
issued 16 invoices in the name of Mindcorp,
being a trading name he used in his private practice, of which 13 invoices were
($2,418.00) and three were not paid ($558.00).
– the Appellant had contact with Client H. Client H was referred by a
doctor at the medical practice at which the Appellant
worked on a part-time
basis. The Appellant provided treatment to Client H and issued legitimate
invoices, thereafter the Appellant
issued 39 invoices in the name of Mindcorp,
being a trading name he used in his private practice. All of these invoices
($7,254.00).
– Client I’s employer arranged for him to receive counselling from
the Appellant. Client I attended a few sessions,
but then refused any further
consultations. The Appellant issued 28 further invoices, 24 of which were paid
($4,344.00) and four
were not paid ($724.00). Three of the invoices issued were
for a period of time when Client I was an in-patient at a public hospital.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Probation and Parole Service – Pre-Sentence Report 1 July
pre-sentence report (exhibit 22) was provided to the Tribunal. This report
noted that the Appellant was born in Uruguay and moved
to the United States when
he was one year old. There was a further move when he was three years old to
this point the Tribunal notes that the Appellant gave evidence this was not an
accurate account of his history. He also confirmed
he took no steps to correct
the information before the Local Court. The Appellant has two children from his
first marriage (aged
15 and 19 as at the date of the report) and was married
with one child aged 20 months. The Appellant advised he had completed Year
and, since leaving school, had mainly worked as a carer in group homes for the
disabled. The report noted he completed a degree
in psychology in 1996 and had
established his own practice. The Appellant had advised he also undertook
casual employment as a residential
care worker.
report noted the Appellant stated he had developed an alcohol and gambling
problem over the period 2004 to 2005 due to his divorce
and the subsequent
financial stresses. He also suffered from depression and anxiety and his
psychiatrist had diagnosed
‘mental health issues relating to
three years earlier. He was regularly attending his
psychiatrist for therapy.
report also noted that the Appellant stated he felt his offending behaviour was
‘like gambling, winning and losing’
. He also stated that
gambling and drinking
‘went hand in hand’
. However, the
report noted that the Appellant accepted responsibility for his conduct and
acknowledged that his actions had brought
consequences.
report stated that the Appellant had been assessed as
‘unlikely to
require, or benefit from, supervision’
by the Probation and Parole
Service as he had apparently reached a position of stability.
Appellant placed a large number of references before the Tribunal. None of the
references were written for the purpose of the
Council Inquiry or for this
Appeal. Many of the references do not indicate awareness of the criminal
charges. In his oral evidence
the Appellant acknowledged that some of the
referees were unaware of the criminal proceedings at the time they wrote the
or had limited details. He further acknowledged that some of the
referees had been his clients and he had not had regard to any Code
or Ethics prior to approaching them to write the reference.
Reference of Mr William Garrigos – Undated
Garrigos provided an undated reference in which he stated that he had known the
Appellant for almost 40 years and that the Appellant
had a ‘deep
commitment to his community.’ Mr Garrigos further stated that the
Appellant worked with disadvantaged youth
and provided service that ‘goes
well beyond the call of professional duty.’
Reference of Mr John De Giusti – 30 October 2006
De Giusti provided a reference in which he stated that he had known the
Appellant since they were in their teen years. Mr De Giusti
reports that he
sees the Appellant as a family man and a caring person, who was ‘kind and
honourable’, and that he had
‘witnessed him see patients for
De Giusti reported that he saw gradual changes in the Appellant’s
behaviour over a period of a few years, and that they worried
him. Mr De Giusti
stated that the Appellant had acknowledged his wrong-doing and took full
responsibility for it, and was seeking
Reference of Mr Adam Malouf – 30 October 2009
Malouf provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he stated that
he had known the Appellant for approximately 8 years.
Mr Malouf stated that the
Appellant had given him frequent and helpful advice when his wife had been
hospitalised with depression,
and had provided frequent psychological assistance
to his son with his ability to cope with the stresses of his sporting
achievements.
Mr Malouf advised that the Appellant had spent a great deal of
time with him and his family providing guidance and counselling,
often at night,
and that he had always given his time and advice to Mr Malouf freely and without
requesting any form of payment or
compensation.
Reference of Mrs Audrey Samuel – 9 November 2009
Samuel provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant which stated that she had
consulted with him on numerous occasions at Fairfield
Chase Specialist Centre
and not been charged for such consultations. Mrs Audrey also stated that she
had worked on a casual basis
at the Centre and had witnessed the Appellant
consult with many of his patients and receive ‘nothing but a courteous
Reference of Ms Pamela Hurley
– 22 November 2009
Hurley provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant which stated that she had
known the Appellant for 12 years, having first
met him when they worked for
community service organisations. Ms Hurley stated that at the time the
Appellant was assisting to relocate
residents with intellectual disabilities to
new boarding homes. Ms Hurley stated that she found the Appellant to be
and supportive’ throughout the project.
Hurley stated that since that time she has referred people to the Appellant for
advice and support, including a family member,
and that she appreciated his
approach, especially with people with intellectual disabilities, and that his
approach was ‘both
practical and understanding’.
Reference of Luis Bentos-Pereira – 24 November
Bentos-Pereira provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he
stated that he had known the Appellant for approximately
18 years. Mr
Bentos-Pereira stated that the Appellant had given him psychological assistance
without ever charging him for such
service. He stated that the Appellant had
also helped his daughter and attended at her school and met with teachers in
Bentos-Periera further stated that the Appellant is very well known and
respected in his community and in other non English speaking
communities
‘due to his commitment and altruism’.
Further Reference of Mr Luis Bentos-Pereira – 15 October
Bentos-Pereira provided a further reference on behalf of the Appellant,
addressing the District Court Magistrate following the
Appellant being charged
with Obtain Money by Deception. However, other than the first two sentences of
the reference, the reference
was an exact duplicate of the reference he provided
for the Appellant on 24 November 2009, and offered no further support or
information.
Reference of Mrs Elsa Docherty – 25 November 2009
Docherty is a former colleague of the Appellant and previously worked with him
at Fairfield Chase Specialist Centre between 2001
and 2007. Mrs Docherty
provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant, in which she stated that during
that time he regularly attended
patients without appointments and would often
not charge them for his time. Mrs Docherty stated that the Appellant was
well liked and trusted by all of his patients’.
Further reference of Mrs Elsa Docherty - 28 June 2011
this reference Mrs Docherty states that she had worked as the Appellant’s
‘Secretary/Receptionist’ when he worked
at the medical centre on a
weekly basis. Mrs Docherty noted that initially most of the Appellant’s
‘patients’ related
to treatment provided under the Workers
Compensation scheme. However, after the introduction of the Medicare scheme (the
Scheme) she reports that ‘..his list of patients grew to many
varied types of cases’.
Docherty reports that after these patients had used up their ‘Medicare
visits’ they would present asking to ‘just
have a quick chat’
with the Appellant and that he was always generous with his time and not turn
them away. He would refer
on patients he ‘could not help’ and
arranged group therapy sessions in his own time.
Reference of Ms Cherie Dargan – 12 December 2009
Dargan provided a reference for the Appellant in which she stated that she had
known the Appellant for six years. Ms Dargan stated
that the Appellant had
provided counselling support to her and her son ‘at no cost’, and
that the Appellant had shown
a genuine interest in her son’s mental
health, and that of herself and her family, which she found ‘very rare in
professionals.’
Reference of Manuel Arriguetti JP – 127 (sic) February
Arriguetti provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he stated
that he had known the Appellant for over 30 years.
The Appellant had
collaborated as a journalist for Mr Arriguetti’s publications. Mr
Arriguetti stated that the Appellant
had been ‘promoting solidarity
campaigns in benefit to our community institutions’, such institutions
including those
that supported the elderly.
Arriguetti stated that the Appellant was a ‘gentleman full of integrity,
kind and always willing to organise solidarity work
in benefit of those socially
disadvantaged.’ Mr Arriguetti also stated that the Appellant ‘knew
how to gain the admiration
and respect from his colleagues...and the
community’.
Further Reference of Manuel Arriguetti JP – 17 October
Arriguetti provided an amended reference for the Appellant, several months after
his initial reference, in which he addressed the
Magistrate of the District
Court. However, other than the introductory two sentences, the reference is an
exact duplication of the
reference Mr Arriguetti provided in February 2010 and
provides no further support or information.
Reference of Ms Deborah Ward – 17 April 2010
Ward provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant, in which she stated that
she had known the Appellant for eight years. Ms
Ward stated that the Appellant
had counselled both herself and her daughter, who had a moderate disability.
She stated that due
to her ‘difficult financial situation’ the
Appellant worked ‘on many occasions without charge’.
Ward stated that she found the Appellant to be ‘very honest and
reliable’, and that she was ‘surprised’
to learn of the
charges brought against the Appellant, as ‘it seemed out of character for
him’. She also stated that
the Appellant had expressed ‘his remorse
and regret’ over the charges, and that he had told her he was seeking help
relation to his gambling problems.
Further Reference of Ms Deborah Ward – 10 October
Ward provided a further reference for the Appellant, several months after her
initial reference, in which she addressed the Magistrate
of the District Court.
However, other than the introduction to the reference, the reference is an exact
duplication of the reference
Ms Ward provided in April 2010 and provides no
further support or information.
Reference of Mr Nicholas Townsend – 19 April 2010
Townsend provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant, in which he stated
that he had known the Appellant for four years. The
Appellant had provided
psychological and emotional support following being granted extended sick leave
due to a work injury. Mr
Townsend stated that the Appellant provided
‘initial counselling sessions free of charge until I was able to organise
support plan’.
Townsend further stated that he found the Appellant had ‘a very high
professional conduct’, and that he believed that
the behaviour leading to
the charges was ‘out of character’. Mr Townsend further stated that
the Appellant was someone
who could be ‘trusted fully without
Reference of Mr Rubens Locapute – 22 April 2010
Locapute provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he stated that
he had known the Appellant for 11 years. Mr Locapute
had been an accounting and
taxation adviser to the Appellant during this time, as well as having
participated in
‘many social and charitable functions
Locapute stated that he found the Appellant to be
‘of good character,
honest and hard working.’
He also stated that the Appellant had
expressed to him his remorse for his actions in relating to the charges, and was
the Appellant had been ‘
battling some personal and health
Mr Locapute stated that he considered the charges to be out
of character for the Appellant, and that he often provided his time
expertise in the community at no charge, including one of Mr Locaupte’s
close relatives. Mr Locapute expressed the Appellant’s
actions in these
proceedings to be a
‘lack of judgment on this occasion’
that the Appellant remained a ‘dedicated and respected professional’
in the community.
Reference of Mr Alan Price – 22 April 2010
Price provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he stated that he
had known the Appellant for three years through
sporting and social interests.
Mr Price stated that he found the Appellant to be
‘a hard working,
generous and caring person and quite charitable with his time.’
Price stated that he was
‘very surprised’
to learn of the
offence committed by the Appellant, and believed the Appellant was
‘worthy of support from all the people he has helped in his work and
sporting activities’
Reference of Mr John De Giusti – 25 April 2010
De Giusti provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he stated
that he had known the Appellant for over 20 years.
Mr De Giusti stated that he
and the Appellant had travelled, lived, worked and played in a band together
during the course of their
friendship. He described the Appellant’s many
positive personal qualities and also stated that the Appellant would
‘give his time to many people, sometimes for no charge at
De Giusti stated that it
‘came as a shock’
that the Appellant
was charged with the offences, although he stated that he could see that the
Appellant’s personality took
‘turn for the worst’
around four or five years prior, and his moods would very different and he
noticed that the Appellant was gambling more. Mr De Giusti
stated that during
this period, however, the Appellant
‘remained loyal to his
De Giusti stated that the Appellant had shown remorse and acknowledged
‘that he wasn’t in a good place psychologically’, and that
he regretted that he had ‘let down his patients’
Further Reference of Mr John De Giusti – 1 November
De Giusti provided an amended reference on behalf of the Appellant in which he
confirmed that he had known the Appellant for over
20 years, and that he had
been close friends with the Appellant for the majority of that time. Mr De
Giusti stated that he had noticed
changes in the Appellant’s behaviour
around four or five years prior to the offences. However, essentially the
reference of
1 November 2010 was almost identical to that provided by Mr De
Giusti on 25 April 2010.
Reference of Mr Mark Diaz – 26 April 2010
Diaz provided a reference on behalf of the Appellant, in which he stated that he
had known the Appellant for approximately 23 years
in a personal capacity. Mr
Diaz stated that he believed ‘beyond any doubt that there were a series of
circumstances that may
have had a significant influence’ on the
Appellant’s actions.
Diaz refers to his trust in the Appellant, how
‘passionate’
the Appellant is about teaching young people about the benefits of sport, and
his ability to work well with people helping them with
their problems.
Diaz stated that he had discussed this matter on a regular basis with the
Appellant and that the Appellant had been experiencing
‘symptoms of
depression, was finding it very difficult to sleep and was consuming high
amounts of alcohol on a regular basis’
during the period of his
conduct. He also stated that the Appellant had been gambling during this
period, to distract him from his
Diaz stated that the Appellant was
‘sorry, embarrassed and
remorseful’
for his actions. He felt that the circumstances in which
the Appellant found himself
‘could under no circumstances be described
as being a part of his nature’
and that during this period he had
‘experienced a temporary lapse of reasoning’
Further reference of Mr Mark Diaz – 1 November
Diaz provided a further reference on behalf of the Appellant, addressing the
District Court Magistrate following the Appellant
being charged with Obtain
Money by Deception. However, other than the first paragraph of the reference,
the reference was an exact
duplicate of the reference he provided for the
Appellant on 26 April 2010, and offered no further support or information.
Letter of Ms Susan Elfert – 16 December 2001
Elfert was the wife of a patient who consulted the Appellant during his recovery
from a Workers Compensation claim. She wrote
to the Appellant thanking him for
his assistance during the time her husband consulted with him. She states that
the Appellant’s
contribution to her husband’s recovery had been
‘immeasurable’
. She also states that the Appellant provided
‘many hours of professional therapy for which we were never
Evidence from Dr Pusic (treating
psychiatrist)
were produced under Summons from Dr Augustus Pusic. These documents included a
referral from Dr Fiona Payne dated 3 January
2008. Dr Payne is the
Appellant’s treating general practitioner. The referral is
opinion and management’
and records that the Appellant ‘
concerns about ongoing issues with possible depression’
. She noted
that another general practitioner, one from the medical centre in which the
Appellant worked, had prescribed Efexor for
the Appellant.
bundle of documents produced by Dr Pusic included handwritten notes of
consultations. Although the notes are for the best part
illegible it appears
that the Appellant had attended upon Dr Pusic regularly although only one
consultation had occurred in 2011.
Augustus E Pusic provided a report (dated 23 April 2010 – part of exhibit
23) to the solicitor acting on behalf of the Appellant
in his criminal
proceedings. The report stated that he had first been consulted by the
Appellant on 31 March 2008 and had regularly
seen him between then and the date
of the report. The Appellant had given him a history of having ‘suffered
lifelong recurrent
episodes of depression’ and reported that he had been
‘pervasively and continuously depressed for the last two years
seeing me’. The Appellant described dissatisfaction with everyday life,
that he lacked energy; he frequently lacked
motivation, that he could be
emotionally labile, would spontaneously cry, and had suffered dysphoria.
his sleep and concentration were disturbed, the Appellant denied suicidal
Appellant stated that his distress had been increased in the months prior to
consulting Dr Pusic due to the death of a close friend
from a heroin overdose
and had recognised for himself the need to obtain psychological help.
Appellant reported to Dr Pusic that he had an ‘addictive
personality’ meaning that, when dysphoric, he sought ways
of immediately
relieving his tension. The Appellant admitted drinking to excess in the
previous year as a means of self-medicating
his anxiety and inducing sleep,
although he stated he had brought his drinking under control prior to consulting
Dr Pusic. The Appellant
also reported excessive gambling on poker machines,
football scores and at the Casino as another way he attempted to relieve his
chronic depression.
Pusic stated:
Mr Camacho admitted that in order to finance his gambling losses
he did on occasion over bill WorkCover leading to the current charges
he is soon to appear in court.
the heading ‘Past History’ Dr Pusic recorded the following:
Being a migrant from Uruguay, Mr Camacho does miss the lifestyle
of his country of origin.
Mr Camacho did say that as a child he had some difficulties with
concentration and attention. Even as an adult he does have difficulty
maintaining his focus and he has difficulty in organising himself. It appears
that there is some suggestion of Attention Deficit
Pusic recorded that the Appellant was one of five children (one brother
suffering from gambling difficulties) and that his parents
were unskilled
labourers. He also recorded that the Appellant described himself as a
‘model student’
and as being independent and self-sufficient.
He noted that the Appellant had spent numerous years in Uruguay and Argentina,
had been in Australia since 1991. He noted his work experience as a
group-home supervisor and as having worked as a psychologist
for government
services and in his own practice. Dr Pusic noted that the Appellant coached
soccer at a high level. The Appellant
reported that he first married at the age
of 29 and that this marriage had lasted 12 months. Two of his children were
first marriage. In 2009 he married again to an accountant, with whom
he had a ‘mutually supportive relationship’.
report stated:
Mr Camacho did say that he had used cannabis in the years gone
by, though the cannabis did tend to make him depressed and he had not
in recent years. There is no other history of drug or alcohol abuse. There is
no history of antisocial behaviour.
Pusic diagnosed the Appellant as suffering from Dysthymic Disorder for at least
two years prior to seeing him, and that he suffered
depression with recurrent acute exacerbations associated with acute
He stated that the Appellant also suffered from the
‘frequently associated conditions of alcohol abuse and pathological
and the Appellant had already sought help for his addictive
behaviour by the time he had seen him. Dr Pusic expressed the view that
conditions were in remission by the time the Appellant first consulted him. Dr
Pusic was, therefore, of the view that the Appellant
was suffering from a mental
illness at the time he had committed the offences against WorkCover.
Pusic was of the view that the Appellant was highly motivated to seek help. He
also noted the Appellant had expressed deep shame
and remorse
uncharacteristic behaviour’
and that he felt shame and concern for how
his behaviour reflected upon his family. Dr Pusic stated the Appellant required
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy, prescribing ‘Lovan’ (20mg
per day) and monthly consultations. He expressed the view
antidepressant medication would be required for at least two years. On the
basis of his progress over the previous 12-24
months, Dr Pusic considered there
to be a favourable prognosis for the Appellant, provided he maintained ongoing
treatment. The
report stated:
With ongoing psychotherapeutic intervention, pharmacotherapy and
joint counselling
(i.e. with his wife)
the likelihood for Mr Camacho to
re-offend would be eliminated.
Pusic provided a short report dated 2 August 2010 (part of exhibit 23) which
certified that the Appellant had regularly attended
consultations over the last
28 months and had complied with all treatment offered, being regular cognitive
behavioural psychotherapy.
The report also notes the Appellant continued taking
Fluoxetine (40mg per day).
Medical Reports – Dr Olav Nielssen
Nielssen provided WorkCover with a report dated 29 June 2010. Dr Nielssen noted
the Statement of Agreed Facts (for the Court appearance),
the report of Dr Pusic
dated 23 April 2010, the Appellant’s CV and various certificates.
Nielssen noted that the Appellant confirmed that the main part of the
allegations made by WorkCover were correct, although he indicated
that most of
the offences occurred over an 18 month period, rather than the three year
period. The Appellant described the medical
practice in which he worked as
‘like a mini hospital’
. He reported he had worked at
the centre for about seven years and that 50% of his revenue had been paid to
the medical practice.
He told Dr Nielssen that the offences began after he was
paid by mistake for a consultation that did not take place. Thereafter,
Appellant generated more invoices for patients of the practice, whose treatments
‘covered by worker’s compensation insurance’
Appellant denied committing the offences out of a feeling of resentment over the
amount of his revenue that was paid to the
practice, as he felt the practice had
Appellant indicated he had never been good with paperwork and, although he had
accessed the practice records, he generated all
of the invoices while he was at
from documents lying
around the practice, rather than from accessing the
practice database. The Appellant stated his wife did not know about the
The invoices were located on his home computer when the Police
undertook a search. The Appellant told Dr Nielssen that the offences
at a time when he was depressed as a result of a range of problems. He had
recently remarried a woman 15 years his junior,
who was keen to have children.
This made him anxious, as his two older children were nearly independent. He
had also developed a
gambling problem which contributed to his shortage of
money. More generally, he felt that he was
‘not getting ahead’
compared to other people of his own age, rather he was ‘starting out all
over again’
Appellant stated that he did not understand his own thinking at the time as the
offences were ‘reckless and very easily
detected’. He also stated
that he had not realised he was depressed until after he was treated for
depression with antidepressant
medication prescribed by a psychiatrist.
from the medication prescribed by Dr Pusic, the Appellant had increased his
exercise and had attempted to counter his depression
using positive thinking.
The Appellant informed Dr Nielssen that his gambling became a problem in the
mid-2000s and was part of
his attempt to catch up to address his feeling of
‘not getting anywhere’
. The Appellant stated he was not
obsessed by money, rather, he was careless with money and
imagined that he could earn more’
Appellant told Dr Nielssen that he was not aware of any family history of mental
illness or psychiatric care. However, his upbringing
was unstable because of
frequent moves. He left Uruguay with his immediate family at age three and
returned when aged 11. At the
age of 15 he moved to Argentina and then at the
age of 18, back to Australia.
Appellant reported that his first two children were born when he was in his
early 20s, having married a woman who was a painter.
He also reported suffering
from a period of depression after his divorce which resolved when he travelled
for a year in South America
as a backpacker, before returning to Australia and
forming a new relationship.
the heading of ‘History of Substance Abuse’ the following is
Mr Camacho said that he drank alcohol but did not see alcohol
use as a problem, although he said that when he was depressed he drank
in an attempt to get to sleep. He said that his recent intake had been a glass
of wine per day.
He denied ever using any kind of illicit drug or ever abusing medication,
including anabolic steroids.
He reported the period of gambling on sports results around the time of
the offences, but no gambling on poker machines, horse racing
He said he did not smoke cigarettes.
the heading of ‘Other History’, Dr Nielssen recorded that the
Appellant was the middle of three children, with his
older sister working in
trauma counselling services and his younger brother working as a disability
carer and a tennis coach. The
Appellant is recorded as stating his parents had
a pharmacy in Uruguay, but did factory work in Australia. The Appellant states
his father was educated and had contributed to a Spanish language newspaper when
he was younger.
Appellant also reported that he did well at school despite the disruptions and
change in language and had completed an Honours
Degree and a Masters Degree in
psychology at the University of Western Sydney and a Diploma of Philosophy at
the University of Wollongong.
Further, he had enrolled in, but not completed a
Doctor of Philosophy.
training as a psychologist the Appellant indicated he had worked in disability
services. As a psychologist he had interests
in pain management and sports
performance coaching.
Nielssen noted
‘slight differences’
in the family history
that had been provided to Dr Pusic. He also noted that Dr Pusic had elicited a
history of episodic depression
as well as problems with attention and
concentration. He also noted Dr Pusic’s diagnosis.
Nielssen formed the view that the Appellant’s intelligence was at the
higher end of the normal range from his vocabulary
and educational attainment.
He made the following diagnoses:
Disorder, currently in remission.
Pathological
gambling, also in remission.
Nielssen also agreed with Dr Pusic’s diagnosis of dysthymic disorder,
which had been a chronic low-grade depressive illness
for at least two years.
Although dysthymic disorder is a form of mental illness within the meaning of
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
, he did not consider
the Appellant was a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
. His report stated:
The presence of depressed mood might have contributed to his
propensity to gamble and also to commit these offences to alleviate his
financial difficulties. However, there did not appear to be a very strong link
between the effect of symptoms of a depressive illness
and the offending, as the
offences were committed over several years and the symptoms of illness were not
so severe as to prevent
him from working or fulfilling other social commitments
in that time.
It is recommended that Mr Camacho continue treatment for depression and
that he undergo professional supervision if he returns to
Transcript of the Council Inquiry
transcript of the Council Inquiry formed exhibit 30. The Appellant informed the
Council Inquiry that he had a conviction for shoplifting
when he was 21 years
old. He had stolen $8 worth of spark plugs from a K-Mart and was fined $100. He
stated that it was
‘...one of those stupid things’
Appellant stated that he had stopped stealing after he married (for the second
time). In his oral evidence before the Tribunal
the Appellant stated that he had
not intended to infer that his marriage played any role in this occurring.
Appellant stated that he was under some stress at the time he committed the
offences as his second wife wanted to have children
and as they were in love
they decided to get married, although he did feel like he was starting again
rather then becoming ‘freer’
as his elder children became more
independent.
Appellant outlined his personal history as outlined elsewhere in this document
to the Council Inquiry. The inconsistencies between
the information in the
Pre-Sentence report and the reports from psychiatrists were explained to the
Council Inquiry (and to this
Council explored the Appellant’s work experience, training and continuing
education. There were areas in which the Appellant
was certainly deficient. In
particular, the Tribunal notes the Appellant did not engage in Continuing
Professional Development (CPD)
and clinical supervision for a period of 15
years. The issue of the ethics of obtaining references from previous clients
raised with the Appellant during the Council Inquiry.
Decision of the Council Inquiry
Reasons for Decision of the Council Inquiry was published on 11 January 2011
(exhibit 31). The Council Inquiry made a finding
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and, noted that the court had
‘imposed a punishment upon the
psychologist’
. The Council Inquiry issued a severe reprimand. The
Inquiry then made the following Orders for the purpose of protecting the
Camacho, who is currently unregistered, is ineligible to apply for registration
until 3 March 2011.
3 March 2011 Mr Camacho is eligible to apply for provisional registration for a
period of two (2) years, and must meet all of the
requirements of provisional
registration as currently in place and covering all of the requirements required
by the Psychology Board
of Australia.
acceptance of the supervision plan and the granting of provisional registration
Mr Camacho must attend for assessment by the Impaired
Registrants Panel in
relation to his psychological functioning, with particular reference to his
gambling behaviour, his alcohol
use, and any degree of mood disorder he might be
experiencing.
Evidence of the Appellant
Letter Dated 27 February 2010
Appellant wrote to the Board on 27 February 2010 (exhibit 4) stating that he did
not wish to challenge the Decision of the Board
to temporarily suspend his
registration. He stated his sentencing had been postponed until 28 April 2010
‘administrative issues of the court’
. He stated that,
in December 2007, he sought help from his GP who referred him to a psychiatrist,
Dr Pusic. This was prior to him
becoming aware of the investigation by
WorkCover. The Appellant offered the Board a copy of the report Dr Pusic was
preparing for
his Court appearance. The Appellant stated he wished to fully
cooperate with the investigation ‘in order to close this chapter
life’. He further stated:
I have accepted responsibility for my actions, including returning the money
before the sentencing date. I have also voluntarily
planned taking some time
off from my work after sentencing and referring my patients to another
psychologist during that time.
Appellant stated he had over 30 letters from patients indicating he had provided
psychological services in the past without charge.
He provided a few of these
letters to the Board. He stated:
I love my work, which brings me great satisfaction when I can help a person.
I am not someone that has ever been interested in money
and I will continue to
provide services to people in need for as long as I can. Unfortunately, I was
experiencing psychological
issues of my own for a period of time that I truly
and fully regret.
Appellant indicated he was willing to work under supervision as he had not had
formal supervision for a ‘long time’.
He stated he would meet with
the supervisor as regularly as the Board determined and would adhere to strict
guidelines. The Appellant
stated that he had made a serious mistake, which had
cost him his reputation.
Email Dated 17 March 2010
Appellant requested that the Board consider delaying his suspension to allow him
to refer on his patients, as many had special
needs, including language
difficulties (being of non-English speaking backgrounds) (exhibit 10).
Facsimile Dated 2 August 2010
Appellant sent a facsimile to the Council on 2 August 2010 (exhibit 23). He
provided the Council with a copy of the Community
Service Order made by the
Magistrate on 1 July 2010, reports from Dr Pusic dated 23 April 2010 and 2
August 2010, the report of Dr
Olav Nielssen dated 29 June 2010 and some
references.
Appellant also indicated he had requested the transcript of the remarks on
sentencing made by the Magistrate and stated that he
would forward it as soon as
it was available. The Appellant stated he had commenced his community service
and asked that the Council
consider allowing him to commence working again. He
Between 2005 and 2007 was a very difficult and complex time in my life of
which I have deservedly paid very dearly for; reputation
wise, personally, and
financially. I will not add to the information in the reports however I would
like to state that I have been
receiving help for my psychological issues and
had continued to work in my practice since 2007 without any issues. My
to psychology practice has only strengthened and I believe I still
have a great deal to offer the community. If the Council decides
to reinstate
my license I would appreciate being under supervision for the length of time the
Council determines to be fair. This
would give confidence to the Council of my
ability as a psychologist and in the administration of my
Oral Evidence of the Appellant
Appellant gave evidence for the better part of the second day of the Inquiry.
The Appellant admitted he had been convicted of
the offences as set out in the
material provided to the Tribunal. He detailed his compliance with the community
service order and
stated he had paid his fine. He had also agreed on the amount
of costs he would repay to WorkCover and had made arrangements to do
Appellant stated that the appeal lodged by WorkCover with respect to sentence
was unsuccessful and that he had incurred additional
costs as a result of this
Appellant admitted his conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
He further stated that at the time he was committing
the offences he should not
have been working as a registered psychologist.
Appellant stated that he had sought assistance from a GP in the practice he
worked who referred him to a psychiatrist about nine
months prior to the time of
WorkCover coming to search his office. The referral to Dr Pusic was obtained in
December 2007; however
he was unable to secure an appointment until 31 March
2008. Dr Pusic is the only psychiatrist from who he had sought treatment for
depression. He had maintained contact with Dr Pusic. He felt he was stable and
that he had stopped gambling. The Appellant confirmed
that he had only attended
Dr Pusic on one occasion this year, being in March. He had been unable to attend
the appointment set for
June as he was ill and the first available appointment
had been in mid July.
Appellant gave evidence that he would not wait for his next appointment if he
felt the need to see Dr Pusic in between times.
He would ring and either go on
to the waiting list or ask Dr Pusic to ring him. He had called upon Dr Pusic as
recently as December
2010 after the local paper published an article on page
three about his convictions which caused him incredible distress. The Appellant
also stated that WorkCover had information regarding his convictions on its
website which along with the newspaper article came up
if his name was
. The Appellant stated that the publication of the
article in the local paper was the first occasion his sister had found out that
he had been convicted of the offences. After this incident he found that the
members of his soccer club and his family were very
supportive. His reputation
‘football world’
had been impacted but he hoped they
would be ‘forgiving’ so that his reputation would be restored when
people realised
‘it was a mistake’
. He also stated that he
would have to ensure that from here on in his work would have to be ‘
to scratch’
. When asked by the Tribunal what he meant by
to scratch’
he stated that he would have to maintain supervision, he
would have to keep
, he would have to abstain from
alcohol and not engage in any behaviour that would jeopardise his progress.
Appellant stated that he had become caught in the habit of gambling. He stated
that for the period of two years he made the
and behaved
‘recklessly’
as his conduct
was always going to be
‘found out’
relation to the reference from Mrs Docherty dated 28 June 2011 the Appellant
stated that he had asked her to write a letter for
him and that he had employed
cross-examination the Appellant confirmed that his current dose of the
antidepressant Lovan was 40mg per day.
Appellant was asked about the description given by Dr Pusic that he suffered
‘lifelong recurrent episodes of depression’
23). The Appellant agreed that it was an accurate description but that they
were not the words he would have used to Dr
Pusic. He would have told Dr Pusic
that he had a disposition to depression, that he was depressed as an adolescent
and that he had
experienced lows and highs in his 20’s.
Appellant stated that although he had a disposition to depression for quite a
long time he became pervasively depressed from about
early 2006. It was at this
time that he suffered from a lack of sleep and suffered mood swings. Prior to
this he had managed his
depression quite well, being able to work, study, have
friends and maintain a family life.
Appellant also stated that he had been very depressed in 1998 after he divorced
from his first wife, and he then travelled overseas
for 10 months to cope with
the depression. When he returned home he stated that his new relationship (with
his current wife) helped
with the depression.
was not until 2005 that things began to change. His partner (now wife) wanted to
have children and he was already in his late 30s
with two children from his
previous marriage for whom he was paying maintenance. He stated that he felt
like he was
‘starting all over again’
. He reacted by
increasing his workload and consequently the amount of exercise he undertook was
reduced. This led to sleep difficulties
and he began using alcohol as an aid for
sleep. He felt like he was in a
‘spiral downturn’
life. He felt that everything was getting on top of him and so he started
gambling in order
to ‘create wealth’
. In fact, the gambling
had led the Appellant into debt, as had the consequences of the criminal
proceedings, the Council Inquiry
and this current Tribunal Inquiry.
Appellant stated that he does not gamble at all now. He has assessed himself as
‘addictive personality’
meaning he had a
disposition to addiction. This was not limited to gambling but also influenced
his approach to work, study, family
life in which he was very focussed, a trait
he related to addictive type of behaviour. He identified himself as obsessive
aware that this gave him the energy to do a lot of things at one time.
He agreed with Dr Pusic’s opinion that when dysphoric
he sought ways of
immediate satisfaction.
Appellant acknowledged that Dr Pusic had suggested that his wife attend some
sessions. He thought this was for the purpose of
having verification from her as
to issues rather than for the purpose of addressing any relationship issues
between them. The Appellant
stated that there were no relationship issues with
his wife and that Dr Pusic had spoken to his wife over the phone. Joint sessions
were not part of the current treatment plan.
Appellant described being extremely distressed (to the point of experiencing
something like a psychotic episode) the night before
the article exposing his
fraudulent behaviour was published in the local paper. He felt that he has now
been judged by the courts,
the community and his profession.
Appellant was asked questions regarding his knowledge of WorkCover
investigations as at around April to July 2007 when some of
the invoices he had
forwarded to WorkCover were not paid. The Appellant stated that he did not
become aware that some of the invoices
had not been paid as 90% of the invoices
he lodged were being paid. Under cross-examination he denied having any
knowledge of the
investigation (or knowing that ‘
the game was
) until after he had sought referral to Dr Pusic.
Appellant was asked questions about the comment made by Dr Nielssen that his
stealing had stopped when he got married for the
second time when clearly the
conduct continued for a number of months after the marriage. The Appellant
stated that he had indicated
a number of factors that had caused him anxiety
around this time and he did not mean that he had stopped the conduct because of
marriage, but had meant to say that the bulk of the conduct decreased after
this time with the number of invoices decreasing as he
was becoming aware of his
cross-examination the Appellant agreed that he had never taken part in an
interview with Work Cover which he attributed to legal
advice he had received to
this effect.
Appellant stated that he did not really consider playing poker machines as part
of his gambling problem because he did not see
it as part of his compulsive
behaviour/gambling addiction as he only played them occasionally (hence why he
told Dr Nielssen that
he did not play poker machines as he did not consider it
relevant to Dr Nielssen’s judgment of his gambling behaviour). His
gambling was focussed on betting on sporting events.
Appellant stated that he was of the view that if he had not commenced gambling
he would not have committed the fraud against WorkCover.
The Appellant accepted
that his description of
‘over billing WorkCover’
was not a correct description as it did not
adequately describe the scope and totality of his conduct. By way of explanation
Appellant stated that as Dr Pusic was his treating psychiatrist he found it
’ to make such an admission. The Appellant
stated that ultimately Dr Pusic became aware of the scope of the conduct because
he was asked to write a report for the purpose of the criminal proceedings.
Appellant also acknowledged that he had not accurately reported to Dr Nielssen
the length of time over which the fraudulent conduct
occurred. He explained this
in terms of not having a clear recollection of the events.
asked about how he obtained the appropriate WorkCover authorisation numbers to
use on the false invoices the Appellant stated
that he had not made a plan to do
so and had found the information on documents laying around in the practice. In
hindsight he states
that he actively was seeking the numbers for the express
purpose of billing WorkCover. In between patients
he would write down the WorkCover numbers from documents
laying around. He acknowledged that this was reckless behaviour.
agreed that there was a high degree of premeditation in the scheme but not much
planning as once the first invoice was created
it was only a matter of changing
the data on the invoice and sending it in –
‘Doing it was so
the behaviour had cost him considerably more than he obtained.
the time that his registration as a psychologist was suspended he has been
working as a youth worker/residential care worker
with adolescents in the care
of the ‘DoCS’. He works on a casual basis undertaking between 60 to
95 hours per fortnight.
He receives $29 per hour for this work.
confirmed he had not had any clinical supervision or mentoring since 1996 as he
had been very confident with his own abilities,
acknowledging that he may have
been too confident re same. He also stated that supervision was difficult given
the fact that he lived
in the Blue Mountains and supervision would have meant he
would be away from his practice for a whole day.
asked why he had not completed any continuing professional development between
1996 and 2010 the Appellant stated that he had
and that he did not feel that he
‘needed it’
as well as it being costly and time consuming.
Appellant confirmed he agreed his conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and that he took no issue with the fairness
conditions suggested.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Appellant clarified all of the
inconsistencies in the reports in evidence before the
Appellant completed his high school education at TAFE as a mature aged student
in 1988 and 1989. He then undertook his university
he was provisionally registered the Appellant worked in the area of disability
services and for the Adult Migrant English Service.
Apart from his own practice,
the Appellant does not appear to have worked in any other type of private
setting and his experience
is substantially in the disability framework. The
Appellant confirmed that his current treating GP is Dr Fiona Payne.
Submissions of the Respondent
Respondent made brief oral submissions at the end of the Inquiry. The Respondent
submitted that the Tribunal should make a finding
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and should impose conditions in the nature of those outlined in writing.
Respondent submitted that the issue of competency that was raised by the Council
Inquiry was not relied upon for the purpose of
this Tribunal as it was outside
the Particulars of Complaint. Further, an order that the Appellant be granted
provisional registration
was not within the power of the Tribunal given this
category of registration was not open to a person already on the Register. The
submissions also noted that the statement by the Council Inquiry that the
Appellant was unregistered at the time was incorrect. He
was and remains
this point the Tribunal notes that there was a basis for concern on the part of
the Council with respect to the Appellant’s
training and continuing
education. This is not a matter taken in to account by the Tribunal when making
the orders herein but is
properly a matter for the supervisor appointed in
accordance with the Orders.
Submissions made by the Appellant
Appellant indicated in brief oral submissions before the Tribunal agreement that
the conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Indication was also given as to the general acceptance of the conditions on
registration produced in writing
by the Respondent. The Appellant did not agree
to provisional registration.
Findings in relation to the Particulars of
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Appellant was convicted of nine
counts of obtaining money by deception. Further, the
Tribunal is satisfied that
the conduct demonstrates that the judgment possessed by the Appellant was
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied
unsatisfactory professional conduct is proven.
outlined above the Tribunal had significant concerns regarding appropriateness
of the Complaints that were placed before the Tribunal
(noting that whether the
Complaint comes by way of the Tribunal’s appellant function or otherwise).
Had a Complaint of professional
misconduct been before the Tribunal, given
findings of a similar nature in other protective jurisdictions, it is likely
a finding would have been made. As there was no exploration of the
issues of unfitness on the basis of the convictions or the lack
character the Tribunal will not enter into any speculation beyond once again
referring to the other cases already noted above.
Considerations relevant to Orders
Appellant’s registration is currently suspended. He has not practised
since around March 2010. The conduct is constituted
by 260 separate acts of
dishonesty. The Appellant defrauded a significant amount of money over a
significant period of time. There
can be no doubt as to the objective
seriousness of the conduct.
Tribunal has taken into account various matters that allow it to form the view
that the laying of a further Complaint, of professional
misconduct, is an
unnecessary step as the Orders appropriate for this matter are open to it with a
finding of unsatisfactory professional
Tribunal is of the view that the Appellant is unlikely to commit any offences of
this nature in the future provided he takes care
to maintain good mental health.
The conditions to be imposed on his registration will ensure that the Appellant
will practise without
any fraudulent acts. It is envisaged that the initial
period of at least two years will be required to ensure that the Appellant
not fall back into his previous ‘bad habits’. The Council will have
the benefit of reports from the Appellant’s
treating psychiatrist,
treating general practitioner and supervisor as well as reports from the
Appellant himself in deciding whether
or not the conditions on registration need
to remain in place for a longer period of time.
the circumstances of this matter de-registration is not, in the Tribunal’s
view, required to protect the public, to maintain
the reputation of the
profession, to allow the public to repose trust in members of the profession and
to act as a general deterrent
to other members of the profession. The Tribunal
notes the Appellant pleaded guilty at an early stage, has made reparation, has
into an agreement with WorkCover to pay the costs ordered, admits to
unsatisfactory professional conduct and is willing to have conditions
upon his registration.
strong focus of supervision must be the ethics of practice as a health
professional. Registered psychologists, along with other
health professionals,
are placed in positions of trust that facilitate the provision of appropriate
health care to persons under
various schemes. These schemes will not operate if
health professionals abuse the trust so reposed.
Tribunal is concerned that the Appellant did not seek to have inaccuracies in
the various reports placed before the Local Court,
the Council Inquiry and this
Tribunal corrected.
Tribunal is of the view that it is imperative that the Appellant implement a
Private Practice Management Plan which includes accounting
processes, reporting
processes and a business plan should he ever return to private practice.
matter highlights the type of difficulties practitioners may avoid if they
engaged in appropriate peer review/supervision. The
Orders made herein aim to
address this deficit in the Appellant’s practice. It is of upmost
importance that the Appellant utilise
all opportunities provided to him as a
consequence of compliance with the Orders herein. Regular supervision will
ensure he is practising
in an appropriate manner.
Appellant has significant criminal convictions. The maintenance of the
reputation of the profession and the trust that should
be able to be reposed in
registered psychologists require this Tribunal to impose a significant raft of
Conditions on registration.
This is to minimise the risk that the Appellant will
fall in to the same pattern of conduct he became so practiced at in the past
providing ongoing, regular supervision which is a required standard and an
essential clinical requisite for all practising psychologists.
Tribunal is of the view that there is little room for the Appellant to depart
from anything other than strict compliance with
the Conditions on his
Registration. Any failure to comply with conditions should be viewed as
significant by the Council.
If the Appellant moves into another jurisdiction within Australia the relevant
body to monitor these conditions will be the Psychology
Board of Australia. The
Tribunal Orders that the suspension of the Appellant’s registration be
lifted once the initial authorisation
has been provided by the
Appellant/Practitioner in accordance with Order 2 and the Council has approved a
Supervisor in accordance
with Order 6 provided the Appellant meets all other
requirements for current registration (e.g. recency of practice). At this time
the following conditions are to be imposed on the Appellant’s registration
(the Appellant is referred to as the Practitioner
in these orders for ease of
transfer on to the Register):
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in the terms attached to the Reasons for
Decision document
Camacho v Psychology Council of NSW
Practitioner authorises the Psychology Council of NSW to exchange information
with WorkCover NSW, Medicare Australia, the Motor
Accidents Authority, Victims
Services and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (or any other similar
bodies that administer
schemes of a similar nature) where such exchange is
necessary to facilitate the monitoring of the Practitioner’s claims for
benefits under the relevant schemes. The Practitioner must maintain this
authorisation until such time as the Psychology Council
of New South Wales lifts
this Condition. This Condition is to be referred to as the authorisation
condition and it may be lifted
by the Psychology Council of NSW once all
conditions relating to auditing, supervision, continuing professional
development and psychiatric
care have been lifted by the Psychology Council of
Practitioner must provide a copy of this Reasons for Decision document to any
employer he works for where his registration as
a psychologist is relied upon
prior to commencing such employment until such time as all other conditions on
registration (except
for the authorisation condition) are lifted by the
Psychology Council of NSW in accordance with these Orders.
to commencing work as a registered psychologist in private practice the
Practitioner is to provide a written private practice
management plan endorsed
by the Supervisor approved of by the Psychology Council of NSW in accordance
with these Orders. The Practitioner
is not to commence working in private
practice until he receives written confirmation from the Psychology Council of
NSW that the
private practice management plan has been approved. This Condition
is part of the auditing conditions on the registration of the
Practitioner.
Practitioner is to submit his practice to a financial audit by a person or
persons (Auditor(s)) nominated by the Psychology Council
of NSW after six months
of practising in private practice. This process is to be repeated every 12
months for a minimum period of
two years until this Condition is lifted by the
Psychology Council of NSW once it is satisfied that this Condition is no longer
based upon the reports of the Auditor(s) and the compliance of the
Practitioner with the other Conditions herein. The Psychology
Council of NSW may
nominate a suitably qualified person or persons to act as the Auditor(s). The
Practitioner is to provide all cooperation
requested by the Auditor(s) and is to
bear all of the costs associated with the audit process.
Practitioner is to undertake at his own cost a minimum of two hours of
individual supervision a month with a Psychology Council
of NSW approved
supervisor (Supervisor) for a minimum period of two years from the time the
Practitioner commences working as a registered
psychologist (whether in private
practice or as an employee). The Practitioner is to forward the name, contact
details and relevant
details of a proposed registered psychologist to be a
Supervisor. The Practitioner is to provide the name, contact details and
details of other registered psychologists should they not be approved
of by the Psychology Council of NSW or if the Supervisor is
unable or unwilling
to continue acting in the role. The Practitioner is to authorise and direct in
writing the Approved Supervisor
to forward reports to the Psychology Council of
NSW every three months after appointment by the Psychology Council of NSW. The
Practitioner
must forward a copy of this written direction and authorisation
endorsed by the Supervisor to the Psychology Council of NSW. The
Practitioner is
not to commence working as a registered psychologist until such time as he
receives written confirmation of the Psychology
Council of NSW’s approval
of the Supervisor. This Condition may be lifted by the Psychology Council of NSW
after a minimum
period of two years if the Psychology Council of NSW is
satisfied with the professional progress made by the Practitioner. The
supervision
undertaken and reported upon by the Supervisor is to include file
audits and focus on the following areas:
Legal, Ethical
and Professional Conduct
Professional
practice procedures
Communication
and interpersonal relationships
Professional
particularly in times of stress or stressful situations
Requirements for
registration and specialisation under the National Law (NSW)
Practitioner is to complete an additional 30 hours of Continuing Professional
Development activities (CPD) in the 12 months after
his name is restored to the
Register in accordance with these Orders. This is in addition to the 30 hours of
Mandatory Continuing
Professional Development activities required for the
maintenance of registration. The Practitioner is to bear the costs of all CPD.
The Practitioner is to take advice from his Supervisor as to the appropriate CPD
to undertake. The Practitioner is to provide written
confirmation of
satisfactory completion of all CPD undertaken to the Psychology Council of NSW.
Practitioner is to provide a self-report on his practice from commencement of
work as a registered psychologist every three months
for a minimum of two years
and thereafter at a frequency and for a duration determined by the Psychology
Council of NSW.
Practitioner is to remain under the care of a treating general practitioner. The
Practitioner is to forward the name and contact
details of the GP to the
Psychology Council of NSW prior to commencing work as a registered psychologist,
and at any time he changes
treating GPs, for a minimum period of two years and
until such time as the Psychology Council of NSW decides this condition is no
longer required. The Practitioner is to forward to the Psychology Council of NSW
an authority and direction addressed to the GP to
provide reports to the PCNSW
of any concerns regarding gambling, alcohol abuse, addictive behaviour or any
other clinically significant
mental health issue. The Practitioner is to forward
a copy of the written authorisation and direction given to the GP with the
acknowledgement
of receipt by the GP endorsed thereon. Any cost involved in
compliance with this condition is to be borne by the Practitioner. The
Psychology Council of NSW may remove this condition after a minimum period of
two years should it consider this condition no longer
Practitioner is to remain under the care of a treating psychiatrist. The
Practitioner is to forward the name and contact details
of the treating
psychiatrist to the Psychology Council of NSW prior to commencing work as a
registered psychologist and at any time
he changes his treating psychiatrist for
a minimum period of two years and until such time as the Psychology Council of
NSW decides
this condition is no longer required. The Practitioner is to forward
to the Psychology Council of NSW an authority and direction
addressed to the
treating psychiatrist to provide reports to the PCNSW every six months. The
Practitioner is to attend the treating
psychiatrist on a minimum of two
occasions per year and at the direction of the treating psychiatrist. Any cost
involved in compliance
with this condition is to be borne by the Practitioner.
The Psychology Council of NSW may remove this condition after a minimum period
of two years should it consider this condition no longer required.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision
document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
1) The Appellant and his legal advisor,
2) The Crown Solicitors
3) The Psychology Council of New South Wales,
5) The Psychology Board of Australia,
6) WorkCover NSW,
7) as the Council and Board see fit.
Dated: 2011
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Margaret Crowley
___________________
Lizabeth Tong
___________________
Siew-Foong Liew
Annexure A: Index of Documents in evidence
Annexure B: Submissions on the
Nature of the Appeal
Annexure C: Reprimand
Annexure D: Schedule of
CAMACHO V PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS FORMING THE RESPONDENT'S
DATE OF DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
13 January 2010
Letter from M Hawkins of WorkCover to N Beeston of the Psychologists
Registration Board (‘the Board’) enclosing documents
relevant to
charges in the Chief Industrial Magistrates Court:
i) Statement of
ii) Second Memorandum of Advice;
iii) Court Attendance Notices
13 January 2010
Email from N Beeston of the Board to L Duncombe of WorkCover acknowledging
notification
9 February 2010
Letter from the Board to Mr Camacho, regarding intention to suspend
registration
27 February 2010
Letter from Mr Camacho to the Board in response to notification of 13
January 2010 and Board's intention to suspend registration,
enclosing nine
character references and professional letters
11 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan, Registrar to Mr Camacho advising of
11 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan, Registrar to Ms Muller, Chair of the Psychologists
Tribunal advising of suspension
11 March 2010
Letter from Tribunal to Mr Pehm of the HCCC advising of suspension
11 March 2010
Registrant Suspension Certificate
15 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan to M Hawkins, Workcover NSW regarding suspension
17 March 2010
Email from Mr Camacho to Ms Shanahan requesting to see patients for
referrals on 19 and 26 March 2010
18 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan, Registrar to Mr Camacho advising of reviewed
18 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan, Registrar to Mr Pehm of the HCCC advising of
reviewed decision
19 March 2010
Letter from M Shanahan, Registrar to Ms J Muller, Chair of the Tribunal,
advising of reviewed decision
23 March 2010
Email from M Shanahan to L Duncombe of Workcover NSW enclosing notification
of suspension dated 18 March 2010
11 May 2010
Letter from Ms Grati-Feliks, Deputy Registrar of the Board to the HCCC
regarding progress of matter and request to extend suspension
13 May 2010
Chairperson of Psychology Tribunal approval of extension of suspension
21 May 2010
Certificate of implementation of extension of suspension on registration
21 May 2010
Letter from M Shanahan of the Board to Mr Camacho regarding the extension
of suspension
21 May 2010
Letter from M Shanahan of the Board to Mr Pehm of the HCCC regarding the
extension of suspension
21 May 2010
Letter from M Shanahan of the Board to Ms Hawkins of WorkCover regarding
the extension of suspension
1 July 2010
Transcript of Sentencing Remarks in the Chief Industrial Magistrates
1 July 2010
Pre-Sentence Report
2 August 2010
Letter from Mr Camacho to the Council enclosing the following:
Community Service Order
ii) Correspondence and psychiatric report prepared by
Mr Camacho's treating psychiatrist, Dr Augustus Pusic
iii) Independent
psychiatric report prepared by Dr Olav Nielssen
iv) 14 character and
professional letters
4 August 2010
Letter from A McEacharn of the Board to Mr Camacho regarding the extension
of suspension under the new law
12 October 2010
Email from Mr Camacho to Ms Nikolich of the Psychology Council (‘the
Council’) regarding the sentencing remarks
4 November 2010
Letter from M Nikolich of the Council to Mr Camacho advising that the
matter brought against him will be dealt with by Council Inquiry
10 December 2010
Letter (Submissions) from WorkCover to the Council
10 December 2010
Email from Ms Garcia of the Council to Mr Camacho enclosing Notice of
15 November 2010
Notice of Inquiry including particulars of complaint
14 December 2010
Transcript of Council Inquiry proceedings
11 January 2011
Reasons for Decision by the Council
13 January 2011
Letter from M Nikolich of the Council to Mr Camacho advising of the Outcome
13 January 2011
Letter from M Nikolich of the Council to Mr Pehm, HCCC, advising of the
Outcome of Inquiry
8 February 2011
Email correspondence from Mr Camacho to M Nikolich appealing against
Council’s decision
9 February 2011
Letter from M Nikolich of the Commission to Ms Joanne Muller, Chair of the
Psychology Triunal of NSW referring appeal to the Psychology
17 February 2011
Letter from M Nikolich of the Council to the HCCC advising of
Camacho’s appeal
Extract Health Practitioner Regulation Law (NSW) Subdivision 5, Sections
148-148I – Dealing with Complaint by inquiry at meeting
Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics
Mr Camacho's Character References
Guidelines for 4+2 internship program: Provisional Psychologists and
Supervisors
29 June 2011
Letter from CSO enclosing an Amended Notice of Inquiry dated 29 June 2011
and related legislation.
30 June 2011
Extract from the Register of Practitioners maintained by AHPRA with respect
to the Appellant
23 March 2011
Submissions of Psychology Council in relation to nature of appeal under s
159 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
from a decision
under s 148E
17 May 2011
Covering letter to Dr Pusic enclosing Summons to Produce Documents and
documents so produced.
1 July 2011
AHPRA - Confirmation of Registration Status for Appellant
Appellant’s Documents
A1 Submissions of Appellant dated 13 June 2011 (not relied upon).
Documents faxed to the Registry on 29 June 2011.
A2. CV of the
A3. Letter from NSW Department of Corrective Services dated 11 May 2011.
A4. Copy of handwritten Supervision Log Book completed by Dr Alex Gilandas
over the period 1994 to 1996.
A5. Schedule of property seized from the Appellant under search warrant.
Document provided to Tribunal during Inquiry.
A6. Reference dated 28 June 2011 from Mrs Elsa Docherty ‘To Whom It May
A7. Email from Ms Astrid Ottaway, Senior Solicitor, Criminal Law Practice,
WorkCover NSW to Mr Jeffery Chan dated 22 April 2010.
CAMACHO V PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW
SUBMISSIONS ON THE NATURE OF THE APPEAL
Submissions of Psychology Council in relation to nature
of appeal under s 159 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
from a decision under s 148E
Legislation
159(1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
National Law
) provides that a person ‘
to the Tribunal for a health profession against
conditions imposed by the Council for the health profession on the
registration
under Division 3
or 4 or the alteration of
the conditions by the Council. Section 159(1)(d) provides an appeal from a
of Council under s 148E.
out in a separate note, the transitional provisions of the National Law provide
(a) the Inquiry by the Board/Council into Mr Camacho’s conduct was to
be dealt with under the repealed
Psychologists Act 2001
(and not the
National Law): see Sch 5A cl 4(1)-(2);
(b) any appeal from that decision of the Board/Council ‘is to be dealt
with under [the National] Law as if the relevant matter
had been decided under
this Law’ : see Sch 5A cl 4(3).
1B If the Inquiry had been determined under the National Law, it would have
been determined under s 148E. Section 159(1)(d) provides
an appeal from a
direction or order of Council under s 148E. Thus, the effect of the
transitional provisions is that Mr Camacho’s
appeal to this Tribunal is
also under s 159 of the National Law.
159 is silent as to what type of appeal it confers. Thus, the nature of the
appeal will depend on principles of statutory
interpretation.
the reasons set out below, the Psychology Council submits that, although there
are indications either way, after balancing the
various factors, the better view
is that the nature of the appeal is de novo.
the outset it is noted that there appears to be a legislative drafting oversight
in s 159C of the National Law, which sets out
the powers of a Tribunal on a
s 159 appeal. Section 159C provides that on an appeal under s 159,
‘a Tribunal may by order
terminate, vary or confirm a period of
or revoke, vary or confirm the
, as it thinks
proper.’ Section 159(1)(d) provides an appeal from a
of Council under s 148E. However, s 159C does not set out the
express powers of the Tribunal to deal with the direction or order
that is the
subject of an express right of appeal. It is submitted that s 159C would be
read as conferring a power on the tribunal
in a s 159(1)(d) appeal to revoke,
vary or confirm the direction or order under s 148E, as it thinks proper.
Authorities
Allesch v Maunz
the majority of the High Court noted that there were
three categories of appeal:
An appeal in the strict
, in which the function of the appellate body is ‘simply to
determine whether the decision under appeal was or was not erroneous
evidence and the law as it stood when the original decision was given’,
and in which the appellate body cannot receive
further evidence;
An appeal by way of rehearing
in which the powers of the
appellate body ‘are exercisable only where the Appellant can demonstrate
that, having regard to
all of the evidence now before the appellate (body), the
order that is the subject of the appeal is the result of some legal, factual
discretionary error’; or
A completely fresh rehearing
, called a hearing de novo, in
which the power of the appellate body to re-exercise the power must be exercised
‘regardless
nature of an appeal will ultimately depend on the terms of the statute
conferring the right of
Court noted in
Coal & Allied
It was pointed out in
Brideson (No 2)
that ‘the nature of [an] appeal
ultimately depend on the terms of the statute conferring the right [of
’. The statute in question may confer limited or large powers
on an appellate body; it may confer powers that are unique to
the tribunal
concerned or powers that are common to other appellate bodies. There is, thus,
no definitive classification of appeals,
merely descriptive phrases by which an
appeal to one body may sometimes be conveniently distinguished from an appeal to
Coal & Allied
, the High Court then went on to observe:
an appellate tribunal can receive further evidence and its powers are not
restricted to making the decision that should have been
made at first instance,
the appeal is usually and conveniently described as an appeal by way of
rehearing. Although further evidence
may be admitted on an appeal of that kind,
the appeal is usually conducted by reference to the evidence given at first
and is to be contrasted with an appeal by way of hearing de
. In the case of a hearing de novo, the
matter is heard afresh and a
decision is given on the evidence presented at that hearing
Ordinarily, if there has been no further evidence admitted and if there has
been no relevant change in the law, a court or tribunal
entertaining an appeal
by way of rehearing can exercise its appellate powers only if satisfied that
there was error on the part of
the primary decision-maker. That is because
statutory provisions conferring appellate powers, even in the case of an appeal
of rehearing, are construed on the basis that, unless there is something
to indicate otherwise, the power is to be exercised for
the correction of error.
However, the conferral of a right of appeal by way of a hearing de novo is
construed as a proceeding in
which the appellate body is required to exercise
its powers whether or not there was error at first
High Court in
Coal & Allied
then discussed
Brideson [No
The provision considered in
Brideson (No 2)
conferred power on the Commission to take further evidence, a provision which is
indicative of an appeal by way of rehearing.
It also required the Commission
make such order as it [thought] fit
requirement indicated
that the Commission's appellate powers
constrained by the need to identify error
on the part of the
primary decision-maker, but, rather, that the Commission was
obliged to give
its own decision on the evidence before
Sperway Constructions
, the Builders Licensing Board held an inquiry into
a complaint under the Builders Licensing Act 1971. Section 31 of that Act
a person aggrieved by a determination of the Board to appeal to the
District Court where the appeal ‘shall be dealt with by
rehearing’.
Section 31 was silent as to whether further evidence could be received by the
District Court.
J (Barwick CJ and Stephen J concurring) stated at
‘There are, of course, sound reasons for thinking that in
many cases an appeal to a court from an administrative authority will
necessarily entail a hearing
.... The nature of the proceeding
before the administrative authority
may be of such a character as to lead to
the conclusion that it was not intended that the court was to be confined to the
before the authority
There may be no provision for a hearing
at first instance
or for a record to be made of what takes place there.
The authority may not be bound to apply the rules of evidence
or the issues
which arise may be non-justiciable. Again, the authority may not be required to
furnish reasons for its decision. In
all these cases there may be ground for
saying that an appeal calls for an exercise of original jurisdiction or
On the other hand
the character of the function undertaken by the
administrative authority in arriving at its decision may differ markedly from
instances already supposed.
The authority may be required to determine
justiciable issues formulated in advance; to conduct a hearing, at which the
parties may
be represented by barristers and solicitors, involving the giving of
oral evidence on oath which is subject to cross-examination;
transcript record; to apply the rules of evidence; and to give reasons for its
determination
. In such a case a direction that the appeal is to be by way of
rehearing may well assume a different significance.
the answer will depend on an examination of the legislative
rather than upon an endeavour to classify the administrative
authority as one which is entrusted with an executive or quasi-judicial
function, classifications which are too general to be of decisive assistance.
Primarily it is a question of elucidating the legislative intent
question which in the circumstances of this case is not greatly illuminated by
the Delphic utterance that the appeal is by way
rehearing.’
J (Barwick CJ and Stephen J concurring) concluded that the appeal by
way of rehearing under s 31 was
and was not confined to the
materials adduced at the inquiry. In doing so, Mason J noted at 180 that the
initial inquiry held by
the Board had some of the characteristics of a judicial
‘[1] The notice contains particulars of the grounds
alleged against the defendant,
[2] the issues are susceptible of judicial determinations, there is a hearing
which is to be in ‘open court’,
[3] the defendant may be legally represented;
[4] the rules of evidence are to be applied; and
[5] there is the implied obligation to record the evidence that is
given.’ (numbering added)
J then went on to observe at 180-1:
On the other hand the prescribed
procedures have a number of features which indicate that the appeal to the
District Court
cannot be conveniently or readily undertaken
if the court
is to be confined to the materials adduced at the inquiry and which also
indicate that
considerations of fairness
to the defendant make it the
more likely that the District Court appeal was to involve a hearing de novo.
It will be noticed that the holding of the inquiry under s 28 and the
making of the determination by the Board under s 30 are two
distinct and
separate proceedings, though the Board is required to consider the evidence
taken at the inquiry. One member of the
Board may hold the inquiry, whereas it
is the Board which makes the determination. The only function of the inquiry, it
to receive evidence and perhaps hear argument.
Certainly the person
holding the inquiry is not empowered to make findings
and all that the Board
is required to consider before making its determination is the evidence given at
the inquiry.
It is not even required to consider the argument addressed to
the inquiry
nor, indeed, is there any requirement that a transcript of
argument be made for later consideration by the Board
The inquiry is into ‘the grounds upon which the defendant has been
called upon to show cause’ (s 27(6)). The Board is
not expressly required
to rule upon these grounds; it is only required to make an ultimate
determination under s 30, no doubt after
reaching some conclusion as to the
grounds alleged. But the fact remains that the scope of the inquiry is in terms
limited to the
grounds stated in the notice and that it does not extend to the
ultimate determination to be made by the Board.
This in itself creates
obstacles to the reception of evidence
and the making of submissions
directed to the ultimate determination and not to the grounds stated in the
notice. Yet this determination
is to be made by the Board without the benefit of
a hearing before it and without any appearance by the defendant or by any legal
representative on his behalf. And it is a determination which may be made
without any obligation to give reasons.
The consequence of all this is that it cannot be supposed that the
Parliament intended to so confine the District Court in hearing
an appeal under
. This conclusion is reinforced by a consideration of the severe
consequences which flow from the cancellation or suspension of a
occasioned by a determination adverse to the holder. Such a decision constitutes
a deprivation of a valuable privilege.
It is not reasonable to conclude that
Parliament intended that such a result could ensue
from a determination by
the Board in accordance with the prescribed procedures unless there exists an
appeal to the District Court
which involves a hearing
(emphasis supplied)
Koh v The State of South Australia
(1989) 154 LSJS 38,
the Full Court of the South Australian Supreme
Court considered the nature of an appeal to the Teachers Appeal Board from a
of the Minister of Employment and Further Education dismissing the
appellant from the teaching service. The right of appeal to the
to the Teachers
Appeal Board provided:
(5) The Appeal Board may, upon the hearing of
under this section,
vary or revoke
determination
or decision subject to appeal, and if the determination or
decision has taken effect, order that the officer be re-instated in the
service as if no such determination or decision had been made.
statute was silent as to what type of appeal it was. King CJ made the following
observations (p43-p44) (Prior J agreeing):
‘Where disciplinary
powers are vested in a Minister or an administrator,
it is to be expected in
the ordinary course of affairs that they will be exercised in accordance with
administrative rather than quasi
judicial procedures
. Proper investigations
must be made
but they need not proceed by way of formal hearing
justice must be observed and this requires that the person in jeopardy have fair
notice of what is alleged against him and
a reasonable opportunity to answer the
allegations.
It does not imply that an investigation which is conducted by a
Minister or an administrative official and not by a tribunal must
necessarily
afford to the person in jeopardy an opportunity to confront and cross-examine
the persons making the allegations against
; O'Rourke v Miller
It is noteworthy that neither the Minister nor the Director-General
is given power to compel attendance of witnesses, to administer
compel answers to questions
It seems to me therefore that the
Act does not contemplate a hearing of a formal or quasi judicial type before the
Director-General
or his delegate such as occurred in the present case, but
rather an investigation by means of administrative methods
and procedures
leading to the disciplinary decision by the Director-General or the Minister.
Nothing which I have said, of course,
is intended to convey that the
Director-General may not discharge his responsibilities in the way in which he
chose to discharge
them in the present case.
The importance of the foregoing
is that the hearing before the Teachers
Appeal Board may well be the first opportunity provided to the alleged offender
to confront
the witnesses against him and to cross-examine them
certainly his first opportunity for a hearing at which the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books and papers can
be compelled, oaths can be
administered and answers can be required
; see Education Act s50. These are
strong indications that the appeal to the Teachers Appeal Board
is by way of
rehearing de novo
That type of appeal
is the norm
appeal is to a tribunal from the decision of a Minister or an administrative
official who is not expected to conduct a
formal or quasi-judicial hearing
Appeals to tribunals from such decisions are to be regarded, in my opinion,
prima facie as appeals by way of rehearing de novo
Calman v Commission of Police
, a delegate of the Commissioner of Police
rejected the appellant's claim for ‘hurt on duty benefits’ and he
to the Government and Related Employees Appeal Tribunal. The High
Court held that a proceeding before the Tribunal was ‘a
fresh exercise of
administrative
statute was silent as to what type of appeal it was.
concluding that the appeal involved a fresh exercise of administrative power,
the High Court had regard to matters such as the
power of the Tribunal to take
evidence on oath, to compel the production of evidence, and to conduct a full
ACJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ analysed the matter as
Section 186(2) of the Police Service Act
provides that the GREAT Act applies to and in respect of an appeal under
the same way’ as it applies to a disciplinary appeal
under Div 2 (ss 23-27) of Pt 3 of the GREAT Act. The applicable
of Div 2 in this case was s 24. Section 48(2) of the GREAT
Act provides that,
in relation to an appeal under s 24 of the GREAT Act,
the tribunal ‘may decide to allow or disallow the
such other decision with respect to the appeal as it thinks fit’
Further, s 48(3) provides that
the decision of the tribunal on appeal is
’, subject to the operation of Pt 5 (ss 54-56),
entitled ‘Appeals from the Tribunal’. In addition, s 48(4)
the tribunal on appeal to provide its decision in the ‘form of an
instrument in writing signed by the Senior Chairperson or
Chairperson before
whom the appeal was heard and shall include the reasons for the decision’.
Various provisions of the statute disclose that the tribunal
is empowered to inquire into the merits of the matter before it, at a
hearing and in a manner
which is distinct from
the process adopted by the
administrative decision-maker at first instance
. The effect of these
provisions is as follows.
The sitting of the tribunal was ‘formal’
(s 36), as opposed to an ‘informal’ hearing for promotion
appeals under s 20 of the GREAT Act (s 35(1)).
Evidence at such a
sitting of the tribunal is given on oath and is subject to cross-examination
(s 38(1)). The scope of the evidence available to the tribunal is not bound
by the rules or practice as to evidence (s 43(1)). Further,
the tribunal,
subject to an exception in s 43(2),
may inform itself on ‘any
matter in such manner as it thinks fit’
(s 43(1)). Section 43(2)
prohibits the tribunal informing itself on, or taking into consideration,
‘any matter which has not
been disclosed in evidence at a sitting of the
Tribunal if the matter is one which ought, in the interests of justice, to be
for challenge or testing by the persons entitled to be present at the
sitting’. Moreover, s 44 confers power on the Senior
Chairperson or
Chairperson of the tribunal
to compel discovery of documents and the
attendance of witnesses
Thus the proceeding which the appellant initiated in the
tribunal, pursuant to s 186(1) of the Police Service Act, was, by the
of s 48(2) of the GREAT Act,
in substance, a fresh exercise of
administrative power
, this now being pursuant to the criteria laid down in
s 186(1) of the Police Service Act.
In that sense, the
‘appeal’ may be described as an administrative hearing de
Nature of Tribunal’s role
Relevantly,
here s 159(1)(b),(d) of the National Law involve an administrative appeal from a
decision of an administrative body (the
Council) to an administrative appellate
body (the Psychology Tribunal) under s 148E of the National Law (or relevantly
equivalent under the repealed
Psychologists Act 2001
the authorities set out above, the factors suggesting that the Tribunal’s
role is to determine the complaint based
on the material that is presented to
the Tribunal (ie. that the Tribunal is to substitute its own view on a
consideration de novo
of the evidence before it before rather than limit its
role to detection of error in the decision of the Council) are as
(a) There is no
right to legal representation for the practitioner before the Council when it
determines the complaint (s 47(6) 2001
Act) (although the health practitioner is
entitled to attend the meeting of the Council at which the complaint is dealt
with (s 47(1)
(b) There is no
requirement for evidence to be given on oath (and no provision for the cross
examination of any witness is made).
(c) The Council
does not have the power to summons a person to appear to give evidence or to
produce documents.
(d) The Council
inquiry is to be conducted with as little formality and technicality as possible
(s 46(c) 2001 Act).
(e) There is no
obligation on the Council to keep a formal transcript of proceedings when
dealing with a complaint under Division
4 of Part 4 of the 2001 Act (although
the Council must keep full and accurate minutes of the proceeding of the meeting
6 2001 Act)).
(f) There is no
requirement for leave to be granted before a person can appeal to the Tribunal
under s 159 of the National Law.
contrast, various provisions of the National Law disclose that the Tribunal is
empowered to inquire into the merits of a matter
before it at a formal hearing
and in a manner which is
from the process adopted by the
administrative decision-maker at first instance (ie. by the
proceedings before the Tribunal are relatively formal;
days’ notice must be given of the time and place for the conducting of the
inquiry or the hearing of the appeal by the
Tribunal (s 167A);
(ii) proceedings
of a Tribunal are to be open to the public except when the Tribunal otherwise
directs (s 167B(2));
Tribunal must give a written statement of the decision
Tribunal has the power to:
itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks fit (s 148C(a));
evidence on oath (Sch 5D cl 3(3));
(iii) summons a
person to appear to give evidence or produce documents (Sch 2 cl 3(1)); and
costs (Sch 5D cl
(v) the health
practitioner is entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner (s
(c) There is no
power of the Tribunal to remit the matter to the Council (suggesting it must
make a decision for itself).
Tribunal is not able to dismiss the appeal (again, suggesting it must make a
decision for itself). Rather, on an appeal under
s 159, the Tribunal relevantly
may by order [1] revoke, [2] vary or [3] confirm the conditions,
as it thinks
(e) Although
the Council does not for example have the power to suspend under s 148E (or s 51
of the 2001 Act), it does have powers
which if exercised could have relatively
serious consequences for a practitioner (such as the power to impose conditions
on registration
(s 148E/ s 51) and the power to impose a fine (s 148F / but
not under the 2001 Act)).
significant factor is that there is no statutory right of appeal from a decision
of the Tribunal under s 159 to the Supreme
s 162 of the
National Law which does not apply here). Thus, for example, where a Council
exercises a power under Subdivision 8 of
Division 3 of Part 8 (as
appeal to the Tribunal under s 159 was not de novo allowing further evidence,
then (even though the Tribunal has broader
coercive powers to allow the
gathering of evidence) the Tribunal would be limited to evidence before the
Council in circumstances
where, because the Council has no coercive powers to
summons witnesses and documents, the evidence that both the health practitioner
and/or the Council may have wanted to adduce, was not before the Council when it
made its decision;
(b) The health
practitioner has no statutory right of appeal of any sort to the Supreme
(c) The health
practitioner only has common law rights of judicial review to have the decision
of the Tribunal under s 159 reviewed
by the Supreme Court. In such a judicial
review application, the Supreme Court would not be entitled to enquire into the
or hear evidence as to the merits (in circumstances where the decision of
the Tribunal was limited to the evidence before the Council
and in turn, as
discussed, where the Council has limited evidence-gathering
if the appeal to the Tribunal under s 159 was not de novo allowing further
evidence, then the health practitioner would at no
time in this process have had
a hearing before either an administrative body or a court at which the
attendance of witnesses and
the production documents can be compelled, oaths can
be administered, answers can be required, cross examination can be undertaken
and the health practitioner can be legally represented.
such, the s 159 appeal (construed as a de novo appeal) is the only level in the
process at which the health practitioner would
have that opportunity.
together, it is submitted that these factors suggest that the Tribunal’s
role is to consider the complaint de novo based
on the evidence before it
(including any new evidence) rather than limit its role to detection of error in
the decision of the Council
based on the material before the
Opposing view
Considerations
suggesting that the appeal is not de novo include the following.
the Council must give a written statement of its decision which must include
reasons for its decision (s 48(1) 2001 Act). Thus the
Tribunal has the benefit
of reasons of the Council when considering the
the Tribunal will presumably have the benefit of the full and accurate minutes
kept by Council of the proceeding of the
meeting (Sch 3 cl 6 2001 Act).
Woolcock v Medical Board
[2009] NSWMT 3
(24 September 2009), Deputy
Chairperson Murrell DCJ considered the nature of an appeal to the Tribunal under
s 95 of the Medical
Practice Act from a suspension under s 66 of the
Medical Practice Act. Section 95 of the Medical Practice Act was in similar
to s 159 of the National Law (and, like a comparison of s 159 to
s 158, 160, s 95 sat alongside ss 87 and 98A which specified the
was a rehearing with fresh evidence).
DCJ held that s 95 was not a de novo appeal (but rather was confined to a
rehearing on the merits in which the evidence is
confined to the material that
was before the Board): at [20]. It is noteworthy that Murrell DCJ held that a s
95 appeal could not
involve the receipt of further evidence, inter alia, because
of the express references to ‘fresh evidence’ in s 87 and
equivalent of s 158(2) and 160(2) of the National Law), but at the same
time held that s 95 was a ‘rehearing’
notwithstanding the express
references to ‘rehearing’ in s 87A and s 98A (and the absence of
such a term in s 95).
contrast, in
v Medical Board
, presided over by Deputy
Chairperson Ainslie-Wallace DCJ (15 April 2008) it was not in issue between the
parties (and the Medical
Tribunal proceeded on the basis) that an appeal to the
Tribunal under s 95 of the Medical Practice Act from a suspension under s
the Medical Practice Act
de novo (see at [15]).
in a decision of the Medical Tribunal presided over by Deputy Chairperson Balla
DCJ a few months before the
decision (2 July 2009) (
Medical Board
), it was not in issue between the parties (and the Medical
Tribunal proceeded on the basis) that an appeal to the Tribunal under
the Medical Practice Act from a suspension under s 66 of the Medical Practice
de novo. In
Deputy Chairperson Murrell DCJ
did not refer to either the
the decision of
the next year (25 June 2010) Deputy Chairperson
Balla DCJ presided over a Tribunal hearing which proceeded on the basis that the
s 95 appeal was governed by
(ie. confined to a rehearing on the
merits in which the evidence is confined to the material that was before the
Board ) but did
not refer to her Honour’s earlier contrary approach in the
Gorman case
case is the only case of which counsel is aware where the issue
of the de novo hearing under s 95 was contested (ie. in the
decisions the Tribunal with the concurrence of the parties
proceeded on the basis that the appeal was de novo).
decision is in that sense stronger authority than the
decisions. However, it can fairly be said that
Medical Tribunal decisions on the nature of the appeal under s 95 of the Medical
Practice Act are not consistent or clear.
is submitted that the
decision is not directly analogous here.
Although s 95 of the Medical Practice Act is in similar terms to s 159 of the
Law, s 95 only concerned an appeal against certain decisions of the
Medical Board. By contrast, s 159(1) of the National Law confers
an appeal from
multiple differing pathways (and in relation to each, the factors in paragraphs
[18]-[23] above differ). For example,
a Council making a s 150 decision (which
can be appealed under s 159(1)(a)) has coercive powers to allow the gathering of
(see s 150J) and an internal power of review exists (s 150A). Neither
of these factors apply to the situation here where a decision
is made by a
Council on Inquiry under Div 4 of Part 4 of the 2001 Act or under s 148E of the
National Law and is appealed to the
Tribunal under s 159.
while it would be undesirable for the content of the appeal right in s 159 to
differ depending on the particular pathway of
the decision being appealed, this
could be a possibility if the factors listed in [18]-[23] above differ in
relation to the first
instance administrative decision maker being appeal from.
However, this Tribunal need only determine the nature of this s 159 appeal
a decision under Div 4 of Part 4 of the 2001 Act.
other provisions within Division 6 of Part 8 of the National Law, namely, ss 158
and 160, specify that the appeal to the Tribunal
is to be dealt with by way of
rehearing and fresh evidence (whereas s 159 is silent as to the type of appeal).
Sections 158 and 160
are the only two provisions in the National Law expressly
specifying what type of
to a Tribunal is involved.
158 provides that a health practitioner may appeal to the Tribunal from a
finding of a Committee. Section 158(2)-(3) provide:
appeal is to be dealt with by way of
rehearing and fresh evidence
evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received at the
inquiry, may be given.
(3) The Tribunal may—
(a) dismiss the appeal; or
(b) make any finding or exercise any power the Tribunal could have
made or exercised if the complaint had been originally referred
s 160 provides that a health practitioner may appeal to the Tribunal from a
finding of a Performance Review Panel. Section
160(2)-(3) are in the same terms
as s 158(2)-(3) set out above.
Saville v Health Care Complaints Commission and Anor
[2006] NSWCA 298
Basten JA (Handley JA agreeing) observed at [20] that
-(5) of the
Medical Practice Act 1992
– which is in the same form as
(2)-(3) of the National Law – ‘suggest that the appeal may be
by way of rehearing, but may also be a hearing de
it may not be the case that
are de novo appeals
(but rather may involve a rehearing, having regard to all of the evidence now
before the Tribunal, to determine
whether the order that is the subject of the
appeal is the result of some legal, factual or discretionary error: see the
of authorities at para [3] above). In this respect, it may be that,
notwithstanding the difference in language between
on the one hand and
on the other, that the answer to the difference lies in the fact that
are appeals by way of rehearing (ie. correcting for error below) and
is an appeal de novo for the reasons set out at paragraphs [18]-[23]
s 159C provides that the Tribunal may by order [1] revoke, [2] vary or [3]
confirm the conditions, as it thinks proper. This is
to be contrasted to the
language in
s 158(3)(b)
s 160(3)(b)
, which provides that in a
appeal the Tribunal ‘may make any finding or exercise any power
or combination of powers that the [first instance decision
maker] could have
made or exercised.
alone, the language in
s 158(3)(b)
s 160(3)(b)
may appear to suggest a
broader appeal than in s 159C. However, in a
able to dismiss the appeal (which tends against the
conclusion that the
appeals are de novo). By contrast,
appeal, the Tribunal has no power to dismiss the appeal
(suggesting it must make its own decision in substitution of the first instance
decision-maker notwithstanding the ‘revoke, vary or confirm’
language in s 159C). In this respect, it is noted that
the statute considered
Koh v The State of South Australia
(1989) 154 LSJS 38,
(discussed above) involved similar language to
s 159C and the Full Court of the South Australian Supreme Court held that
(however the statute considered in that case did
not involve (as this case does) other provisions expressly conferring an appeal
right in the nature of a rehearing with fresh evidence).
is apparent from the analysis above that the question of the nature of an appeal
from a decision of a Council under Div 4 of Part 4 of the 2001 Act
is a difficult one. However, for the reasons set out above, the
Council submits that on balance the better view is that the Tribunal’s
role is to determine the complaint based
on the material that is presented to
the Tribunal. That is, that the Tribunal is to substitute its own view on a
consideration de
novo of the evidence before it before rather than limit its
role to detection of error in the decision of the Council.
CAMACHO V PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW
Carlos Camacho you are hereby reprimanded by this Tribunal in relation to the
fraudulent conduct you engaged in within your practise
of the profession of
psychology.
Your conduct demonstrated a significant lack of judgement and a total disregard
for the fundamental requirement of honesty in all
of your dealings.
You abused the trust placed in you by WorkCover and others to render invoices
properly raised. It is imperative to the provision
of psychological care to
those so entitled that trust be placed in registered psychologists not to abuse
schemes designed to provide
such care promptly with a minimum of barriers.
There are indications that you have particular vulnerabilities to depression,
gambling, alcohol abuse and dishonest conduct. You
must vigilantly guard against
any of these issues affecting your conduct in the future.
The Tribunal considers that it is only a raft of conditions on your registration
that will allow you to practice appropriately in
the future.
(2000) 203 CLR 172
at 180 per Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and
Hayne JJ; see also
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ
v New South Wales Medical Board
[1976] 2 NSWLR 281
Bradshaw v Medical Board of
Western Australia
(1990) 3 WAR 322
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR
at 179–181;
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
222–226 and 238–242;
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
(and [21]–[31]) per Gleeson CJ, Gummow and
Re Coldham Ex parte Brideson
[1990] HCA 36
(1990) 170 CLR 267
Allied Operations v AIRC
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron
and Hayne JJ
Allied Operations v AIRC
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
per Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron and Hayne JJ (citations omitted)(emphasis supplied)
Allied Operations v AIRC
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron
and Hayne JJ (emphasis
Builders Licensing Board v
Sperway Constructions
[1976] HCA 62
(1976) 14 ALR
Licensing Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 62
(1976) 135 CLR 616
Commission of Police
(1999) 167 ALR 91
[1999] HCA 60
per Gaudron ACJ,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ
Commission of Police
(1999) 167 ALR 91
[1999] HCA 60
Gaudron ACJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
Callinan JJ
Calman v Commission of Police
(1999) 167 ALR 91
[1999] HCA 60
Aldrich v Boulton & Anor
[2000] QCA 501
per Thomas JA, Pincus
and Muir JJA agreeing (namely, in contrast to the
case, it is
lawful for a decision to be made by the Council without exposing
reasons and without mention of the matters taken into account in
deciding upon
the particular order that is made).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (887 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter