URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/307.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McGufficke v Building Professionals Board [2013] NSWADT 307 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
McGufficke v Building Professionals Board
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 307
Hearing Date(s):
2 December 2013
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Friedmann, Non-judicial Member
Board's findings and orders affirmed
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE - Accredited Certifier - Review of disciplinary
decision - standards in relation to issuance of construction
and occupation
certificates - three allegations found proven - Board finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct -- orders of
reprimand and fine - decision of Board
Building Professionals Act 2005
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Building Professionals Act
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
Cases Cited:
McGufficke v Building Professionals Board
[2013] NSWADT 296
Resources of Australia Pty Ltd; ex p Pollock
[2004] WASCA 122
District Council of Mt Barker
[2001] SAERDC 30
Principal judgment
Scott McGufficke (Applicant)
Building Professionals Board
(Respondent)
Representation
D A Lloyd (Applicant)
- Solicitors:
J Callaghan, Lee & Lyons (Applicant)
A Grey, Building Professionals
Board (Respondent
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
applicant, Mr Scott McGufficke, an accredited certifier, has applied for review
of a disciplinary determination made by the Building
Professionals Board under
Building Professionals Act 2005
(BP Act). He holds a Category
A2 accreditation, with conditions, registration no BPB 0083. He is director of
the business, AcroCert
Pty Ltd, based at Maitland NSW.
decision made 28 February 2013 the Board found him guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in relation to the issuance of
a construction certificate
and a final occupation certificate for a development at Lot 100, Headlam Road,
Moss Vale, described as
an 'equine agistment facility', with an estimated
building cost of $5.4m. In summary, Mr McGufficke was found, one, to have issued
a construction certificate which gave the development the wrong classification;
two, to have repeated the error in relation to the
occupation certificate; and
three, to have issued the occupation certificate when a pre-condition of the
development consent relating
to waste management had not been complied with.
Board made the following disciplinary orders:
A. Mr McGufficke is reprimanded.
B. Mr McGufficke is ordered to pay a fine of ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
to be paid to the Board within 28 days of the date of
the decision on the
C. Mr McGufficke undertake in 2013, successfully complete, and provide
suitable evidence to the Board upon successful completion of
the following
course:Advanced Building Regulation, offered by UTS Centre for Local
Government.
Tribunal's review jurisdiction is conferred by s 33 of the BP Act. The review
goes to the merits of the decision, both in respect
of the primary finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and the disciplinary orders. The Tribunal's
powers are conferred by
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(ADT Act), the primary provision being
It provides:
63 Determination of review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for a review of a reviewable decision, the
Tribunal is to decide what the correct and preferable
decision is having regard
to the material then before it, including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant enactment on the
administrator who made the
(3) In determining an application for the review of a reviewable decision,
the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the reviewable decision and make a decision in substitution
for the reviewable decision it set aside, or
(d) to set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by the administrator in accordance with any directions
recommendations of the Tribunal.
McGufficke lodged the review application on 31 May 2013. The Board filed all
relevant material, including its investigation report.
The report was prepared
by Mr Ron Rodgers of the Board. The investigation arose from a complaint by Mr
Les Pawlak, Manager, Development
and Building Services, Environmental Assessment
Branch, Wingecarribee Shire Council.
the application itself, Mr McGufficke submitted that the Board's decision was
not the correct and preferable one in the circumstances.
He contested the
Board's findings against him in respect of each of the three allegations found
proven (a fourth allegation was found
not proven). If the Tribunal disagreed,
and upheld the Board's decision, he submitted in the alternative that the fine
He did not contest the educational order. Generally as to penalty, he
submitted that greater regard should have been given to the
fact that one of the
four allegations was not proven.
McGufficke filed submissions and other material. The Board provided submissions
in support of its decision.
Tribunal heard the application on 2 December 2013, and, as is usual in this
class of case, the Tribunal was constituted by a presidential
member and a
non-judicial member with expertise in accredited certification (Mr Peter
Friedmann, a registered surveyor of standing,
and an accredited certifier). Mr D
A Lloyd appeared for Mr McGufficke, and Mr A Grey for the Board. Mr McGufficke
did not give evidence.
He relied on the submissions as to interpretation made by
'Unsatisfactory professional conduct'
'Unsatisfactory
professional conduct' is defined by s 19 of the BP Act as
unsatisfactory professional conduct
of an accredited certifier
means any of the following (whether consisting of an act or omission):
(a) conduct occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited
certifier's functions as a certifying authority that falls
short of the standard
of competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier,
(b) a contravention of this Act, the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
, or the regulations under any of those
Acts, by the accredited certifier, whether or not the accredited certifier is
prosecuted or
convicted for the contravention,
(c) a contravention by the accredited certifier of a law (whether or not a
New South Wales law, and whether or not the contravention
is an offence) that
relates to the functions or obligations of a person as an accredited certifier
or the holder of an equivalent
authorisation, or involves fraud or dishonesty,
whether or not the accredited certifier is prosecuted or convicted for the
contravention,
(d) a failure to comply with a statutory or other duty, or a contractual
obligation, imposed on the accredited certifier by or in
accordance with a law
(whether or not a New South Wales law) that relates to the functions or
obligations of a person as an accredited
certifier or the holder of an
equivalent authorisation,
(e) the exercise by the accredited certifier of functions as a certifying
authority in a partial manner,
(f) the wilful disregard by the accredited certifier of matters to which the
accredited certifier is required to have regard in exercising
functions as a
certifying authority,
(g) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with any relevant code of
conduct contained in the accreditation scheme,
(h) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with a term or condition
of the certificate of accreditation,
(i) a failure by an accredited certifier to comply with an order of the Board
or the Tribunal under this Act,
(j) a failure by the accredited certifier, without reasonable excuse, to
comply with a direction or requirement under
(k) wilfully misleading or obstructing the Board in the exercise of any
function under this Part or
(l) any other improper or unethical conduct of the accredited certifier that
indicates that the accredited certifier is unfit to properly
carry out the
duties of an accredited certifier,
(m) any conduct specified by a provision of this Act as being capable of
being unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct or any
other conduct prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition.
we have commented elsewhere recently, it is we think less than fair to
accredited certifiers to have a general finding of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct entered without specifying the categories among the above into which it
is seen as fitting. We will approach
this case on the basis that it is the
primary category, category (a), into which Mr McGufficke's conduct is said to
fall, plus in
the case of Allegation 1 category (g).
McGufficke's first argument in reply does not turn on the detail of the
allegations and the Board's response.
submission focusses on the terms of category (a) in the definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
submission notes that category (a) states that unsatisfactory professional
conduct occurs if in the exercise of his or her functions
the accredited
certifier 'falls short of the standard of competence, diligence and integrity
that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier'. The argument is that the Board must satisfy itself that
the conduct found
to be in error breaches the standard of 'competence, diligence
and integrity' in each respect. Here, it is submitted, the errors
competence and diligence, but there was no finding of lack of integrity.
Therefore, it is contended that there can be no
finding in terms of category
(a). That being the case all allegations fail, perhaps with the limited
exception of the element of
allegation 1 that relies on breach of provisions of
the Code of Conduct.
our view, and with respect, this is a far-fetched submission. The standard
simply refers to the three usual components of formulations
of this kind. It is
not necessary in a case where category (a) is under consideration for each of
the three components of the standard
to be the subject of separate evidence and
separate adverse findings, before a global finding can be made. A certifier
person of integrity in the sense that there is nothing about the
conduct that was dishonest, corrupt or serving some personal interest
conflict with that of the client or the community. Nevertheless, he or she may
have displayed a lack of competence or a lack of
would defeat the purposes of the statutory scheme if this mechanical
interpretation were to be adopted. Clearly, the expression
is meant to be a
compendious or collective one, and it is enough that there be a failure to reach
an acceptable standard in relation
to one of the components for a global finding
to be made. Consistently with this view, therefore, the word 'and' should be
'or'. As Malcolm CJ noted in
Re Peat Resources of Australia Pty Ltd;
ex p Pollock
[2004] WASCA 122
'the purposive approach to
interpretation of a statute includes reading 'and' for 'or' or vice versa if the
purpose of the legislation
suggests such an interpretation'. See generally,
Pearce & Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(6th ed. 2006)
[2.25]-[2.27].
will now turn in more detail to outline the nature of the development, and the
detail of the Allegations and the findings.
of Development.
On 9 February 2010 (later modified on 17 August 2010)
Wingecarribee Shire Council granted development consent for a development
as 'Equine Agistment Facility.' The consent had 32 conditions. There
were 12 'general' conditions, 7 'environmental management' conditions,
engineering works and services' conditions, 5 'building requirements'
conditions, and 1 condition headed 'government agencies'.
The 'government
agencies' condition was highly detailed, with 26 paragraphs referring to eight
subject areas where adherence was
required to the Sydney Catchment Authority's
regional environmental plan.
construction certificate issued by Mr McGufficke described the development as an
'equine facility including horse stables, training
and maintenance facilities,
farm sheds and garage'. It gave an estimated value of the works as
Tribunal was shown a number of photographs. They depicted a major structure, its
primary features being a double storey building
at the front to which were
connected a wing on either side at a right angle to each other. Each wing
contained a number of stable
boxes set either side of a walkway, and associated
facilities such as hosing down stalls, vet rooms and equipment areas. The
also included some external structures, and a garage.
its submissions the Board described this building, the main building, as a
multi-use building with the following elements: office
(x4), reception, tea
room, staff room, trainers lounge, office/lunch room, WC (x6), staff shower and
wash basin area, bedding store
room, hyperbaric chamber area, vet, spa (equine),
rug store/tack store (x2), dry tack store, bedding (room), bin store, bedding
wash bay (x4), feed mix and store (x2), tack (room), tie up (stall) (x6),
store (room), horse box (x24). The other buildings on the
property were: hay and
feed store/paddock feed, machinery store, garage, workshop/farm store/secure
store, arrivals barn/arrivals
yard. The complex also included an equestrian
centre, a salt water training centre and an arena.
will deal with Allegations 1 and 2 together.
Allegation 1
Mr McGufficke determined construction certificate no. 10-370, dated 28
July 2010, for a new purpose-built equine agistment facility.
The building
included provision for a hyperbaric chamber, spa, staff amenities, reception,
feed store, board room, offices, trainer's
lounge and wash bays. Mr McGufficke
noted on the certificate an incorrect building classification of class 10a in
lieu of classes
5 and 7b. In so doing, Mr McGufficke failed to properly consider
the requirements of
s 109F(1)(a)
Environmental Planning and Assessment
(EPA Act) and clauses 145(1)(b) and 147(1)(f) of the
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Regulation 2000
In failing to properly consider the classification of the building, Mr
McGufficke's actions fell short of the standard of competence,
diligence and
integrity that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent accredited certifier and breached
requirements 1 and 5 of the Building
Professionals Code of Conduct for Accredited Certifiers.
The provisions mentioned above state:
EPA Act, s 109F Restriction on issue of construction certificates
(1) A construction certificate must not be issued with respect to the plans
and specifications for any building work or subdivision
work unless:
(a) the requirements of the regulations referred to in section 81A (5) have
been complied with, and
Reg 145(1)(b)
EPA Reg, cl 145 Compliance with development consent and Building Code of
(cf clause 79G of EP&A Regulation 1994)
(1) A certifying authority must not issue a construction certificate for
building work unless:
(b) the proposed building (not being a temporary building) will comply with
the relevant requirements of the
Building Code of Australia
(as in force
at the time the application for the construction certificate was made).
EPA Reg, cl 147 Form of construction certificate
(1) A construction certificate must contain the following:
(f) the classification (in accordance with the
Building Code of
) of the building to which the certificate relates.
Code of Conduct, cl 1 (
Building Professionals Board, Code of Conduct: a
(2006, rev. 2007))
Code of Conduct, cl 1
An accredited certifier shall carry out his or her functions and duties, and
exercise any discretionary powers, in a way that promote
or preserve the public
Code of Conduct, cl 5
An accredited certifier shall exercise reasonable care and attention in
carrying out his or her duties, and in the exercise of his
or her powers.
Allegation 2
Mr McGufficke issued a final occupation certificate dated 20 February 2012
for a building that was not suitable for occupation or
use in accordance with
its classification under the Building Code of Australia. The building did not
comply with the requirements
for a class 5 and 7b building pursuant to the
Building Code of Australia. Mr McGufficke has breached section 109H(5)(c) of the
Mr McGufficke's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the
standard of competence, diligence and integrity that a member
of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited certifier.
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Restrictions on issue of occupation certificates
(5) A final occupation certificate must not be issued to authorise a person
to commence occupation or use of a new building unless:
(c) the building is suitable for occupation or use in accordance with its
classification under the
Building Code of Australia
Consideration
McGufficke's assessment of the various elements of the facility led him to
conclude that the best overall classification under
the Building Code of
Australia (BCA) was that the development fell into Class 10a, i.e. a
non-habitable shed.
BCA has ten classes, and its detailed provisions are grouped into two categories
- Class 1 and 10 buildings (Volume Two), and
Classes 2-9 buildings (Volume One).
Classes 1 and 10 cover small scale residential buildings - single dwellings, and
smaller scale
boarding house, guest house, hostels or the like. Classes 2-9
cover more substantial buildings such as duplexes (Class 2), larger
boarding houses and the like (Class 3), dwellings within Class 5-9 buildings
(Class 4), office buildings used for professional
or commercial purposes (Class
5), shops (Class 6), a building which is a car park, or used for the storage or
display of goods (Class
7), a laboratory or workshop (Class 8), or a building of
a public nature, such as a health care building (Class 9).
consequences attach to different classifications. Classes 1 and 10 lie at the
lower end of the regulatory scheme. They do
not attract the degree of regulation
that attaches to Classes 2 to 9 buildings in relation to such matters as:
structural elements
(e.g. load-bearing beams, fire hazard properties), fire
resistance (e.g. compartmentation and separation, protection of openings),
access and egress, services and equipment (fire fighting, smoke management, lift
installations, emergency lighting), health and amenity,
and miscellaneous other
issues (such as energy efficiency).
BCA's commentary deals with the situation where a building has diverse elements
or a development has diverse elements capable
of carrying different
classifications. The commentary provides guidance as to which classification
should ultimately be chosen, after
weighing up the particular classifications
that might attach to particular elements. So for example, a development might
have a residential
element that arguably falls within Class 1 or Class 4, but
otherwise have elements that place it within Class 5, in which case the
classification would be Class 5. This is a simple illustration.
McGufficke assessed the facility as Class 10a within the Building Code of
Australia (BCA). This classification covers 'a non-habitable
building being a
private garage, carport, shed or the like'.
McGufficke's overall assessment was that it was 'a non-habitable shed'. He
regarded the dominant element of the main building to
be the two wings that
contained the stable boxes for the horses. He acknowledged that the two storey
structure at the front entrance
of the main building could not properly be
treated as a shed. It contained a reception area, with at ground level four
offices, two
WCs and a tea room. Upstairs there was a board room, a meeting
room, a store, a WC and a tea room. However he considered that this
feature did
not affect the overall judgment having regard to the '10%' rule. The BCA (Vol 1,
p 40) provides:
'A.3.3. Multiple classification
Each part of a building must be classified separately, and
(a) (i) where parts have different purposes - if not more than 10% of the
floor area of a storey, being the minor use, is used for
a purpose which is a
different classification, the classification applying to the major use may apply
to the whole storey; and
(ii) the provisions of (i) do not apply when the minor use is a laboratory or
Class 2, 3 or 4 part.'
is not a defined term under the BCA. The following meanings given by the
Oxford English Dictionary (on-line)
provide, we think, an accurate
indication of how the word is ordinarily used in the Australian
a. A slight structure built for shelter or storage, or for use as a
workshop, either attached as a lean-to to a permanent building
or separate;
often with open front or sides. The special purpose is indicated by a defining
word prefixed, as cow-, cart-, goat-,
b. A similar structure, but large and strongly built; often consisting of
a roof supported on columns. Also Austral. and N.Z., short
a. poet. A hut, cottage, poor dwelling.
b. gen. A structure that affords shelter or covering; the hiding-place,
lair or nest of an animal.
wings of this complex were far more than mere barns or sheds in the way these
terms might be used in ordinary speech to refer
to a horse-barn or a sheep-shed.
For example the north facing wing had the following configuration of internal
elements - starting
from the rear yard: spa, hyperbaric chamber, staff
amenities, vet's room, store, then 6 horse boxes, then a central cross-wing with
a feed mix & store, a bedding room, and office/lunch room, a rug store/tack
store, a dry tack store, two wash bays, followed
by another 6 boxes. The east
wing had 12 horse boxes divided into two sets of 6 with a similarly arranged
cross-wing (the main difference
being that it had two tie-up boxes), and at the
far end there were staff amenities, a staff room, a trainer's lounge, a wash
two tack room and four more tie-up boxes.
our view there was a level of complexity to these wings which bore no
relationship to the usual meaning of shed.
consequence of his classification was that the regulatory standards applicable
to non-habitable sheds were all that he required
be satisfied. In our view, this
assessment was wrong and demonstrated incompetence.
were referred by Mr McGufficke's counsel to various interstate court rulings
going to the question of what structures could reasonably
be regarded as a shed.
They turned on their own facts. We acknowledge that a shed could be a big
structure, cover a large area and
serve a commercial purpose. Much will depend
on the complexity or otherwise of the physical elements of the built structure
singularity or otherwise of the activity that occurs in the shed. We
endorse the observations of the South Australian Environment,
Resources and
Development Court in
Schmidt v District Council of Mt Barker
[W]e think it appropriate to express the view that the principal reason for
the classification of buildings is to ensure that all
buildings are both
structurally sound and may be safely used for the purpose for which they have
been either constructed or adapted.
If a building is used for a purpose other
than that appropriate for its classification, there are risks that it may not be
structurally
adequate for that use and that its occupants may be in danger. That
is what the classification of buildings is all about.
our view, Allegation 1 (the construction certificate) is proven in relation to
the primary element of the allegation, i.e. that
'Mr McGufficke noted on the
certificate an incorrect building classification of class 10a'. Similarly the
primary element of Allegation
2 (the final occupation certificate) is proven,
i.e. that he 'issued a final occupation certificate ... for a building that was
suitable for occupation or use in accordance with its classification under
the Building Code of Australia.'
both Allegations, the assertion is made that the proper classification was class
Class 5 - 'an office building used for professional or commercial purposes,
excluding buildings of class 6, 7, 8 or 9'
Class 7b - 'A building which is - for storage, or display of goods or produce
for sale by wholesale'.
is not essential that we make a finding on this aspect of the case. In our view,
it is at the least plain that this was a complex
that fell within the classes
2-9 group, and therefore the relevant governing document was Volume One of the
of the two categories nominated by the Board, on their face and read in
isolation from the descriptions of the other classes,
seem adequate to describe
the kind of complex under notice in this case. One would not normally conceive
of an 'office' building
as one housing 24 horses, even though the complex did
have a number of 'office'-type elements. Similarly one would not normally
of the building under notice as one whose purpose was the 'storage, or
display of goods', though again it has some elements of that
accept that certifiers do therefore fact difficulties in coming up with a
classification that best fits the development. However,
in our view it should
have been plain that this was not a class 1/10 situation, and Mr McGufficke's
obligation was to do his best
to select a classification from the other 8
classes. Clearly classes 2, 3 and 4 were not relevant, they relate to
residential buildings.
Similarly class 6 (retail shops and the like) was not
relevant, nor was class 8 (laboratory, production facility, repair facility),
and these were not buildings of a 'public nature' in the way the term is used in
class 9. It follows from this process of elimination
that the overall
classification should have been either class 5 or class 7b. There is a level of
inexactitude involved, but this
approach would have ensured that the levels of
public protection attached to buildings of this nature would have been applied
this complex, rather than the very low levels of protection required of
sheds. At hearing the Board gave examples of the differences
in the levels of
public protection (around issues such as fire protection, access and egress,
particular features such as the door
the investigator, Mr Rodgers, noted in his report to the Board -
The building being classified as a class 10a building was not
required to be assessed under volume 1 of the BCA as providing:
appropriate fire
lighting in accordance with Part E1 of the BCA
appropriate
emergency lighting and exit signs in accordance with Part 3A of the BCA
appropriate
access for people with disabilities in accordance with Part F2 of the BCA
appropriate
measures to ensure that essential fire safety measures required for the
principal building were maintained. No fire safety
schedule or final fire safety
certificate existed for the principal building prior to the issue of the final
occupation certificate.
agree with Mr Rodgers' assessment that:
Mr McGufficke has not given proper consideration to the safety of the
building's occupants having regard to the building's size, purpose,
operations,
the extent to which people are employed in the building, the likely fire load of
the building, and the likely consequences
of any risks to the safety, health and
amenity of people using the building.
is incumbent on the certifier to make a best fit with the classifications having
regard to the overall purpose of the built structure,
the physical
characteristics of the built structure, the variety of its elements, the nature
and degree of human activity, and in
a case like this the degree of animal
activity that the building is to accommodate.
are satisfied that Allegations 1 and 2 are proven, and that Mr McGufficke's
conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of s
19(a) of the BP Act. Further we agree that he committed the contraventions
asserted in the allegations and
that therefore his conduct also constituted
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s
now turn to Allegation 3.
Allegation 3
Mr McGufficke issued a final occupation certificate dated 20 February 2012
when condition 32(xxiv) of Wingecarribee Shire Council's
development consent no
LUA09/0924.01, dated 9 February 2010, was not complied with. The condition
contained in the sub-heading, Implementation
of Conditions required all works
the subject of the condition to be implemented prior to issue of the occupation
certificate as Mr
McGufficke had breached s 109H(2) of the EPA Act.
Mr McGufficke's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the
standard of competence, diligence and integrity that a member
of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited certifier.
Section 109H(2) provides:
Restrictions on issue of occupation certificates
(2) An occupation certificate must not be issued unless any preconditions to
the issue of the certificate that are specified in a
development consent or
complying development certificate, or any requirements of a planning agreement
referred to in section 93F
that, by its terms, are required to be complied with
before such a certificate is issued, have been met.
32 (xxiv) stated that all required works under cl 32 (and also those under cl
22) must be implemented prior to issuance of an occupation
certificate. The 23
preceding requirements of cl 32 all went to works needed to comply with the
requirements of the Sydney Catchment
Authority. The issue in this case was
compliance with the detailed requirements governing wastewater management from
laundries, sinks
and other facilities, disposal of animal and human waste and
effluent and the like (in particular requirements (iii), (iv) and (v)),
to wastewater management.
investigator found that in particular these conditions had not been complied
with as the disposal of all wastewater on site was
to be contained in a 10,000
litre storage tank and then pumped out to be disposed of contrary to the
approval that required that
an onsite disposal system be installed to treat the
waste water.
investigation report noted that the Wingecarribee Shire Council inspection
disclosed that the required works had not been undertaken.
In explanation, Mr
McGufficke stated that he was aware at the time he issued the occupation
certificate that the direct sewer main
was still being arranged, and that an
alternative pump-out system had been installed. He understood that the owner was
in negotiation
with the Council over these issues.
agree with the investigator that, accepting for this purpose that Mr
McGufficke's account is accurate, that there is no warrant
under the law for
issuing an occupation certificate in such circumstances. The appropriate course
is to apply for a modification
of the consent under the s 96
agree with the Board that the allegation is proven, as are the specific
contraventions alleged. The conduct constitutes unsatisfactory
professional
conduct within the meaning of s 19(a) and s 19(b).
Disciplinary Orders
have affirmed the Board's finding in respect of each of the Allegations.
our conclusions, there is nothing to be gained in having a further, separate
hearing on penalty.
noted above the three orders, the first (reprimand) and the third (the course
requirement) is not in contest. Mr McGufficke contests
the second order (fine,
$10,000) as excessive.
our other recent decision affecting Mr McGufficke,
McGufficke v Building
Professionals Board
[2013] NSWADT 296
we noted his many degrees and
breadth of experience. We also noted the testimonials lodged there which are
also before us in this
case, heard one business day later. That case and the
present case both raise concerns in our mind as to the quality of Mr
McGufficke's
professional judgement, and his preparedness to engage in lax
interpretation that appears to be indifferent to the role that an accredited
certifier has in providing an official guarantee of compliance with development
standards. See in that regard the submission that
an accredited certifier's
responsibilities do not extend to all aspects of the approval but only those
items that concern 'building
works', and the decision in this case to classify
the main building as a non-habitable shed.
consider that the fine was in the appropriate range. We do not regard it as
relevant that one of the four Allegations that went
before the Board was found
not proven. The allegation depended on a factual premise that a valid consent
was not in force. That was
shown to be wrong. This was a relatively minor
allegation as compared to the three which we have examined.
Board's findings and orders affirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter