URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/80.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Karen Simpson) v Paul Mclaughlin Group [2006] NSWCIMC 80 (19 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Informant: WorkCover
Authority of New South Wales (
INSPECTOR KAREN SIMPSON)
PAUL MCLAUGHLIN GROUP LIMITED
(ACN 069 148 107)
20026638/06/2 and 20026718/06/2
Hearing Dates:
Date of Decision:
Magistrate:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Sections 8(1)
Representation:
Solicitors for Prosecutor: Carroll &
Solicitor for Prosecutor: Mr J Rodney
Counsel for Defendant:
Mr I Latham
Paul McLaughlin Group Pty Limited t/as PMG Agriculture (ACN 069 148
107), (“the Defendant ”) pleads guilty to a charge
and to a charge under section 13 of the
Occupational Health & Safety
(“the Act”).
The defendant conducts a watermelon growing business at “Borambil
North”, Parkes Road, Condobolin. The business was described
to the Court
as the largest grower of watermelons in Australia. The property is approximately
4,500 acres. There are 4 full-time
employees. During the harvest season the
defendant employs 35-40 people. It is a family company.
The charge in the substantial particular under Section 8(1) of the Act relied
upon is that the Defendant being an employer at “Borambil
Parkes Road, Condobolin in the State of New South Wales (“the site”)
on 23 January 2004 did fail to ensure
the health safety and welfare at work of
all the employees of the employer and in particular Mr Ben Swanston. In
particular, the
(a) Failed to provide and maintain a system of work that was safe and without
risk to health and safety for transporting and moving
watermelon seedlings from
the paddock to the storage area at the site whilst using the
forklift/tractor;
(b) Failed to assess the risks associated with transporting and moving
watermelon seedlings from the paddock to the storage area at
the site whilst
using the forklift/tractor;
(c) Failed to provide any or any adequate instruction or information
concerning the risks associated with transporting and moving
seedlings whilst using the forklift/tractor at the site.
The charge in the substantial particular under Section 13 of the Act relied
upon is that on the said dates at the said place the Defendant,
employer, failed to consult with its employees, in accordance with Division 2 of
the Act, to enable its employees to contribute
to the making of decisions
affecting their health, safety and welfare at work, and in particular to the
health, safety and welfare
of the employee Ben Swanston:
(a) The Defendant failed to have a process of consultation, such as a safety
committee or safety representative;
(b) The Defendant failed to consult with its employees in relation to the
risks of standing on the side of the forklift/tractor and
between the forklift
mast and front of the forklift/tractor whilst it was in motion;
© The Defendant failed to provide its employees with the opportunity of
expressing their views and contributing in a timely fashion
to the resolution of
occupational health, safety and welfare issues at work.
Tendered to the Court by the prosecutor was:
An agreed Statement of Facts
Photographs
The Prosecutors Factual Inspection Report
A printout from the WorkCover Authority Prior convictions Database
A schedule of Costs
And the prosecutors written submissions.
Tendered to the Court by the defendant was:
An affidavit by Paul Gregory McLaughlin, the director of the defendant
corporation. Mr McLaughlin was present at Court.
Documentation regarding the defendant’s safety policies and
programmes.
Written submissions by Mr I Latham of counsel for the Defendant.
The facts relevant to the charge are set out in the Statement of Facts as
1. At all material times the Defendant was a company duly incorporated
with a Registered Office located at 27 Bolsover Street Rockhampton,
Swaffield & Associates, Accountants, Rockhampton in the State of
Queensland.
2. At all material times the Defendant occupied a property located at
“Borambil North” Parkes Road, Condobolin in the
State of New South
Wales (“the site”) where it had as its undertaking agricultural
activities including planting, growing
and harvesting melons (“the
undertaking”).
3. At the entry to the site there was a sign “Borambil North”.
A dirt road approximately two (2 ) kilometers long led
from the entry off the
main Parkes road to the packaging area where there was a large steel shed
approximately 48m long x 26m wide
x 2.10m high. The roof and back wall of the
shed, which faced west, were clad with sheeted steel, all other sides of the
open. The landscape at the site was generally flat with a few trees
in the paddocks.
4. At all material times the Defendant was an employer in the State of New
South Wales.
5. From time to time, there were between thirty-five (35) to forty (40)
employees working at the site. Employees were usually spread
into work groups
undertaking irrigation, picking, storage and packing, planting and land
preparation.
6. At all material times, the Defendant employed Ben Swanston,
twenty-three (23) years old, as a Farmhand/Labourer at the site and
at the time
of the incident he had been employed by the Defendant for approximately four (4)
7. At all material times the Defendant owned and operated a John Deere
2850 tractor serial number T854552 type 4239TL007, which had
a Dalmore forklift
attachment at the front. (“the forklift/tractor”). On each side of
the forklift/tractor, there was
a step approximately 400mm long x 300mm wide, at
The distance from the top of the forklift mast to the ground was approximately
2.25m. Each forklift tyne was approximately 900mm
8. Prior to commencing work with the Defendant Ben Swanston had worked for
approximately two (2) years with Broad, Hay & Spray
working in and around
tractors and had completed a Chemical Users Accreditation course. During this
time Ben Swanston had worked
at the site undertaking contract spraying and hay
making but had not worked with or around the forklift/tractor.
9. At about 11.30 am on 23 January 2004, the day of the incident, Ben
Swanston was working with Craig Schultz planting water melons
seedlings. The
seedlings were contained in black seed trays measuring approximately 700mm x
300mm. As it began to rain the Supervisor,
Chris Schultz, requested Ben
Swanston and Craig Schultz to cease planting and to take the seedlings back to
the storage area.
10. After loading a number of seed trays onto the tynes of the
forklift/tractor, Ben Swanston stood on the side of the forklift/tractor
Craig Schultz drove towards the storage area. On the way to the storage area
Ben Swanston noticed that the seed trays were
unstable and subsequently moved
towards the front of the forklift/tractor, and stood between the forklift mast
and the front of the
forklift/tractor to hold the seed trays preventing them
from falling off the tynes whilst Craig Schultz continued to drive the
11. Craig Schultz stopped the forklift/tractor near the packing shed and
lowered the forklift mast whilst Ben Swanston remained standing
between the
forklift mast and the front of the forklift/tractor. As the mast descended it
caught Ben Swanston’s left foot
between the slide slot at the back of the
forklift mast.
12. In the incident Ben Swanston sustained a traumatic crush injury to his
left foot. He was taken to hospital where initially his
toe was stitched back on and his (4
) toe was stitched. He was put
on an intravenous drip and a course of antibiotics. After four (4) days of
treatment in hospital
healing had not progressed and the wounds were infected.
Subsequently his fourth (4
) and fifth (5
) toes were
amputated with a partial amputation to the lateral side of his left foot. Ben
Swanston was off work for approximately
eighteen (18) weeks with the injury and
as at 22 February 2005 the injury area was still sensitive, pain comes and
is still present in his left foot.
13. Chris Schutz, the site supervisor informed the Inspector that he had
undertaken induction training of Ben Swanston which included
showing him how to
plant seedlings sitting on a plastic chair hooked up to the rear of a tractor
and how to water the seedlings.
Ben Swanston informed the Inspector that the
induction training was limited to being shown how to pick and plant water melons
he was not instructed or trained on the use and operation of any machinery
at the site.
14. Prior to the incident, the Defendant did not have a formal induction
safety program for employees at the site and had not undertaken
any formal or
written risk assessments for the use of the forklift/tractor, other machinery or
work activities at the site.
15. Prior to the incident, the Defendant did not have in place any
accident reporting procedure, formal occupational health and safety
occupational health and safety representative and there was no formal
consultation process for employees at the site.
Matters relating to information
16. Prior to the incident there were no safe work method procedures or
written instructions for the operation of machinery and work
activities at the
site. Chris Schultz informed the Inspector that he showed employees what was
required in respect of land preparation
so far as on the job training was
concerned but he was not aware of what happened in respect of picking or
planting water melons
or working on the harvester.
17. Employees were given rudimentary safety instructions being that if
they observed something which was not right, they were to report
Schultz informed the Inspector that basic instructions to employees included,
who they were to work with, driving on the
property, start and finishing times,
smoko times, lunch times and permit areas.
18. The Defendant did not consult or share with its employees information
concerning safe work methods or procedures at the site.
The Defendant failed to
consult with its employees in relation to the dangers of standing between the
forklift mast and the front
of the forklift/tractor whilst it was in motion. As
there were no formal mechanisms in place, the Defendant failed to provide its
employees with the opportunity of expressing their views and contributing in a
timely fashion to the resolution of occupational health
and safety welfare
issues in the workplace.
19. On 3 March 2004 in response to a report of an accident notified to
WorkCover by the injured person, the Inspector attended at
the site and met with
Paul McLaughlin, Director of the Defendant and Chris Schultz, Manager of Land
Preparation to undertaken an
inspection. The Inspector made a number of
observations and took photographs of the site including the packaging area and
the tractor.
20. On 3 March 2004 the Inspector observed that employees may be exposed
to risks of injury from unsafe systems of work when riding
on the front of the
forklift/tractor. On 8 March 2004 Inspector Simpson issued Improvement Notice
No. 7-50150 upon the Defendant
which required the Defendant to identify any
hazards associated with the use of the forklift/tractor and to assess the risk
and eliminate
the risks or if not reasonably practicable to do so to control the
risks. The Defendant’s attention was drawn to the Regulation
and the Act
and the Fork Lift Truck Drivers Guide 1998.
21. On 8 March 2004 Inspector Simpson issued Improvement Notice No.
7-50026 upon the Defendant which required improvements for providing
establishing occupational health and safety consultative processes as prescribed
by the Regulation including safety committees,
safety representatives and other
agreed arrangements with employees. The Defendant’s attention was drawn
to the Code of Practice
concerning consultation, the Regulation and the
22. Following this incident the Defendant undertook the following remedial
work at the site:-
i. A consultative process as prescribed by the OHS Regulation has been put
ii. Improvement Notices have been complied with.
iii. Induction procedures have been put in place with an induction
registrar for employees.
iv. A Code of Standards for employees.
v. Safety meetings.
vi. A safety policy dated 2 December 2004.
vii. Risk assessments have been undertaken for tractor/forklift and
forklift operations as well as risk assessments for land preparation,
irrigation, watermelons, pumpkins, tractor operations, general maintenance of
farm, general farm hazards and safe work procedures
to tasks on the
MAXIMUM PENALTY
The maximum penalty prescribed by Parliament under the Act for Corporations
being the first offence is $550,000 and for individuals
is $55,000 see section
12 (b) of the Act. However by virtue of section 105 of the Act, The Court is
limited to imposing a maximum
penalty of $55,000. The size of the penalty
obviously reflects the legislative and community expectation that offences under
Act will be treated seriously. See
R v Howland
[1999] NSWCCA 10
(1998) 104 A Crim R
R v Slattery
(1996) 90 A Crim R 519
PRINCIPLES APPLICABLE TO SENTENCING UNDER THE ACT
RELEVANT SENTENCING FACTORS
Crimes Sentencing Procedure Act 1999
("the CSP Act") applies to
sentencing hearings in this jurisdiction. Section 3A of the CSP Act codifies the
common law position in
relation to the purposes of sentencing as stated by the
High Court in
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
the protection of society, deterrence to the offender and of others
who may be tempted to offend, retribution and reforms.”
However the legislative framework of the CSP Act does not represent a
departure from settled sentencing principles or an imposition
on judicial
discretion but rather further guidance and structure to the sentencing process.
[2004] NSWCCA 131.
In considering the penalty to impose it is for the Court to determine the
objective seriousness of the offence otherwise referred
nature and quality”
of the offence by taking into account
the relevant objective facts that go to the offence. See
Capral Aluminium v
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Mayo-Ramsay)
; 99 IR 29;
Lawrenson Diecasting Pty Limited v WorkCover Authority
of New South Wales
Fisher v Samaras Industries
Pty Limited
(1996) 82 IR 384.
In consideration of penalty for an offence under the Act, the Court takes
into account the object and purpose of the Act to protect
workers from breaches
of safety, health and welfare and to compel attention to occupational health and
safety issues so that persons
are not exposed to risks to their health and
safety in the workplace. See
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
(Inspector Ankucic)
v McDonald’s Australia Limited
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
(2000) 95 IR
Defendants are entitled to consideration for subjective factors which
mitigate the seriousness of the offence or exculpate the accused
early plea of guilty, co-operation with the investigating authority and measures
taken after the accident. See
Lawrenson Diecasting at
477. Other relevant
considerations include the matters referred to in section 21A (3) of the CSP
Consideration of a number of factors will assist in determining the objective
seriousness of an offence:
(a) the maximum penalty prescribed for the offence;
(b) the need for general deterrence;
(c) the need for specific deterrence;
(d) the nature and quality of the offence having regard to considerations of
foreseeability;
(e) the nature of the offence relative to the availability of remedial
(f) the practical consequences flowing from the commission of the
NATURE AND QUALITY OF THE OFFENCE
Warman v Work Authority Authority
(1988) 80 IR 326 at 339, the Full
Bench of the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session referred to the
well settled approach
to the determination of penalty:
"The penalty must reflect the nature and quality of the particular
offence. The level of penalty must, on the one hand compel attention
occupational health and safety risks in order to ensure that persons are not
exposed to such risks at their workplaces, but on
the other hand must not be
oppressively high. "
Lawrenson Diecasting Pty Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
the Commission in Court Session noted
that a number of factors may tend to establish the existence of an objectively
serious offence.
These include where there is an obvious or foreseeable risk to
safety against which appropriate measures were not taken, even though
measures were available and feasible. In the present cases, the Court should
have regard to the following:
1. The obvious risks involved;
2. The degree of seriousness of the breach;
3. Availability of simple remedial steps.
The charge and the particulars of the charge establish the parameters in
which the objective seriousness of the offence should be
considered by the
Morison v Powercoal.
Foreseeable and obvious risks involved
In the circumstances the risk of injury to Mr Swanston from falling from the
side of the forklift/tractor whilst it was in motion
or being caught between the
descending mast and the front of the forklift/tractor was apparent and
foreseeable. See
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Ankucic)
v McDonald's Australia Limited
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
(2000) 95 IR 383
When one looks at the particular failures, the evidence shows that there was
no safe work method procedure for transporting and moving
watermelon seedlings
using the forklift/tractor or for securing the seed trays in a way that would
prevent persons from having to
hold on to the trays whilst the forklift/tractor
was in motion. There were no safe work method procedures or written information
or instructions for the operation of the forklift/tractor while transporting and
moving watermelon seedlings from the paddock to
the storage area.
The Defendant failed to assess the risks associated with transporting and
moving watermelon seedlings from the paddock to the storage
area whilst using
the forklift/tractor. There was no system in place to ensure that employees
would be properly informed, instructed,
trained and supervised in the use and
operation of machinery at the site.
Employees interviewed by the Inspector were unable to inform the inspector of
such procedures. The employees were given rudimentary
safety instructions being
that if they observed something which they thought was not right they were to
Prior to the incident, the Defendant did not have in place any accident
reporting procedure, formal occupational health and safety
occupational health and safety representative and there was no formal
consultation processes for employees at the site.
Matters relating to
information about safety were undertaken infrequently and informally. There was
no formal mechanism in place
by which employees were informed or able to express
their views or contribute in a timely fashion to the resolution of occupational
health and safety and welfare issues in the workplace.
The need to properly assess the risks, implement adequate measures to isolate
or control the risks and a safe work system and to communicate
procedures to the workers was vitally important because the Defendant was
conducting a large scale farming operation in
an isolated area. Failure to
employ safe work systems and communicate such had the potential for very serious
consequences.
The existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk which is likely to result in
serious injury or death will result in the offence being
made more serious in
nature. See
Capral Aluminium Limited at paras 81 and 82.
This is not a
case where with the benefit of hindsight, a risk is finally revealed. The risks
associated with the operation of machinery
at the Defendant’s undertaking
were foreseeable.
The degree of seriousness of the breach
The seriousness of
an injury does not dictate the size of any penalty but it does demonstrate the
seriousness of the detriment to
safety occasioned by the offence:
Authority (NSW) v Wonar Pty Ltd
(unreported, Industrial Court, NSW, No 1214
JJ, 30 June 1992 (at
Lawrenson Diecasting; Tyler v Sydney Electricity
(1993) 47 IR 1
The risk of serious injury or death as a result of being crushed by the
forklift/tractor while transporting and moving watermelon
seedlings from the
paddock to the storage area by standing on the mast was always apparent. The
need for the implementation of safe
work systems, their observance and
communication and acknowledgement of such by the workers in such circumstances
was paramount.
In the incident Ben Swanston sustained injury to his left foot. The injury
and his progress thereafter are documented at para 13
in the Statement of
This is not a case where the employee acted outside of the established work
system for transporting seedlings or whose actions were
Defendant’s control. There is no evidence that Mr Swanston was an abuser
of safe workplace practices or that he
had engaged in or encouraged conduct that
posed risks to him or other employees at the site. His action was exacerbated
by his haste
to make good a problem that had both safety and operational
implications.
The obligation of the employer to ensure safety is absolute and is not
diminished by such behaviour. The duty is owed not only to
the careful and
observant employee but also to the hasty, careless, inadvertent, inattentive,
unreasonable or disobedient employee
in respect of conduct that is reasonably
foreseeable. See
Dunlop Rubber Australia Ltd v Buckley
[1952] HCA 72
(1952) 87 CLR 313
McLean v Tedman
(1984) 115 CLR 306
at 311 - 312 and
Authority of NSW (Inspector Twynam-Perkins) v Maine Lighting Pty Limited
(1995) 100 IR 248.
Availability of simple remedial steps
The seriousness of the offence is demonstrated by the simple and
straightforward steps the Defendant could have implemented to meet
obligations under the Act. This should have included proper identification of
the risks and implementation of safe work procedures,
a proper documented
control system for safety matters, regular consultation with its employees in
relation to safety and establishing
forums to discuss safety matters, effective
communication and supervision of the work at the site.
The defendant is entitled to credit for its swift actions aimed at ensuring
that an accident similar in nature does not occur in the
General and Specific Deterrence
General deterrence must be
taken into account because, as identified by
at 386, and approved by the Full Bench in
Morrison v Powercoal
the offence is against a statute of public interest and public
concern and it is important to compel attention to occupational health
safety issues. The fact that an employer is located in a rural area provides no
excuse to the strict observance of the safety
It is submitted by
the defendant that general deterrence should be taken into account but should
take account of the organisational
and legal costs of the accident. The
defendant does accept the view expressed in
Morrison v Eureka Opals (No 3)
[2006] NSWIRComm 151
that all defendants experience these factors. It is
appropriate that I include in the penalty an element for
general deterrence.
In relation to specific deterrence, as the Full Bench observed in
Aluminium v WorkCover Authority [2000
at [77], that in view of the
scope of the obligations by employers under the
Occupational Health &
, in most cases, it will be necessary to have regard to the need
to encourage a sufficient level of diligence by the offender in the
future. The
Defendant remains an employer and continues to undertake a large enterprise in
farming growing watermelons. In particular
the Defendant continues to engage a
significantly large itinerant workforce on a seasonal basis. However, the risk
of re-offending
is extremely low as a result of the extensive and comprehensive
measures taken by the defendant, together with a demonstrated commitment
safety. Accordingly, the component for specific deterrence is small.
The Nature and quality of the offences
In summary, applying the objective features here the defendant submitted that
the offence should properly be seen as being at the
low end of the scale of
culpability. While there are two separate offences; the defendant submitted they
should be viewed through
“the prism of totality”.
However, there were inadequacies in the Defendant’s system of work and
means of communicating and drawing attention of the workers
to matters of safety
as outlined above. There was every prospect of serious consequences arising from
a breach of the Act. Such prospect
was foreseeable as described above. I would
place the breaches in the mid range of matters coming before this court. I agree
both the prosecutor and the defendant that the principle of totality
A question of parity
An ex-tempore judgement was
delivered on 27 January 2005 in
Inspector Simpson -v- Stephen Allan Sandeman
and Wallace Stanley Sandeman
in this Court dealing with a breach under
section 8(1) and a breach of section 13. The Court dealt with the matter under
the principle
of totality. That is, all matters were dealt with as if the
Defendants were a single enterprise and the individual fines were adjusted
accordingly. The statement of Facts Showed:
On 5 December 2003 the worker was in the process of cleaning up the work
area and was travelling in a forklift driven by Michael Duncan.
suggested that he climb onto the forklift tynes in order to collect debris from
the roof top gutters. The worker was raised
approximately 2.5 metres
Whilst in motion, with the worker raised on the tynes of the forklift,
the front left wheel of the forklift struck a piece of debris
(believed to be
timber), causing the forklift to lose balance. As a result of the loss of
balance the worker fell from the tynes
of the forklift on to the concreted floor
As a result of the accident the worker suffered unconsciousness, a broken
right wrist, a broken AC joint of the shoulder, neck sprain,
and partial hearing
loss in the left ear.
The worker was not properly supervised at the
time of the accident. The worker was provided with no formal training or
induction upon
recommencement of work with the defendants in November
It was common practice prior to the accident for employees of the
defendants to be elevated on forklift tynes to undertake work such
as clearing
roof top gutters.
Daniel Shells and Philip Betsha were aware that it was common practice
prior to the accident for employees of the defendants to be
elevated on forklift
tynes to undertake work such as clearing roof top gutters.
no safe system of work as employees were allowed to travel unsecured in forklift
tynes raised up to 2.5 metres, in areas
where debris was allowed to be
Prior to 5 December 2003 the defendants had failed to implement many of
the recommendations of the Safety Inspection Report.
Prior to 5 December 2003 the defendants had no formal Occupational Heath
& Safety Policy in place and did not have an Occupational
Safety committee.
Prior to 5 December 2003, and in particular after receiving the Safety
Inspection Report, the defendants failed to properly consult
employees to enable the employees to allow their employees to contribute to the
making of decisions regarding their health
and safety whilst at the defendants
The Court dealt with the matter under the principle of
totality. That is, al matters were dealt with as if the Defendants were a single
company and the individual fines were adjusted accordingly. The Court stated:
The starting point for an appropriate penalty for a company in a
similar situation, prior to deductions for early guilty plea, would
for breach of s 8(1) and $6,000 for breach of s 13. The Court noted that using
a "global" approach this would be reduced
to $12,000. After deducting 35% for
mitigation matters including an early plea the court found that the appropriate
overall penalty
(both defendants combined for both breaches) should be
The Court then allocated a figure of $1,950 as a fine for
each of the four court attendance notice, two for each partner.
defendant says that the level of risk in
was significantly
higher then in the current matter. In
the worker was raised
approximately 2.5 metres high. This seems to have been a common practice. As a
result of the accident, the
worker suffered significant injuries. The operations
manager Daniel Shells and the general manager Philip Betsha were aware of these
On the other hand the defendant says there are significant
similarities in terms of the equipment used, the otherwise good character
defendants, the lack of safety systems in place, the later rectification of
safety problems; the cooperation with WorkCover
and the plea of guilty.
The defendant submits that in accordance with the principles of parity
that the decision in
should set the upper limit of the penalty
in this matter.
The Prosecution submits that the decision in
establish an upper limit for consideration of penalty in this case.
The principle of parity is premised upon the aspect of equal justice. In
Postiglione v R
(1997) 198 CLR 295 in the joint judgment of Dawson and
Gaudron JJ their Honours stated:
In the case of co-offenders, different sentences may reflect
different degrees of culpability or their different circumstances. If
notion of equal justice is not violated. On some occasions different sentences
may indicate that one or other of them if
infected with error. Ordinarily,
correction of the error will result in their being a due proportion between the
sentences and there
will then be equal justice
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
the Full Bench highlighted the distinction between the
principle of parity and consistency. At [62]:
“It is important to observe the distinction between, and the
differing application of, the principle of parity
and consistency.
Consistency is relevant to the sentencing of different offenders with similar
characteristics who have committed
similar crimes, and to the sentencing of
co-offenders in the same crime. The principle of parity is usually considered
only to the sentencing of co-offenders in the same crime and thus is
not relevant in this matter."
One of the difficulties in applying the principle of parity is that there
will be differences in individual circumstances. For example
the maximum penalty facing the defendants, being individuals, was $55,000 on
each charge; whereas in this case the maximum penalty
is $550,000 for a
corporation on each charge.
Subjective Factors
The Defendant is entitled to have taken into account its plea of guilty to
the offence. The plea of guilty was entered at an early
stage. The utilitarian
value of the plea is at the highest end of the scale of discount for a plea of
guilty. See
R v Thompson: R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383.
The Defendant has co-operated with the WorkCover Authority during its
investigation of the accident. This is accepted as a mitigating
factor within
the jurisdiction. See
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector
Penfold) v Fernz Construction Materials Pty Limited
(1999) 91 IR 119.
Further section 21A (3) (m) and S 22 CSP Act provides legislative recognition
that the Court may impose a lesser
penalty in such
circumstances.
defendant is a good industrial citizen. It has a reasonably large workforce. It
does not have any record of previous convictions.
It has taken steps to ensure
that it is unlikely to re-offend. To the extent that corporate body acting
within a regime of strict
liability can be rehabilitated, that possibility must
be accepted. The defendant has shown remorse for the offence and has shown
(through its officers) deep personal distress and contrition. It has assisted
WorkCover in its investigations. It has introduced
a series of policies and
practices to increase safety at the workplace.
PRINCIPAL OF TOTALITY
Department of Education and Training (NSW) –v- Keenan
[2001] NSWIRComm 106
the issue of totality was considered by the
Full Bench of the Commission. The Court said:
“In determining
penalties for multiple offences under the Act the Court is required to determine
separately an appropriate penalty
for each offence. Having done so, the Court
should then consider what the appropriate penalty should be by applying the
of totality. Where the multiple offences contain common elements, the
principle of totality must, for that reason alone, be applied
to ensure that the
Defendant is not punished more than once for the common elements of the offences
and to avoid double jeopardy
that would follow if that occurred”.
For all the above reasons and allowing the 25% discount
in each matter for the pleas of guilty it is appropriate that a fine of $16,500
be imposed for the s8 (1) breach and a fine of $8,250 be imposed for the s13
breach. The offences containing common elements and
to avoid double jeopardy I
will apply the principle of totality and further reduce the penalties to $10,725
and $5,362 respectively.
1. The defendant is convicted and
fined in regard to each s 8(1) breach $10,725 and in respect of the s13 breach
$5,362, a total of
2. The defendant is ordered to pay to WorkCover
its costs agreed at $3,635.58.
3. The above monies are to be paid to the
Downing Centre Local Court within 28 days.
4. There is a moiety of the fines
to the prosecutor.
Acting Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter