URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glover, Brian John [2024] NSWMPSC 3 (29 February 2024)
Our Ref: 8844/24 PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE
Constituted under Part 8 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation
Dr Brian John Glover MED0001068733 184510
Date/s of Inquiry:
29 January 2024
Mr Paul Mark - Chairperson Dr Hester Wilson
Dr Sara Fergusson Ms Jennifer Houen
Jordan Mitchell – Legal Officer Megan McGrath - Legal
Peter Aitken - Barrister
Megan Priestley - HWL Ebsworth
29 February 2024
The Committee reprimanded Dr Glover
Committee members:
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Appearance for Dr Brian John Glover:
Date of decision:
Publication of decision:
Non-publication directions are made with respect to the name or
identification of Patient A appearing in Schedule A and Annexure A
Complaint, and the names or identification of the pharmacies in Annexure A to
the Complaint
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Healthcare Complaints Commission v Dr Glover
Introduction
May 2019 until June 2021 Dr Glover issued various scripts for restricted drugs
to one of his patients. Dr Glover admits that
his prescribing fell significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner with his level of
training and experience.
Dr Glover also admits that his failure to record his
patient’s addiction status and drug seeking behaviour was in breach of
Schedule 4, clause 1(2) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (NSW)
Regulation’
). Dr Glover acknowledges
that his conduct in these respects amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct under the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law’
). We agree. In the protection of the
public, we have decided to reprimand Dr Glover.
The complaint
circumstances of Dr Glover’s conduct are set out in a complaint made by
the Health Care Complaints Commission
Commission’
) dated 20 December 2023
). The Complaint consists of two
components:
(a) Complaint One concerns the prescribing of the restricted drugs and alleges
unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(a)
of the National Law;
(b) Complaint Two alleges the failure to record in his clinical notes
information known to Dr Glover was a breach of the Regulations
and amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(b) of the National Law.
form of the Complaint, with the name of the patient removed, is attached, and
marked “A”. The Attachment A to the Complaint
lists the restricted
drugs prescribed by Dr Glover with the name of the patient and the various
pharmacies redacted.
Non-publication direction
to Schedule 5D clause 7(1) of the National Law we made a direction that no
information be published that would identify the
patient. That direction
Our hearing
hearing of our inquiry into the Complaint took place on 29 January 2024. Jordan
Mitchell appeared for the Commission with the
assistance of Megan McGrath. Dr
Glover was represented by Peter Aitken, instructed by Megan Priestley of HWL
Ebsworth Lawyers.
Commission provided us with a significant volume of material. There was no
objection to us receiving the documents as being relevant,
which we marked
exhibits as follows.
(a) Exhibit A –
Documents of the Health Care Complaints Commission Volume 1A
(b) Exhibit B –
Documents of the Health Care Complaints Commission Volume 1B
(c) Exhibit C –
letter from the Commission to Dr Emery Kertesz dated 20 December 2023 and
reply from Dr Kertesz dated 6
January 2024;
(d) Exhibit D –
evidentiary certificate issued by AHPRA dated 11 December 2023;
(e) Exhibit F –
two letters from the Commission to Dr Glover dated 5 May 2021 and 10
May 2021 being the letters
to which Dr Glover replied in his letter of 15 May
2021, being at tab 15, page 121 of Exhibit A.
behalf of Dr Glover, we received a folder of material titled
Respondent’s Bundle of Documents Volume One of One
and two CPD
statements which we received without objection and marked exhibits as
(a) Exhibit 1 –
Respondent’s bundle of documents
including reply to the Complaint
dated 31 October 2023, a statement by Dr Glover with annexures of 30 October
2023 and a reference
from Dr Salma Ali of 2 October 2023 with the relevant
letter of request from HWL Ebsworth Lawyers;
(b) Exhibit 2 –
RACGP CPD statement for the 2020/2022 triennium;
(c) Exhibit 3 –
RACGP CPD statement dated 21 January 2024.
Glover gave evidence in person. Dr Salma Ali gave evidence by audio-visual
the outset of our inquiry Mr Aitken drew our attention to paragraphs 45, 46 and
48 of Dr Glover’s statement of 30 October
2023. (Exhibit 1, Tab 2).
Dr Glover admits the subject matter of the Complaint in both respects. As
provided by s146A of the
National Law that admission allows us to consider
whether it be necessary to exercise any of the relevant powers under the
Law in the protection of the public.
evidentiary material provided by the Commission is comprehensive and is not
disputed. Dr Glover is an experienced medical practitioner
having been first
registered in 1982 and practising as a general practitioner in Armidale since
2006. The particulars of Complaint
One sets out the ways in which the Commission
alleges his care fell below what was expected. The clinical notes reveal that Dr
failed to record information about the patient that he was legally
required to record as detailed in Complaint Two. Dr Glover readily
acknowledges
and admits all the particulars of the Complaint.
find the subject matter of the Complaint has been proved as is set out in the
particulars of Complaint One and Complaint Two. In
reaching our conclusion we
were assisted by the evidence of Dr Emery Kertesz in his detailed review and
assessment of Dr Glover’s
conduct as set out in his report of 13 May 2022
(Exhibit A tab 7 page 58) and Dr Kertesz’s follow up letter of 6 January
(Exhibit C).
Accordingly,
we find Dr Glover guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct as alleged in
Complaint One and Complaint Two.
Protective orders
found unsatisfactory professional conduct is it appropriate for us make any
protective orders?
Commission submits that we should reprimand Dr Glover for his conduct in
Complaint One and Complaint Two. In addition, the Commission
submits that
conditions should be imposed on Dr Glover’s registration to limit him to
seeing no more than 30 patients in any
one day, not practising for more than 40
hours a week, and to being mentored by an experienced general
practitioner.
behalf of Dr Glover, Mr Aitken accepted that a reprimand was appropriate but
there was no need for any conditions on Dr Glover’s
registration, as the
public was adequately protected by a reprimand.
agree that a reprimand is warranted. Do the circumstances warrant the imposition
of conditions on Dr Glover’s registration?
What were the circumstances?
is no significant dispute about the circumstances of Dr Glover’s conduct.
Dr Glover was the general practitioner for the
patient for some years before May
2019 and then until June 2021. The patient had been seeing Dr Glover for general
care, particularly
for substance disorder, primarily alcohol. It is apparent
from the medical records and Dr Glover’s statement (Exhibit 1, page
paragraphs 9-14) that the patient had complex medical issues including ongoing
pain management. Over the years the patient’s
narcotic use escalated and
Dr Glover was unsuccessful in seeking to wean the patient off Codeine.
Glover accepted and agreed that he should have obtained advice from a pain
specialist, enforced boundaries around the use of medication,
documented his
treatment plans and obtained the advice of colleagues. He confirms he should not
have prescribed any form of narcotics
for the patient.
seeking to explain how he made these mistakes and failures Dr Glover reflected
on his relationship with the patient. He had worked
with the patient as an
Opioid Dependency Treatment provider and prescriber. The patient was a
registered pharmacist for some of the
years of treatment. As Dr Glover
“the fact that
[the patient] was a fellow health practitioner meant I trusted [the patient]
when I should not have. I should
have been more assertive and firmly imposed
boundaries with [the patient’s] care”.
The question of
“trust” had to do with Dr Glover’s acceptance of the
patient’s stated need for restricted
drugs and usage when he should have
been more questioning and sceptical.
compounding factor from late 2019 was the COVID-19 pandemic. It was difficult to
obtain appointments with specialists and there
were shortages of general
practitioners to work with Dr Glover in his practice. Apparently, these
pressures meant that he did not
give the patient as much attention as he should
have. He relied too much on the patient not requiring close treatment as she had
been an experienced heath practitioner.
this history, it is apparent that the circumstances were not so much of Dr
Glover not identifying the problem or not knowing
what to do but letting his
trust in the patient and the pressure of work allow him to be distracted from
what he knew he ought to
24 June 2021, following proceedings under s150 of the National Law, conditions
were imposed on Dr Glover’s registration that
he is not able to prescribe
S8 drugs and Benzodiazepine derivatives. Dr Glover gave evidence that this event
prompted him to review
his practices. Dr Glover said in his statement:
(a) He now takes better
care of himself;
(b) He holds weekly
meetings to promote discussion of challenges that he and his colleagues face,
and the practice team is encouraged
to maintain effective support networks;
(c) He now takes regular
time out for annual leave, sick leave and lunch breaks and encourages patients
to make face to face appointments
with their usual general practitioner, instead
of walk-ins;
(d) He has developed
systems including the use of templates and patient contracts to foster practice
wide boundaries and expectations
of patient behaviour by providing patients with
information, such as a sign in the practice that restricted drugs will not be
on the first consultation, and other policies for dealing with drug
seeking patients, prescribing drugs of addiction and provision
prescriptions.
Glover also speaks of the weaknesses in his past practice that led to the
prescribing problems for the patient. Looking back, he
says he should have
regularly undertaken the following:
(a) a better assessment
of the patient’s pain and conditions;
(b) taking a more thorough
(c) using alternative
measures for controlling pain and anxiety;
(d) possible referral to
other services such the pain team and a psychiatrist;
(e) obtaining NSW Health
authority for relevant prescriptions;
(f) finding out why the
patient left a previous doctor and obtaining those records; and
(g) being firmer
responding to requests for prescriptions and setting strong boundaries including
following a predetermined reduction
plan and assisting on staged supplies to
assist with withdrawal following lapses.
the practice is not yet at its full strength and is hoping to grow, Dr
Glover says the number of patients and hours
of work are better managed than
during the COVID period.
is significant and important for our consideration that Dr Glover’s
evidence was supported and confirmed by Dr Ali, one of
the general practitioners
works with Dr Glover. Dr Ali gave evidence that she had seen and participated in
the changed practices. Dr Ali was able to confirm
the practice was now dealing
with the problems of drug seeking patients and prescribing restricted drugs in a
thorough and comprehensive
manner. The strategy was for the whole practice,
rather than being left to individual practitioners.
Two concerns Dr Glover’s failure to record the patient’s addiction
status to alcohol and schedule 8 drugs, and
that the patient was a drug
dependent person. It is apparent from the evidence that Dr Glover was aware of
those matters yet failed
to record that information in his clinical notes. That
information was a significant and relevant aspect of the patient’s
allowing for Dr Glover being aware of those issues without making a record, he
is not excused for failing to record that information.
Had he made those
entries, he may have prompted himself to be more careful when dealing with the
patient. And any other practitioner
dealing with the patient needed to know that
information.
Glover has since undertaken courses on medical records and made changes to his
e-record keeping. It is clear from Dr Glover’s
statement that the changes
to his practice mean it is unlikely that a similar error would happen
Consideration of protective orders
Commission provided helpful and comprehensive written submissions. We have been
particularly assisted by the Commission’s
summary of the relevant
principles for our consideration.
agree that it is appropriate to reprimand Dr Glover for Complaint One and
Complaint Two. A reprimand brings home to Dr Glover the
concern that we have
respect to the prescribing of
restricted drugs did or at least had the potential
to adversely affect the care and treatment of the patient. Restricted drugs have
been so categorised precisely because they are high risk substances.
Practitioners needs to be aware of the importance of being thoughtful
careful in their treatments and prescribing practices. Practitioners need to
careful that they do not allow their personal connections with a patient to
cloud their judgment. They need to be aware of when it
would be better for them
to seek further clinical advice or when the patient needs to be referred
matter of maintaining complete clinical records is important. Medical records
are critical in providing good patient care. The
Regulation, Schedule 4
cl1(2)(a), sets out the minimum requirements for clinical notes. Those
obligations are not onerous and were
always capable of being met by Dr Glover. A
reprimand will remind other practitioners to be aware of those obligations and
Are conditions warranted?
Commission has submitted that we should consider a condition on Dr
Glover’s registration limiting him to 30 patients
in any one day and not
to practice more than 40 hours per week. On our assessment of the evidence, we
do not see or consider that
Dr Glover’s unsatisfactory professional
conduct arose from overwork that would warrant ongoing restrictions on his
registration.
We are dealing with unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect
of one patient that arose in the circumstance of a personal relationship
the patient and the unusual exigencies of COVID 19.
evidence is that Dr Glover is presently working within those limits, and he has
no intention of working more intensely nor is
there pressure to do so. The
practice is not yet working at its full capacity and could do with the
participation of another practitioner.
Notwithstanding that situation, Dr Glover
has not worked to excess and has remained within the boundaries he has set
himself. In
our assessment it is not necessary to impose those restrictions on
Dr Glover’s practice.
Commission also proposes a condition for a mentor. We do not see the need to
impose such a condition. In his statement and when
giving evidence Dr Glover has
demonstrated to us that he has a good understanding of the circumstances which
led to his unsatisfactory
professional conduct. He has changed his practices to
ensure a similar matter could not arise again, and
changes have been made to the whole practice. It is noteworthy that Dr
Ali’s evidence confirmed and supported Dr Glover’s
evidence about
these changes.
our view it is not necessary to impose any of the proposed conditions in the
protection of the public. Nor is any other condition
responding to the Commission’s submission for conditions on his
registration Dr Glover said he believed any condition would
end his ability to
supervise practitioners under various education programs. He is not currently
supervising international medical
graduates, but Dr Glover said he hopes and is
looking towards supervising international medical graduates as part of his
plans. Were he unable to supervise international graduates Dr Glover
said he would retire early and leave Armidale with one less
practitioner.
that proposition correct and is the possibility of Dr Glover’s early
retirement a factor against imposing a condition? At
our suggestion both the
Commission and Dr Glover provided supplementary written submissions on that
accept that the Medical Board of Australia’s
Guidelines: Supervised
Practice for International Medical Graduates
provides that were Dr
Glover’s registration to be subject to conditions the Medical Board of
Australia would not permit him
to supervise an international medical graduate.
Even with no conditions imposed but a reprimand in place, he may be denied the
to supervise depending on the Medical Board of Australia’s
assessment of all the circumstances at that time. Much may change,
and there is
a degree of speculation in Dr Glover’s future intentions.
are not of the view that the undetermined possible future impact on Dr
Glover’s ability to supervise an international
medical graduate is a
determining factor that would lead us not to impose a condition, nor to consider
the imposition of a condition.
on the evidence as matters presently stand, we conclude that no protective
orders, beyond the reprimands, are necessary.
Determination
Having found the subject
matter of Complaint One to have been proved, and in accordance with s146B(1)(a)
of the National Law, we reprimand
Having found the subject
matter of Complaint Two to have been proved, and in accordance with s146B(1)(a)
of the National Law, we reprimand
Appeal and review rights
Dr Glover has
the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal
within 28 days of the date of these
written reasons.
Distribution of decision
We provide a
copy of this written statement of our decision to Dr Glover, the Health Care
Complaints Commission, the National Board,
and the Medical Council of NSW,
noting the provisions of s171E(4) of the National Law.
Mark Paul – Chairperson Date: 29 February 2024
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
Executive Officer Medical Council of NSW Punt Road
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 12, 323 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Medical Council
of NSW in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(‘the National Law’)
AMENDED COMPLAINT HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr Brian John Glover
(“the practitioner”) of ARMIDALE, being
practitioner registered under the
National Law
BACKGROUND TO ALL COMPLAINTS
In 1982, the practitioner obtained a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of
Surgery from the University of Sydney. The practitioner
was first registered as
a medical practitioner in New South Wales on 7 April 1982. In 1987, the
practitioner obtained a Diploma of
Obstetrics from the Royal Australian College
of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists and a Diploma of Botanic Medicine from the
Cross Herbal School.
In 2006, the practitioner commenced working as a general practitioner at
Armidale Medical Centre in Armidale, New South Wales (“the
Practice”).
During the period of events that are the subject of the complaints
(“relevant period”) the practitioner was practicing
as a general
practitioner at the Practice.
COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of medicine is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
This complaint relates to the practitioner’s prescribing of restricted
drugs to Patient A.
Annexure A to this Complaint identifies the restricted drugs prescribed by the
practitioner to Patient A.
The drugs identified in Annexure A are in the following categories:
(i) drugs of addiction within the meaning of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Act 1966
(NSW) (“PTGA”), being drugs contained in Schedule
8 of the Poisons List proclaimed under
of the PTGA (“Schedule 8
(ii) prescribed restricted substances within the meaning of the PTGA, being
drugs contained in Appendix D of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(NSW) (“PTGR”) (“Schedule 4D drugs”); and
(iii) restricted substances within the meaning of the PTGA, being drugs
contained in Schedule 4 of the Poisons List proclaimed under
PTGA (“Schedule 4 drugs”).
For the purposes of the particulars set out below, at all material times up
until 16 April 2020, Tramadol was a Schedule 4 Drug.
From 17 April 2020 onwards
Tramadol was a Schedule 4D Drug.
For the purpose of the particulars set out below, the recognised therapeutic
standard of what was appropriate in the circumstances
(i) the Full Prescribing Information published by MIMS Australia for the
relevant drug at the relevant time;
(ii) the Product and Consumer Medicine Information published by the
Therapeutic
Goods Association for the relevant drug at the relevant time
(iii) the Medical Board of Australia “Good Medical Practice: A Code of
Conduct for Doctors in Australia” issued March
(iv) the Medical Board of Australia “Good Medical Practice: A Code of
Conduct for Doctors in Australia” issued October
2020 (in relation to
periods of contravention after that date);
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
Patient A the Schedule 8 drug Oxycodone as set out
in Annexure A in a quantity
and for a purpose that, having regard to the period of time over which the drug
was prescribed:
not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what was appropriate in
the circumstances, contrary to clause 79 of the
was not clinically indicated or appropriate in the patient’s
circumstances.
Patient A the Schedule 8 drug Oxycodone as set out
in Annexure A in
circumstances in which:
was a type C drug of addiction within the meaning of section 28(6) of the
least 9 March 2015, the practitioner held an opinion that Patient A was a drug
dependent person; and
practitioner did not obtain the proper authority from the Secretary of NSW
contrary to section 28(3) of the PTGA.
Schedule 8 drug Oxycodone to Patient A, without appropriately
assessing Patient
A by conducting an adequate and appropriate examination
Patient A the Schedule 8 drug Oxycodone as set out
in Annexure A in
circumstances where:
prescribed Oxycodone to Patient A at inappropriate irregular
prescribed Oxycodone in a variety of strengths and doses.
failed to consider or implement a Schedule 8 medication contract.
failed to consider or implement a staged supply of Oxycodone.
Schedule 8 drug Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) to Patient
A, without appropriately
assessing Patient A by conducting an adequate and appropriate
examination.
drug Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) in combination
with the Schedule 8 drug
21 June 2019, the practitioner ceased prescribing the Schedule 8 drug
Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) to Patient A in circumstances
where he failed to
appropriately follow up on his management plan of reducing the prolonged use of
short acting narcotics.
10 March 2020 and 15 May 2021, the practitioner prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 8 drug Tapentadol as set out in Annexure
A for a purpose that, having
regard to the period of time over which the drug was prescribed:
not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what was appropriate in
the circumstances, contrary to clause 79 of the
was not clinically indicated or appropriate in the patient’s
circumstances.
10 March 2020, the practitioner inappropriately commenced prescribing the
Schedule 8 drug Tapentadol to Patient A, without appropriately
assessing Patient
A by conducting an adequate and appropriate examination.
10 March 2020 and 15 May 2021, the practitioner prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 8 drug Tapentadol as set out in Annexure
A in circumstances in
was a type C drug of addiction within the meaning of section 28(6) of the
least 9 March 2015, the practitioner held an opinion that Patient A was a drug
dependent person; and
practitioner did not obtain the proper authority from the Secretary of NSW
contrary to section 28(3) of the PTGA.
10 March 2020 and 15 May 2021, the practitioner prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 8 drug Tapentadol as set out in Annexure
A in circumstances
prescribed Tapentadol to Patient A at inappropriate irregular
prescribed Tapentadol to Patient A in a variety of strengths and doses.
failed to consider or implement a Schedule 8 medication contract with Patient
failed to consider or implement a staged supply of Tapentadol to Patient
10 March 2020 and 15 May 2021, on the dates and in the quantities set out in
Annexure A, the practitioner inappropriately
prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 8 drug, Tapentadol, in combination with the schedule 4D
benzodiazepines, Diazepam and Temazepam,
placing Patient A at increased risk of
dependence, overdose, profound sedation, and respiratory depression.
24 September 2020 and 12 February 2021, on the dates and in the quantities set
out in Annexure A, the practitioner inappropriately
prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 8 drug, Tapentadol, in combination or at the same period of time as
prescribing with the Schedule
4 drug, Paracetamol + Codeine.
24 September 2020, in the quantity set out in Annexure A, the practitioner
inappropriately prescribed for Patient A the Schedule
4D drug, Tramadol,
combination or at the same period of time as prescribing with the Schedule 4
drug, Paracetamol + Codeine.
10 March 2020 and 24 June 2020, in the quantity set out in Annexure A, the
practitioner inappropriately prescribed for Patient
A Tramadol, in combination
with or at the same period of time as prescribing the Schedule 8 drug,
Tapentadol.
on or around 18 January 2019 and 6 November 2020, the practitioner prescribed
for Patient A Tramadol, as set out in Annexure
A in circumstances
continued to prescribe Tramadol for an inappropriate duration, which was outside
the therapeutic guidelines in the patient’s
circumstances.
prescribed Tramadol at inappropriate irregular intervals.
failed to consider or implement a Schedule 4D medication contract with Patient
failed to consider or implement a staged supply of Tramadol to Patient
19 February 2020, the practitioner inappropriately commenced prescribing the
Schedule 4D drug Temazepam to Patient A, without appropriately
assessing Patient
A by conducting an adequate and appropriate examination.
19 February 2020 and 3 June 2021, the practitioner inappropriately prescribed
for Patient A the Schedule 4D drug Temazepam
as set out in Annexure A in
circumstances where:
failed to counsel Patient A about sleep hygiene.
failed to consider or implement a Schedule 4D medication contract with Patient
failed to consider or implement a staged supply of Temazepam to Patient
19 February 2020 and 22 January 2021, in the quantity set out in Annexure A, the
practitioner inappropriately prescribed for
Patient A the Schedule 4D drug,
Temazepam, in combination with or at the same period of time as, the Schedule 4D
drug Diazepam.
24 September 2020 and 12 February 2021, on the dates and in the quantities set
out in Annexure A, the practitioner inappropriately
prescribed for Patient A the
Schedule 4D drug, Temazepam, in combination or at the same period of time as
prescribing with the Schedule
4 drug, Paracetamol + Codeine.
A the Schedule 4D drug Diazepam as set out
in Annexure A in circumstances
failed to consider or implement a Schedule 4D medication contract with Patient
failed to consider or implement a staged supply of Diazepam to Patient A.
continued to prescribe Diazepam for an inappropriate duration, without obtaining
specialist advice.
24 September 2020, in the quantity set out in Annexure A, the practitioner
inappropriately prescribed for Patient A the Schedule
4D drug, Diazepam, in
combination or at the same period of time as prescribing with the Schedule 4
drug, Paracetamol + Codeine.
prescribed for Patient A the Schedule 4D drug, Diazepam,
as set out in Annexure
A for a purpose that, having regard to the period of time over which the drug
was prescribed:
not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what was appropriate in
the circumstances, contrary to clause 79 of the
was not clinically indicated or appropriate in the patient’s
circumstances.
Annexure A, the practitioner prescribed the Schedule
8 drugs Oxycodone,
Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) and Tapentadol, as well as Tramadol, Diazepam and
Temazepam, to Patient A in circumstances
failed to respond appropriately to Patient A’s drug seeking
behaviours.
failed to seek advice from appropriately trained colleagues or specialists about
his ongoing prescribing to Patient A.
failed to modify his ongoing prescribing to Patient A despite having formulated
a possible drug withdrawal action plan as early
failed to appropriately record Patient A’s addiction status to either
alcohol or medications on her referral letters.
Annexure A, the practitioner prescribed the Schedule
8 drugs Oxycodone,
Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) and Tapentadol, as well as Tramadol, Diazepam and
Temazepam, to Patient A in circumstances
where the practitioner failed to
complete adequate assessments of Patient A in that he failed to undertake
adequate and appropriate
examinations at:
patient A reported a change in her symptoms.
adding additional medications or commencing new medications.
on or around 18 January 2019 to 3 June 2021, on the dates and quantities as set
out in Annexure A, the practitioner prescribed
the Schedule 8 drugs Oxycodone,
Oxycodone/Naloxone (Targin) and Tapentadol, as well as Tramadol, Diazepam and
Temazepam, to Patient
A in circumstances where he failed to make appropriate
referrals for specialist assistance.
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(b) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner:
Contravened
a provision of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales)
Regulation 2016
(NSW) (“NSW Regulation”).
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
on or around 18 January 2019 to 3 June 2021, the practitioner failed
Patient A’s addiction status to alcohol in her medical records.
Patient A’s addiction status to schedule 8 drugs in her medical
in Patient A’s medical records that she was a drug dependent
his conduct in particular 1 the practitioner breached schedule 4, clause 1(2)(a)
of the NSW Regulation.
Dated: 20 December 2023
Brianna Butt Legal Manager
Health Care Complaints Commission
Security: Sensitive
SCHEDULE TO COMPLAINT OF THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
Dr. Brian John Glover
Reference in Complaint
Identity of person
Security: Sensitive
Prescribing for
by DOCTOR Brian GLOVER
Date Prescribed
Date Dispensed
Drug Brand name
Drug Generic Name
Drug Strength
Drug Schedule
PBS or Private
Pharmacy Script No.
Dispensing Record y/n
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
Oxycodone/Naloxone
Oxycontin MR
Oxycontin CR
Oxycontin MR
Oxycontin CR
Oxycontin CR
Oxycontin MR
1-2 tds prn
2* (0 left)
2* (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
2* (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
2* (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
2* (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
2* (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
2 * (0 left)
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
Paracetamol/Codeine
0.5-2 bd prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
1-2 tds prn
Paracetamol/Codeine
Paracetamol/Codeine
1/2 2-4hr prn
*Indicates either original script with repeat or repeat script dispensed
Oxycodone/Naloxone
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.74 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter