URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/277.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GWD v Children's Guardian [2025] NSWCATAD 277; (12 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GWD v Children’s Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 277
Hearing Date(s):
17 June 2025
Date of Orders:
19 June 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
P Decle, Senior Member
Emeritus Prof P Foreman AM, General Member
The decision of the Children’s Guardian on 25 June 2024 to impose an
interim bar on the Applicant pursuant to s 17(2) Child
Protection (Working with
Children) Act 2012 is set aside.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - Holder of Working with Children Check –
Interim Bar – Admission of Evidence Without Provenance
– Weight to
be Placed on Finding of Overseas Body – Correct and Preferrable Decision
– Is it Likely that there
is a Real and Appreciable Risk to the Safety of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Child Protection (Working
Children) Act 2012
Evidence Act 1995
Working with
Children Act 2005 (VIC)
Cases Cited:
BKE v Office of the Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 523
v the Queen
[1986] HCA 29
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
[1938] 60 CLR 336
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC
Commissioner for Children & Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
v NSW Civil & Administrative Tribunal
[2015] NSWSC 126
Children’s Guardian
[2020] NSWCA 338
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
FamCAFC 251
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
GM v Department of Human Services
[2025] SASCA 68
[2022] FedCFamC1A 161
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A
Jess (a pseudonym)
[2024] NSWCATGD 16
[1998] HCA 68
McDonald v Director-General of Social Security
[1984] FCA 59
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Wang
[2003] HCA 11
Ministry of
Transport v FV (GD)
[2008] NSWADTAP 60
Office of the Children’s
Guardian v CFW
[2016] NSWSC 1406
Office of the Children’s Guardian v
[2022] NSWSC 1036
OYJ v Secretary to the Department of Justice and
[2019] VCAT 33
PQR v Secretary, Department of Justice and
Regulation (No 2)
[2017] VSC 514
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian
Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] 42 FLR 331
VQB v The Secretary to
the Department of Justice
[2013] VCAT 789
Principal judgment
GWD (Applicant)
Children’s Guardian (Respondent)
Representation:
A Sapienza (Applicant)
R J Pietriche
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Mark O’Brien Legal (Applicant)
Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00048336
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to s 64
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
publication or broadcast of the name of the Applicant, any person who appears as
a witness and any child referred to in
these proceedings is prohibited.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applicant made an application pursuant to
Child Protection (Working
Children) Act 2012
seeking to review the
decision of the Children’s Guardian on 25 June 2024 to impose an interim
bar on his working with children
check clearance (the review application).
final hearing held on 17 June 2025 encountered some practical challenges and,
with the consent of the parties, the Tribunal dispensed
with the need for a
hearing and ordered that the parties file further short submissions on 18 June
2025 and the application thereafter
be determined on the papers.
reasons discussed below, after receiving the final submissions of the parties,
the Tribunal determined it was appropriate to deliver
its decision prior to
issuing its reasons.
19 June 2025, the Tribunal made an order setting aside the decision of the
Children’s Guardian on 25 June 2024 to impose
an interim bar on the
Applicant pursuant to s 17(2) WWC Act. The parties were notified that written
reasons would be provided. These
are those reasons.
is noted that in between making the above order and delivering these reasons,
the WWC Act has been substantively amended. The references
to the WWC Act in
this decision relate to the version in existence as at 19 June
Applicant was a professional sportsperson who competed at a national and
international level until 2022.
2 July 2020, the Applicant was issued with a Working with Children Check
clearance (WWCC). Pursuant to this clearance, the Applicant
coached mainly young
people in New South Wales.
June 2024, the Children’s Guardian received information about a decision
made by an overseas body to the effect that the
Applicant had engaged in
behaviour towards a minor that breached their code of conduct. Following this,
an interim bar was imposed
on the Applicant’s WWCC (the interim bar
decision) and the Applicant was notified that the Children’s Guardian
to cancel his WWCC and was conducting a risk assessment.
6 February 2025, the Applicant filed the review application.
Tribunal made directions in March 2025 for the Children’s Guardian to file
documents required by s 58
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(s58 Documents), for the Applicant to file the
evidence he relied upon and an order that the name of any person mentioned in
the proceedings
or referred to in any documentary material is prohibited.
May 2025, the Tribunal listed the matter for final hearing, noting that it was
expedition because the interim bar expires on 26 June
”. Directions were also made with respect to a foreshadowed
application by the Children’s Guardian for orders to keep
documents confidential.
The final hearing on 17 June 2025
before the final hearing was due to commence on 17 June 2025, the Tribunal
building and surrounding area was impacted by a
significant flooding event.
There were two relevant effects from this. The Children’s Guardian was
unable to physically attend
the hearing room (where the Applicant and his legal
representatives and witnesses were already present) and the Tribunal lost some
technical services including the ability to record the hearing.
immense effort and resourcefulness in difficult circumstances, the Tribunal
registry staff were able to arrange for the Children’s
Guardian to appear
by audio visual link and to record the hearing using remote recording
there was a risk of the review application becoming nugatory if the hearing did
not proceed that day, the Tribunal decided that
it was desirable to hear the
Children’s Guardian in respect of their Confidentiality Application by AVL
and in the absence
of the Applicant and his legal representatives.
hearing the Confidentiality Application, when the open session resumed, the
Children’s Guardian withdrew the Confidentiality
Application and made an
oral application that the Children’s Guardian be excused from lodging the
Confidential Material with
the Tribunal pursuant to s 59 ADR Act. That order was
not opposed by the Applicant and was made by the Tribunal having been satisfied
it would have made some confidentiality orders with respect that material.
hearing resumed after lunch with both the Applicant and the Children’s
Guardian and their legal representatives appearing
Evidentiary
issues were dealt with (referred to at pars 58 to 61 below). Unfortunately, just
prior to the Applicant giving evidence,
the building in which the Tribunal was
sitting was evacuated for the day. The Tribunal gave the parties the option of
the hearing part-heard to the following week. The parties proposed
instead that the Tribunal determine the matter on the papers giving
appropriate
weight to the fact that the Applicant’s evidence would not be tested under
cross-examination. The Children’s
Guardian sought the opportunity to make
further short written submissions in respect to the weight to be given to the
Arbitration
Decision and this course was not opposed by the Applicant provided
they had the right of reply.
circumstances where evidentiary issues had been dealt with, the parties had
filed written submissions and would have the opportunity
to file further
submissions, the fact that the interim bar would be expiring shortly and the
unfortunate difficulties arising out
of the flooding event, the Tribunal
determined that it was appropriate to dispense with an oral hearing and reserved
its decision.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to review a decision of the Children’s Guardian
to impose an interim bar, provided the application
for review is not filed more
than 6 months after the interim bar decision (s 27(3) WWC Act). That condition
has been satisfied.
is no requirement for the Applicant to seek an internal review before making an
application to the Tribunal for administrative
review of a decision that is
reviewable under the WWC Act (s 27(7) WWC Act).
Consequently,
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (ADR Act) give
the Tribunal jurisdiction to hear and determine this application.
Tribunal’s role is to decide what is the correct and preferrable decision
having regard to the material before it and relevant
law (s 63(1) ADR Act).
Legislative Scheme and Relevant Caselaw
Tribunal is required to determine whether the Children Guardian’s decision
to impose an interim bar is the correct and preferrable
context in which the Tribunal is making its decision is legislation which has as
its paramount consideration protecting children
from child abuse (s 4 WWC
4 Safety, welfare and well-being of children to be paramount
consideration
The safety, welfare and well-being of children and, in particular, protecting
them from child abuse, is the paramount consideration
in the operation of this
17 WWC Act governs when an interim bar may be imposed:
17 Interim bars
(1) The Children’s Guardian may, at any time after receiving an
application for a working with children check clearance or
commencing an
assessment of an applicant for or holder of a clearance, determine that the
applicant or holder is subject to an interim
bar, being a bar on the applicant
or holder doing any of the following—
(a) engaging in child-related work,
(b) residing on the same property as an authorised carer,
(c) residing on a property where a family day care service is provided.
(2) The Children’s Guardian may make a determination under this section if
it is of the opinion that it is likely that there
is a risk to the safety of
children if the applicant or holder engages in child-related work or resides on
a property referred to
in subsection (1)(b) or (c) pending the determination of
the application or assessment.
(3) The Children’s Guardian must as soon as practicable after determining
that an applicant or holder is subject to an interim
bar, give written notice of
that determination to the applicant or holder and to each person that the
Children’s Guardian reasonably
believes to be a notifiable person in
relation to the applicant or holder.
(4) An interim bar ceases to have effect—
(a) on notification in writing by the Children’s Guardian to the applicant
or holder that the interim bar is revoked, or
(b) in the case of an applicant for a clearance, if the applicant is granted or
refused a clearance, or
(c) 12 months after the interim bar takes effect,
whichever occurs first.
‘risk to the safety of children’ is defined in s 5B WWC Act as
a real and appreciable risk to the safety of children
to s 5(1) WWC Act, ‘children’ means ‘persons under the age of
determining this application, the Tribunal is specifically required to have
regard to each matter listed in s 30(1) WWC Act that
is relevant (
Civil & Administrative Tribunal
[2015] NSWSC 126).
The list of
potentially relevant matters are:
30 Determination of applications and other matters
(1) The Tribunal must consider the following in determining an application under
(a) the seriousness of the offences with respect to which the person is a
disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or
imposition of an interim bar,
(b) the period of time since those offences or matters occurred and the conduct
of the person since they occurred,
(c) the age of the person at the time the offences or matters occurred,
(d) the age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time they
occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim,
(e) the difference in age between the victim and the person and the relationship
(if any) between the victim and the person,
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known, that the victim was
(g) the person’s present age,
(h) the seriousness of the person’s criminal history and the conduct of
the person since the matters occurred,
(i) the likelihood of any repetition by the person of the offences or conduct
and the impact on children of any such repetition,
(i1) any order of a court or tribunal that is in force in relation to the
(j) any information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the
application,
(j1) any relevant information in relation to the person that was obtained in
accordance with section 36A,
(k) any other matters that the Children’s Guardian considers necessary.
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
Young CJ provided the meaning of ‘risk’ which underpins the
current statutory test [42]:
It almost follows, from what I have just said, that one does not define risk as
meaning minimal risk. One would in any case as Mr
Singleton has submitted,
exclude fanciful or theoretical risks, but what one is looking for is whether,
in all the circumstances,
there is a real and appreciable risk in the sense of a
risk that is greater than the risk of any adult preying on a child. One,
must link the word “risk” with the words that follow,
namely, “to the safety of children”.
task of assessing whether there is a real and appreciable risk to the safety of
children pursuant to the WWC Act has been judicially
considered over the years.
The focus of much of this consideration has been how to assess risk in those
difficult cases where it
cannot be determined that the alleged harmful conduct
is true, but neither can it be determined that the allegations have no
foundation.
CXZ v Children’s Guardian
[2020] NSWCA 338
Simpson JA (with whom McCallum J agreed) explained the task
as follows:
52. Nowhere does the High Court [
[1998] HCA 68]
suggest, that every individual allegation is to be assessed as either
“well founded” or “groundless”.
Nowhere does the High
Court say, or suggest, that all allegations must be treated as falling into one
or other of those categories.
Indeed, it explicitly says the opposite.
those cases which do not fall into one or other of those categories the court or
tribunal must decide whether the evidence is such
as to justify a finding that
there is a relevant risk
53. In the context of the Child Protection Act this assessment will depend upon
a number of things: among them,
the seriousness of the allegations, the
strength of any evidentiary support for the allegations, and the relevance of
the conduct
the subject of the allegations to the risk to the safety of
if a clearance is granted to the applicant.
54. The view I have expressed above that the proposition that a three-step
process is required should be rejected is in accordance
with what Beech-Jones J
. At [33] his Honour said:
“... Thus in such cases it may be that [the Tribunal] can be satisfied
that an allegation of sexual abuse against an applicant
is established. Equally,
[the Tribunal] may be affirmatively satisfied that the relevant incident did not
occur, in which case it
can be put aside. However, in a context where the
welfare of the child is paramount and the question being posed concerns the risk
of harm to children, [the Tribunal] may not be satisfied that an allegation of
abuse has been made out, but nevertheless conclude
that the circumstances
surrounding a particular incident or course of conduct means that there is a
risk to a child or, more correctly,
that the existence of a risk has not been
disproven.”
he task of the Tribunal is
, to expand on what Beech-Jones J said
to determine, even if it is unable to be satisfied one way or
the other as to the truth of all or any of the allegations, whether,
of the possibility that the alleged conduct occurred, the applicant poses a risk
to the safety of children
. If so, the Tribunal must refuse to grant a
clearance. Of course, in that process the Tribunal will give consideration to
the strength
of the evidence supporting the allegations and will, inevitably,
reach conclusions about the truth or falsity of some. If it finds
any allegation
to be without foundation it will discard it from further consideration. If it is
satisfied that the allegation is
well founded, it will assign to it such weight
as it sees fit, in the consideration (inter alia) of the circumstances listed in
It is the allegations between those two extremes, those that are
neither proved nor disproved, that the Tribunal must address in determining
whether the applicant for a clearance poses a risk to children
[Emphasis added].
issue of risk analysis has been judicially considered in many jurisdictions in
Australia, including state working with children
cases, child welfare cases and
family law cases. Many of those cases, in the Tribunal’s view, show
substantial uniformity in
the way in which risk of harm to children is
conceptualised and analysed. That is not surprising as they have a common
jurisprudential
foundation.
2022, a 5-judge bench of the Full Court of the Federal Circuit & Family
Court of Australia was specially constituted to consider
an appeal which dealt
with arguments around the concept of risk of harm to children in parenting
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
In a unanimous decision, the Full Court
the High Court case of
[1998] HCA 68
was the foundation for the
development of jurisprudence concerning risk of harm to children in many
law and WWC Act matters, and specifically
referred with approval to the decision in
(at [55]). A special leave
application to appeal this decision was refused by the High Court.
decision is plainly consistent with the existing view of the NSW Court of Appeal
considering WWC Act matters (
per Basten JA at [25], McCallum JA at
[28] and Simpson AJA at [44] - [56]) and other decisions of the NSW Supreme
Court (see for
example the discussions in
BKE v Office of the
Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 523
Office of the
Children’s Guardian v CFW
[2016] NSWSC 1406
Office of the Children’s Guardian v DVR
[2022] NSWSC 1036
common foundation across jurisdictions has produced a broad range of helpful
descriptions of the general process of risk analysis
in cases concerning the
safety of children. Of course, in having regard to these cases, it is essential
that decision-makers keep
in mind the substantive differences that exist in the
application of risk analysis principles in different jurisdictional contexts
per Basten JA at [14] - [16] and Simpson AJA at [50]).
Full Court in
Isles & Nelissen
approved (at [50]) the formulation by
Austin J in
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
that risk exists
on a spectrum [139]:
Speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of expressing
the chance of it happening. The concept of chance
lies along a continuum,
encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly probable and
remotely possible, assuming
the polar extremes of certainty are ignored. ...At
some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent it cannot
tolerated: it is unacceptable.
Hickson & Matthew
[2022] FedCFamC1A 161
, McClelland DCJ summarised
the findings in
Isles & Nelissen
and explained that at its’
essence [38]:
...determining the issue of risk essentially involves applying a risk matrix,
whereby it is necessary to assess the potential seriousness
of the harm in the
context of the probability of its occurrence...
GM v Department of Human Services
[2025] SASCA 68
, the South Australian
Court of Appeal described the task of assessing risk to the safety of children
(in the context of South Australian
working with children legislation) in a more
expansive manner:
110. As to the degree of risk, the exercise involves an assessment of the
likelihood of the apprehended harm occurring. It will usually
consideration of the past behaviour and conduct of the relevant adult. That may
take the form of abuse of a physical, sexual,
psychological or emotional nature.
It will include abuse in its widest sense, and so including conduct such as
manipulation, intimidation,
threats, harassment or neglect. But it will also
extend to consideration of conduct that might be described as grooming or poor
recognition (particularly in the context of relationships involving a
degree of authority or power on the part of the adult). It
will include other
behaviour which might be indicative of a prurient interest in a child or
children, or of an interest in other
inappropriate sexual or violent behaviour.
It will also include behaviour which might represent a less direct risk of harm
to children,
such as a dysfunctional or hazardous lifestyle, difficulties with
the abuse of alcohol or drugs, or adherence to social attitudes
or beliefs which
conflict with broader community norms.
111. As mentioned later in these reasons, past conduct need not be proven to any
particular standard for it to be relevant to the
assessment. Nor does there need
to be a likelihood of any particular form of harm occurring before it may be
taken into account.
However, in determining what weight should be attached to
information about past conduct and the prospect of apprehended harm in
future, it will be important to have regard to where on the spectrum of proof or
satisfaction the information as to past conduct
lies. It will be important to
have regard to whether it represents, for example, proven past conduct,
allegations based upon some
sound factual basis and from an apparently credible
source, or mere allegations without any identified factual basis or source.
112. As to the seriousness of the risk, this involves a consideration of the
potential gravity of the consequences for a child were
the apprehended harm to
occur. This may range from a risk of immediate and significant physical or
sexual harm, through to a risk
of a longer-term form of psychological or
emotional harm.
113. The assessment will often be multi-faceted, involving consideration of a
range of information about past behaviours and risks,
of varying types and with
varying degrees of likelihood and seriousness. In such cases, it will require an
assimilation and synthesis
of this information, in order to arrive at an overall
assessment of the risk that the relevant adult poses to children.
115. It may be expected that a realistic prospect of relatively serious harm
would ordinarily be unacceptable. Conversely, it may
be expected that a
fanciful, farfetched or theoretical prospect of mild or insignificant harm would
ordinarily be acceptable. However,
as should be apparent from the above
articulation of the process, it is difficult, and generally unwise, to
generalise.
above cases show, in the Tribunal’s view, a consistent approach to risk
assessment across jurisdictions. The totality
of the evidence concerning the
alleged past conduct must be carefully considered and assessment made as to the
weight to be given
to that evidence. Unless allegations are rejected as
groundless, the alleged conduct must be considered regardless of whether it
mere possibility or based on strong foundation. The Tribunal must determine to
what extent the alleged past conduct, individually
or cumulatively, is
potentially harmful to the safety of children. The Tribunal must also consider
what is the likelihood of the
alleged past conduct occurring in the future. It
is the synthesis of these factors which allows the Tribunal to assess where the
conduct in question falls along the spectrum of risk to the safety of
present case requires the Tribunal to have regard to the legislative aim of
protecting children from child abuse, the matters
in s 30(1) WWC Act and, using
the method of risk analysis derived from caselaw, the Tribunal must assess
whether it is ‘likely’
that there is a risk to the safety of
children if the Applicant engages in child related work or engages in the
conduct regulated
by s17(1)(a)-(c) WWC Act. The meaning of ‘likely’
is not defined in the WWC Act, nor has this section been the subject
of judicial
consideration.
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees’
[1979] 42 FLR 331
, at [339] the Full Federal Court discussed the
ambulatory meanings of ‘likely’ as follows:
The word “likely” is one which has various shades of meaning. It may
mean “probable” in the sense of “more
probable than not”
- “more than a fifty per cent chance”. It may mean “material
risk” as seen by a
reasonable man “such as might happen”. It
may mean “some possibility” - more than a remote or bare chance.
it may mean that the conduct engaged in is inherently of such a character that
it would ordinarily cause the effect specified.
the case of
Jess (a pseudonym)
[2024] NSWCATGD 16
, the Tribunal sitting
in its Guardianship Division considered the meaning of ‘reasonably
likely’ for the purpose of considering
an application for special medical
treatment of a child. The Tribunal found:
The adverb “reasonably” in the expression “reasonably
likely” conveys a sense that the likelihood of an event
occurring is
relatively less than it is “likely”. The qualifying adverb
diminishes the phrase’s weight or intensity
compared with the power of the
adjective “likely” standing by itself. It conveys a sense that there
is “a fairly
good chance” that the potential event will occur: see
(2009) 76 NSWLR 22
[2009] NSWSC 530
(Palmer J); see
also Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836.
“likely” event is not one which is more likely than not to occur,
that is “odds on”, or necessarily probable
but must be more than a
mere possibility: Re the Will of Bridget
[2018] NSWSC 1509
(Hallen J).
Ultimately,
the meaning of ‘likely’ must be drawn from the context of the WWC
Boughey v the Queen
[1986] HCA 29
). The relevant context is
the Children’s Guardian receiving information that results in an
assessment being triggered in respect
of a person who has applied for or who
already has a clearance. The purpose of imposing an interim bar is clearly
intended to protect
children while the Children’s Guardian is gathering
information as part of its assessment as to whether the person poses a
the safety of children.
parliament has chosen to likely over other words such as ‘possible’
or ‘reasonably likely’, the particular
statutory context that
‘likely’ appears in s 17 WWC Act is protective. The Tribunal
therefore considers that ‘likely’
is intended to require
satisfaction that is more than a possibility but less than a strong
probability.
the Tribunal is not satisfied that it is likely that the Applicant poses a risk
to the safety of children, the Tribunal must not
set aside the Children
Guardian’s decision (which would have the effect of allowing the Applicant
to work with children) unless
s 30(1A) WWC Act is satisfied. That section
(1A) The Tribunal may not make an order under this Part which has the effect of
enabling a person (the affected person) to work with
children in accordance with
this Act unless the Tribunal is satisfied that—
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with
the affected person that was not directly supervised
by another person while the
affected person was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the order.
first limb of this test is to be determined by reference to a hypothetical
‘reasonable person’. The Tribunal was not
referred to and has been
unable to find any judicial authority considering the scope of this test in NSW,
however, there have been
some administrative and judicial decisions in respect
of a substantially similar reasonable person test in Victorian working with
children legislation. Section 13(3)(a) and 26A(4)(a)
Working with Children
(VIC) (WWC Act (VIC)) provides that the Secretary or Tribunal
(whoever is considering the matter) must be satisfied that:
a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with the
applicant that was not directly supervised by another
person while the applicant
was engaged in any type of child-related work.
VQB v The Secretary to the Department of Justice
[2013] VCAT 789
Vice-President of the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal considered the
reasonable person test in the WWC Act (VIC)
in the context of an applicant who
had a series of relatively recent convictions for domestic violence related
offences and a significant
psychiatric disorder (although he was medicated and
receiving treatment). The Vice-President held that the reasonable person test
was to be objectively determined and that:
A reasonable person would not approach the task with a closed mind, thinking
that once a person has offended, he or she can never
be redeemed. The reasonable
person, however, would not put aside all scepticism and reasonable caution in
this most difficult area
in some over-optimistic attempt to facilitate
rehabilitation.
PQR v Secretary, Department of Justice and Regulation
Bell J rejected an argument that the reasonable person test in the
WWC Act (VIC) was akin to what is colloquially known as ‘the
test’. Bell J affirmed that it was an objective test that requires
consideration of the response of a reasonable person
who has knowledge of all of
the facts and surrounding circumstances (at [57]).
OYJ v Secretary to the Department of Justice and Regulation
[2019] VCAT
, Deputy President Lulham considered that the reasonable person test in WWC
Act (VIC) should be interpreted in the following ways:
(1) To be consistent with human experience that a reasonable parent would be
more cautious about risks to their own child than they
would in respect of other
peoples’ children [94];
(2) But, not so broadly so as to remove the intent behind this section [96]:
A hypothetical reasonable person, considering whether to allow their own child
to have direct contact with an applicant for an Assessment
Notice, could well
take a different view if their child was very young and it was proposed that the
child would be entirely alone
with the applicant, than if the child was 17 years
of age and was to be in contact with the applicant only at a school camp
by many other teenage children and a number of teachers. This much is
clear. But to refer to the broad range of possibilities in
this way invites a
misinterpretation and misapplication of the subsection 26A(4)(a), because it
could create a situation where an
applicant could never satisfy the test. The
broader the age range of the child, and the broader the range of activities
being child-related
work as broadly defined, the more difficult it becomes to
conclude that a reasonable person would ever allow his or her child to
direct contact with an applicant while the applicant was engaged in any type of
child-related work
second limb of the test in s 30(1A) WWC Act is the ‘public interest’
test. That test is also objective and requires
the Tribunal to consider the
public interest, which necessarily includes the interest of the community in
protecting children from
child abuse, and to prioritise that over the private
interest of the Applicant. The Respondent conceded that if the Tribunal found
that the Applicant did not pose a real and appreciable risk to the safety of
children and the reasonable parent test in s 30(1A)
WWC Act was satisfied, that
it would be in the public interest for the Applicant to be granted a
Approach to Fact-Finding
is no onus of proof on any party in this type of administrative review
proceedings (
McDonald v Director-General of Social Security
Notwithstanding the Applicant has held a WWCC since 2020, there is no
presumption that he does or does not pose a risk of harm to
Tribunal is not constrained to the material relied upon by the Children’s
Guardian in its interim bar decision and must
also consider the material
existing at the time of the hearing (
Drake v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
[1979] 46 FLR 409).
This is particularly important when
making decisions about potential risk to the safety of children.
determining the facts, the Tribunal “
is not bound by the rules of
evidence and may inquire into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as
it thinks fit, subject
to the rules of natural justice
” (s 38(2) CAT
Act). This means the Tribunal has a discretion to act on any material that is
rationally probative; but must
determine whether in all the circumstances it is
proper to act on that material and must act fairly towards the parties
Commissioner for Children & Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
is important to understand the distinction between making findings of fact and
undertaking assessment of risk.
Fact-finding
involves consideration of evidence about past known events. Facts are either
established or not established. It is a
binary exercise. The standard of proof
for findings of fact in civil proceedings is the balance of probabilities. The
Tribunal has
regard to the principle arising from
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
[1938] 60 CLR 336
) that the degree of satisfaction required
to make a finding on the balance of probabilities will depend upon the nature of
the issues.
Factors that are relevant to the degree of satisfaction that must be
achieved include “
the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description or the gravity of the
consequences
flowing from a particular finding
assessment of risk involves deciding the degree of possibility of future events
occurring that pose a risk to the safety of children.
It is a predictive and
evaluative exercise based upon consideration of all relevant evidence of past
events before the decision-maker
(whether they are proven as facts or not). The
civil standard of proof has no role to play in the assessment of risk:
Material before the Tribunal
Hearing Bundle
Tribunal received in evidence a Hearing Bundle prepared by the parties which
contained material that had been filed in advance
and read by the Tribunal in
preparation for the final hearing. The evidence admitted, except the document
referred to in par 58 to
61 below, included the following documents:
(1) For the Children’s Guardian
(a) Section 58 Documents filed on 14 March 2025;
(b) Supplementary s 58 Documents filed on 27 March 2025;
(c) Further supplementary s 58 Documents filed on 30 April 2025;
(d) Non-confidential version of an Affidavit of MLC (an employee of the
Children’s Guardian) dated 19 May 2025;
(e) Non-confidential version of an Affidavit of TK (an employee of the
Children’s Guardian) dated 20 May 2025; and
(f) Non-confidential version of written submissions drawn on 6 June 2025.
(g) Supplementary submissions drawn on 18 June 2025.
(2) For the Applicant:
(a) Review Application filed 6 February 2025;
(b) Affidavit of the Applicant dated 1 April 2025;
(c) Affidavit of RM dated 25 March 2025;
(d) Affidavit of the Applicant’s mother dated 1 April 2025;
(e) A bundle of references lodged 2 April 2025;
(f) Affidavit of the Applicant dated 28 May 2025;
(g) Written submissions drawn on 28 May 2025;
(h) Affidavit of the Applicant dated 13 June 2025 (with the consent of the
Children’s Guardian the Tribunal granted leave for
the Applicant to rely
upon this further Affidavit);
(i) Written submissions in reply drawn on 13 June 2025.
(j) Supplementary submissions drawn on 18 June 2025.
Rejected document
Tribunal did not accept into evidence a two-page typed document relied upon by
the Children’s Guardian which was described
in the index to the
Supplementary Bundle to be a victim impact statement by Claimant 1 who had made
relevant allegations about the
Applicant’s conduct in USA. The document
was typed, undated and unsigned. The document, which appeared to be written in
person by Claimant 1, contained fresh allegations against the Applicant
not previously made her in the formal processes that she
and the Applicant had
already engaged.
Applicant opposed the document being accepted. In short, the Applicant argued it
would be unfair to admit the document as evidence
of the truth of its contents
where it was unsworn and Claimant 1 was not available to be cross-examined about
it (relying upon authorities
If the document were admitted
as to the fact that allegations were made, its probative value would be
negligible. The Children’s
Guardian submitted that the Tribunal should
have regard to the document as it contained statements by Claimant 1 about the
Applicant’s
alleged abusive behaviour towards her; the fact that it was
unsworn/unsigned went to the issue of weight. It was submitted that the
statement could be used as evidence of the truth of the allegations and it was a
relevant matter that Claimant 1 had made these further
allegations. Cases such
were distinguishable because those cases typically involved
material that derived from separate proceedings. Here the substance of
allegations in the document gave weight to the other evidence of Claimant
1’s allegations.
Tribunal rejects the contention that just because a document contains
allegations that could be relevant to the risk of harm to
children it should be
admitted into evidence and questions about provenance should be addressed when
assessing its weight. In this
case, there is no material before the Tribunal (no
email, file-note or other document) which give any clue as to the provenance of
the document. When this issue was raised, the Children’s Guardian did not
seek an opportunity to adduce evidence which might
shed light on who wrote it or
how and when it came into existence. It was plain from the material already
before the Tribunal that
at least one third party was the source of material
provided to the Children’s Guardian and there was significant animus
threats of legal action) between that third party and the Applicant
and his mother. Without any evidence capable of linking the document
to Claimant
1, the allegations in the document could not have any probative value.
if there was some evidence demonstrating that the document had been written by
Claimant 1, or even if the Tribunal assumed that
it was written by Claimant 1,
there were strong reasons against it being admitted.
(1) The Children’s Guardian accepted that there was no evidence before the
Tribunal as to why Claimant 1 had not given a sworn
statement or was not
available for cross-examination. The failure to give evidence about Claimant
1’s availability is significant
in circumstances where the evidence
suggested a person in contact with the Children’s Guardian was also in
(2) It would be unfair to the Applicant for the Tribunal to give any substantial
weight to new unsworn allegations of Claimant 1
without having any opportunity
to test them.
(3) The fact that the document purportedly contained fresh complaints about the
Applicant by Claimant 1 is not a compelling reason
to admit the document. It was
unexplained why Claimant 1 had not given sworn evidence about these complaints
in the arbitration proceedings
in August-September 2024. The form and the
content of the document did not produce any corroborative effect in respect of
allegations made in the arbitration proceedings.
(4) Finally, to the extent that the document was said to contain evidence by
Claimant 1 as to the impact on her of the Applicant’s
alleged conduct,
there was sufficient record of those matters was otherwise before the Tribunal
in the Arbitration Decision.
Section 128 Certificate
limited certificate was issued to the Applicant with respect to evidence which
tended to prove that he had committed an offence
in an overseas jurisdiction
pursuant to s 128
Evidence Act 1995
General issues
reaching its decision on 19 June 2025, the Tribunal read and considered the
material referred to in par 57 above. In doing so,
the Tribunal has had regard
to general issues of weight attaching to the evidence discussed below.
evidence given by the Applicant in these proceedings was not tested by
cross-examination with the effect that his credibility
and reliability cannot be
assumed other than what it is apparent on the face of the material.
Children’s Guardian relies upon an Arbitration Decision delivered in the
USA concerning relevant allegations against the
Applicant. The Tribunal was not
provided by either party in the present proceedings with any of the material
that was before the
Arbitrator. The only official record of what occurred
during the arbitration hearing is contained in the Arbitrator’s decision
issued on 16 September 2024 (the Arbitration Decision).
Arbitration Decision discloses that the parties were United States Centre for
SafeSport (SafeSport) and the Applicant. The hearing
was conducted virtually and
Claimant 1, the Applicant and one other witness gave evidence. The evidence of
Claimant 2 and other known
and unknown witnesses came solely through a SafeSport
investigation report prepared by an unknown investigator/s. The Arbitrator
entitled (by reference to the relevant SafeSport Code) to accept the
investigation report into evidence even though it was not
tested. The Applicant,
through his lawyers, had the opportunity to submit written questions to the
Arbitrator who asked them of Claimant
1 in a ‘neutral manner’.
Opening and closing statements were made. None of the hearing was recorded.
Arbitration Decision is plainly relevant; however, its findings are not binding
on the Tribunal. The Tribunal is required to make
its own findings on material
questions of fact and is not even constrained by prior decisions involving the
same factual history
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 11
per McHugh at [37]). Like any other piece of evidence,
the Tribunal must assess the weight to be attached to any relevant findings
by the Arbitrator. The Tribunal considers that the Arbitrator’s findings
are to be given due weight for the fact that
the Arbitrator was professionally
engaged by SafeSport to inquire into and determine whether the Applicant had
violated the SafeSport
Code and what consequences should flow for the protection
of athletes, including minor athletes, under their jurisdiction. Giving
weight to the Arbitrator’s findings does not obviate the need for the
Tribunal to forensically assess the evidence so far
as it is relevant to
findings that this Tribunal needs to make. For example, it is also a relevant
matter that the Arbitrator’s
assessment of the credibility of the parties
was made in the context that the Applicant and Claimant 1’s evidence was
but not in the manner of cross-examination, let alone vigorous
cross-examination, suggested by the Children’s
Relevant Evidence
otherwise indicated, the following represents findings of relevant fact made by
the Tribunal.
his professional career spanning many years until 2022, the Applicant was an
eight-time Australian national champion and represented
Australia at the Olympic
Games three times.
2012, at the age of 17-8 years, the Applicant moved to a state (State A) in the
United States of America (USA) to train with a
coach TG. In November 2017, at
the age of about 23 years, the Applicant moved to another State, also in the
USA, to train with another
March 2020, SafeSport received a report that the Applicant had allegedly engaged
in misconduct against Claimant 1 and Claimant
2 while he was in the USA between
2016 and 2017. SafeSport is an independent body set up by USA Congress in 2017
to, among other
things, investigate allegations of abuse and misconduct against
athletes participating in the US Olympic and Paralympic Movement.
were presented by either party in the current proceedings in respect of the
investigation or determination of the complaints
concerning the Applicant by
SafeSport and what follows is ascertained from the reasons of the later
Arbitration Decision.
SafeSport considered it did not have jurisdiction to investigate the complaints,
however, in 2021, the Applicant was notified
by SafeSport of the complaints and
that an investigation was being undertaken. In 2021, the Applicant participated
in a short interview
with an investigator conducted virtually. The Applicant was
not otherwise given an opportunity to see or respond to the allegations
him. A temporary order was made preventing the Applicant from having contact
with the complainants, however, it appears that
no steps were taken by SafeSport
to preclude the Applicant from performing or competing in the USA pending
finalisation of their
investigation. In 2022, the Applicant was invited by a USA
sporting association to compete in a prestigious sporting event.
February 2022, the Applicant retired from professional sport, returned
permanently to Australia and started working full-time as
a coach. He had 15 to
20 clients who paid him for individual and group lessons. The ages of the
students were from 4yo to 28yo, with
most of the students between 9yo and
February 2024, Claimant 2 published a book in the USA in which she alleged that
the Applicant had abused her. That book and the
content of those allegations
were not before the Tribunal.
April 2024, reforms were made to SafeSport investigation procedures which
included the right for respondents to review and respond
to SafeSport’s
than 4 years after the first report, on 14 May 2024, SafeSport issued a Notice
of decision to the effect that the Applicant had:
(1) Engaged in physical misconduct by providing Claimant 1 alcohol in 2016 and
2017 when she was under the state and federal drinking
(2) Engaged in sexual misconduct with Claimant 1 on multiple occasions between
2016 and 2017 when she was 16-17 and the Applicant
was 21-22; and
(3) Engaged in battery in 2017 – by kissing Claimant 2 over her objection.
(the SafeSport decision).
further allegation by Claimant 2 that the Applicant had sexually assaulted her
in 2017 was rejected by SafeSport.
determined that the Applicant was permanently ineligible from participating in
any event, program, activity or competition
authorised by, organised by or under
the auspices of the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee and other relevant
organisations. Additionally,
SafeSport determined the Applicant should have no
Applicant became aware of the SafeSport decision the day after it was issued.
That same day, the Applicant’s mother, who
at the time was involved with
several professional sporting bodies that the Applicant was involved with,
Guardian to notify them of the SafeSport
decision. Parents of the Applicant’s minor students were also
following month, in June 2024, the Children’s Guardian issued an interim
bar formally preventing the Applicant from working
with children. From that
time, the Applicant ceased coaching completely and removed himself from
professional bodies in the sport.
Applicant appealed the SafeSport decision and an Arbitration hearing was
conducted in August and September 2024. The Arbitration
Decision contains
relevant findings said to be using ‘the preponderance of the
evidence’ (balance of probabilities) as
the standard of proof. The
Tribunal accepts relevant aspects of those findings to the extent they are set
the time of the alleged conduct, which occurred in State A, it was unlawful to
furnish alcohol to a minor. It is unclear whether
this was defined as being a
child under the age of 18 years or 21 years, but resolution of that question is
not necessary. It was
also unlawful for an adult to have sex or oral copulation
with a minor (being a child under the age of 18 years) and the minor was
to consent to such acts.
1 met the Applicant in October 2015 and they maintained a social media
connection. The Applicant encouraged her to meet and
try to be trained by his
coach TB in State A.
1 visited State A in January 2016 and on other occasions before moving there in
June 2016. Claimant 1’s parents were
opposed to her move and they were
estranged for a period causing Claimant 1 mental distress.
moving to State A Claimant 1 joined the training by TB. Claimant 1 and the
Applicant spent time together alone and socially
with others who were also being
trained by TB. Claimant 1 considered the Applicant supported her and that he was
her best friend.
Applicant provided alcohol to Claimant 1:
(1) In January 2016 when she was 16 years old and the Applicant was 21 years
old. The Claimant and the Applicant had been at a team
gathering. The Claimant
was looking for a ride back to her aunt’s home, which the Applicant gave
her. The supply of alcohol
occurred during the trip.
(2) By admission in August/September 2016 at his apartment (despite the
Applicant denying during the investigation having any recollection
of providing
alcohol to Claimant 1). Claimant 1 turned 17 years old in August 2016 and the
Applicant would still have been 21 years
Applicant admitted to having sexual intercourse with Claimant 1 between 10 and
20 times after she turned 17 years of age, between
August 2016 and June 2017.
conduct in par 86 and 87 above was enough for the Arbitrator to find that the
Applicant had breached SafeSport’s code of
conduct; it amounted to a
breach of community standards because it was against the law in State A. The
Tribunal considers these were
significant findings for the Arbitrator. The
Arbitrator repeatedly stated they were enough to dispose of the matter leaving
the impression
that the Arbitrator’s other findings about the interactions
between the Applicant and Claimant 1 were not necessary for the
Arbitrator’s ultimate decision. Nonetheless, the other findings of the
Arbitrator as to alleged conduct by the Applicant are
said by the
Children’s Guardian to demonstrate the Applicant poses a risk to the
safety of children and the Tribunal therefore
has also considered these findings
August 2016 and June 2017 when the Applicant and the Claimant 1 were having
sexual intercourse, neither the Applicant or Claimant
1 considered they were in
a relationship or “boyfriend” and “girlfriend”. Others
in their social/training
circle did not know they were having intercourse. The
Applicant was having intercourse with other people, including it seems Claimant
2, during the same period.
Arbitrator found and the Tribunal accepts:
(1) The Applicant was not ‘grooming’ Claimant 1, but she was a
lonely and vulnerable teenager living away from home.
(2) That the Applicant failed to exercise boundaries with his young friend who
was also part of TB’s coaching group creating
a negative impact on her.
Arbitrator found in certain respects that the evidence of Claimant 1 was more
credible than the Applicant and accepted several
contentions by Claimant 1 over
the denials or contrary accounts given by the Applicant. Where these findings
are relevant to the
issue of the risk posed by the Applicant to children they
are discussed below.
Arbitrator found and the Tribunal accepts the Applicant was Claimant 1’s
first sexual encounter and that the experience,
including being
‘taught’ how to give oral intercourse, was a shock and was a
‘big deal’ to her.
Arbitrator found the Applicant kept his sexual relationship with Claimant 1
secret because he knew it was wrong (at law). The
Arbitrator found that both
parties agreed they were not in a relationship, but the Arbitrator accepted
Claimant 1’s account
that the Applicant asked Claimant 1 to keep the
sexual relationship secret (telling others they were like siblings) and found
the Applicant did not tell his friends about it despite being open about
other relationships with them.
(1) The Tribunal notes that the Applicant continues to deny that he was aware of
the age of consent in California until the end of
his sexual relationship with
Claimant 1. The Applicant says he would not have had a sexual relationship with
Claimant 1 if he had
known. The Applicant also says that Claimant 1 told him she
did not want to be boyfriend/girlfriend and in that context agreed not
anyone of their sexual relationship. His motivation was said to be that the
sport community was rife with gossip and as they
were not boyfriend/girlfriend
he wanted to keep it private. There was evidence before the Arbitrator that the
Applicant was having
sexual intercourse with another person, possibly Claimant
2, in the same period as Claimant 1.
(2) The Tribunal is unable to find that the Applicant knew of the age of consent
in State A, although it is likely that he had knowledge
given he had been living
in State A since 2012 between the ages of 17 and 22 years; a period that many
young people would be or contemplating
being sexually active. The Tribunal
accepts that in the State that Claimant 1 was from (State C), the age of consent
was 17 years.
Claimant 1 and the Applicant both agree that their sexual
relationship started shortly after Claimant 1 turned 17 years of age, and
Tribunal finds that it is probable both were to some degree alive to this issue.
It is certainly possible that the Applicant
wanted to keep the relationship
quiet because of Claimant 1’s age. Whether or not the Applicant knew his
interactions with
Claimant 1 were unlawful and he was being deliberately
deceptive for that reason, it was at minimum ignorant and insensitive behaviour
potentially reflecting a pre-occupation with his own needs and interests over
Claimant 1’s.
Arbitrator found, over the Applicant’s denial, that the Claimant
experienced emotional pressure/force from the Applicant
to continue to have
intercourse and oral sex with him between September 2016 and June 2017. While
the Tribunal is mindful that the
Arbitrator saw the parties give evidence
first-hand and had before her statements that are not before the Tribunal, there
evidence and little to no details or context in the
Arbitrator’s reasons as to what the Applicant is said to have said or done
which supports this finding. There were also no contemporaneous complaints by
Claimant 1. The evidence recounted by the Arbitrator
is almost exclusively the
account of Claimant 1, given many years after the events in question, as to how
she felt or perceived events
before, during and after intercourse with the
Applicant. Even if the Tribunal accepts this evidence, having regard to the
of persuasion required by
the Tribunal cannot
find the Applicant did exert emotional pressure or force on Claimant 1 to have
intercourse with him. It is, of
course, possible that the Applicant did so, but
the evidence does not allow the Tribunal to give any significant weight to this
allegation.
Arbitrator found that the Applicant took advantage of a young, socially
immature, vulnerable girl. The Tribunal accepts on the
evidence in the
Arbitration decision that Claimant 1 was young, socially immature and
vulnerable. It is not clear however, what evidence
supported the
Arbitrator’s finding that the Applicant took advantage of Claimant 1.
Again, there is limited evidence of specific
acts or things said by the
Applicant which demonstrate this finding. The primary evidence recounted in the
Arbitration Decision
again appears to be Claimant 1’s account of how
events made her feel, sometimes from the perspective of many years later.
Furthermore,
Claimant 1 gave evidence suggesting that, while she later came to
understand it was unhealthy behaviour, at the time she used sex
to keep the
Applicant interested or close. This gives the impression of a disjuncture
between the actual events and Claimant 1’s
current feelings about them.
the Arbitrator found and the Tribunal accepts the Applicant provided alcohol to
Claimant 1 and that they consumed alcohol together
at times that they had
intercourse, which could infer exploitation, the Arbitrator specifically
rejected the contention that the
Applicant groomed Claimant 1. The evidence of
both the Applicant and Claimant 1 (and the only witness) shows they were part of
group of young people who lived in or who had moved to State A to access high
performance coaching. The totality of the evidence
gives the clear impression
that the individuals in this group engaged in a range of social activities and
some had relationships
with each other. That context does not exclude
exploitation but it gives a different perspective to the nature of the
interactions
between the Applicant and Claimant 1.
Tribunal is not satisfied that the evidence demonstrates the Applicant took
advantage of or exploited Claimant 1. Regardless,
the Tribunal does accept there
was a power imbalance between the Applicant and Claimant 1 given their ages and
experience. The Applicant’s
sexual relationship with Claimant 1 was
objectively inappropriate and unlawful pursuant to the laws of State A. It is
likely that
the relationship was a negative experience for Claimant 1 and the
Applicant was, and likely remains, insensitive to that fact.
Arbitrator was unable to make findings in respect of the following allegations
made by Claimant 1 and denied by the Applicant:
(1) That the Applicant used physical force during intercourse, that his kissing
and fondling of Claimant 1 was coercive, that he
held her head and forced her
onto his penis during oral sex, that sex was rough and that towards the end of
their sexual relationship
she said “no” many times and he held her
(2) That the Applicant took Claimant 1 to a lawyer in August 2017 to sign an NDA
(presumably a non-disclosure agreement).
the Arbitrator did not make findings these two allegations did not occur but was
not satisfied of their truth on the balance
of probabilities. Plainly Claimant
1’s allegations cannot be rejected as groundless and the Tribunal accepts
that there is
a possibility that the Applicant behaved that way.
Arbitrator was unable to make any findings in respect of Claimant 2’s
allegations:
(1) That the Applicant engaged in non-consensual intercourse. The Arbitrator
noted that SafeSport did not pursue this allegation,
Claimant 2 did not give
evidence and the Applicant denied it. No particulars were included in the
Arbitration Decision as to the
nature of the alleged conduct by the
(2) That the Applicant kissed Claimant 2 without her consent at a party.
is no evidence of the alleged non-consensual intercourse and having regard to
the age of Claimant 2, the context of the alleged
kiss and the fact that
Claimant 2’s allegations were not tested in the arbitration proceedings,
the Tribunal cannot place any
weight upon those allegations.
Arbitrator upheld the bans and no-contact orders imposed by SafeSport.
the Notice sent by the Children’s Guardian the Applicant in June 2024
advising of their intention to cancel his WWC Clearance
it was suggested that
the SafeSport decision had resulted in a termination of the Applicant’s
employment as a coach in the
USA. It was conceded by the Children’s
Guardian in their submissions that there was no evidence of the Applicant
coaching Claimant
1. There is nothing in the Arbitration Decision which gives
any basis to find that the Applicant held any position of authority in
of either of the claimants. The Children’s Guardian properly withdrew
their submission that the Applicant was Claimant
1’s teacher; the relevant
statement in the Arbitration Decision is plainly a reference to Claimant 1
having learned about sexual
intercourse from the Applicant.
the time of the hearing, almost 12 months had passed since the Children’s
Guardian imposed an interim bar and commenced assessing
the Applicant’s
suitability for a working with children check. Other than the Arbitration
Decision, it appears no evidence
has come to light in this period suggesting
that the Applicant has been the subject of any other misconduct allegations, or
any other child or adult has ever made a complaint about the
Applicant’s conduct towards them.
Applicant has never been contacted by Police from any jurisdiction in relation
to the allegations of the claimants. There is no
evidence that the Applicant has
any criminal record or is or has been the subject of allegations that he has
engaged in criminal
activity that might be relevant to the safety of children.
Applicant has been coaching students between the age of 4 and 28 years in
Australia since 2022. The Applicant produced letters
from 26 people in support
of his application; these included parents of students the Applicant coached,
fellow coaches and professionals
working in that sport and 2 teenage students
coached by the Applicant. Some of the letters are in the nature of character
which hold limited relevance. Some of the letters demonstrate that
the writer was aware of the SafeSport decision although it was
not possible to
know whether they were aware that Claimant 1 was below the age of legal consent
at the time of her relationship with
the Applicant or that it was alleged that
the Applicant had sexually assaulted Claimant 1 and Claimant 2. That is a
significant limitation
with respect to the weight that can be given to this
Ministry of Transport v FV (GD)
[2008] NSWADTAP 60
The primary relevance of the letters is that it demonstrates that the Applicant
has a large amount of support from parents and
students he coached; not only
were no concerns raised about his interactions with children, most accounts
described the Applicant
engaging with children in a respectful and professional
manner (including when he has accompanied children to international competitions
as part of their coaching team). Of course, it goes without saying that only
persons who are happy with the Applicant’s conduct
are likely to give
positive references and their existence does not preclude the existence of
parents or students not feeling the
same way. Of significance though, there is
no evidence of any formal or informal complaints about the Applicant or his
conduct arising
from his coaching
activities.
Consideration
issue for the Tribunal is whether it is likely that the Applicant poses a real
and appreciable risk to children such that the
interim bar should be maintained
to prevent the Applicant engaging in child related work (and the other matters
in s 17(1) WWC Act)
while the Children’s Guardian undertakes her
assessment.
for the Children’s Guardian submitted that the Tribunal should find it is
likely that the Application poses a real and
appreciable risk to children. The
Children’s Guardian relies heavily upon the Arbitration decision and
findings and focuses
particularly upon the objective seriousness of the
Applicant’s conduct towards Claimant 1, his ongoing denial and lack of
and the age disparity and vulnerabilities of Claimant 1.
for the Applicant submitted that the Tribunal should find it is not likely that
the Applicant poses a real and appreciable
risk to children. Counsel points to
the conduct falling at the lower end of the spectrum of seriousness, the context
of their relationship,
the length of time since the alleged conduct, the
Applicant’s respected role in the sporting community, his lack of criminal
history or other allegations relevant to posing a risk towards children. It was
submitted the Applicant’s denial of the allegations
makes it difficult to
demonstrate insight now and points to other evidence of the Applicant showing
insight into the emotional needs
of the students he coaches.
Tribunal’s consideration of the matters required by s 30(1) WWC Act is set
(a) the seriousness of the offences with respect to
which the person is a disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or imposition of an interim bar,
Applicant admitted to having sexual intercourse with Claimant 1 while she was 17
and under the legal age of consent in State A.
That is a strict criminal offense
and is objectively a very serious matter. The subjective circumstances, however,
lessen the seriousness
of this conduct. This includes the fact that Claimant 1
was 17 years old, it was a somewhat similar age relationship, the differing
of legal consent in this age group (Claimant 1 was over the age of legal consent
in State C where she was from and in Australia
where the Applicant was from) and
the Applicant was not a coach of Claimant 1.
Applicant also admitted to giving the Applicant alcohol on one occasion when she
was 17 years old, although the Arbitrator found
that he did so on multiple
occasions. Again, the supply of alcohol to a minor is a criminal offense in in
State A and an objectively
serious matter. The context of this behaviour,
whether it was once or multiple times, was a similar age friendship between the
and Claimant 1 and, although alcohol was said to be supplied at the
time of sexual and oral intercourse, according to the Arbitrator
did not amount
to grooming. That lessens the seriousness of the conduct for the purpose of
considering the risk of harm posed by
the Applicant to children.
allegations made by both Claimant 1 and Claimant 2 that the Applicant engaged in
sexual or indecent assaults, and Claimant 1’s
allegations that the
Applicant was physically and emotionally coercive are objectively extremely
serious matters. It is relevant
that these allegations are unproven and that,
having regard to par 101 above regarding Claimant 2’s allegations, the
cannot find that the Applicant has engaged in a pattern of behaviour
which involves serious boundary violations or abusive behaviour.
(b) the period of time since those offences or matters occurred
and the conduct of the person since they occurred,
alleged conduct took place between 2016 and 2017, now 8 to 9 years ago. The
Tribunal places significant weight upon the fact that
there have been no other
allegations of this nature (or of any nature which poses a risk to children)
either before or since these
allegations.
(c) the age of the
person at the time the offences or matters occurred,
the time of the alleged conduct, the Applicant was between 21 and 22 years of
age. It is very relevant that the alleged conduct
took place in a setting where
the Applicant and a group of other young people were all living away from home
in State A to access
high performance coaching from TB.
age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time they occurred
and any matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim,
1 was 16.5 years old at the time the Applicant was alleged to supply her with
alcohol and was 17 years old at the time that
she and the Applicant started
having sexual and oral intercourse. The Tribunal has accepted that she was a
young, socially immature
and vulnerable girl.
the Tribunal has found the allegations made by Claimant 2 have limited
relevance, for completeness, Claimant 2 was between
21 and 22 years old at the
relevant time and there is no evidence supporting a finding that she had any
particular vulnerability.
(e) the difference in age between the
victim and the person and the relationship (if any) between the victim and the
difference in age between Claimant 1 and the Applicant was 4 years. This age
difference has greater significance because Claimant
1 was 17 years old and the
Tribunal has already found that there was a power differential between them
because of the Applicant’s
age and sexual experience. There was no age
difference between Claimant 2 and the Applicant. There is no evidence to support
that the Applicant has a pattern of engaging in sexual interactions
with others where there exists a power differential or significant
difference.
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably
have known, that the victim was a child,
Applicant knew Claimant 1 was a child.
(g) the person’s
present age,
Applicant is now almost 31 years of age. The Applicant has now been permanently
living in Australia for several years. He no longer
trains abroad and does not
compete internationally.
(h) the seriousness of the
person’s criminal history and the conduct of the person since the matters
Applicant has no criminal history or other conduct which suggests that he poses
a risk of harm to children.
(i) the likelihood of any repetition
by the person of the offences or conduct and the impact on children of any such
repetition,
the Applicant, now a 31 year old man, were to engage in a sexual relationship
with a teenage child (in Australia), provided they
were over 16 years and not a
student, that would not be unlawful. If the Applicant also supplied that teenage
child with alcohol,
that would be unlawful, and given the age difference, would
raise the real possibility of grooming. Regardless of the supply of alcohol,
there would likely be an enormous power imbalance (in favour of the Applicant)
in many important aspects of their interactions including
their sexual
experience and ability to influence the other’s decision-making around sex
and other intimate acts. This power
imbalance would be exacerbated if the
Applicant kept the relationship secret or supplied alcohol to the teenage child.
In these circumstances
there would be a real risk of the teenage child being
unable or unwilling to communicate their needs and wants to the Applicant.
Without other friends or trusted adults knowing about the relationship, there
the teenage child could engage in sexual acts that
they were not ready for, were
uncomfortable with or did not want to do. This could potentially have
long-lasting adverse emotional
consequences for the teenage child.
Tribunal finds, however, that the likelihood of the Applicant engaging in a
secret relationship with and supplying alcohol to
a teenage child now is low.
The circumstances of the Applicant’s interactions with Claimant 1 were
very specific in time and
place and are never likely to be repeated. There is no
evidence of any pattern of behaviour by the Applicant in engaging in
relationships
with another child, let alone another person where there is a
significant power differential or who he is coaching.
the Applicant were to physically and emotionally coerce another person,
particularly a teenage child, to engage in sexual intercourse
or sexual acts
without their consent, the emotional consequences for that teenage child are
likely to be severe and long-lasting.
The Tribunal finds, however, that the
likelihood of the Applicant engaging in this conduct to be very low. It has not
been established,
even on the balance of probabilities, that the Applicant
previously engaged in this conduct. There is no evidence of the Applicant
otherwise engaging in criminal conduct, nor is there any evidence to find that
the Applicant has a pattern of behaviour which involves
exploitation, abuse of
power or boundary violations over others.
(i1) any order of a
court or tribunal that is in force in relation to the person,
are no relevant orders in this matter.
(j) any information given
by the applicant in, or in relation to, the application,
Tribunal has had regard to the information supplied by the Applicant to the
Children’s Guardian and the evidence he has
provided to the Tribunal. It
is noted that the interim bar has been in place for almost 12 months without the
Children’s Guardian
determining to cancel the Applicant’s clearance.
(j1) any relevant information in relation to the person that was
obtained in accordance with section 36A,
does not appear to have been any information obtained in accordance with s 36A
(k) any other matters that the Children’s Guardian
considers necessary.
Tribunal has had regard to the s 58 material produced by the Children’s
Guardian, save for the document referred to in pars
58 to 61 above.
Tribunal is mindful that this jurisdiction is protective, not punitive; an
applicant for a clearance might be entirely innocent
of alleged conduct; yet be
properly denied a clearance (or have an interim bar maintained) because the
Tribunal finds that the evidence
of risk of harm to children is too high
per Simpson AJA at [58])
regard to the facts of the present case and the analysis above, the Tribunal is
not satisfied that it is likely that the Applicant
poses a real and appreciable
risk to the safety of children. The Tribunal considers that the risk posed by
the Applicant to the safety
of children is overall very low. The
Applicant’s objectively unlawful and inappropriate behaviour in having a
sexual relationship
with Claimant 1 in 2016-2017 and the possibility that the
Applicant may have engaged in sexually abusive behaviour towards Claimant
be balanced against the time that has passed, the particular factual context
from which the allegations arise which are unlikely
to be repeated, the evidence
that the Applicant has been teaching children for a few years without complaint
and the lack of any
other evidence that the Applicant poses any risk to the
safety of children. The evidence suggests that the level of risk presently
by the Applicant is overall low; not much greater than the risk that any person
poses to a child.
Tribunal further finds, as required by s 30(1A) WWC Act, that a reasonable
person would permit their child to have direct contact
with the Applicant and it
is in the public interest for the Applicant to have a clearance.
(1) A reasonable parent is likely to be concerned about the Applicant’s
unlawful behaviour and the allegations of sexual assault
made against him,
however, the Tribunal considers that, armed with the facts, a parent would
understand that the interactions between
the Applicant and Claimant 1 relate to
a specific time and place when both were young. They would understand the
allegations of abusive
behaviour are not proven and be reassured by the time has
passed, the lack of any other evidence of relevant inappropriate conduct
number of parents who are very happy with the Applicant’s coaching and
interactions with their children.
(2) In circumstances where the risk to the safety of children is low, there is a
public interest in the Applicant being able to coach
children as he was doing
prior to the interim bar. The Applicant has enormous talent in his sport and
there is significant benefit
to individuals and the Australian community receive
coaching from him. It is noted that the Children’s Guardian accepts that
if the Applicant does not pose a risk, the public interest test would be
satisfied by the Applicant.
the above reasons, the Tribunal made an order to set aside the decision of the
Children’s Guardian to impose an interim
Tribunal finds that it is desirable to continue the order prohibiting disclosure
of the names of any person mentioned in these
proceedings in order to protect
the identity of an alleged victim. The Tribunal has also removed from this
decision information concerning
the Applicant which could lead to the
identification of the victim.
(1) The decision of the Children’s Guardian on 25 June 2024 to impose
an interim bar on the Applicant pursuant to s 17(2) Child
Protection (Working
with Children) Act 2012 is set aside.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
13 November 2025 - Para 106: Administrative formatting text removed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter