URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Klironomos v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMR 17; (28 May 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Klironomos v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
NSWPICMR 17
Peter Klironomos
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEWER:
Brett Williams
DATE OF DECISION:
28 May 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review
matter; dispute about pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE); insurer determined
PAWE as nil; business operated by a company
as trustee for trust; claimant
issued invoices to company; concession that no evidence monies were paid in any
form directly to the
claimant or that he received earnings for the work he
performed; claimant argued he constructively received earnings;
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (No 1)
Gorrie v Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited
Singh v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
Pal v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
Liu v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
claimant’s PAWE determined by reference to the gross earnings he received
and not the earnings of the company; clause
4(1) Schedule 1 is concerned with
actual earnings received not constructively received; claimant did not actually
receive any earnings
during the relevant period; PAWE assessed as nil; decision
under review affirmed; orders made for payment of claimant and insurer’s
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
reviewable decision dated 23 December 2024 is affirmed.
of the reasonable and necessary legal costs incurred by the claimant in
connection with the proceedings is permitted under
s 8.10(4)(b)
Accident Injuries Act 2017
of the insurer’s reasonable legal costs for legal services provided to it
in connection with the proceedings is permitted
Accident Injuries Act 2017
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Klironomos (claimant) was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 2 August 2024
(accident). He subsequently made a claim for
statutory benefits under Part 3 of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) on Insurance Australia
Limited t/as NRMA Insurance (insurer). Liability for the claim has been
proceedings were commenced by the claimant and involve a dispute about his
pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE). PAWE are used
to determine the amount of
weekly payments during the first and second entitlement periods: s 3.6 and s 3.7
dispute arose after the insurer determined on 23 December 2024 that the
claimant’s PAWE were nil; a decision that was subsequently
affirmed by an
internal reviewer. The insurer’s decision of 23 December 2024 is the
decision under review. The dispute is a
merit review matter: Sch 2 cl1(a) MAI
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
the first entitlement period weekly payments of statutory benefits are payable
in accordance with s 3.6. That provision states,
relevantly, as
3.6 Weekly payments during first entitlement
period (first 13 weeks after motor accident)
(1) An earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident and suffers a
total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the injury
is entitled to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section during the first
entitlement period.
Only a person who was an earner when injured is entitled to statutory
benefits under this section—see Schedule 1.
(2) A weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at
the rate of 95% of the difference between the person’s
pre-accident weekly
earnings and the person’s post-accident earning capacity (if any) or
post-accident earnings, whichever
is the greater, for the first entitlement
s 3.7 uses PAWE to ascertain the amount of payments during the second
entitlement period.
is defined, relevantly, in Sch 1 cl 4 as follows:
Meaning of ‘pre-accident weekly earnings’—general
(1) Pre-accident weekly earnings, in relation to an earner who is injured as
a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average
of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the 12 months immediately before the
day on which the motor accident
occurred, unless subclause (2) applies.
term “loss of earnings” is defined in Sch 1 cl 3 as
Meaning of ‘loss of
Loss of earnings
means a loss incurred or likely
to be incurred in a person’s income from personal exertion.
(2) A person’s
income from personal
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
allowances and
retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone
or in partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
(3) A person’s
income from personal
does not include—
(a) interest, unless the person’s principal business consists of
the lending of money, or unless the interest is received in
respect of a debt
due to the person for goods supplied or services rendered by the person in the
course of the person’s business,
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick or other leave entitlement.”
PRELIMINARY CONFERENCES
proceedings were the subject of two preliminary conferences. At the preliminary
conference on 21 February 2025 the parties sought
an opportunity to obtain
further evidence, make further written submissions, and explore whether the
dispute could be resolved. Directions
were made for the filing of further
evidence and submissions by the parties. The insurer’s application to
lodge additional
documents dated 12 February 2025 was declined.
the preliminary conference listed on 2 April 2025 the insurer confirmed that its
case was that for the purposes of Sch 1 cl 4(1)
of the MAI Act the gross
earnings received by the claimant as an earner during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which
the accident occurred were nil, and that it disputed the
claimant received any earnings during this period. The claimant sought and
given an opportunity to provide further evidence to address these matters.
Further directions were made and the proceedings listed
for hearing on 22 May
parties were unable to resolve the dispute and the matter proceeded to hearing.
Mr Ghabar, of counsel, appeared for the claimant.
Mr Boyd appeared for the
insurer. No witnesses were required for questioning and no oral evidence was
parties confirmed that the dispute requiring determination was the
claimant’s PAWE. That dispute in turn boiled down to
a dispute about
whether the claimant, as an earner, received earnings during the relevant
parties agreed that:
(a) the claimant was injured as a result of the accident;
(b) s 3.1 is engaged;
(c) at the time of the accident the claimant was working as a concrete truck
(d) for the purposes of s 3.6(1), the claimant is an “earner”;
(e) the claimant’s PAWE is to be determined in accordance with Sch 1
cl4(1), and
(f) for the purposes of Sch 1 cl 4(1) the 12 months immediately before the day
on which the accident occurred is 2 August 2023-1
August 2024 (relevant period).
parties confirmed that the following further matters were not in dispute:
(a) during the relevant period the claimant was the sole director, secretary and
shareholder of Peak Empire Pty Limited (Peak);
(b) during the relevant period Peak contracted with Metromix Pty Limited
(Metromix) to provide a concrete truck;
(c) other than when he was sick, the claimant drove the concrete agitator truck
and made deliveries of concrete as required by the
contract between Peak and
(d) Peak acted as trustee of the Peak Empire Trust (Trust);
(e) the claimant issued invoices to the Trust for the work he performed, and
(f) Metromix paid Peak for the performance of the contract.
the course of submissions, it was raised with the parties that the term
“earnings” as used in Sch 1 cl 4(1) is
not defined in the MAI Act,
and that in
Allianz Insurance Australia Limited v Shahmiri
[2022] NSWSC
), Harrison AsJ determined that the meaning of the term
“earnings” in Sch 1 cl 4(1) could not be derived from the definition
of “loss of earnings” contained in Sch 1 cl 3 of the MAI Act:
[64]-[66]. Among the reasons given for this was that
“loss of earnings” and “earnings” are not the same:
parties were taken to
Iskandar v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
[2024] NSWPICMR 11
where the meaning of “earnings” was
addressed at [58]-[64], and it was found that “earnings”, as that
is used in Sch 1 cl 4(1), means income gained in return for labour or
services provided by an earner. The parties agreed that the
same meaning should
be adopted in these proceedings.
Ghabar, of counsel, confirmed that there was no evidence before the Commission
that monies were paid in any form directly to the
claimant, or that he received
earnings for the work he performed. Instead, he argued that the gross earnings
by the claimant as an earner should include earnings he
“constructively received”. Mr Ghabar was not able to identify
authority or provision that supported this submission.
fallback position was that Peak’s profit during the relevant period
represented the gross earnings of the claimant for the
purposes of Sch 1 cl
respect to the claimant’s primary case, the insurer argued that
“earnings received” in Sch 1 cl 4(1) does not
“earnings constructively received”, that there is no evidence the
claimant received any earnings as an earner
during the relevant period, and the
claimant’s PAWE is $0.
to the claimant’s secondary submission, the insurer submitted that Peak is
a separate and distinct legal entity and that
its profits are not the
claimant’s earnings.
evidence relied on by the parties is contained in a joint bundle filed by the
insurer on 13 May 2025. All the material in the
bundle that was referred to by
the parties in submissions has been considered: see rule 67D Personal Injury
Commission Rules.
the contract between Metromix and Peak, the trust deed, nor documents confirming
ownership of the truck are in evidence. It
was not disputed that the truck
driven by the claimant was owned by Peak.
claimant has provided two statements. In his first statement dated 15 January
2025 the claimant stated that:
“At the time of my accident, I
was not employed. I had however previously, operated a business. I was the sole
director, secretary
and shareholder of the Peak Empire Pty Ltd. The Peak Empire
Pty Ltd as trustee of the Peak Empire Trust, operated a business where
a concrete truck and would subcontract to Metromix Pty Ltd. In order to engage
in that subcontracting work, I needed to
trade and operate through a company and
have various insurances including workers' compensation.”
states that during the course of that “employment”, he drove the
concrete truck and derived income. The claimant stated
that the Trust
distributed any profits and earnings to him “personally” during the
course of the financial years ending
30 June 2023 and 30 June 2024. He stated
that that income was income he had derived "off [his] own back” and
asserted that
it was personal services income from his own “personal
exertions”.
claimant went on to state that:
“[6] If there were days where
I was unable to attend work, I would organise and pay a driver to work. During
the course of the
financial years ending 30 June 2023 and 30 June 2024,
those earnings totalled the sum of $3,470.00 and would have represented
approximately
two weeks of work over the entire period I operated the business
where I was sick or unable to attend work and where a driver drove
[7] Other than those few days where I paid a driver, if I was unable to drive
the truck, the truck did not work and did not derive
any taxable income. I was
the heart and soul of the business...:”
claimant stated that the net proceeds of the business were distributed to him
and “set out in [his] personal tax returns
for the financial years ending
30 June 2023 and 30 June 2024.” He went on to
“[8] ... Whilst I may have received income sporadically
during the course of the 2023 and 2024 financial years, the amount of
I received, would always be reconciled at the end of the year and would end up
in my tax return. The net proceeds of the
business were distributed to me and
that includes the income of the business less all the expenses of the business.
The business
was not running at a loss. The business made enough income to pay
me income/wages for my personal exertions.”
his subsequent statement dated 20 February 2025 the claimant stated as
“[2] At the time I signed my statement [dated 15
January 2025] I understood that my earnings came from The Peak Empire Trust
distributing my profits and earnings to me personally during the course of the
financial years ending 30 June 2023 and 30 June 2024.
I now understand that from
an accounting analysis this is not what occurred.
[3] What actually occurred is that using my own ABN, I issued invoices to the
Peak Empire Trust and then I arranged for the Peak Empire
Trust to pay those
invoices. Those invoices represented my personal exertions for my work
[4] That income that was paid to me, was essentially income which I had
derived ‘off my own back.’ It was personal services
income from my
own personal exertions.”
claimant stated that the income shown in his income tax return is income that
was paid to him, having issued invoices to the Peak
Empire Trust. He then
“caused the Peak Empire Trust to pay those invoices” and those
payments are his personal income.
He stated that:
“Some of the
funds were paid directly to me. Some of the funds were paid to third parties. I
made those payments and those payments
still form part of and still comprise my
own personal Income which is reflected in my income tax return. The payments
were made for
my own use and benefit.”
[10] the claimant stated:
“...the funds paid to me were not
‘trust distributions of profit’ from the trust but rather a payment
to me that invoiced the trust using my own ABN...”
issued by the claimant are in evidence. The invoices cover the period April 2023
to July 2024. Each monthly invoice is for
a different amount. The invoices are
sequentially numbered and addressed to the Trust.
claimant relies on a statement from Tom Kouloukakis dated 17 April 2025.
Mr Kouloukakis states that “over the years”
he has undertaken
accounting work for the claimant and the Trust. He understood that the claimant
would “drive the truck”,
Metromix would issue recipient created tax
invoices to the Trust, and deposits into the Trust bank account for the work
by the claimant. He states:
“When preparing the 2023
and 2024 financial year financial statements and tax returns for the [T]rust and
for Peter personally,
I took instructions from Peter and my staff and I
carefully reviewed the [T]rust bank statements. The bank account is in the name
of the trustee, Peak. Peak was at all times registered on a cash or ordinary
receipts basis. Peter as an individual could only ever
be registered on a cash
or ordinary receipts basis...”
Kouloukakis stated that a review of the bank account statements, business
records and a reconciliation of the recipient created
tax invoices for the
period 2 August 2023 to 1 August 2024 resulted in the preparation of the general
ledger report annexed to his
statement. The analysis recorded in the profit and
loss report and the general ledger report records the funds that were received
into the Trust bank account and the funds were “spent” or
transferred out of the bank account on a cash basis. He states
financial material confirmed that the Trust paid either the claimant or third
parties for his “use and benefit”
the sum of approximately $73,500.
That sum, he states, represented income to the claimant. I have considered the
matters explained
at [12] in the statement.
[13] Mr Kouloukakis states:
“The sum of $73,639.48 using code
826 in the general ledger is the amount of money that was paid out of the trust
bank account
and which reflects [the claimant’s] personal
[14] Mr Kouloukakis explains why the sum of $73,639.48 does not reconcile
precisely with the sum of $73,500 recorded as sub-contractor
expenses. He states
that he reconciled the sum of $73,639.48 as being funds that were paid out of
the Trust for the claimant’s
“use and benefit and which were either
actually or constructively received by him”.
insurer relies on a report of Mr Croft, an accountant, dated 18 December 2024.
Among other matters, Mr Croft expressed the opinion
that the claimant’s
purported subcontractor income of $73,500 is the result of accounting journal
entries that did not result
in a cash payment to him; that is, the claimant did
not actually receive any payments from the Trust in line with his invoices.
are over 300 pages of financial records. Those records, to the extent they were
referred to in submissions have been considered.
There is also medical material
in the joint bundle. That material has not been considered; it is not relevant
to the PAWE dispute
and was not referred to by the parties in their
submissions.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
claimant relies on written submissions dated 17 April 2025. The submissions
describe the business structure involving Peak, the
Trust, and the claimant. In
short, the Trust by its corporate trustee, Peak, traded and operated the
concrete truck. The claimant’s
personal exertion driving the truck
resulted in the trust deriving income. The claimant submits that but for his
personal exertion
driving the truck the Trust would not have derived any income.
assertion in the submissions that only the claimant drove the truck is not quite
correct; the claimant’s statement dated
15 January 2025 records at [6]
that during the course of the financial years ending 20 June 2023 and 30 June
2024 if there were days
he was unable to attend work (due to illness or
otherwise) he would organise and pay a driver to drive the truck.
claimant’s submissions record at [18] that funds were transferred from the
Trust bank account to various third parties and
that no other person or third
party had control over the trust funds. He submits that he
“received” those funds; as the
controlling mind of the trust, he
chose where to direct them. The claimant argues that he had the discretion as to
the control of
those funds and what he used the funds for. In the
claimant’s submission, he derived and received the actual and constructive
use and benefit of all those funds.
claimant relies on
Zou v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
NSWPICMR4 and argues that “as the owner of the business” his PAWE
should be based on the proceeds of the business,
calculated by reference to the
revenue of the business less all the expenses of the business.
submissions record that profits of the business were not paid to the claimant by
way of a dividend or a trust distribution. Rather,
using his own Australian
Business Number (ABN), the claimant issued invoices to the Trust and the Trust
then paid those invoices
to the claimant.
is, however, no evidence before me that the Trust made payments to the claimant.
The claimant’s case at hearing was that
payments were made to third
parties at his direction. His submission at [25] in part reflects this. The
claimant submits that all
the payments made by the Trust were made for his use
and benefit and represent “either actual or constructive payments to
He also notes that the payments “show” in his income tax
returns and submits the sum of $73,500 recorded in his 2024
representative of the proceeds of the business.
claimant submits that income paid to him, or for his use and benefit, was paid
against invoices he issued utilising his ABN.
claimant argues that payments he received constitute personal exertion income,
whether they were paid to him directly or whether
they were paid to third
parties. He submits that the payments to third parties were not business
expenses but rather payments directed
by him for his benefit at his
discretion.
the claimant’s submission the earnings paid to him for invoices issued to
the Trust represent personal income derived and
received by him and result of
his personal exertion. On that basis, his PAWE should be assessed in accordance
2023 and 2024 income tax returns.
to the issue of whether he received earnings, the claimant argues:
(a) No other person had any legal entitlement to the funds derived by the
(b) Income is considered "derived" or “received” for tax purposes
even if it has not been physically received by the
person: s 6-5(2) and (3) of
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
(c) An individual under the Australian tax law is deemed to have received or
derived income on a cash basis or receipts basis method.
This means that income
is received or derived when it is actually or constructively received.
Constructively received means the income
was made available to a taxpayer but
not physically received by him.
(d) The general ledger report sets out the nature of the payments made for his
constructive benefit. Those payments are income and
earnings received by him.
claimant referred to
Pal v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
[2023] NSWPICMR 57
) and distinguishes the facts in
that case from those in his case. He also refers to s 6.5 of the
In the claimant’s submission his 2024 income tax return demonstrated gross
earnings of $73,315.00, those earnings equate to
PAWE of $1,499.90, and his
entitlements should be determined on that basis.
oral submissions Mr Ghabar emphasised the following matters:
(a) whether the invoices issued by the claimant were actually paid to him or
paid at his direction the funds were received by him;
(b) the claimant can be considered to have received earnings for the purposes of
Sch 1 cl 4(1) if he constructively received those
earnings by way of disbursing
the equivalent of the funds he invoiced for to third parties, including for home
(c) the general ledger shows the payments that were made to third parties at the
direction of the claimant, and this constitutes
constructive receipt by the
(d) the claimant does not have to “physically” receive the payments
for them to be considered earnings;
(e) interpretation of Sch 1 cl 4(1) should be approached on a beneficial
(f) payments made by the Trust to the claimant were in the nature of profit
distribution and that is a form of personal exertion
(g) everything under payment code 826 in the profit and loss statement is a
payment directed by the claimant and represents what
otherwise would have been
payments made directly to him;
(h) the invoices issued by the claimant and his individual tax return show what
his earnings were;
provisions are capable of informing the determination of the
claimant’s PAWE, and
(j) the “business” was carried on by the claimant because he was the
controlling mind of Peak.
claimant sought an order under s 8.10(4)(b). He submitted that, given the
matters in dispute and the legal work involved, exceptional
circumstances exist
that justify payment of reasonable and necessary legal costs incurred by him in
connection with the proceedings.
submissions
insurer relies on written submissions dated 5 May 2025 wherein it:
(a) disputes that the net proceeds of the business were distributed to the
claimant, and submits that despite the claimant being
an earner, his PAWE is nil
because he did not receive any earnings from exertion in the pre-accident
(b) argues the Trust’s Financial Year (FY) 2024 tax return shows that Peak
made no distributions in FY2024. That being the
case, reference by the claimant
to a distribution of earnings (being the proceeds of the business) is
inaccurate;
(c) argues the Trust’s FY2024 financial statements show that it had
accumulated losses of $92,014 as at 30 June 2024. That
is, Peak, as the trustee
did not, and could not, make any distributions of earnings to the claimant
because there were no proceeds
to distribute;
(d) submits that while the claimant’s FY2024 individual tax return shows
supplement income of $73,500, being the subcontractor
“wages” that
were recognised by an accounting journal entry on 30 June 2024, the claimant did
not receive any payments
from the Trust or Peak in the relevant period, and
(e) argues that cls 3(2)(a) and 4(1) of Sch 1 of the MAI Act establish that the
earnings must be received by the claimant in order
to form part of his earnings
from personal exertion for the purpose of calculating PAWE.
insurer submits its position is consistent with
Singh v Insurance Australia
Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
[2023] NSWPICMR 39.
The insurer also relies
on Zou v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2024] NSWPICMR 4
[6] the insurer refers to and explicitly relies on the report of Mr Croft dated
18 December 2024.
insurer argues that regardless of whether the Trust generated income via the
claimant’s personal exertion, it remains that
it is not his
“earnings” for the purpose of the PAWE calculation unless and until
the proceeds of the business are distributed
to him and received by him.
the insurer’s submission Mr Croft’s report establishes that no
income has been distributed to the claimant by the Trust
in the pre-accident
period, and the claimant did not actually receive any payments from the Trust in
line with his invoices and the
income declared in his tax returns which were
filed after the accident.
insurer argues that whether or not the subcontractor income represents a
repayment of loan advances by the Trust, the amount listed
as subcontractor
income in the tax returns was not received by the claimant and is therefore not
his earnings from personal exertion
for the purpose of determining his PAWE.
insurer argues that the dispute is not whether the claimant “generated
income”, but whether the claimant, as a separate
legal entity to the
Trust, received earnings in the pre-accident period.
insurer disputes that the claimant received income via the invoices issued from
his ABN to the Trust. The insurer argues that
whether or not the
claimant’s method of issuing invoices utilising his own personal ABN to
the Trust for his personal exertion
is an “accepted commercial
method” is irrelevant to the dispute. The Trust is a separate legal entity
to the claimant.
In the insurer’s submission it cannot be asserted that
the claimant “received” income via the Trust on the available
evidence. He receives earnings in his personal capacity to the extent the
Company/Trust makes payments to him, or he receives a distribution
income. In the insurer’s submission neither has occurred in the relevant
insurer submits that all references to the
are irrelevant to the
dispute and that “income” for tax assessment purposes is not the
same as “receipt of earnings”
for the purpose of calculating PAWE
under the MAI Act.
insurer argues that the statement of Mr Kouloukakis does not address the core
issue in dispute. In its submission, whether or
not there are funds which make
up the claimant’s personal income “in accordance with Australian tax
law” is not
the same question as whether he received earnings in the
pre-accident period within the meaning of the MAI Act.
insurer also argues that the general ledger report cannot be relied upon because
it is not a contemporaneous document, and a significant
amount of the debits
under code 826 are cash withdrawals without further details listed.
oral submissions the insurer emphasised that:
(a) earnings generated by a company are not the same as earnings received by a
(b) Peak’s earnings were not the claimant’s earnings;
(c) there is no evidence that the claimant actually received any earnings during
the relevant period, and
(d) on the available evidence the claimant’s PAWE were $0.
insurer sought an order under s 8.3(4) with respect to its costs, relying on the
same matters identified by the claimant in support
of his application for
CONSIDERATION
his statement of 20 February 2025, the claimant describes himself as the
“heart and soul” of the business. I accept
that, when legal forms
are stripped away, that characterisation is accurate. The claimant drove the
concrete truck and delivered
and poured the concrete. Other than on rare
occasions, he was the only person who carried out the work. In short, if he did
the truck and deliver the concrete, Peak would not earn income.
Peak is a separate and distinct legal person. In this regard
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) states as follows:
Separate legal entity that has its own powers
As far as the law is concerned, a company has a separate legal existence that
is distinct from that of its owners, managers, operators,
employees and agents.
A company has its own property, its own rights and its own obligations. A
company's money and other assets
belong to the company and must be used for the
company's purposes. A company has the powers of an individual, including the
to: * own and dispose of property and other assets * enter into contracts
* sue and be sued. Once a company is registered, its separate
legal status,
property, rights and liabilities continue until ASIC (Australian Securities and
Investments Commission) deregisters
the company.
[sections 119, 124—125, 601AA—601AD]”
contracted with Metromix and Metromix paid Peak for the work performed under the
contract. Metromix did not pay the claimant.
The “business” referred
to by the claimant was not carried on by him; it was carried on by Peak.
the work performed in fulfilment of the contract between Peak and Metromix was
undertaken by the claimant this does not alter
the legal position; payments made
in accordance with the contract were made to Peak, and any income, profit, or
earnings received
in performance of the contract were Peak’s. The proceeds
of the business were the earnings of Peak, not the claimant. Payments
on behalf of the Trust were made at the direction of Peak as trustee for the
Trust and not at the direction of the claimant.
claimant’s PAWE is determined by reference to the gross earnings he
received not the earnings (or profit) received by Peak,
a separate and distinct
legal person:
Patton v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (No 1)
NSWPICMR 45,
Gorrie v Allianz
Australia Insurance Limited
[2023] NSWPICMR
Singh v Insurance Australia
Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
[2023] NSWPICMR
Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2024] NSWPICMR 65.
claimant conceded at the hearing that there is no evidence before the Commission
that monies were paid in any form directly to
him, or that he received earnings
for the work he performed.
do not accept the claimant’s submission that various concepts, terms and
definitions found in the
can be called on to assist interpreting
Sch 1 cl1(1).
are not similar statutes. They
do not come within the
in pari materia
principle. The language found in
each statute is used in different and dissimilar
Each of the
has different objects and deals with different
subject matter. Each Act must be read in context.
discussed earlier, “earnings” is not defined in the MAI Act and a
definition of “earnings” cannot be derived
from the definition of
“loss of earnings” found in Sch1 cl 3 of the MAI Act. The parties
agreed that “earnings”
means income gained in return for labour or
services provided by an earner.
the Merit reviewer found that Sch 1 cl 4(1) is concerned with actual
earnings received by the claimant: at [48]. I agree. I reject
claimant’s “constructive receipt” case.
is no evidence the claimant actually received income in return for labour or
services he provided during the relevant period.
The evidence does not support a
finding that he received any income in the nature of earnings, salaries, wages,
commissions, fees,
bonuses, pensions, retiring allowances and retiring
gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of employee or
relation to any services rendered,
from Peak, Metromix, or the Trust.
income referred to in the claimant’s individual income tax returns was not
earnings received by him. As submitted by the
insurer, income for the purposes
is not the same as earnings received by the claimant for
the purposes of Sch 1 cl 4(1).
if, as the claimant submitted, a beneficial approach may be
to interpreting Sch 1
cl 4(1) it would not result in a different outcome given the facts of the
claimant’s secondary case is that payments made by the Trust to him were
in the nature of profit distributions, a form of
personal exertion income he
received in the relevant period. He relies on Mr Croft’s report in support
of this submission.
In this regard, Mr Croft expressed the opinion that total
annual payments determined at the end of the FY2024 are more likely to
distribution of profit or a transaction between the claimant (as beneficiary)
and the Trust.
his statement dated 20 February 2025 the claimant
“[2] At the time I signed my statement [dated 15
January 2025] I understood that my earnings came from The Peak Empire Trust
distributing my profits and earnings to me personally during the course of the
financial years ending 30 June 2023 and 30 June 2024.
I now understand that from
an accounting analysis this is not what occurred.”
went on to state at [10]:
“...the funds paid to me were not
‘trust distributions of profit’ from the trust but rather a payment
to me that invoiced the trust using my own ABN...”
Kouloukakis did not describe or refer to distributions of profit to the claimant
in his statement.
am not satisfied that in the financial years ending 30 June 2023 and 2024 there
is evidence of distribution of Trust income to the
find that the claimant did not actually receive any earnings during the relevant
period. It follows that during the 12 months immediately
before the day on which
the accident occurred the claimant did not receive any gross earnings as an
earner. His PAWE is $nil.
Claimant’s costs
claimant seeks an order under s 8.10(4) of the MAI Act permitting payment of the
reasonable and necessary legal costs he incurred
in connection with the
proceedings. The Commission can make the order sought only if satisfied that
exceptional circumstances exist
that justify payment of the costs he has
incurred: s 8.10(4) MAI Act.
be “exceptional circumstances” the circumstances must be unusual or
out of the ordinary, whether as a result of qualitative
or quantitative factors.
The case need not be one that is unique, unprecedented, or very rare. The
question is determined on the
basis of the facts of the individual
Exceptional
circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a combination of
exceptional factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which, although
individually of no particular significance, when taken together are seen as
exceptional.
AAI Ltd trading as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
it was found that
s 8.10(4) of the MAI Act can be seen as designed to deal with particular,
unusual situations where the maximum
costs fixed by the Regulations may not be
adequate, and that:
“[99] ...other cases can be envisaged
which are exceptional, because they involve an unusual degree of factual or
legal complexity
or for some other reason, and this requires the incurring of
more substantial legal costs by a claimant. These cases fall within
have taken into consideration the factual and legal issues in dispute and the
legal work undertaken by the claimant’s lawyers
in connection with the
proceedings, including the preparation of written submissions and appearance at
the hearing. These matters,
when taken together, satisfy me that exceptional
circumstances exist that justify payment of the claimant’s costs.
Insurer’s costs
insurer seeks a costs order under s 8.3(4) of the MAI Act and relies on
at [127]-[128]. The insurer argues that, having regard to the
complex legal and factual issues that arose in the proceedings, the
should exercise its discretion to make the order it seeks.
regard to the issues in dispute and the legal work undertaken on behalf of the
insurer, I am satisfied that for the purposes
of s 8.3(4) of the MAI Act, the
Commission should permit payment of the insurer’s reasonable legal costs
for legal services
provided to it in connection with the proceedings.
DETERMINATION
reviewable decision is affirmed.
of the reasonable and necessary legal costs incurred by the claimant in
connection with the proceedings is permitted in accordance
with s 8.10(4) of the
of the insurer’s reasonable legal costs for legal services provided to it
in connection with the proceedings is permitted
under s 8.3(4) of the MAI
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
[2023] NSWPICMR 57
For example, the
claimant argues that income is considered "derived" or “received”
for tax purposes even if it has not
been physically received by the person. He
also submits that: an individual under “the Australian tax law “is
to have received or derived income on a cash basis or receipts basis
method; this means income is received or derived when it is
actually or
constructively received, and constructively received means the income was made
available to a taxpayer but not physically
received by him. He also refers to s
discussion in D Pearce,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 9
Sch 1 cl 3(2) MAI
ADCO Constructions
Pty Ltd v Goudappel
(2014) 254 CLR1;
[2014] HCA 18
Australia Insurance Limited v Estate of the Late Summer Abawi
[2025] NSWCA
Kirk JA (Adamson and Stern JJA
San v Rumble
[2007] NSWCA 259
Ho v Professional
Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (551 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter