URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ziegeler v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd [2025] NSWPICMR 21; (27 June 2025)
PERSONAL INJURY COMMISSION
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Ziegeler v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd
[2025] NSWPICMR 21
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Montgomery-Hribar
DATE OF DECISION:
27 June 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(PIC Act); costs dispute arising from
statutory benefits claim; application for merit review of reasonable and
necessary costs; substance
of application required consideration of exceptional
circumstances; issue of jurisdiction; consideration of
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v Rymer
; guiding principle of PIC Act considered and
applied; section 8.10(4) of MAI Act and meaning of “exceptional
circumstances”
considered;
San v Rumble
Professional Services Review Committee No 295
AAI Ltd trading as GIO v
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
considered; whether
costs reasonable and necessary;
not satisfied of existence
of exceptional circumstances; legal costs up to maximum provided in the
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
reasonable and necessary; no costs of merit
review application.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(a) no exceptional circumstances exist, and
(b) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant in respect of the
miscellaneous claims assessment matter determined on 20 February
2025, up to the
maximum costs provided under the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
reasonable and necessary.
claimant is entitled to recover up to 16 monetary units for his legal costs and
$30 for other costs and expenses.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
proceedings relate to a costs dispute between Luke Ziegeler (claimant) and
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (insurer). The
costs dispute arises in
connection with a claim for statutory benefits and a related miscellaneous
claims assessment matter under
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Act) that was determined by me on 20 February 2025 (primary proceedings).
the second of two preliminary conferences in the primary proceedings, I provided
the parties with an opportunity to make submissions
on costs. Both parties
declined to do so. As the matter was a regulated miscellaneous claims assessment
the claimant was entitled
to recover up to 16 monetary units in respect of his legal
5 May 2025, being after the primary proceedings were closed, the claimant filed
an application for merit review, seeking an order
that exceptional circumstances
existed in the primary proceedings to justify payment of legal costs in excess
of the regulated amount.
insurer disputes that exceptional circumstances exist such as to warrant the
cost order sought by the claimant.
Relevant legislation
8 of the MAI Act regards costs and fees.
8.3 of the MAI Act provides for the fixing of maximum costs recoverable by
Australian legal practitioners, and relevantly
(4) An Australian legal practitioner is not entitled to be paid or recover
legal costs for any legal services provided to a party
to a claim for statutory
benefits (whether the claimant or the insurer) in connection with the claim
unless payment of those legal
costs is permitted by the regulations or the
Commission.”
8.10(1) provides:
“A claimant for statutory benefits is
(subject to this section) entitled to recover from the insurer against whom the
is made the reasonable and necessary legal costs, and other costs and
expenses, incurred by the claimant in connection with the claim.
Other costs and
expenses include the cost of medical and other tests and reports.”
entitlement in s 8.10(1) is qualified by sub-sections (2) to (4). These
sub-sections provide:
“(2) The regulations may make provision
for or with respect to fixing the maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a
under this section (including any matters for which no costs and
expenses are recoverable from the insurer).
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and
necessary legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
regulations or the Commission:
(4) The Commission can permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant
but only if satisfied that—
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant.”
2 of the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (Regulations) pertains to
maximum legal and other costs.
3(2)(a) of Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the Regulations provides that whether, for
the purposes of section 2.30 (Claim against Nominal
Defendant where vehicle not
identified) of the Act there has been due inquiry and search to establish the
identity of a motor vehicle
is a regulated miscellaneous claims assessment
matter. Clause 1 of that Part provides that the maximum costs for legal services
to a claimant or an insurer in connection with an assessment under
Division 7.6 of the MAI Act involving a dispute about a regulated
miscellaneous
claims assessment matter are 16 monetary units.
Accordingly,
for the purposes of s 8.3(4), a claimant’s legal costs can be recovered up
to the amount of 16 monetary units (permitted
by the regulations) or in excess
of this amount if permitted by the Commission under s 8.10(4), if those costs
are reasonable and
necessary (s 8.10(1)).
1(aa) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act provides that “whether for the purposes
of section 8.10 (Recovery of costs and expenses
in relation to claims for
statutory benefits) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant are
reasonable and necessary”
is a merit review matter.
8.3(4) and 8.10(4) of the MAI Act refer to payment of legal costs being
permitted by the Personal Injury Commission (Commission).
Section 31 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“The Commission is to be constituted by one or more
Division members ... to which the function of dealing with the proceedings
allocated”.
Members are listed in s 8 of the PIC Act and include principal, senior and
general members. A Merit Reviewer is not a Division
Member and does not
constitute the Commission.
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Rymer
[2022] NSWPICMRP 6
“...The power to permit costs outside the MAI
Regulation (under s 8.10(4)) lies with a member of the Commission who, absent
agreement between the parties, must give that permission before a merit reviewer
can then assess those costs and determine what costs
are reasonable and
necessary and payable by the insurer.”
determined the primary proceedings in my capacity as a Member and in that
capacity had the power to determine the claimant’s
entitlement to costs.
At the preliminary conference on 3 February 2025, I asked the parties whether
they sought an opportunity to
make submissions in respect of costs. They
declined. Accordingly, no order as to costs was made.
as a Merit Reviewer, I am not able to exercise Commission power and cannot
permit the payment of legal costs under s 8.10(4)
claimant’s current application for Merit Review is made pursuant to cl
1(aa) of Schedule 2, being whether the costs and
expenses incurred are
reasonable and necessary. An application under this clause does not involve
consideration of whether payment
should be permitted under s 8.10(4) due to the
existence of exceptional circumstances.
in substance, the claimant’s application seeks a determination by the
Commission under s 8.10(4) that exceptional circumstances
existed in the primary
proceedings so as to permit the payment of legal costs above the maximum
provided by the Regulations. The
insurer has responded to the application on
that basis.
objects PIC Act include “to enable the Commission to resolve the real
issues in proceedings justly, quickly, cost effectively
and with as little
formality as possible”,
the guiding principle as set out in s 42 provides, inter alia, that:
“...the practice and procedure of the Commission should be
implemented so as to facilitate the resolution of the issues between
the parties
in such a way that the cost to the parties and the Commission is proportionate
to the importance and complexity of the
subject-matter of the
proceedings”.
would be contrary to the objects of the PIC Act and the guiding principle of the
Commission to require the claimant to re-file
his application simply so that it
can be allocated to me in my capacity as a Member. The substance of the
claimant’s application
should prevail over the form. While it has been
filed as a merit review matter under cl 1(aa) of Schedule 2, I consider it is
appropriate
to determine it in my capacity as a Member. This will enable me to
determine the application under s 8.10(4) of the MAI Act.
52(3) of the PIC Act provides:
“(3) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling
legislation without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
the preliminary conference on 2 June 2025, the parties agreed to the dispute
being determined on the basis of the documents before
me and the submissions of
the parties, and without holding a formal hearing.
considered s 52 of the PIC Act, Procedural Direction PIC2 and the documents
before me, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information available to me to
allow me to determine the issues in dispute ‘on the papers’ and
without holding a formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE
parties both relied on written submissions for the purposes of this application.
These submissions have been considered.
have also considered the helpful clarifications made to the claimant’s
submissions based on the questions I asked Ms Christopoulos
at the preliminary
conference on 2 June 2025.
Claimant’s submissions
claimant’s submissions dated 4 March 2025 submit that exceptional
circumstances existed in the primary proceedings as they
were legally and
factually complex, and necessitated substantial legal research, preparation, and
the instruction of counsel.
is submitted that the primary proceedings involved a dispute regarding the
interpretation and application of ss 2.30 and 2.31 of
the MAI Act. The claimant
further submits that there was a need to “rebut complex arguments from the
claimant’s submissions refer to the involvement of QBE as well as Allianz,
which it said complicated the matter and required
additional correspondence and
further legal efforts to clarify liability and responsibilities.
claimant submitted that he was required to obtain and submit extensive evidence,
including a chronology of events, submissions,
witness statements, statements
from lawyers, police reports, ambulance reports and other documents.
claimant submitted that the dispute was complex and novel, leading to multiple
procedural hearings, orders, rounds of submissions,
oral submissions,
legislative and case law review, and formal correspondence. In respect of the
legal research, the claimant submits
this involved statutory interpretation of
the MAI Act and an analysis of judicial precedent to differentiate the
circumstances from prior cases where due inquiry and search and
not been deemed sufficient.
claimant submitted that it was necessary to brief experienced counsel given the
“nuanced legal contentions raised by the
insurer as to the timeliness of
investigation and CCTV footage among other matters”, as well as the
procedural demands of the
Commission’s processes
part of this application, the claimant resubmitted the bundle that was before me
in the primary proceedings. My preliminary conference
reports and decision in
the primary proceedings were also provided, as well as email correspondence
between the claimant and insurer
where the insurer confirms it will pay
regulated costs.
being a dispute in respect of costs, the claimant’s application did not
include any quantification of the costs sought,
not was an itemised schedule of
costs provided.
the preliminary conference, I queried what costs were being sought by the
claimant. On 2 June 2025, the claimant uploaded a document
titled “Tax
Invoice” addressed to the insurer. The Tax Invoice was dated 2 June 2025.
It totals $16,995 of solicitor
costs, inclusive of GST. The Tax Invoice also
referenced three disbursements, being barrister fees in the amount of $1,540
of GST, a “GIPA Application” to NSW Police in the amount
of $30 and a Direction for Production to NSW Police in the amount
of $108.50.
The disbursement invoices were not provided.
submissions
insurer provided submissions dated 21 May 2025. The insurer submitted that
exceptional circumstances did not exist in the primary
proceedings. It says that
it is difficult to see how the circumstances were ‘unusual’ or
‘exceptional’ and
describe it as a “standard dispute”.
insurer submitted that much of the work that the claimant submits to be grounds
for an exceptional costs order was preparatory
work required to carry out the
claimant’s due inquiry and search obligations. The insurer submitted that
this work would have
been required in the absence of a dispute before the
Commission, and forms part of the usual work for claims lodged against the
defendant where the vehicle alleged to be at fault is unidentified.
insurer further submitted that the fact the claimant was required to undertake
reasonable steps to identify the at-fault vehicle
in accordance with s 2.30(2)
of the MAI Act is by no means an unusual or exceptional circumstance. Rather,
that is a requirement
of the MAI Act.
insurer refutes that the matter involved factual and legal complexity. It
submitted that none of the tasks identified by the claimant
exceed the ambit of
what is ordinarily and reasonably required in legal and administrative work for
a dispute under s 2.30 of the
insurer referred to the two preliminary conferences before me in the primary
proceedings and noted that neither took a substantial
amount of time, with the
second preliminary conference only taking 20 minutes. The insurer noted that the
matter was then resolved
on the papers.
insurer referred to the misallocation of the matter to QBE and submitted that it
was, with respect, a confusion predominately
on the part of the claimant’s
solicitor and that the costs of the ‘additional correspondence’ were
prior to the
lodgement of the dispute in question.
respect of the engagement of counsel, the insurer submitted that the claimant
has failed to establish that exceptional circumstances
necessitated the
instruction of counsel. They submitted that this instruction was simply a
convenience to the claimant.
insurer put on brief further submissions dated 4 June 2025 referring to the
claimant’s Tax Invoice dated 2 June 2025. The
insurer provided a copy of
the invoice that it previously received from the claimant on 7 April 2025. The
invoice dated 7 April 2025
was for $9,990. The insurer submitted that the
professional fees in the Tax Invoice dated 2 June 2025 have increased to $16,995
explanation.
insurer repeated its submission that the claimant has failed to discharge the
burden of establishing that exceptional circumstances
exist to justify the
recovery of payment from the insurer under s 8.10(4)(b) of the MAI Act.
DID EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES EXIST IN THE PRIMARY PROCEEDINGS?
“Exceptional
circumstances” is accepted to mean circumstances that are unusual or out
of the ordinary, determined based
on the facts of the individual
The case does not need to be
one that is unique, unprecedented, or very
Exceptional
circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a combination of
exceptional factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which, although
individually of no particular significance, when taken together are seen as
exceptional.
the existence of “exceptional circumstances” was
accepted by both parties and therefore was not discussed at detail in
However, Wright J noted
that the power to permit the payment of legal costs provided in s 8.10(4) of the
MAI Act can be seen as designed
to deal with particular, unusual situations
where the maximum costs fixed by the Regulations may not be
His Honour noted that
in exceptional cases it is appropriate to permit the recovery of legal costs in
excess of the maximum fixed
by the Regulations “...where that was
reasonably required to prevent injustice, hardship or some other relevant
adverse consequence”.
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 290
, where the
Court of Appeal considered “exceptional circumstances” in the
context of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules,
Another question of construction concerned ‘exceptional
circumstances’ in rule 31.18(4). In
San v Rumble (No 2)
, I gave consideration to the expression
‘exceptional circumstances’ in a different statutory context to the
Without repeating that discussion in full, I shall state such of the
conclusions as seem to me applicable in the construction of
rule 31.18(4).
(a) Exceptional circumstances are out of the ordinary course or unusual, or
special, or uncommon. They need not be unique, or unprecedented,
or very rare,
but they cannot be circumstances that are regularly, routinely or normally
encountered:
R v Kelly (Edward)
[1999] UKHL 4
[2000] 1 QB 198
(b) Exceptional circumstances can exist not only by reference to quantitative
matters concerning relative frequency of occurrence,
but also by reference to
qualitative factors:
R v Buckland
[2000] EWCA Crim 1
[2000] 1 WLR 1262
[2000] 1 All ER 907
(at 1268; 912-913).
(c) Exceptional circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a
combination of exceptional factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which,
although individually of no particular significance, when taken together are
seen as exceptional:
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
(d) In deciding whether circumstances are exceptional within the meaning of a
particular statutory provision, one must keep in mind
the rationale of that
particular statutory provision:
R v Buckland
(at 1268; 912-913).
(e) Beyond these general guidelines, whether exceptional circumstances exist
depends upon a careful consideration of the facts of
the individual case:
v Independent News Auckland
[1996] NZHC 2245
[1996] 2 NZLR 184
have approached my analysis of whether “exceptional circumstances”
existed in the primary proceedings in light of the
above guidance and
considering s 8.10(4) in the context of the MAI Act.
have considered the parties’ submissions, the factual and legal issues in
dispute in the primary proceedings, and the legal
work said to have been
undertaken by the claimant’s lawyers in connection with those proceedings.
dispute in the primary proceedings was largely factual, being whether the
claimant had satisfied his due inquiry and search obligations
under s 2.30 of
the MAI Act. There were no complex or novel legal arguments ventilated.
parties confirmed at the preliminary conference on 21 November 2024 that whether
the nominal defendant had a right to reject the
claim under s 2.31 of the MAI
Act was not in issue.
at the preliminary conference on 21 November 2024, the parties agreed that the
dispute was limited to whether the claimant had
satisfied the requirements of s
2.30(2) of the MAI Act. There was no issue as to what those requirements were.
The primary proceedings
involved no issues of statutory interpretation, nor was
there a dispute as to the application of the law. An understanding of the
requirements of the MAI Act and Guidelines, including with respect to the
obligations of a claimant and insurer under s 2.30, is
expected of personal
injury practitioners. A case such as the current matter should not require
significant legal research.
appreciate the tasks identified in the claimant’s submissions required
legal work to be undertaken. However, I find those
tasks were largely
preparatory and were required to carry out the claimant’s due inquiry and
by s 2.30 of the MAI Act.
also note that Ms Christopoulos was queried about some of the identified tasks
in the claimant’s submissions. She confirmed
that at least one of those
tasks was undertaken by the claimant rather than the claimant’s legal
representatives. Tasks regarding
the internal review application to the insurer
were also included, being tasks not related to the primary proceedings.
parties each prepared written submissions and a bundle of documents for the
purposes of the primary proceedings. Again, I appreciate
those tasks would have
required legal work. However, for the purposes of determining whether the matter
involved exceptional circumstances,
I have taken into consideration the relative
lack of complexity of the issues ventilated. There were no issues of statutory
construction,
nor were there any complex legal principles required to be
addressed or determined.
witnesses were called. No expert evidence was obtained. I note the claimant
prepared a statement, as did a law clerk and a paralegal.
However, I find that
these types of statements are commonly prepared in applications arising under s
2.30 of the MAI Act and do not
consider this to be unusual or exceptional.
it were such that standard applications in respect of s 2.30 of the MAI Act
constituted “exceptional circumstances”,
then I would expect that to
have been expressly contemplated by either the Regulations or the MAI Act
were two preliminary conferences in the primary proceedings. The dispute was
determined on the papers and the parties agreed
it was not necessary for the
matter to proceed to a formal assessment conference.
accept that the matter was initially misallocated to QBE. However, there is no
evidence before me that this caused additional legal
costs and I do not consider
this is sufficient to constitute exceptional circumstances. Indeed, as I found
in the primary proceedings,
the claimant did not inform either QBE or Allianz as
to the due inquiry and search that he had undertaken prior to August 2024. At
time did the claimant’s legal representatives seek to clarify the correct
insurer or copy both insurers into their correspondence.
Any additional
correspondence and resulting legal efforts appear limited to several short
emails sent prior to the application to
the Commission.
claimant submitted that it was necessary to brief experienced counsel given the
“nuanced legal contentions raised by the
insurer as to the timeliness of
investigation and CCTV footage among other matters”, as well as the
procedural demands of the
Commission’s processes. I note the CCTV footage
issue was limited to a brief oral submission by counsel that he had reviewed
relevant CCTV request form, which purportedly stated that the footage is only
held for one or two weeks. In any event, I do not
consider this is a nuanced
legal issue that would require experienced counsel.
accept the submission that counsel may have been helpful in finalising the
written submissions and preparing oral arguments. However,
briefing counsel is a
forensic decision. It can also be more cost effective than using solicitors to
do certain work. I do not consider
that merely because counsel was briefed means
the matter gives rise to “exceptional circumstances” as required by
the experience of counsel was apparent at the preliminary conferences, I do not
consider that the circumstances of this matter
are such that they would
reasonably exceed the capabilities of an experienced personal injury solicitor.
accept that the legal work undertaken in respect of the primary proceedings may
have resulted in legal costs exceeding the regulated
amount. However, that is
not the question that I must resolve. I am required to determine whether
exceptional circumstances existed.
There was nothing about the dispute that took
it outside the realm of what could be considered usual or expected
circumstances.
find that the circumstances of the primary proceedings were such that are
regularly, routinely or normally encountered in applications
regarding s 2.30 of
the MAI Act.
find that the claimant has not persuaded me, on balance, that the circumstances
of the primary proceedings are exceptional or out
of the ordinary. I am not
satisfied that it is appropriate to displace the usual costs regime provided in
the legislation.
ARE THE LEGAL COSTS REASONABLE AND NECESSARY?
costs are reasonable and necessary is determined on a case-by-case basis:
I have not found the existence of exceptional circumstances, the claimant is
only permitted to recover his reasonable and necessary
legal costs up to the
maximum amount permitted by the Regulations: s 8.10(1) MAI Act.
the onus rests on the claimant to establish his legal costs are reasonable and
necessary, it is often helpful to provide an
itemised schedule of the costs
claimed that sets out the tasks performed and the time spent on each. This was
not done by the claimant.
When requested to quantify his claim for costs, the
claimant provided a document titled “Tax Invoice” dated 2 June 2025
(Tax Invoice).
is necessary to make some observations in respect of the Tax Invoice, which I
have done below. Despite my concerns with the Tax
Invoice, I am satisfied, based
on a holistic view of the legal work undertaken in the primary proceedings, that
the claimant would
have incurred reasonable and necessary legal costs in an
amount not less than the maximum permitted by the Regulations. I find he
be entitled to recover from the insurer his legal costs up to the maximum
regulated amount.
Tax Invoice is dated 2 June 2025, being the date of the preliminary conference
in this matter.
disbursements listed do not include copies of the invoices for those
disbursements.
is no hourly rate identified. Nor is there an identification of the time spent
for each task. There is no way for me to assess
whether the legal costs incurred
for each task are reasonable and necessary.
entries list the “Staff” as “AC”. There is no key to
assist in identifying who is referenced by “AC”.
Based on the
evidence before me, it appears this is either a reference to Andrew
Christopoulos, being the solicitor on record in
the primary proceedings, or
Alexandra Christopoulos, being the practitioner who appeared at the preliminary
conference in this matter.
either case, there are several entries in the Tax Invoice where work said to be
done by “AC” is inconsistent with the
evidence before me. For
example, the entry dated “01/07/2024” states "Email correspondence
between Sydney Morning Herald
re advertisement” and lists the
“Staff” as “AC”. However, A52 of the claimant’s
schedule of documents
shows this communication was addressed to “Alexis
Waddups”, being a paralegal. That Alexis Waddups sent the relevant
correspondence is supported by her signed statement, at A63, where she refers to
her inquiries with the Sydney Morning Herald at
paragraphs [7] to [9], and
notes, at [8], that “Ms Buckley sent me an email regarding the
advertisement requirements for both
the Age and the Sydney Morning
Tax Invoice also lists that “AC” was the person who travelled to and
inspected the accident site and nearby premises,
including Liverpool Catholic
Club, on 2 August 2024, 7 August 2024 and 9 August 2024. This is contrary to the
signed statement of
Zaccary Lancaster, law clerk, dated 19 August 2024 which
states, at paragraphs [5] to [13] that he undertook this work. I also note
the signed statement Zacchary Lancaster was dated 19 August 2024. However, the
Tax Invoice states that this statement was drafted
on 3 December 2024.
may be a reasonable explanation for the above inconsistencies. However, in
circumstances where I have not found exceptional
circumstances, and where I
accept that the claimant should be entitled to the maximum costs provided by the
Regulations, it was not
necessary for me to seek to resolve them.
are several tasks where I consider the legal cost is, at face value, not
reasonable or necessary. For example, there is a charge
on 2 October 2024 of
$1,925 for “Reviewing file, documents, notices, drafting submissions for
due search and inquiry dispute,
draft dispute bundle”. This entry alone is
close to the maximum regulated costs for this type of dispute.
and despite cl 23 of the Regulations providing that no costs are payable for
legal services provided to a claimant in connection
with an application for
internal review by the insurer, there are several entries in the Tax Invoice
which pertain to these costs.
For example, an entry dated 21 August 2024 seeks
$577.50 for work solely related to the internal review application.
respect of the disbursements claimed, there are two disbursements regarding the
NSW Police. There is evidence of the GIPA Application
to NSW Police in the
bundle of documents, along with a cheque for payment in the amount of $30. I am
satisfied that this cost is
reasonable and necessary within the meaning of s
8.10(1) of the MAI Act and is recoverable from the insurer.
is no evidence of there being a direction for production on NSW Police. Leave
was not sought to issue a direction for production
in the primary proceedings.
The claimant has not sought to explain why a direction for production was
required in addition to the
GIPA application, nor have they provided a copy of
the direction. There is no receipt to substantiate this disbursement.
Accordingly,
the claimant has not satisfied me that these costs have been
incurred in relation to the primary proceedings, nor that these costs
reasonable or necessary.
is also made to an invoice for Mr Isackson’s barrister’s fees. A
copy of Mr Isackson’s invoice has not
been provided. As barrister fees
constitute “legal costs”, no additional allowance can be made for
this invoice in the
absence of a finding of exceptional circumstances and the
regulated legal costs should be appropriately apportioned.
SHOULD A COST ORDER BE MADE IN RESPECT OF THE CURRENT
PROCEEDINGS?
terms of the costs of this dispute, the regulations do not permit payment of
costs in relation to a costs dispute and no such order
is sought by the
am not satisfied that exceptional circumstances existed in the primary
proceedings. I therefore decline to permit payment of legal
costs under s
8.10(4) of the MAI Act.
the purposes of s 8.10, the legal costs incurred by the claimant in respect of
the miscellaneous claims assessment determined
on 20 February 2025, up to the
maximum costs provided under the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
reasonable and necessary.
claimant is entitled to recover up to 16 monetary units from the insurer in
respect of the miscellaneous claims assessment application
determined on 20
February 2025.
am satisfied that the disbursement regarding the GIPA Application to NSW Police
is reasonable and necessary, and allow payment of
those costs in the amount of
claimant’s entitlement to costs of this merit review is nil.
Cl 22 and Sch 1 cl 3(2)(a) of
the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
(Regulations).
Sch 1 cl 3(1) of
the Regulations.
discussion in
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Rymer
[2022] NSWPICMRP 7
3(c) of the PIC Act.
42(4) of the PIC Act.
Rumble (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 259
San v Rumble (No
[2007] NSWCA 259
Ho v Professional
Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (498 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter