URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owers-Brown v The Owners-Strata Plan No 92562; Nakkan v The Owners-Strata Plan No 92562 [2025] NSWCATCD 67; (22 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Owers-Brown v The Owners-Strata Plan No 92562; Nakkan v The Owners-Strata
Plan No 92562
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 67
Hearing Date(s):
10 November 2023; 4 and 26 June 2024; submissions, transcript and Court
Book to 13 November 2024
Date of Orders:
22 August 2025
Decision Date:
22 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
G Sarginson, Deputy President
(1) By 3 months from the date of this order The
Owners-Strata Plan No 92562 is to engage a suitably licensed builder or builders
and/or tradespersons to perform the works set out in Schedule A of this
(2) All works are to be
performed by suitably licensed persons exercising due care and skill and in
accordance with any applicable
legislation, including (to the extent applicable)
Design and Building Practitioners Act 2020
(3) The lot owners of Lots 3 and 4
of the strata building are to give reasonable access to the owners corporation
and all builders
and tradespersons engaged by the owners corporation so that the
works can be performed and completed.
There is no order as to costs, with each party to bear its own
(5) If a party seeks to vary the
costs order the following orders apply:
Costs applicant is to file and serve costs submissions and documents by 14
days from the date of these orders.
respondent is to file and serve costs submissions and documents by 28 days from
the date of these orders.
(c) Costs applicant
is to file and serve costs submissions in reply by 35 days from the date of
these orders.
(d) Any party can apply to vary
the procedural timetable for the filing and serving of costs submissions and
documents by way
of an application in writing to the Tribunal and the other
parties by no later than the date of compliance with the relevant timetable
obligation.
(6) The proceedings in Case
Number 2023/00401663 and Case Number 2023/00406758 are otherwise
Catchwords:
LAND LAW – strata title –
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW) – whether timber decking is lot property or common property –
duty of owners corporation to repair or replace –
Strata Schemes
Management Act 2015
(NSW) – whether duty breached – appropriate
remedial orders
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Regulation 2022 (NSW)
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Conveyancing (Strata Titles) Act 1961
Design and Building
Practitioners Act 2020
Interpretation
Real Property Act 1900
Strata Schemes Development Act
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Schemes (Freehold Development) Regulation 1997
Strata Schemes
Management Act 1996
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
Schemes Management Regulations 2016 (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Elizabeth Street Sydney Pty Ltd v Hellenic Club Ltd
[2016] NSWCATCD
Coscuez International Pty Ltd v The Owners-Strata Plan No 46433
NSWCATAP 147
Dare v Pulham (1982) [HCA] 70;
(1982) 148 CLR 658
Davenport v
The Owners-Strata Plan No 536; The Owners-Strata Plan No 536 v Davenport
NSWCATAP 301
Deacon v National Strategic Constructions Pty Ltd; National
Strategic Constructions Pty Ltd v Deacon
[2017] NSWCATAP 185
Kalokerinos Pty Ltd v Jain
[2025] NSWCA 137
Fisher v Hebburn Ltd
[1960] HCA 80
Glenquarry Park Investments Pty Ltd v Hegyesi
[2019] NSWSC
Gray v Sirtex Medical Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 40
(2011) 193 FCR 1
Harris v The Owners-Strata Plan No 34056
[2022] NSWCATAP
Hawach v A & A Building Services Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATAP
Henadeck Pty Ltd v Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority; Niraula v
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority
[2020] NSWCATAP 200
Hillpalm Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWSC 362
Hogan v Trustee of the Roman Catholic Church (No 2)
[2006] NSWSC 74
Maple v The Owners-Strata Plan No 8950
[2021] NSWCATCD
Maxwell v Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
(1957) 96 CLR 261
May v Ceedive
[2006] NSWCA
McCrohan v Harith
[2010] NSWCA 67
Melani v The Owners-Strata Plan No
[2017] NSWCATCD 73
National Australia Bank v Blacker
Power Rental Op Co Australia, LLC v Forge Group Power Pty Ltd (in liq)
(receivers and managers appointed)
[2017] NSWCA 8
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Proprietors of Strata Plan No 6522 v Furney
[1976] 1 NSWLR 416
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 340 ALR 368
Ridis v Strata Plan 10308
[2005] NSWCA 246
(2005) 63 NSWLR 449
Saunders v South Canberra Holdings Pty Ltd
[2023] ACAT
Seiwa Pty Ltd v Owners Strata Plan 35042
[2006] NSWSC 1157
[2024] NSWCATAP 28
The Owners – Strata Plan No 21563 v
[2023] NSWCATAP 326
The Owners - Strata Plan No 33368 v Gittins
[2022] NSWCATAP 130
The Owners SP 35042 v Seiwa Australia Pty Ltd
The Owners Strata Plan No 50276 v Thoo
[2013] NSWCA 270
The Owners-Strata Plan 32735 v Lesley-Swan
[2012] NSWSC 383
Owners-Strata Plan No 21563 v Rutherford
[2023] NSWCATAP 326
Owners-Strata Plan No 2661 v Selkirk
[2024] NSWSC 760
The Owners-Strata Plan
No 55468 v Silberstein
[2025] NSWCATAP 102
The Owners-Strata Plan No 63341 v
Malachite Holdings Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP 256
The Owners-Strata Plan No
63731 v B & G Trading Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATAP 273
Owners-Strata Plan No 68255 v Downs; Downs v The Owners-Strata Plan No 68255
[2021] NSWCATCD 34
Transport for NSW v Hunt Leather Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 227
(2024) NSWLR 489
Vickery v Owners-Strata Plan No 80412
[2020] NSWCA 284
(2020) 103 NSWLR
Walsh v The Owners-Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
Group Pty Ltd v Betts
[2025] NSWCATAP 70
White House Developments Pty Ltd v
The Owners-Strata Plan No 70276
[2025] NSWCATAP 68
Texts Cited:
G.E. Dal Pont ‘Law of Costs’ 5th edition
Dictionary 2025 edition
Principal judgment
Case Number 2023/00401663
Kerri Owers-Brown and Lindsay Brown
(Applicant)
The Owners-Strata Plan No 92562 (Respondent)
Case Number
2023/00406758
Robert Nakkan (Applicant)
The Owners-Strata Plan No
92562 (Respondent)
Representation:
Case Number 2023/00401663
J Jaffray (Applicant)
Rennie (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Swaab Lawyers (Applicant)
Lawyers (Respondent)
Case Number 2023/00401663
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
BTC Lawyers (Applicant)
WMD Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2023/00401663 and 2023/00406758
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a dispute under the
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW) (SSM Act)
between owners of adjoining Lots (Ms Owers-Brown and Mr Brown owing one Lot; Mr
Nakkan owning the other Lot) that
involves whether the owners corporation has
complied with its duty to maintain and repair common property in respect of
timber decking
on balconies.
are two separate Tribunal proceedings. Case Number 2023/00401663 is the
application by Ms Owers-Brown and Mr Brown against the
owners corporation. Case
Number 2023/00401663 is Mr Nakkan’s application against the owners
corporation.
both proceedings involve similar issues and claims, both proceedings were listed
for hearing together. The orders made apply to
both sets of
proceedings.
Background to the Dispute and Conduct of the
this decision, the Tribunal has set out the lay evidence of the parties. The
parties relied on a copious amount of lay evidence,
and it is appropriate to set
that evidence out so there is no doubt that the Tribunal considered it.
Regrettably, that has contributed
to the decision being protracted.
in closing written submissions of the parties, little reference is made to the
lay witness evidence, and the focus of the
submissions is upon the expert
lot owners’ lay evidence is contained primarily in the affidavits of Ms
Owers-Brown and Mr Nakkan. The owners corporation’s
lay evidence is
primarily contained in affidavits of current and former strata committee members
(Mr Flood; Mr Schneller; and Mr
Gehrig); former and current strata managers (Mr
Hatzigeorgiou and Ms Lovie); and Mr Weir, a supervisor of the original builder
the strata building who was involved in the supervision of the installation
of the timber decking by sub-contractors to the builder.
proceedings were hard fought and the parties are likely to have incurred
significant legal expenses. A reason for that may partly
be animosity between Mr
Flood; Mr Schneller and Mr Gehrig on the one hand and Ms Owers-Brown who was a
strata committee member and,
for a period, the Secretary of the strata
committee, when the owners corporation took a position in NCAT proceedings
involving a
former lot owner (Mr O’Donnell) that timber decking was lot
property and was the responsibility of lot owners to maintain and
Owers-Brown now takes the position in these proceedings that timber decking is
common property that the owners corporation
has a duty to keep and maintain in a
state of good repair.
reason may be the significant divergence between expert witnesses (in
particular, Mr Wilkie and Mr Calandra) regarding the
condition of the timber
decking; and what is required for repair. In essence, Owers-Brown and Nakkan
seek that the whole timber decking
system proximate to their lots be removed and
replaced, which will be of substantial cost. The owners corporation denies the
is common property and asserts that if it is, moderate repairs are
appropriate.
were 3 expert witnesses who gave evidence in the proceedings. Ms Owers-Brown and
Mr Nakkan relied upon Mr Phil Buckley (flooring
inspector of AFTA); and Mr
Wilkie (building consultant). The owners corporation relied upon Mr Calandra
(building consultant). After
various directions (and attempts) to produce a
coherent and detailed joint expert report, a final joint expert report was
dated 11 June 2024 that dealt with specific questions identified by the
will be discussed later in the decision there is a significant divergence
between Mr Wilkie and Mr Calandra on the nature of the
defects in the timber
decking and the appropriate method of rectification. Mr Wilkie assert the whole
timber decking system proximate
to Lots 3 and 4 needs to be removed and
replaced. Mr Calandra asserts that only sections of decking boards (in the areas
uncovered and more exposed to weather) need to be replaced. The
difference in cost between the two methods of rectification is substantial.
Buckley agrees with Mr Wilkie on some issue and Mr Calandra on other issues, and
states that remedial works involving waterproofing
is outside the sphere of his
hearing proceeded over 3 days (10 November 2023; 4 June 2024; and 26 June 2024).
Ms Jaffray of Counsel appeared for Ms Owers-Brown,
instructed by Saab Lawyers.
Mr Crowley, Solicitor, appeared for Mr Nakkan. Mr Rennie of Counsel appeared for
the owners corporation
instructed by WMD Lawyers.
the first day, Ms Owers-Brown; Mr Nakkan; and Mr Flood gave evidence and were
cross examined. At the end of the first day, the
Tribunal made procedural
directions that included granting the owners corporation leave to amend their
Points of Defence to raise
s 106(3) of the SSM Act; and directed the expert
witnesses to prepare a joint expert report setting out areas of agreement and
disagreement.
the second day of the hearing, the experts witnesses had not prepared a
comprehensive joint expert report, although a form of joint
expert report dated
3 June 2024 (signed by Mr Calandra, with Mr Buckley agreeing in an email; but
not signed or agreed to by Mr Wilkie)
had been prepared. The Tribunal directed
the experts to confer and prepare a comprehensive joint expert report at a
conference room
at the Tribunal whilst the Tribunal was dealing with other lay
hearing proceeded on 4 June 2024 with Mr Hatzigeorgiou; Mr Schneller; and Mr
Weir giving evidence and being cross examined (the
other lay witnesses not being
required for cross examination).
the lay witnesses were cross examined, there was still no complete agreement
between all of the experts in respect of a joint
expert report. A form of a
document was emailed to the Tribunal on 4 June 2024, but it was not a
comprehensive and complete joint
expert report that would allow the Tribunal to
clearly understand the issues that the experts agreed upon and disagreed
Tribunal determined it appropriate to direct the experts to prepare a
comprehensive joint expert report that addressed specific
questions; contained a
detailed scope of works; and clearly set out the areas of agreement and
disagreement between the experts.
The hearing was further adjourned so that
report could be prepared. Due to the amount of time spent on cross examination
of lay witnesses
and interlocutory applications and arguments, the hearing would
not have been able to conclude on 4 June 2024 in any event.
final day of the hearing was 26 June 2024. The experts had prepared a Joint
Expert Report dated 11 June 2024. That document exceeds
110 pages. The Joint
Scott Schedule component of the report is in A3 page format 11 pages in length,
with small font.
experts (Mr Buckley; Mr Wilkie and Mr Calandra) were cross examined whilst
giving concurrent expert evidence on 26 June 2024.
evidence concluded on 26 June 2024, and there was a timetable for the filing and
serving of written submissions. The parties also
filed a transcript of all the
hearing dates; and filed a Court Book (2 volumes).
written submissions in chief of Ms Owers-Brown (prepared by Ms Jaffray of
Counsel) are dated 9 August 2024. They are 29 pages
in length, with an attached
annexure being a scope of works in respect of the proposed work order sought by
Ms Owers-Brown (referred
to as “remedial works” but the works are
“not necessarily limited to” the works set out in the annexure).
There is also a schedule of documents identified.
written submissions in chief of Mr Nakkan (prepared by Mr Crowley) filed on 9
August 2024 are 19 pages in length.
written submissions in chief of the owners corporation (prepared by Mr Rennie of
Counsel) dated 9 September 2024 are 41 pages
written reply submissions of Ms Owers-Brown (prepared by Ms Jaffray of Counsel)
dated 30 September 2024 are 14 pages in length.
written reply submission of Mr Nakkan (prepared by Mr Crowley Solicitor) filed
on 25 October 2024 are 7 pages in length.
transcript of evidence was filed on 1 November 2024 and the Court Book (which
contained a compendium of the documents admitted
into evidence at the hearing)
was filed on 13 November 2024.
Factual Background
Owers-Brown and Mr Brown are the owners of Lot 3 (referred to throughout the
evidence of the parties as “Unit 103”).
Mr Nakkan is the owner of
Lot 4 (referred to throughout the evidence of the parties as “Unit
strata building comprises of 8 levels. Lots 3 and 4 are located on level 1 of
the strata building. The strata building is located
in a southern Sydney suburb
in close proximity to a beach.
strata scheme comprises of 27 Lots, and common property.
strata plan was registered on 23 December 2015.
Owers-Brown and Mr Brown purchased their lot in about December 2016. They reside
in the lot. Between late 2017 and mid-February
2023, Ms Owers-Brown was a member
of the strata committee. Ms Owers-Brown is also, by occupation, a licensed
strata manager.
July 2021, Mr Nakkan and his wife (who is not a party to the proceedings)
purchased Lot 4. Mr Nakkan and his wife moved into the
strata building soon
after purchase, and reside in their lot.
3 March 2023, Mr Nakkan commenced proceedings in the Tribunal.
3 April 2023, Ms Owers-Brown and Mr Brown commenced proceedings in the
Owers-Brown
orders sought are set out in the application filed on 3 April 2023, which has
not been subsequently amended.
following orders are sought:
(1) The owners corporation “rectify the common property timber deck in Lot
3” under s 232 of the SSM Act, by reason of
its breach of s 106(1) of the
(2) The owners corporation “engage suitably qualified and licensed
contractors to carry out the rectification works necessary
to repair the common
property timber deck in Lot 3 in accordance with the National Construction Code,
applicable Australian Standards,
Design and Building Practitioners Act
(NSW) and any other applicable legislation”.
(3) The owners corporation pay damages to the lot owner under s 106(5) of the
(4) An order invalidating the resolution (Motion 3) made by the owners
corporation at a general meeting on 30 March 2023 in respect
of maintenance of
decks, pursuant to s 24(1) of the SSM Act and /or s 150 of the SSM Act.
(5) The owners corporation pay the respondent’s costs of the
proceedings.
(6) “Any other order the Tribunal sees fit.”
of Claim were filed with the application. The following orders are
(1) The owners corporation “carry out the remedial work necessary to
repair the damage to the common property of unit 104 being
the timber decking on
the terrace”.
(2) The owners corporation “contract with suitably qualified contractors
for the carrying out of all work necessary to rectify
damage to the common
property of unit 104, being the timber decking”.
(3) The owners corporation pay damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act.
Points of Defence
no Points of Claim were filed in the Owers-Brown proceedings, no Points Of
Defence have been filed in those proceedings.
the owners corporation filed Points of Defence in the Nakkan proceedings. The
Points of Defence provide a narrative of why
the owners corporation opposes the
orders sought. It is clear the same position is adopted in the Owers-Brown
proceedings.
Points of Defence assert that since 2016 “the lot owners had always been
informed, and believed, that the lot owners owned
each of the timber decks for
each unit or lot”. Instructions were “provided to lot owners for the
care of the timber
decking to their respective properties.”
capital works fund and capital works fund plan were prepared and provisions on
the basis that lot owners were responsible for
any repairs required to timber
decks. Other lot owners had undertaken works to replace or repair their own
decks at their own expense.
2019, proceedings were taken in the Tribunal by Mr O’Donnell in respect of
repairs to timber decking in unit 101. Those proceedings
raised the issue of
whether the timber decks were common property or lot property. The proceedings
were “resolved.” A
consent order provided, in part, that the owners
corporation was to enact a by law to “bring the records of the strata into
line with the owners expectations” (timber deck By-law).
Owers- Brown was a strata committee member involved in the O’Donnell
proceedings, and gave instructions to Solicitors engaged
to represent the owners
corporation. The position of the owners corporation was that the decks were lot
property rather than common
property. Ms Owers-Brown was “on notice of,
and had indicated broad consent to” the timber deck By-law.
Owers-Brown “delayed” the timber deck By-law being prepared and put
before a meeting of the owners corporation.
or about 30 March 2023, shortly after Ms Owers-Brown ceased to be a strata
committee member, the timber deck By-law was passed
at the Annual General
Meeting of the owners corporation.
Owers-Brown “now seeks to prevent the registration of that By-law”
by bringing proceedings in the Tribunal seeking
an order under s 150 of the SSM
the Owers-Brown and Nakkan applications “attempt to exploit the delay in
the passage of the timber deck By-law so as to
bring artificially inflated
claims that are unfair to other owners.”
proceedings “seek payments for works that are well in excess of any
reasonable costs of repairing or replacing the timber
decks to their original
condition,” and seek “capital improvements to the lot property
rather than a direct like-for-like
repair to the timber deck.”
are “significant questions” as to whether the lot owners
“neglect” has caused damage to the deck. In
the Nakkan proceedings,
“the damage to the deck matches a mat of grass placed on the deck for the
urination use of the previous
owners pets, and where large heavy pots had been
placed directly onto the timber.” In the Owers-Brown proceedings
“observations
of persons that have visited the unit and the expert engaged
provide an inspection suggest that the deck has not been maintained
accordance with the guidance provided to all lot owners, and shown deterioration
only where heavy pots and furniture has been
placed directly onto the
the owners corporation has not filed its own proceedings in the Tribunal, it
seeks “orders” in its Points of
Defence. The orders sought are as
(1) Both sets of proceedings be dismissed.
(2) The owners corporation “is to register the timber deck By-law at its
earliest convenience.”
(3) Owers-Brown and Nakkan pay the owners corporation’s costs of the
proceedings.
(4) “Such further order as the Tribunal sees fit.”
Evidence Of The Parties
Affidavits of Ms Owers-Brown
Owers-Brown affirmed two affidavits (13 July 2023 and 1 November
Affidavit of 13 July 2023
Owers-Brown states that she and her husband purchased the lot in late December
2016, and moved in to the lot approximately 6 weeks
was a strata committee member “from late 2017 until mid-February
2023”. Ms Owers-Brown was, for a period of time,
the Secretary of the
strata committee.
lot “features a terrace area that is approximately 137 m2 that is mostly
covered by a timber deck. Some parts of the deck
are uncovered.”
all relevant times, Network Strata Services Pty Ltd t/as Netstrata have been the
strata managing agent of the owners corporation.
Owers-Brown asserts that in “about May 2019” she became aware that
the owners of unit 101 (i.e. a lot on the first
floor of the strata building) Mr
and Ms O’Donnell had “raised concerns that the timber deck located
on the terrace at
their unit was exhibiting signs of failure”. Ms
Owners-Brown contacted the builder of the strata building, Sammut Constructions
Pty Ltd (Mr Mark Weir) who told her the timber decking had been installed
“by a sub-contractor.”
Owers-Brown asserts she first noticed “signs of failure” of the
timber deck of her lot in “about February 2020”.
The “signs of
failure” are identified as:
(1) Timber panels showing “signs of decay and distortion.” Timber
panels were “swelling and compacting against
each other” and
“boards were distorting out of place and no longer sat flat.” Timber
deck boards “that were
uncovered” had “also begun to
decay.” Boards felt “spongy underfoot with the boards lagging and
firmness”. In other areas boards had become a “trip
hazard” because they were not sitting flat.
(2) There were “holes forming in the timber boards, which had worsened
over time.” The “worst areas of decay, with
visible and large
holes” were “immediately adjacent to the living area where the
timber was exposed to weather conditions.”
(3) When it rained, “rain would pool on top of the timber boards and did
not drain.”
to Ms Owers-Brown “over the course of the next 18 months” she
“became aware” that other lot owners
were experiencing similar
problems with deterioration of timber decks and drainage. This included the
owners of Lot 4 (unit 104).
18 December 2019, the owners corporation received written legal advice from
Grace Lawyers. A copy of that advice is annexed to
the affidavit of Ms
Owers-Brown (but not the letter of instruction). That advice is addressed to The
Secretary of the owners corporation.
The advice was given in the context of an
application by Mr O’Donnell and his wife for a NSW Fair Trading mediation
of seeking repair to the timber deck proximate to their lot.
advice states that the lawyers had been instructed by the owners corporation
that the “view” of the owners corporation
was that repair of the
decking was not the responsibility of the owners corporation. Rather, “all
owners assumed individual
responsibility for repair and maintenance of the decks
on their respective terraces since the plan was registered.”
Lawyers stated that it was their view that the timber decking formed part of the
flooring of the building (having been installed
when the strata building was
constructed) and:
“Due to the method of affixation was intended to form part of the flooring
system of the terraces and as such is common property...the
timber deck in our
view forms part of the flooring to the terrace and as such forms part of the
common property. It is also apparent
from the Lifestyle Decking Manual that the
timber deck is affixed to the slab/floor by being screwed to the floor
underneath which
means, and it is arguable, that it became a physical part of
the floor at registration of the strata scheme (the relevant date).”
advice also recommended that the owners corporation obtain an expert report to
address the assertion by Mr O’Donnell and
his wife that damage had been
caused due to water penetration by reason of blocked drainage pipes.
June 2020, Mr O’Donnell and his wife commenced Tribunal proceedings
against the owners corporation. Mr O’Donell and
his wife sold their lot on
19 August 2020. There was a dispute about whether Mr O’Donnell and his
wife had standing to continue
with the application, but it is unnecessary to
refer to that issue.
29 March 2021, McDonald SM gave a written decision, a copy of which was attached
to the affidavit. The decision refers to two complaints
relevant to these
proceedings by Mr O’Donnell and his wife, although a number of different
complaints were made and relief
sought including a dispute about production of
strata documents.
first was water ingress into the garage of their lot. The second was stormwater
“ponding” on the timber floorboards
of the terrace to the lot
causing damage to common property, and a “concern” that water could
enter the lot.
SM made stated the following (at [27]-[31]):
“The timber floorboards form part of an installed floor and drainage
system and are supplied, manufactured product of “Urbanline
Architectural... The timber floorboards are permanently fixed over concrete
joists in the support structure with the entire area
of the terrace sealed with
a non-applicable membrane over a shaped concrete surface that creates a drainage
basin. The concrete slab
underneath the timber floorboards varies in its
flatness between 60mm and 100mm in depth to allow for water flow and slopes
the area that directs water to the outlet.
The applicants claim that the timber floorboards and the maintenance of the
drainage system beneath the timber floorboards on the
balconies and terraces of
each allotment are part of the common property of the strata scheme and thus the
responsibility of the
owners corporation as the timber floorboards form the
floor of each lot and form part of the drainage system of the building on the
balconies and the terraces.
The strata committee, the owners corporation and the strata manager all
apparently refute this and claim that the maintenance of
the timber floorboards
and of the drainage system are the responsibility of each lot owner.
The Tribunal is not required to determine this issue finally and for the
purposes of this hearing. The Tribunal also notes in fairness
that because of
the nature of this hearing, no evidence was adduced by the respondent about the
drainage system which was installed
on the terraces and balconies and which
could contradict the evidence of the applicants.
However, the Tribunal then simply notes at this time at a strong prima facie
case exists in support of the applicant’s assertion
that the timber
floorboards and the drainage system on the balconies and terraces of the strata
scheme should be properly characterised
as common property, and therefore that
the care and maintenance of them should be matters for the owners
corporation.”
this juncture, it is important to note that under s 37 of the SSM Act, strata
committee members have a duty perform their functions,
so far as is practicable,
for the benefit of the owners corporation, and with due care and diligence. The
benefit of the owners corporation
means the benefit of all lot owners, not one
or a select group.
to Ms Owers-Brown, in late 2021 due to her (and the strata committee’s)
concern about defects in the strata building,
she “took the lead” to
engage experts to identify the defects in the strata building and the method of
rectification.
This was done in the context of the six-year period for statutory
warranties under the
(NSW) (HB Act) nearing
expiration.
October 2021, the owners corporation instructed Grace Lawyers to commence legal
proceedings against the builder of the strata building,
and the developer. The
developer was Sammut Family Pty Ltd, a related company to the builder of the
strata building.
November 2021, legal proceedings were commenced.
25 November 2021, Mr Poriters of RHM Consultants Pty Ltd prepared a expert
report on defects in the strata building, and method
of rectification. A copy of
that report is attached to the affidavit. The following is set out at pp 21-22
of the report:
SYSTEMIC DEFECTS Continued
Location & Description
Balconies and terraces (Units 101, 102, 103, 104 and 801)
1. Units 101, 102, 103, 104 and 801 have balconies and terraces that feature the
proprietary timber decking system described in the
preceding Item SD.3
(Lifestyle Decking by Woodform Architectural).
2. Units 1010, 102, 103, and 104 are located on Level 1 and features a large
balcony, areas of which are also exposed externally
(i.e. to sun and rain).
3. Unit 801 is located on the top floor of the building and features a large
balcony, areas of which are also exposed externally
(i.e. to sun and rain).
4. The areas of the timber decks that are exposed are exhibiting deterioration
despite frequent re-coating by the owners of these
5. The owners of these units also instructed that the timber decking boards
swell, expand, buckle, warp and displace (particularly
at joints between
boards). This was evident to varying degrees on each of the balconies and
6. The owners of these units also instructed that as a result of the
swelling/expansion of the timber decking boards, the gaps between
same close,
and this consequently allows undrained water to accumulate on the timber decks
after rainfall.
7. The species of hardwood timber used on the decks was not determinable and
requires confirmation.
8. A generic brochure for the proprietary decking system has been provided, but
no project specific designs or specifications have
been provided.
1. Inadequate provision in timber decking board fixing system to accommodate
movement of timber decking boards.
2. The gaps created between the individual timber decking boards may be
inadequate to accommodate movement/expansion of the timber
decking boards. The
generic brochure indicates nominal 3mm gap, which may be inadequate.
3. The clearance around the perimeter of the timber deck is inadequate. The
generic brochure indicates a nominal 5 mm clearance.
The clearance was measured
in various locations, with no clearance having been provided.
4. A review of the project specific designs and specifications will be required
to determine how the movement of the timber decking
boards in exposed locations
was accounted for in the design of the decking system.
Section 18B
(b) and (c) of the
(b) Failure to supply materials that are good and serviceable for the purpose
for which they are used (i.e. a timber decking system
suitably durable for the
conditions of service).
(c) Failure to perform work that complies with the
Recommended Scope of Works/Method of Repair
1. Set up work areas and protect surrounding surfaces.
2. Disassemble the timber decking system.
3. Reinstate the timber decking system ensuring adequate provisions in fixings
to accommodate movement of boards, and adequate gaps/clearances
around boards to
accommodate expansion.
4. Re-coat timber decking boards.
5. Clean up and make good work areas.
Note: If the proprietary system is no longer available, and it is not possible
to salvage and reinstate existing timber boards, consideration
will need to be
given to replacing the timber decks.
Location and Description
Balconies and Terraces
1. The balconies and terraces throughout the building do not have stormwater
drainage overflow outlets (e.g. splitter pipes).
2. Accordingly, there is a risk that the balconies and terraces will flood with
water in the event of surcharge occurring throughout
the stormwater drains or
blockage during heavy rainfall. This water could then overflow into the building
3. This issue is considered to be systemic because it was evident on all
balconies and terraces that were inspected. 8 of the 27
units were inspected,
which is considered to be a sufficiently representative sample of units in the
building. A review of the buildings
hydraulic drawings (tender issue) also
indicates that there are no overflow provisions on any of the balconies of the
1. Failure to create suitable overflow to drainage outlets to service the
balconies and terraces.
2. The absence of any overflow provision to prevent the entry of stormwater
internally into the habitable areas within the building
has failed to comply
with Australian Standard AS/NZ3500.3:2003 ‘Stormwater Drainage’
nominates for the requirement to
prevent surface water overflow from entering
the building.
Recommended Scope of Works/Method of Repair
1. Engage a hydraulic consultant/engineer to assess the set up and configuration
of the existing balcony terrace stormwater systems
and design a suitable
overflow layout/drainage plan.
2. On the upper level balconies, core or cut through the base of the perimeter
-Set up work areas and protect surrounding surfaces.
-Establish suitable access provisions to allow the work to be carried out
-Carefully core or cut through the perimeter hobs at appropriate positions.
-Insert PVC or stainless steel splitter pipes into the core holes. In short the
splitter pipes project outward adequately and do
not discharge onto the
-Seal around the splitter pipes.
-Repair any damaged surfaces around the new splitter pipes.
-Paint PVC splitter pipes.
-If the perimeter hobs were cut, appropriately finish and waterproof the hobs to
match surrounding surfaces.
-Clean and make good work areas.
receipt of the RHM Consultants report, Mr Weir and Mr Poriters conducted a joint
inspection of the strata building, and prepared
a joint report.
date of the joint report is 22 July 2022. A copy of that report is attached to
the affidavit.
respect of the relevant balcony/terrace defect items referred to previously, Mr
Weir commented that he did “not agree”
in respect of the balconies
and terraces to Units 101; 102; 103; 104 and 801. In respect of balconies and
terraces generally (the
lack of drainage overflow outlets) the comments were as
MW advised that the finished heights of the hobs around the outer perimeters of
the balconies are lower than the hobs/steps beneath
the balcony doorway
openings, thus providing for overflow.
GP accepts this in principle. Measurement with a rotary laser level will be
required to confirm this.
Owers-Brown asserts that between mid-December 2021 and August 2022 there were
negotiations between the owners corporation and the
builder and developer to
resolve the strata building defects dispute.
the joint report of Mr Poriters and Mr Weir, Ms Owers-Brown asserts it was made
“clear” to her the majority of the
strata committee did not support
obtaining further expert evidence on the timber decking on the
balconies/terraces and the drainage
system. She then “reached out”
to the owners of units 101, 102, 104, 504 and 801 to obtain a further expert
to Ms Owers-Brown, these Lot owners jointly engaged an expert report from Mr
Buckley of the Australasian Timber Flooring
Association (AFTA).
Buckley provided a report dated 1 August 2022. A copy of the report is attached
to the affidavit.
circumstances of the engagement of Mr Buckley are set out in a letter that Ms
Owers-Brown sent to lot owners “as Secretary
of the Strata
Committee” referring to a general meeting of the owners corporation being
called on 22 August 2022 in respect
of “the overall management of the
current building defect claim”. The letter relevantly states as
“In addition to the agenda, I wanted to write and share with you some
additional reports, that I believe are vital in forming
a complete understanding
of the issues surrounding one significant aspect of the defect reports, that has
not been resolved, and
that is the timber deck system used in Breeze.
Despite the timber decks being listed in the initial RHM Consultants defect
report, the Strata Committee received a recommendation
from RTM Consultants and
Grace Lawyers that a further expert report be sought to better analyse the
performance of the timber deck
system. So, six owners (including myself) sought
out and paid for an inspection by a qualified expert who has experience in
expert evidence in the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT)
proceedings, and that report is attached.”
report of Mr Buckley dated 1 August 2022 relevantly states:
inspected the strata building on 27 July 2022. The purpose of the inspection was
to “assess the owners’ concerns regarding
the wear and tear of the
external decking to the terraces for each apartment unit.”
decking is a proprietary system manufactured by Woodform Architectural Pty Ltd.
That manufacturer no longer produces timber decking.
boards have been installed to treated pine battens (estimated to be 35-45mm in
thickness). The battens have been mechanically
fixed to the concrete with
packers of various thickness elevating the battens off the concrete slab.
appears to have been no coating applied to the cut ends, sides or undersides of
the boards “although this was not confirmed.”
The surface of the
boards has been coated as part of the regular maintenance of each unit owner at
different intervals “with
the majority of unit owners stating that the
applications of decking finish were applied at 6-12 month intervals, as per the
maintenance
guide provided at handover”.
decking was installed as part of the original strata building.
had “implied” that they had taken responsibility for
maintenance.
had complained of difficulty in accessing the drainage system below the
had “expressed that areas not exposed to the elements performed well when
maintained effectively.”
103 (the Lot of Ms Owners-Brown and Mr Brown) had a south eastern aspect with
approximately 40% of the deck undercover. The set
down depth of the decking was
approximately 65-85mm. The “areas with more weather protection are in good
condition, with the
owner expressing they were pleased with the aesthetics and
performance of the deck in covered locations.” The exposed areas
deck had “considerable damage and distortion observable to the decking
boards.” Gaps between boards had closed,
the boards showed signs of decay
and fungal growth. The “structural breakdown of the boards had also
developed in multiple
areas of the exposed decking area.”
104 (Mr and Ms Nakkan’s Lot) had a south western aspect with approximately
50% of the total deck area undercover. “As
per all other units, the areas
undercover performed well and were aesthetically pleasing.” However,
“as per all other
decks, compromised or missing perimeter expansion, gaps
between boards, decay and fungal growth and structural breakdown of
was observed in the exposed area of the deck.
owners of Unit 101 provided photographs of works conducted by a plumber showing
boards removed. A photograph showed “what
appears to be a drain in the
concrete sub-floor of this unit” (in the centre of the photo, which is
silted up) whilst the following
photograph shows a close up view of the same
batten system with a pre-set gap beneath the battens, established bey what
be nylon packers.
Buckley’s conclusion is set out at pp 18-22 of the report.
asserts “moisture is affecting boards in areas exposed to the elements
that are not sufficiently repelling water and not
drying quickly enough to
prevent decay in the hardwood timber decking.” The decking system sits low
to the ground, and most
decks have less than the 75 mm of clearance from the
lower surface of the deck to the concrete slab (75 mm is the figure recommended
by AFTA in its publication “Residential Timber Decks-Industry
Recommendations (February 2014)”. There is no “cross
mechanical ventilation in place around any of the deck areas.” There are
no removable panels or sections to allow for
cleaning or maintenance under the
decks. Plant debris had built up below the decking, trapping moisture and
reducing water flow to
drainage points. The durability of the timber used
(Spotted Gum) is less than that recommended for a “close to ground
installations.”
to Mr Buckley, a “combination” of construction and drainage issues
has caused there to be a build-up of moisture
in the timber decking, causing
lateral expansion of the decking boards, fungal growth, and decay over time.
There was also an absence
of expansion gap at board edges. This had contributed
to the moisture below the decks and created water pooling at board edges,
accelerating
moisture penetration and degradation to untreated board areas.
Buckley stated (at p 21):
“When considering the above information and the condition of the decking
on site-both in areas exposed to the elements and
areas undercover, it is
apparent that design and installation shortcomings have created a deck system
that is not equipped to deal
with long term exposure to the natural elements. It
is also apparent that in areas exposed to minimal wet weather (areas under
that the decking system is performing well.
The deterioration of the decking over time is considered irreversible and is
also considered to be largely unavoidable. That is,
whilst the surface coating
may have been insufficient in some areas in the past, all areas of the deck
observed during the inspection
were sufficiently coated for normally expected
conditions. However, as no access points or removable decking system were
there was no way to proven to remove the accumulation of debris
beneath the decking, nor was the rear, sides, and cut ends of the
timber surface
treated in a manner designed to withstand the build-up of moisture over time
without developing fungal growth and
decay. Furthermore, the design and
installation of the decking does not allow for good cross flow ventilation (nor
was mechanical
ventilation observed to have been fitted)., which is critical
when considering decking built close to the ground.”
Buckey (at pp 22-23) referred to “remedial options”. He believed it
was “apparent” that undercover areas
have “performed well and
are not in need of remedial measures” but exposed areas “are not
functioning to a suitable
stated, “remedial measures would be considered necessary to exposed areas
only, providing that the decks can be made up of
separate installations and
possibly systems or products.” Exposed areas of the deck are
“damaged beyond repair in most
cases” and would eventually need to
be removed and replaced. Due to the “restrictions on site to set down
it would be “prudent” to “replace all areas with
materials unaffected by moisture, such as aluminium, PVC composite
materials, or
stone/ceramic materials (but noting that some of these materials can become hot
underneath).”
Buckley also states that any newly installed decking system must have adequate
access points to allow regular maintenance of the
cavity between the deck and
concrete slab.
August 2022, the owners corporation called an Extraordinary General Meeting
EGM was held on 22 August 2022.
agenda for the EGM included Motions in respect of the following:
(1) A Deed be prepared by Grace Lawyers to resolve the NCAT strata building
defect proceedings against the builder and developer
of the strata building,
with an agreed scope of works for repairs to be performed (Motions 4 and 5).
(2) A special By-law be passed (Motion 7) to “absolve” the owners
corporation from certain repair responsibilities and
“provide definition
of the maintenance responsibilities of the fixtures and fittings within a lot
and any appliances that only
service a single lot within the strata
scheme”. Relevantly, that proposed special By-law stated that lot owners,
rather than
the owners corporation, would be responsible for:
3.5. Balcony/Courtyard Areas
a. All tiles, pavers and decking.
(3) The owners corporation engage a suitably qualified lawyer to draft a
By-law “transferring repair and maintenance of decking
under s 143 (of the
SSM Act)” and “appoint a member of the strata committee as a point
of contact to provide the owners
corporation with instructions as
required”. When the proposed By-law was drafted, it would be put to a
general meeting of the
owners corporation (Motion 8).
proposed Deed with the builder and developer did not include repairs to the
timber decks. According to Ms Owers-Brown, the builder
and developer had adopted
the position that issues with timber decking were “fair wear and
tear.” Prior to the meeting,
in her capacity as Secretary of the owners
corporation, Ms Owers-Brown sent lot owners an emailed letter on 17 August 2022,
included a copy of the report of Mr Buckley.
paragraphs [44]-[50] of her affidavit dated 13 July 2023, Ms Owers-Brown gives
her account of what was discussed at the EGM on
17 August 2022. Two Solicitors
from Grace Lawyers attended the meeting.
to Ms Owers-Brown Solicitors from Grace Lawyers orally asserted at the meeting
the timber decking was common property, and
had been “orally told”
by Mr Poriters it may cost $300,000-$400,000 to rectify the defective timber
decking. Ms Graves,
of WMD Lawyers, attended the meeting on behalf of the
builder and developer. According to Ms Owers-Brown, Ms Graves told the meeting
the decking was lot property rather than common property and the builder and
developer were not responsible or liable to repair.
Owers-Brown asserts that Motion 5 to settle the legal proceedings against the
builder and developer passed by simple majority (approximately
60% of unit
entitlements in favour) and Motion 7 was “either defeated or withdrawn
from voting”.
Minutes of the EGM on 22 August 2022 state that Motion 7 was “defeated by
special resolution” as more than 25% of
unit entitlements voted against
it. Motion 8 was “marked as a motion of no consequence as owners who would
be affected by such
an undertaking advised they would not sign
Owers-Brown states that in the period September-October 2022 she and
“other Level 1 owners” obtained “quotations
from strata
remedial builders to understand what was involved to rectify the timber decks in
accordance with the requirements of
Design and Building Practitioners Act
(NSW)” (DABP Act).
affidavit contains the following documents:
(1) “Budget Clarification” of Structural Building Pty Ltd dated 30
September 2022. That document is a “budget costing
only” and does
not include a detailed scope of works or costings in respect of a design in
accordance with the DABP Act. The
costings are $947,749 for replacement of
decking of Units 101, 102, 103 and 104 (including new paving); plus HWI
Insurance of $85,870.
There is a separate amount for Unit 801 ($313,500).
(2) Tender Submission of Builtbeta dated 25 October 2022. That document contains
a scope of works, with a price of $874,465 (inclusive
of GST) for works to Units
101, 102, 103, and 104.
(3) Tender Submission of Builtbeta dated 25 October 2022. That document is in
respect of “option 2”, which is identified
as the removal of
existing decking and the supply and installation of “new engineered timber
decking” to units 101, 102,
103 and 104. The cost is identified as
$332,735 (inclusive of GST).
(4) Tender Submission of Builtbeta dated 25 October 2022. That document is in
respect of “option 3-engineered decking”
to Units 101, 102, 103 and
104. The cost is identified as $992,996 (inclusive of GST).
8 September 2022, Swaab Lawyers (who were engaged by the Lot owners on Level 1
of the strata building) wrote to the Solicitors
for the owners corporation
asserting that the timber decking required repair and that either the owners
corporation should conduct
repairs pursuant to its duty under s 106(1) of the
SSM Act within 3 months; or the owners corporation should pursue the builder and
developer for repairs to be conducted, in circumstances where the Deed had yet
to be executed.
8 October 2022, Ms Owers-Brown wrote to lot owners. In summary, that letter
asserted that the timber decking on Level 1 required
repair; it was common
property; the owners corporation would incur significant costs if it conducted
the repairs; the signing of
the Deed should be “paused” while the
owners corporation attempts to have rectification of the timber decking included
in the Deed. The letter also states that “Richard and David” of the
strata committee had engaged WMD Lawyers to “represent
them (sic) in the
dispute with those of us who have the defective timber decks.” WMD Lawyers
had acted for the builder and
developer, and it was asserted that there was a
conflict of interest.
November 2022, Ms Owers-Brown (and her husband) and Mr Nakkan (and his wife)
applied to NSW Fair Trading for mediation of the strata
dispute. That mediation
occurred on 17 February 2023, but it was unsuccessful.
Meeting was sent out. The meeting was scheduled for
15 February 2023.
agenda for the AGM contained the following relevant Motions:
(1) Motion 20-Absolution of Maintenance Lot Fixtures and Fittings. It is
asserted in the agenda that the proposed By-law was drafted
“guide” a November 2011 Land and Property Information (now Land and
Registry Services) guild to “the
maintenance responsibilities affecting
lot property within a scheme in an attempt to clarify...grey areas surrounding
maintenance”.
(2) Motion 21-Absoultion of Maintenance of Decks. It is asserted that in a
“Fair Trading settlement agreement” (sic)
dated 9 January 2020, a
lawyer would be engaged by the owners corporation to draft a By-law regarding
“maintenance of the timber
terrace”. No By-law had been
“formalised” and “this is the opportunity to ensure compliance
with that agreement
paragraph [62] of the affidavit, Ms Owers-Brown states she attended the meeting.
Motion 20 was defeated. Motion 21 “was passed...despite
four (4) Lot
owners voting against it”.
Minutes of the AGM state in respect of Motion 21:
RESOLVED That the Owners Corporation decide by Special Resolution* pursuant to
sections 136
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
“Special By-law-conferring the responsibility of the decks in the terms
set out as attached to the notice of this meeting
(see annexures) and to lodge
notification of the by-law as a consolidated set of all existing by-laws for
registration at NSW Land
and Registry Services.
Vote: 16 Resolve, 0 Abstain, 4 Defeat
27 February 2023, Ms Owers-Brown emailed the strata manager stating that as the
proposed common property rights By-law did not
have the consent of all Lot
owners, the owners corporation should not register it.
28 February 2023, the strata manager Ms Lovie responded by email stating that
“I confirm we are not registering this By-law
at this time”.
16 March 2023, the strata manager circulated to Lot owners a notice of an EGM
that was to proceed by “pre-meeting vote only”
on 30 March
3 was a Special Resolution Motion “Absolution of Maintenance of
Decks” which, according to the meeting agenda,
was “prepared by WMD
Law”. The Motion was:
“That the Owners Corporation decide by Special Resolution* pursuant to
sections 136 and 141 of the Strata Schemes Management
Act 2015-Absolution of
Maintenance of Decks in the terms set out attachment to the notice, and to lodge
notification of the by-law
and a consolidated set of all existing by-laws for
registration at NSW Land Registry Services.”
“explanation of agenda items” stated:
“As a result of the Fair Trading (sic) settlement agreement dated 9
January 2020 File No 00312273 it was confirmed in point
5 that a lawyer would be
engaged and a by-law put forward for the owners corporation’s
consideration. This seeks to confirm
no ambiguity in relation to the
responsibility being that of the lot owner.
While I confirm this motion was passed at the recent annual general meeting, we
note that there were concerns raised over consent
being applicable. Accordingly,
the lawyer who drafted the motion and By-law confirms:
Strata Schemes Management Act
, a by-law is only required to have
consent if it involves rights over common property of the scheme
to Ms Owers-Brown (at paragraph [67]) the Minutes of the ‘meeting’
on 30 March 2023 state Motion 3 was passed
by a vote with 92% in favour.
However, a copy of the Minutes of the meeting do not appear to be attached to
her affidavit.
Owers-Brown states that “from about 28 April 2023” she was
“aware” that the strata committee had placed
registration of the
By-law “Absolution of Maintenance of Decks” on “hold”
pending determination of these
NCAT proceedings.
Affidavit of Ms
Owers-Brown dated 1 November 2023
affidavit of Ms Owers-Brown dated 1 November 2023 is primarily an affidavit in
reply, but it does include “updated estimate
of costs for replacement of
the timber deck” of Lot 3.
“estimate” is a quotation of #1 Decks Decking and Pergola
Specialists dated 24 October 2023. The quote is to supply
and install Dekorator
composite decking with hidden clips. The total cost (inclusive of GST) is
$45,343.12.
remainder of the affidavit is a reply to the affidavits of Mr Alan Richard Flood
(known as Richard); Mr Andrew Schneller; Mr David
Gehrig; Mr George
Hatzigeorgiou; and the expert report of Mr Emilio Calandra obtained by the
owners corporation.
Flood is the owner of Lot 12 and has been, at all relevant times, a member of
the strata committee.
Reply to Mr Flood’s Affidavit
Owers-Brown asserts:
was a strata committee member between 4 September 2017 and 15 February 2023. In
the period from 15 February 2022 until 15 February
2023 she was the Secretary of
the strata committee.
obtained her license as a strata manager on 27 November 2018 and first commenced
work as a strata manager on 19 March 2019.
Owers-Brown did not have a “short fuse” with contractors.
respect of the O’Donnell proceedings in the Tribunal, Ms Owers-Brown
denies it was her firm view that decking was lot property.
Rather, her belief
was that it was unclear and that the owners corporation should obtain legal
Owers-Brown denies that she was, in effect, the strata manager of the property.
At the relevant time, Mr Hatzigeorgiou of Netstrata
was the strata manager. Ms
Owers-Brown relayed instructions from the strata committee to Grace
no time did two other strata committee members assert that the legal advice from
Grace Lawyers about responsibility for the decking
Owers-Brown denied that she was of the view that the timber decks were lot
property during the period of the O’Donnell litigation.
Rather, she
asserts that the issue was subject to legal advice, and she was not the one who
circulated a “newsletter”
to lot owners that they were responsible
for the maintenance and repair of timber decking. She agrees she sent an email
Lawyers on behalf of the strata committee instructing them to draft a
By-law making Lot owners responsible for repair and maintenance,
was still open to Lot owners who did not agree that the timber decks were Lot
property to refuse to pass the By-laws.”
Owers-Brown denies that there was any conflict of interest in her position on
the strata committee and a Lot owner on level 1 of
the strata building
experiencing damaged timber decking in respect of the strata committee’s
negotiations with the builder
and developer to rectify building defects.
Owers-Brown was concerned that the damage to timber decking on level 1 was not
considered to be a building defect in the claim
against the builder and
developer. It was on that basis, as well as the recommendation of Grace Lawyers,
that she and other owners
on level 1 obtained the expert report of Mr
Flood was “not supportive” of the report of Mr Buckley being
circulated to all lot owners.
Owers-Brown denies that she, in her capacity on the strata committee,
deliberately delayed the preparation of the By-law that would
make lot owners
responsible for the repair and maintenance of timber decking. She further denies
that she is attempting to benefit
from the owners corporation replacing the
timber decking. Rather, she asserts that it is the owners corporation’s
responsibility
to ensure that common property is a good state of
Mr Schneller’s Affidavit
reply to the affidavit of Mr Schneller, Ms Owers-Brown asserts:
Schneller is the Lot owner of unit 801.
Schneller’s description of “minor” damage to the timber
decking of unit 801 is inconsistent with what he told
Ms Owers-Brown in May 2022
Owers-Brown disagrees with Mr Schneller’s opinion that he only saw
“minor deterioration” of the timber decking
on level 1 of the strata
building. Ms Owers-Brown relies on photographs of the timber decking of Lot 3
taken by her husband which,
she asserts, clearly shows the damage is beyond
September 2022, Ms Owers-Brown informed Mr Schneller that the remedial builders
she had asked to quote for repairing the timber
decking system on level 1 of the
strata building would not provide a quotation in respect of Mr Schneller’s
lot because Mr
Schneller’s “plan of repair” would “not
result in a warrantable system”.
Mr Gehrig’s
reply to the affidavit of Mr Gehrig, Ms Owers-Brown asserts:
Gehrig never raised with her, orally or in writing, any concerns about how the
strata committee dealt with the O’Donnell
proceedings, or any other issue
during her time as a strata committee member.
Hatzigeorgiou’s Affidavit
reply to the affidavit of Mr Hatzigeorgiou (the former strata manager), Ms
Owners-Brown asserts:
Owers-Brown was the strata committee member assigned to manage communications
with Grace Lawyers.
Owers-Brown denies that she regularly instructed Mr Hatzigeorgiou to
“remove” from owners corporation meeting agendas
a proposed By-law
that lot owners were responsible for the repair and maintenance of timber
decking. Rather, no draft By-law had
ever been provided by Grace Lawyers.
did not keep Mr Hatzigeorgiou “in the dark” about the progress of
the O’Donnell litigation.
Mr Calandra’s Expert
reply to the owners corporation’s expert report of Mr Calandra, Ms
Owers-Brown asserts:
and her husband did not oppose Mr Calandra lifting timber boards to conduct his
inspection of the timber decking of Lot 3. Rather,
they sought that if any
boards were lifted, they were repaired and, if possible, the lifting of boards
was to be performed at the
perimeter of the deck to limit
Affidavit of Mr Nakkan dated 5 July 2023
Nakkan purchased Lot 4 (unit 104) with his wife on 5 July 2021.
timber decking of the terrace of Lot 4 is approximately 65 sqm. Approximately 30
sqm is uncovered.
Nakkan’s affidavit attaches copies of the report of Mr Buckley and the
report of RHM Consultants. The detail of those reports
have been set out
previously.
respect of the EGM on 22 August 2022, Mr Nakkan states that he opposed the
resolution to enter into the Deed with the builder and
developer, because the
scope of works in the Deed did not include repairs to the level 1 timber
to Mr Nakkan, there are drainage problems on the concrete slab underneath the
timber decking of Lot 4. There are a significant
amount of trees in close
proximity, and plantar boxes that discharge foliage. The south-west aspect of
the Lot means that rain does
not readily dry quickly, particularly in winter.
Mud and debris falls onto the concrete slab below the decking after rain, and
Mr Nakkan regularly cleans dirt and debris from the surface of the
decking, there is no practical way for him to remove the mud and
debris that
collects on the concrete slab below the decking.
Nakkan refers to Mr Buckley’s comments about drainage and the inability to
access underneath the decking, which he asserts
is “exactly the experience
which I have had with the timber decking.” Mr Nakkan refers to the
contents of the RHM Consultants
report in a similar fashion.
respect of unit 801 (Mr Schneller’s Lot, which is located on the top
floor), Mr Nakkan asserts that a notice of strata committee
meeting to be held
on 11 November 2022 noted there were “unapproved building works”
being performed, which include the
removal of timber decking. The notice
included a “renovation application form” which “contained a
proposal to lay
porcelain pavers in place of timber decking.”
Nakkan refers to “proposed repairs by unit 102” A notice of strata
committee meeting to be held on 28 April 2023 contained
a “renovation
application form” with a “proposal to replace the damaged timber
decking with a mineral based composite
decking”. According to Mr Nakkan,
no approval has yet been granted by the owners corporation for such work to be
by the Lot owner.
Nakkan annexes to has affidavit a quotation he obtained from G & G Carpentry
to replace the timber decking with a composite
decking system. The quotation is
dated 30 November 2022. The quote is for removal of existing decking boards and
replacement with
“Modern Deck product.” The proposed cost is
Respondent-Lay Evidence
Affidavit of Alan (Richard) Flood dated 28 September 2023
Flood is the owner of Lot 12 (unit 304). He purchased off the plan and moved
into the building in January 2016.
Flood has been a strata committee member since 13 February 2017.
Flood states that Ms Owers-Brown is a licensed strata manager who works with
Bright & Duggan.
to Mr Nakkan and his wife purchasing Lot 4, the lot was owned firstly by Mr and
Ms Waterford, and then Mr and Ms Whittingham.
According to Mr Flood, Mr and Ms
Whittingham regularly placed an artificial grass mat on the timber decking of
Lot 4 for their dog
Flood states that as of April 2020, the timber decking of Lot 4 appeared to him
to be in a state of good repair. Mr and Ms Whittingham
re-stained the deck about
that time and they told him in the process of doing that the drain would be
Flood asserts that he formed the view that the damage to the timber deck of Lot
4 was not due to any failure of common property
and the drainage system, but was
caused by the artificial grass mat and damage by the Whittingham’s dog. He
acknowledges he
is “not an expert.”
December 2016, the strata committee produced a newsletter to lot owners. Mr
Flood was not on the strata committee at that time,
but received the newsletter.
The newsletter relevantly stated:
“...Residents are informed that the decks are part of their lot and
therefore will need to be maintained by apartment owners.
A regularly (perhaps
yearly) re-staining will need to be carried out to maintain appearance and
quality. For the info, the stain
required is-’Cedar Cyprus’
manufactured by “Dulux Intergrain Natural Stain.” Prewash with
“Intergrain
Flood asserts that Ms Owers-Brown was a strata committee member in the period
from late 2017 to February 2023. She has a “short
contractors, and sought to use contractors from her “contacts” as a
licensed strata manager at Bright
paragraphs [18]-[24] Mr Flood refers to the O’Donnell litigation in NCAT.
He asserts that Ms Owers Brown took it upon herself
to instruct Grace Lawyers
and was “actively involved” in defending the proceedings on behalf
of the owners corporation.
Flood then refers to the mediation agreement entered between the owners
corporation and Mr O’Donnell and Ms Lent (Mr O’Donnell’s
on 8 January 2020. Part of the agreement was the owners corporation was to draft
a By-law “pertaining to the ongoing
maintenance and repair of the timber
to Mr Flood, on 29 January 2020 Ms Owers-Brown sent an email to Lot owners that
relevantly stated as follows:
“One of the agreed outcomes of the mediation was the formation of a By-Law
that regulates the repair, renewal and maintenance
of the timber terraces,
moving forward. That By-law will formalise that each respective lot owner will
be responsible for the repair,
renewal and maintenance of their terrace; a
position that all owners have been upholding (in practical terms) since taking
of the buildings. This is also the position communicated by the
original strata committee.”
copy of the email of 29 January 2020 is annexed to Mr Flood’s
to Mr Flood, Ms Owers-Brown delayed the preparation of a By-law and arranging of
a By-law being put before a general meeting
of the owners corporation by
repeatedly asserting the issue would be dealt with “later.”
Flood states that on or about 9 June 2020, a plumber Mr Simon of CS Plumbing
inspected the drainage system proximate to the timber
decking on level 1 of the
building, and found there were no faults. Mr Simon provided a quotation for
replacement of timber decking
Flood states that on 20 July 2021, in the O’Donnell proceedings, Ms
Owers-Brown provided a statement for the owners corporation.
A copy of that
statement is attached to Mr Flood’s affidavit. The statement asserts the
timber decking on level 1 of the strata
building is lot property rather than
common property.
Flood states that the O’Donnell proceedings were ultimately settled by
consent, with the owners corporation paying $2,780.91
to settle the
proceedings.
paragraphs [48]-[50] of the affidavit, Mr Flood refers to the negotiations with
the builder and developer to settle the common
property defects proceedings.
According to Mr Flood, Ms Owers-Brown in her affidavit had only produced the
“first draft”
of the joint expert report between Mr Poriters and Mr
Weir. However, the “final draft” dated 16 August 2022
all claims by the owners corporation in respect of timber
decks on the balconies, because they are “lot property”.
Accordingly,
the final agreed resolution with the builder and developer did not include any
works in respect of the timber decks on
paragraphs [51]-[69] of the affidavit, Mr Flood asserts that the strata
committee had agreed not to disclose the legal advice from
Grace Lawyers to
other lot owners, and Ms Owers-Brown should not have sent a copy of that advice
on 17 August 2022, particularly
when she was writing as Secretary of the strata
committee. He asserts that Ms Owers-Brown was obtaining expert evidence and
lawyers in respect of seeking repairs to the balconies and terraces on
level 1 and “acting to bring her own claim contrary
to the position that
she and the strata committee had taken in relation to the resolution of the
O’Donnell proceedings”.
Flood asserts that Ms Owers-Brown “controlled” the agenda of strata
committee meetings and owners corporation meetings
and “did not
allow” the strata manager to attend meetings. According to Mr Flood, it
was Ms Owers-Brown rather than the
strata manager, who prepared meeting
paragraphs [77]-[79] of the affidavit, Mr Flood sets out work that other Lot
owners have performed in respect of timber decking.
He states that on 1 July
2023, the owner of Lot 1 sought permission to remove timber decking and replace
it with tiles. That was
approved by the strata committee and work is
“underway.” Lot 2 made a “similar request” which has
been approved
and is in the “planning stages”. Lot 2 is
“planning to replace the timber with a synthetic board” and unit
has “replaced the timber decking with ceramic tiles”. According to
Mr Flood, the timber decking of Lot 1 was “repaired”
owner prior to the lot being sold; Lot 2 had “flattened and sanded the
deck with an industrial sander”. Lot
3 had placed “heavy concrete
pots and tables” on the deck and ceased undertaking maintenance. Lot 4 had
a “previous
owner who had a dog and had a grass mat directly onto the
timber decking”.
paragraph [81] Mr Flood is again critical of Ms Owers-Brown. Among other things,
he asserts that she seeks a “capital improvement”
of the timber deck
rather than a repair; if the owners corporation was held liable it would be
“unfair” to the lot owners
who had either maintained their timber
deck or had replaced the timber decking; and lot owners would be faced with
significant expenses
(including a likely special levy) if the works sought by Ms
Owers-Brown were performed.
paragraphs [82]-[89] Mr Flood comments about Mr Nakkan’s evidence and his
claim. Mr Flood asserts that the quotation obtained
by Mr Nakkan for repairs is
not “like for like.” He makes the same assertions that he made
against Ms Owers-Brown that
the works sought are a capital improvement; they are
unfair to other lot owners who have changed their decking; and will be
unreasonably
expensive to other lot owners.
Flood asserts that between 10 and 13 August 2023 he saw Mr Nakkan and another
person performing “maintenance” of the
terrace deck, which involved
moving heavy pots and other items. Mr Flood asserts this is the first
maintenance on the deck he has
seen Mr Nakkan perform. He further asserts that
it after the work was complete it “rained for two days” and he took
photographs
which, according to Mr Flood, show no ponding of water. Those
photographs are annexed to the affidavit.
Affidavit of Mr David
Gehrig dated 20 September 2023
Gehrig is owner of Lot 15 (unit 403). He purchased his lot in November 2016. He
has been a strata committee member since November
paragraphs [4]-[7], Mr Gehrig sets out the composition of the strata committee.
Relevantly, in the period between February 2020
and November 2022 the strata
committee was comprised of 3 persons (Mr Flood as Chairperson; Ms Owers-Brown as
Secretary and Ms Pettett
as Treasurer).
Mr Gehrig purchased his lot in November 2016, he was told (by an undisclosed
person) the “timber deck is your responsibility”.
Gehrig asserts that he has maintained the timber decking of his terrace and has
had “no issue” with damage or deterioration.
Gehrig refers to the “newsletter” that was sent by the strata
committee in 2016 that timber decks were the responsibility
Gehrig attaches two documents from the NSW Fair Trading website: “What can
affect the safety of a deck or balcony?”
and “Lot owner
responsibilities for maintenance, repair or replacement.”
Gehrig asserts that the terraces and balconies are lot property because they are
“not shown as common property but as lot
property via the vinculum”
on the registered strata plan. According to Mr Gehrig, he understands that it is
his responsibility
to maintain and repair lot property.
Gehrig asserts that Ms Owers-Brown had no authority to circulate the legal
advice from Grace Lawyers, which was addressed to the
owners corporation and the
strata committee had resolved to keep confidential.
Gehrig states that he raised at the AGM’s in 2020 and 2021 that there was
no Motion containing a By-law for lot owners to
maintain the decking on the
terraces of their lots. According to Mr Gehrig, Ms Owers-Brown told him it was
“not ready”
and would be on the agenda at the next meeting. He
asserts the By-law was not prepared and put to a meeting until after Ms
Owers-Brown
decided “not to continue” on the strata committee and
was replaced by Mr Schneller.
Gehrig asserts that since the commencement of these proceedings and appointment
to the strata committee, two lot owners on level
1 of the strata building had
“withdrawn instructions” from the law firm representing Ms
Owers-Brown and had obtain permission
of the owners corporation to alter the
decking. Mr Nakkan had changed Solicitors.
Affidavit of Mr George
Hatzigeorgiou dated 22 September 2022
Hatzigeorgiou was the strata manager of the building employed by Netstrata
between November 2019 and May 2022.
paragraphs [7]-[18] of the affidavit, Mr Hatzigeorgiou gives a history of the
appointment of the strata committee from the first
AGM on 1 March 2016.
Netstrata could, pursuant to its managing agency agreement, “fill the
positions” of Chairperson,
Treasurer and Secretary. Mr Hatzigeorgiou
“did not object” to Ms Owers-Brown taking the position of
27 August 2019, the strata committee resolved to obtain legal advice in respect
of Mr O’Donnell’s “concerns”
terraces, that led to his NCAT litigation in 2020.
Lawyers prepared the advice to the owners corporation on 18 December 2019.
February 2020, there was a mediation with Mr O’Donnell and his wife Ms
Lent at NSW Fair Trading. The mediation agreement
included drafting a By-law to
“clarify” the responsibility of repair to timber decking. The
agreement stated:
“The owners corporation will liaise with a strata lawyer in relation to
the drafting of a by law pertaining to the ongoing
maintenance and repair of
timber terrace.”
the mediation, Ms Owers-Brown emailed Mr Hatzigeorgiou to obtain a fee agreement
from Grace Lawyers to draft the proposed By-law.
He sent a request to Grace
Lawyers soon thereafter.
10 March 2020, Ms Owers-Brown emailed Mr Hatzigeorgiou that a motion be added to
the AGM that owners “generally discuss”
maintenance of the timber
terraces; the results of the O’Donnell mediation; and “approve a
by-law being drafted that
formalises that all owners will be responsible for the
maintenance of their own timber terraces”.
a Motion was included in the agenda for the AGM. The AGM was held on 3 April
2020. The Minutes of the meeting in respect of that
Motion (Motion 14)
RESOVED that the owners corporation approve to have a by-law drafted regarding
the ongoing maintenance to the timber decking which
will be presented to the
owners corporation at a future general meeting.
Vote: 16 in favour, 3 against.
Notes: By agreement of the owners present at the meeting, it was approved not to
allow any owner to view the legal advice from Grace
Lawyers regarding the
responsibility of maintenance to the timber decking.
Hatzigeorgiou asserts that he was later instructed by Ms Owers-Brown to
“delete” discussion of the proposed By-law
from strata committee and
owners corporation meetings because it would be dealt with later.
Ultimately,
the proposed By-law was not put to a vote at a meeting of owners corporation
until March 2023. That proposed By-law was
drafted by WMD lawyers.
Hatzigeorgiou asserts that, based on what Mr Flood had told him, he is of the
view that Mr Nakkan only received the Grace Lawyers
advice because Ms
Owers-Brown gave it to him, despite the position of the strata committee and the
Motion at the AGM on 3 April 2020
that the advice not be distributed to lot
paragraph [43] of the affidavit, Mr Hatzigeorgiou asserts that Ms Owers-Brown
had a “conflict of interest” in respect
of “pursuing a
personal claim” that the timber decking was common property and required
repair or replacement.
paragraphs [44]-[55] Mr Hatzigeorgiou refers to the O’Donnell litigation.
He states that in May 2020, he arranged from Craig
Simmons Plumbing to report
whether there were any drainage issues. The contractor provide a “brief
report” that relevantly
stated as follows:
“Attended unit 101 to look at the balcony drainage, found no issue with
drain was 100 mm and clear. Found drain to ben centre
of balcony best placed to
drain water.”
Hatzigeorgiou assets that Ms Owers-Brown “kept him in the dark”
Affidavit of Ms Tracey
Lovie dated 25 September 2023
Lovie is the current strata manager of the building employed by Netstrata.
affidavit is brief. She asserts that the owners corporation does not have
sufficient funds in the capital works fund to pay for
extensive repairs or
replacement of the timber decking on level 1 of the building, and a special levy
will need to be raised. According
to Ms Lovie, there had been no provision in
previous capital works fund plans for repair or maintenance of timber decking of
terraces and balconies. The only reference was in December 2021 to repair of
an area of timber decking “on the ground floor...near
feature” with a repair amount of $1,573.
Affidavit of Mr
Andrew Schneller dated 25 September 2023
Schneller is the owner of Lot 27 (unit 801). He purchased the lot in 2014 and
has resided in the lot since January 2016. His lot
is the “penthouse
lot” and the only lot located on the top floor (level 8).
Schneller became a strata committee member at the AGM in February 2023,
replacing Ms Owers-Brown who had resigned.
“approximately 2017” Mr Schneller received a newsletter from the
strata committee stating that lot owners were responsible
for the maintenance of
timber decking on terraces. According to Mr Schneller, he conducted regular
maintenance. The timber deck only
had “minor deterioration” in areas
exposed to the weather, and no deterioration to the area under cover.
July 2022, Mr Schneller was “invited” by Ms Owers-Brown to inspect
the timber decking on level 1 of the building and
“discuss options”.
He was asked to contribute (and did contribute) to the cost of obtaining the
expert report of Mr Buckley.
early August 2022, he met with the level 1 lot owners. There was a discussion of
the issues regarding the timber decking and the
upcoming general meeting of the
owners corporation on 22 August 2022.
Schneller asserts that he formed the view at the meeting that if the owners
corporation settled with the builder and developer
without including repair of
the timber decking on level 1, Ms Owers-Brown would take legal action against
the owners corporation.
that meeting, and before the AGM on 22 August 2022, Ms Owers-Brown sent her
emailed letter to all lot owners attaching the advice
of Grace Lawyers about
whether the timber decking was lot property or common property; and the report
of Mr Buckley.
Schneller attended the AGM on 22 August 2022. He asserts that after the meeting,
he did not “meet again” with Ms Owers-Brown
or other level 1 lot
paragraphs [21]-[29] of his affidavit, Mr Schneller refers to his decision to
replace timber decking with tiles. He obtained various
quotations. The cost of
the work was “just under $22,000”. The work occurred in September
2022. When the timber decking
was removed, there was no debris under the deck.
He replaced the timber decking with tiles as they would be more practical to
and have an indefinite life span. The strata committee approved the
work Mr Schneller took photographs whilst the work was performed,
annexed to his affidavit.
Schneller assert that, in his opinion, the quotations obtained by Ms Owers-Brown
to replace timber decking and drainage system
of level 1 are excessive.
Scheller states that he believed decks were lot property and:
“...I observed the report by the NSW Land and Registry Services which held
the decking had a vinculum and therefore formed
part of the apartment.”
Schneller states that in October 2022 he “visited several lots” to
discuss whether lot owners wanted to use the “excessive
respect of his replacement of timber decking with tiles. He asserts the timber
decking of Lots 1, 2, 4 and 20 were
in reasonable condition, other than in
respect of lack of maintenance and pot plants.
paragraph [28] Mr Schneller states he decided to replace timber decking with
tiles at his own expense, notwithstanding he knew
of Ms Owers-Brown’s
views and had seen the report of Mr Buckley. He states the works were done under
the owners corporation’s
“minor renovations by-law registered with
the strata scheme.”
paragraph [29], Mr Schneller states that he was aware that other lot owners had
sought consent to alter their timber decking. Lot
102 had “sought consent
to replace the timber decking with a synthetic timber decking” with the
works likely to cost
“approximately $50,000 to $60,000”. Lot 101 had
“sought consent to replace the timber decking with the same tiles
used in my lot”. The likely cost was approximately $30,000.
Schneller states that “approximately 1 month after” he became a
member of the strata committee; the owners corporation
passed the By-law that
lot owners are responsible for the maintenance and repair of timber
Scheller concludes his affidavit by asserting that Ms Owers-Brown was seeking a
“capital improvement” of her lot; that
the repairs and replacement
“went well beyond like for like”; it was “unfair” to
other lot owners who had
altered their terrace decking if the orders were made;
and the capital works fund had no provision for the work, which would result
a special levy to all lot owners.
Cross Examination of the Lay
Witnesses (other than Mr Weir)
discussed previously, there was significant Tribunal time taken by legal
representatives of the parties cross examining the lay
witness on issues
including the failure to disclose the Grace Lawyers advice; the conduct of the
O’Donnell litigation; the
conduct of the litigation against the builder
and developer (including the decision not to pursue the builder and developer
for defects
in respect of the timber decking); Ms Owers-Brown sending to Lot
owners the Grace Lawyers advice despite previously agreeing not
to disclose it;
and other matters that were asserted to go to the “credit” of the
was some cross examination on the lay witnesses in respect of actual damage to
the timber decking of Lots 3 and 4; and the measures
taken by lot owners to
maintain the timber decking.
is unnecessary to set out the cross examination of the lay witnesses in detail.
As became apparent in the closing submissions of
the parties, despite the extent
of the lay evidence and cross examination of the lay witnesses, the vast
majority of the real issues
in dispute in the proceedings (ss 36(1) and (3) of
the NCAT Act) involves the expert evidence.
the Tribunal pointed out to the representatives of the parties on a number of
occasions during the hearing, the critical factual
issues involved (a) whether
the timber decking was lot property or common property; (b) if common property,
was the owners corporation
in breach of its statutory obligations under s 106 of
the SSM Act regarding the repair (or replacement) and maintenance of the timber
decking proximate to Lots 3 and 4; and (c) if the owners corporation is in
breach of its duty, what (if any) appropriate orders should
complaints about the conduct of the witnesses in the context of the
administration or management of the strata scheme may have
had more relevance if
the proceedings involved appointment of a compulsory strata manager under s 237
of the SSM Act (see, for example
Maple v The Owners-Strata Plan No 8950
[2021] NSWCATCD 108)
; or an application to remove an existing strata committee
member from office under s 238 of the SSM Act (see, for example,
Owners-Strata Plan No 55468 v Silberstein
[2025] NSWCATAP 102).
The Tribunal
has previously referred to the obligations of strata committee members under s
37 of the SSM Act.
is difficult to comprehend why strata committee members would regard it as
appropriate to fail to disseminate in a timely manner
to Lot owners legal advice
that the terrace timber decking was common property, yet take the position in
the O’Donnell litigation
it was not common property.
lay evidence regarding damage to decking boards and maintenance needs to be
weighed in the context of the parties having engaged
expert witnesses who have
inspected the relevant areas.
Affidavit of Mr Weir dated 25
September 2023
Weir was the “site manager” of the builder who constructed the
strata building. He “supervised” the installation
of the timber
decking, and sets out in paragraph [15] how the decking was constructed and
attached to the concrete slab.
paragraph [15] of the affidavit, Mr Weir states as follows:
I supervised the installation and observed that at the time that the timber
decking was laid. The steps in constructing the decks
(a) Affixing the battens to the horizontal concrete surface of the terrace or
balcony by way of a threaded booker rod drilled and
(b) Leaving an air gap of not less than 5 mm around the edge of the decking in
accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines;
(c) Start and finish boards were top screwed.
(d) Attaching the timber to the battens on the horizontal concrete surface with
a secret fixing clip and none of the timber attached
to or joined to the
vertical boundary of the lot.
Weir sets out what he asserts was the time and cost of installing the decks; and
the amount of decking on Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4. He
gives an estimate of what he
asserts it would cost to replace the timber decking of the terraces on level
Weir does not provide a detailed scope of works in his affidavit. He asserts he
has “not been engaged to give evidence as
an expert” but is
experienced in building and “if necessary” agrees to be bound by
NCAT Procedural Direction 3
in respect of expert evidence.
Examination of Mr Weir at the Hearing
the hearing, Mr Weir was only briefly cross examined by Ms Jaffray (T:4/6/24:P
31-34). That cross examination focused on (a) Mr
Weir’s knowledge (or lack
of knowledge) of the DABP Act in respect of any repair of the decking; and (b)
that he was “not
an independent witness” because his
“interests were aligned with” the builder and developer. Mr Weir
asserted that
he gave honest evidence about what happened.
cross examination of Mr Weir regarding how the decking was installed came from
Mr Crowley (T: 4/6/24: P 35-38). The following
relevant evidence was
Nakkan’s Solicitor: I take you to paragraph 15 of your affidavit
that’s headed Work Required to Replace the Decks. You
talk about in
paragraph 15 (a) not about fixing the decks but how they were built and you say
there that: “The batters were
affixed to the horizontal concrete surface
with a threaded booker rod drilled and epoxied”.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: And that was drilled and epoxied into what?
Weir: Into the concrete slab.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: And did the concrete slab have a membrane?
Nakkan’s Solicitor: What’s the purpose of the membrane?
Weir: To waterproof the substrate.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: And if the membrane is breached and water gets under
the membrane and into the slab, what are the consequences?
Weir: The membrane failing.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: I beg your pardon?
Weir: The membrane failing.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: What are the consequences for the building?
Weir: The membrane fails and consequently water could pass through it.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: Water could pass through?
Weir: If there was a crack, yes.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: If the water passed through in this building in the
two units that we’re talking about here, 103
and 104, what is underneath
the slab that could be damaged?
Weir: The commercial.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: The commercial, the restaurants?
(after objection by the owners corporation’s Counsel regarding the
relevance of the questions, which was ruled upon)
Nakkan’s Solicitor: Mr Weir, the purpose of the membrane is therefore to
protect the concrete slab?
Nakkan’s Solicitor: And if the, as you say in paragraph 15(a), those
threaded booker rods, which have been drilled and epoxied
have been pulled out,
they will compromise the membrane, won’t they?
Weir: If they’re pulled out, they will, yes.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: So if they were pulled out and a repair made with
different battens in the way you’ve suggested here,
then that membrane is
going to have to be repaired, if possible, or its going to have to be replaced,
is that correct?
Weir: If they were pulled out. There’d be no need to pull them out.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: What do you mean that they would not need to be pulled
Weir: Well, the battens are fixed to the booker rod. If you had to replace the
battens, you would simply unbolt them and then remove
them and replace them. You
only need to replace-if you need to replace the booker rod, it would be if it
was rusted out and they
were galvanised booker rod, sealed, so I would doubt in
my knowledge if they would need replacing.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: So the holes that are left there-
Weir: Is fully sealed.
Nakkan’s Solicitor: So if a different method of replacement was used, so
if the battens were taken out and were replaced with
something else so that
different rods were used, then the membrane would be compromised, wouldn’t
Weir: If the rods had to be taken out for any particular reason, of course.
Expert Evidence of the Parties
Owers Brown and Nakkan
Nakkan did not engage any separate expert from Ms Owers-Brown and relied upon
the Owers-Brown expert evidence. In colloquial terms,
he travelled in the
slipstream of Owers-Brown.
discussed previously, Ms Owers-Brown had obtained a report from Mr Phil Buckley
dated 1 August 2022. The contents of that report
have been set out
previously.
Buckley also provided an affidavit dated 23 August 2024 that attached his report
and various documents.
affidavit also contains additional details of his inspection of 27 July 2022
(which involved the timber decking of all of the
lots on level 1, as it then
existed) and Mr Buckley’s contact of the original manufacturer of the
timber decking, Woodform
Architectural Pty Ltd.
Buckley (at paragraphs [20]-[24]) refers to the manufacturer’s manual for
affixing the timber decking. Mr Buckley states:
“Also, at page 2 of My Report, I extracted part of the diagram at page 11
of the Woodform Manual, which shows the “customised
clip fixing
The extract and the full diagram shows that the boards are affixed to a timber
structure underneath by screws.
The timber decks I inspected at the Property on 27 July 2022 were each
consistent with the “customised clip fixing system”
described in the
Woodform Manual at Annexure F hereto. The system can be partly seen in the
photograph I took of Unit 104 that appears
at page 13 and more clearly seen in
the photographs provided to me which I refer at pages 17 and 18 of My Report.
I observed from the photographs at pages 17 and 18 of My Report that the timber
structure had been mechanically fixed to the concrete
below. I also observed
this in person during my inspection in areas of partially removed boards in the
Subject Units.”
joint expert evidence at the hearing (T: 26/6/24: P44: L 25-31) Mr Buckley
clarified that in paragraph 3 of his report when he
had referred to “all
decking areas” requiring remediation, he meant “all exposed
areas” of the decking (distinguishing
with the undercover areas, which
were in good condition as compared to the exposed areas which were in much worse
condition).
Mr Wilkie (Building Consultancy Group)
Wilkie’s report is dated 8 November 2023. He inspected the strata building
on 2 November 2023.
Wilkie’s report only involves Lot 3, which was “the only lot I
inspected”.
Wilkie’s report includes responding to the report of Mr Calandra dated 16
October 2023.
to Mr Wilkie, Mr Calandra found that decking boards were “cupped, bowed
and twisted” and there was “wood
rot” found within the surface
and within the body of the timber decking boards. Mr Wilkie agreed that there
should be removal
and replacement of damaged timber boards and that PVC type
boards were appropriate. However, he did not agree that only some damaged
needed to be replaced.
Wilkie asserted that the method of rectification proposed by Mr Calandra was
insufficient because:
(1) Remediation works will require a design by a suitably qualified person (such
as an architect or engineer) to comply with the
requirements of the DABP Act.
(2) Replacement of decking boards on a “like for like” basis would
only lead to the same future deterioration problems
in the future due to
structural and water ingress issues.
(3) Mr Calandra believed 20sqm of decking boards were damaged (23.5% of the
deck). Mr Wilkie believed that “damage to the boards
by either warping,
cupping, and/or wood decay” equated to 80%-90% of the boards and that
85.44 sqm of boards required replacement
(in covered and uncovered decking
areas, stairs, pool deck and pool deck vertical face).
(4) Battens between the slab/substrate and the decking boards needed to be
replaced. This could not be done without removal of the
battens. If battens were
removed, that would likely damage the waterproofing membrane of the
slab/substate. If the waterproofing
membrane was damaged, it would cause water
ingress into the building and structural issues in the form of concrete
(5) In any event, the slab/substrate waterproofing membrane was reaching the end
of its lifespan
to Mr Wilkie, 30% of “exposed boards” had warped and lipped in
different sections; and 10% of “covered
boards” had warped and
lipped. 70% of decking boards, both covered and uncovered, had cupped. Gaps
between boards were “inconsistent”
ranging between 0-5mm, but
whether that could be considered to be a “fault” depended upon the
reason for the gapping.
deterioration. 2% of boards had “visible wood decay” and were a
“potential trip hazard”.
Wilkie performed “invasive testing” of the north side of the deck.
That involved cutting a section of boards, while
taking care not to come into
findings, and there
are photographs of an area of the substrate; a batten; and
the system by which the boards where located into the battens and the
located into the slab/substrate. Mr Wilkie also performed a water test.
Wilkie states the substrate area was “damp to all areas that could be
viewed.” The battens “ran north to south
and measured 70mm x 35 mm
with a black flashing installed on the top face. The gap between the bottom of
the batten and the substrate
was 10 mm. Although only a small area could be
observed, the flashing had no signs of deterioration. Although only a small area
be observed, the batten appeared to have no deterioration.”
Wilkie set out at p 15 a diagram showing the method of location of the decking
to the slab/substrate. At p 15, he states “A
bugle screw was fixing on the
top face of the batten. Directly under this fixing between the batten and the
substrate was a plastic
packer. It is understood that this is the method used by
the builder to secure the batten in the substrate.”
Wilkie also comments upon how the membrane terminated up the wall, and the
likely age of the membrane.
p 18 of the report, Mr Wilkie sets out his conclusions. Mr Wilkie states the
“entire deck needs to be replaced as well as
the membrane.” His
reasons are, in summary:
(1) A builder conducting repairs would likely damage the waterproofing membrane
during removal of flooring boards, battens, batten
fixings into the
substrate/membrane and packers (located between the batten and the membrane).
(2) Such works would “likely decrease the membrane lifecycle and
effectiveness.”
(3) A remedial builder would not be able to warrant the repair works, or
remediate the original membrane if damage occurred.
(4) The installation of new fixings for the battens through the
substrate/membrane could not be warranted for leaks.
(5) Remedial works to the boards could not occur without some damage to the
(6) The “entirety” of the deck’s deterioration is likely to
occur within the next 5 years.
(7) Replacing boards “like for like” will result in the same
deterioration of the decking boards. A “higher quality”
or recycled
wood/plastic board needs to be used.
(8) Due to the age of the membrane, “deterioration of the original
membrane is likely occurring although not observed.”
Although a small area
of the membrane was able to be observed, “it should not be assumed that
defects to the membrane do not
exist due to the age of the membrane.”
(9) When a new deck is installed, access panels should be installed to allow
drainage points to be cleared of debris for maintenance.
pp 25-32 of the report, Mr Wilkie provides a scope of works and costings (as
well as a summary in a Scott Schedule) for removing
the existing timber decking
and replacing it with new timber decking. The total cost is identified as
$83,588.31.
Importantly,
Mr Wilkie states that a “design” of the replacement decking will
have to be performed, to comply with the
DABP Act, and the works (including
installation of a new waterproofing membrane) will need to be performed in
accordance with that
Mr Wilkie does not provide such a design, or state he is suitably qualified
under the DABP Act to provide such a design.
It was clear from evidence at the
hearing that neither he, nor Mr Calandra, or Mr Buckley, is suitably qualified
to provide any design
required by the DABP Act.
Mr Calandra
(Property Inspectors Pty Ltd)
Calandra inspected the strata building on 6 September 2023. Mr Calandra
inspected decking of Lots 3 and 4. He was instructed by
corporation’s Solicitors, WMD Law. He was instructed to carry out
deconstructive testing in order to find out how
the two decks were originally
built and to assess the concrete substrate gradients and the quality of floor
wastes installed in the
subject decks. However, deconstructive testing was
“not approved” and his assessment was based upon a visual inspection
on the top side of the decks, together with using a camera and mirrors in order
to form an opinion about the substrate and fixing
mechanisms used.
Calandra asserts the decking boards are approximately 88mm x 19mm “with a
secret nail/screw fixing principle to mechanically
fix down the timber decking
boards into place. The boards were fixed to “a softwood/treated pine
batten which had a depth ranging
from 18 mm to 30 mm, based on my assessment
using a ruler.
Calandra states the timber battens:
“...should have been a hardwood product, based on the minimal depth found
in various locations within the concealed battens,
which could have contributed
towards the concealed fixings delaminating from the timber battens when the
decking boards began to
swell due to moisture soaking through the decking
to Mr Calandra, decking boards:
“...appear to have ample surface coating applied on the timber decking
boards even though there is significant wood rot within
the timber decking
boards which could have been caused due to horizontal moisture and vertical
moisture entering the timber decking
Calandra (at para [4.8], p 5 of the report) also comments about the comments in
Mr Buckley’s report about the ‘understanding’
provided by the
strata manager or strata committee to lot owners about their purported
“responsibility” to maintain and
repair the timber decking.
Calandra states that the “timber decking boards are installed with minimal
clearance around the perimeter of the floor and
wall junctions, which would not
allow for the treatment of the timber decking boards and preservation procedure
in maintaining the
deck.” He further comments that he had reviewed the
“hydraulic drawings” (although they are not set out in his
presumably the structural plans for construction of the strata building) and
“cannot confirm if the drain points are
installed...as no signed off as
built drawings have been supplied to our office.” However, by reviewing
the photographs contained
in Mr Buckley’s report, “it showcases that
timber battens are suspended and they might be in direct contact with the
which could cause water to pool between the battens which could contribute
towards water pooling and absorbing between through
the softwood timber battens
and up into the and through the timber decking boards.”
Calandra (at para [4.10], p 6 of the report) elaborates on his opinion about the
battens, based on the photographs in Mr Buckley’s
paragraphs [4.12-4.16], pp 7-8 of the report Mr Calandra refers to other issues
raised by Mr Buckley. He agrees with most of Mr
Buckley’s opinions,
including that the “exposed timber decking boards are in poor
condition” and that boards in
undercover areas were in “better
condition” than the boards in exposed areas. Mr Calandra agrees with Mr
Buckley that
a “considerable proportion” of the deck of Lot 4 is
undercover; and he agrees that exposed decking boards are affected
“wood rot in various locations”. He does not agree that the step
down depth of Lot 4 is 65mm-85mm, and would be “more
comfortable”
with a figure of 50mm-70mm.
Calandra’s conclusions are set out at paragraphs [5.1]-[5.14] of his
report. In summary:
(1) Moisture is affecting the timber boards due to possible water pooling within
the void between the concrete slab and underside
of the timber decking boards
due to fallen debris...that has passed through the space between the timber
decking boards prior to
the swelling and delamination and rot of the timber
decking boards.
(2) It is “highly probable” the boards were not treated prior to
installation by the builder.
(3) Due to “minimum clearance and spacing,” the boards “cannot
swell during wet periods, which results in the concealed
fixings delaminating
from the timber battens, together with softwood battens being used which
frequently allows for the short fixings
to be pulled out of the softwood battens
due to the horizontal and vertical pressure applied by the timber decking boards
(4) From viewing photographs, the concrete substrate is “painted black and
it may not be waterproofed” which “could
cause prolonged periods of
pooling water and high moisture content in localised areas within the deck void,
which would result towards
the deterioration of the timber deck due to prolonged
periods of wet weather and/or pooling water within the deck
substrate/void.”
(5) Adjacent plantar boxes have “the potential” for falling
vegetation finding their way into the deck subfloor area
and contributed to
restricting waterflow to the subfloor drainage system. This “could result
in pooling and excessive water
within the subfloor of the deck.” Without
access doors/panels “no removal of the debris is possible nor is
serviceability
of the subfloor deck is possible.”
(6) There were no control joints or expansion joints allowed within the deck,
even though the timber decking boards are installed
with minimal clearance
between each board.
Calandra sets out his scope of works to rectify the defective and damaged
decking boards in a Scott Schedule. The scope of works
to the timber decking at
Lots 3 and 4 is expressed as follows:
“Removal of all damaged timber decking boards and timber batten substrate.
Supply and install a modified timber/PVC composite
wooden batten. Supply and
install like for like decking boards to the areas where the old and damaged
decking boards where (sic)
removed. Stain the new timber decking boards with a
three-coat system on all elevations. Paint and make good the adjoining
cost of repair/rectification of Lot 3 is identified as $13,027.30. The cost of
repair/rectification of Lot 4 is identified as
Expert Report
discussed previously, there were 3 attempts by the experts to complete a joint
expert report.
this juncture, it is appropriate to set out the final Joint Expert Report dated
11 June 2024.
discussed previously, the Tribunal posed 8 questions to the experts (set out in
para [11] of the joint report) that required consideration
and answers.
experts prepared an extensive Scott Schedule setting out their opinions and
summarizing their comments. That document is set out
at pp 8-15 of the report
(in A4) and a separate identical document (in A3) was provided.
pp 16-27 of the report is the answers to the 8 questions posed by the
pp 28-110 are various “inclusions” included by each of the experts.
Materials included by Mr Wilkie included photographs
of the decking (including
an area proximate to the pool); photographs of the “bugle screws” Mr
Wilkie believes secure
the battens into the slab; and extracts from the DABP Act
(which, because the rectification work involves external waterproofing,
within the DABP Act according to Mr Wilkie). Mr Buckley’s inclusions
include a shaded plan of the decking areas referring
to the damaged decking
boards. Mr Calandra’s inclusions include the registered strata plan; the
‘newsletter’ from
the strata committee dated 4 December 2016
regarding lot owners being responsible for maintenance of the timber decks; and
the affidavit
of Mr Weir dated 25 September 2023.
is unnecessary to set out in detail the experts answers to the 8 questions posed
by the Tribunal. Much of the answers repeat, in
a summary form, the opinions set
out previously.
experts agree that areas of the timber decking that are uncovered have
deteriorated and require repair. Mr Buckley believes that
covered areas of the
deck were “performing well” and are “likely to continue to
perform well,” but there
were “compromised elements of the design of
the current decking installation system.”
Mr Buckley also refers to the “compromised elements of the design of the
current decking installation system.”
Mr Calandra believes “the
covered decks do not need to be replaced...only the timber decking areas open to
the elements.”
Mr Calandra comments the existing decking “does not
meet appropriate standards.” Mr Wilke believes the damage is to both
covered and uncovered areas. Mr Buckley comments that replacing some timber
decking boards with PVC decking boards would not be “common”
“aesthetically pleasing.”
referred to previously, a critical issue is the extent of appropriate works to
repair. This issue includes whether battens need
to be replaced (which would
compromise the waterproofing membrane of the slab/substrate).
Wilkie believes that one or more battens need to be replaced, and replacement of
any battens will compromise a waterproofing membrane
that is already reaching
the end of its lifespan.
Calandra states that “if the battens and waterproofing are in good
order” replacement PVC decking boards fixed down
upon existing pine
battens are sufficient, but “if battens and waterproofing are required to
be removed” a “design
practitioner is required to create a scope of
works which would require the existing membrane to be removed and a new membrane
between the old and new membrane being the key element of the design
practitioner’s scope of works” (p 20 joint expert
pp 24-27 of the joint expert report, the experts set out a summary of the issues
they agree upon and disagree upon.
CONSIDERATION
first issue requiring consideration is whether the timber decking of Lots 3 and
4 is common property or lot property.
Is the Timber Decking
Common Property or Lot Property?
parties have made extensive written submissions on this issue.
submissions are summarised as follows:
Owers-Brown and
(1) Owers Brown submitted the strata plan was registered on 23 December 2015.
When it was registered, the applicable legislation was
Strata Schemes
(Freehold Development) Act 1973
(NSW) (‘the 1973 Act’). The 1973
Act was repealed by the
Strata Schemes Development Act 2015
(‘the 2015 Act’) on 30 November 2016. By reason of Cl. 4 of Sch. of
the 2015 Act, a strata scheme in existence
under the 1973 Act is “taken to
be a strata scheme” under the 2015 Act. Accordingly, the 2015 Act applies
to the applicable
definitions of “lot property” and “common
property” and the sub-components of those definitions. Nakkan submitted
the 1973 Act applies.
(2) Even if the 1973 Act applies, the definitions are materially identical to
the 2015 Act (Owers-Brown).
(3) The evidence sufficiently establishes that the wooden timber decking the
subject of the dispute was installed over the horizontal
slab/substrate at the
time of the registration of the strata scheme (23 December 2015) and was not
installed at a later date. In
particular, the reply submissions of Owers-Brown
at paragraph [11] point to the evidence that supports a finding the timber
was installed by the time the strata plan was registered.
(4) By reasons of principles set out by the Supreme Court (Brereton J) in
Seiwa Pty Ltd v Owners Strata Plan 35042
[2006] NSWSC 1157
particular, paras [17]-[18]) and the NSW Court of Appeal in
The Owners SP
35042 v Seiwa Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 272
(in particular, paragraphs
[24]-[32] and [38]-[39]) the horizontal boundary of the lot is the upper surface
of the timber flooring
laid over and affixed to the concrete slab, in accordance
with s 6(1)(a)(ii) of the 2015 Act.
(5) Owers-Brown had pleaded in her Points of Claim the timber decks existed
when the strata building was originally constructed, and
the owners corporation
had not taken issue with this in its Points of Defence. Rather, the owners
corporation had pleaded that the
‘understanding’ of Lot owners were
the timber decks were lot property and their responsibility to repair and
(6) The date of when the timber decks were constructed and attached to the
concrete slab/substrate were factual matters peculiarly
within the knowledge of
the owners corporation and to which the owners corporation had the power to
adduce evidence. It had not adduced
any evidence the timber decking was
installed and affixed to the concrete slab/substrate after registration of the
strata plan on
23 December 2015.
Owners Corporation
(1) It is “common ground” that Notation 2 of the registered
strata plan defines the “upper horizontal boundary”
and not the
“lower boundary”. Accordingly, the legislative definition to the
boundaries is applicable, rather than what
is noted on the registered strata
(2) The owners corporation agrees with the Nakkan submissions that the 1973
Act applies, but also agrees with Owers-Brown that “the
result is the
same” whether s 5 (2)(b)(ii) of the 1973 Act applies or s 6(1)(a)(ii) of
the 2015 Act applies.
(3) The method of construction of the timber deck (as set out in the
affidavit of Mr Weir) is that the timber deck is affixed to the
concrete slab
(the lower horizontal boundary) through booker rods and battens. There is an
“air gap” between the deck
and the vertical wall, and none of the
timber decking is attached to, or joins, the vertical wall.
(4) In terms of the 1973 Act “only the concrete slab (and attached
waterproofing) joins the horizontal boundary to the lot through
construction and
intent”. Any connection with the vertical wall would be “ad
hoc.” Accordingly, the timber decking
does not “join” the
vertical wall within the meaning of either s 5(2)(a)(ii) of the 1973 Act, or s
6(1)(a)(ii) of the
2015 Act. The timber decking “does not join the
vertical boundary and has been placed atop” the horizontal concrete
(5) The NSW Court of Appeal decision in
can be distinguished
from the facts of this case. In
the evidence established that the
tiles and a waterproof membrane were attached to the concrete slab, and that had
been done prior
to the registration of the strata plan. The floor
“joined” the vertical boundaries of relevant cubic space
at [17]). The NSW Court of Appeal decision in
distinguished in
The Owners-Strata Plan 32735 v Lesley-Swan
[2012] NSWSC
(6) The ratio decidendi of the NSW Court of Appeal decision in
“concerned what the terms of the notation on the strata plan meant.”
This case involves a “different factual premise”
where there was a “proper factual concession.” However, this case
involves a timber deck that “does not joint the
vertical boundary of the
lot,” and it is the concrete slab underneath the timber decking that joins
the vertical boundary of
the lot, not the timber decking. Accordingly, the
concrete slab is the horizontal boundary, not the top of the timber decking that
is affixed to the concrete slab.
(7) The NSW Court of Appeal decision in
“underplays”
the significance of the enquiry as to what is the lower horizontal boundary that
joins the vertical boundary
of the lot, as there was a concession on this issue
(8) There is “no definite evidence as to whether the decks were in
place as at the date of registration of the strata plan.”
evidence in cross examination on this issue was unclear, with his affidavit
stating that construction “concluded”
in 2016, but in cross
examination he stated that construction took place in 2015 and 2016 over the
course of about 24 months.
(9) However, the Tribunal “need not make a factual finding on when
construction of the decks concluded,” because “at
the date of
registration of the plan or otherwise, no deck joined the walls to the
balconies, only the concrete slab did.”
(10) The comments of Tobias JA at [39] in
involved discussion of
a “hypothetical where the method of the timber floor being laid over and
affixed to the concrete slab
was imagined rather than considered from available
evidence...there is nothing in the language of the extract to suggest His Honour
was considering a hypothetical timber deck built upon a structure of spacers and
battens, some number of centimetres above the concrete
slab that was also
constructed with an air gap between the deck and wall”.
(11) The requirement of a “careful, factual investigation to determine
the boundaries of the lot” were also referred to
by Tobias JA at
paragraphs [40]-[42].
Applicable Legislative Provisions
Considering
the legal representatives take different positions as to whether the 1973 Act or
the 2015 (Development) Act applies, it
is appropriate to set out both sets of
statutory provisions.
1973 Act has the effect that a strata lot comprised of one or more cubic spaces,
the base of each being designated as on lot or
part of one lot on the floor plan
forming the part of the strata plan, being cubic space the base of whose
vertical boundaries is
as delineated on the sheet of the floor plan, and being
cubic space the base of whose vertical boundaries is as delineated on the
plan and which has horizontal boundaries, as ascertained under s 5(2) of the
1973 Act, but does not include “structural
cubic space” (
Pty Ltd v Owners Strata Plan 35042
[2006] NSWSC 1157
7(2) of the 1973 Act provided as follows:
“Land, including the whole of a building may be sub-divided into lots, or
into lots and common property, by the registration
of a plan as a strata
5(1) of the 1973 Act defined a number of terms used in the Act as
common property
means so much of a parcel as from time to time
is not comprised in any lot.
includes a stairway or ramp.
means a plan, consisting of one or more sheets,
(a) defines by lines (in paragraph (c) of this definition
referred to as
) the base of each vertical boundary of
every cubic space forming the whole of a proposed lot, or the whole of any part
of a proposed
lot, to which the plan relates,
(i) the floor area of any such cubic space, and
(ii) where any such cubic space forms part only of a proposed
lot, the aggregate of the floor areas of every cubic space that forms
the proposed lot, and
(c) where proposed lots or parts thereof to which the plan
relates are superimposed on other proposed lots or parts thereof to
plan relates:
(i) shows the base lines in respect of the proposed lots or
parts thereof that are so superimposed separately from those in respect
other proposed lots or parts thereof upon which they are superimposed, and
(ii) specifies, by reference to floors or levels, the order in
which that superimposition occurs.
means one or more cubic spaces forming part of the parcel to
which a strata scheme relates, the base of each such cubic space being
designated as one lot or part of one lot on the floor plan forming part of the
strata plan, a strata plan of subdivision or a strata
plan of consolidation to
which that strata scheme relates, being in each case cubic space the base of
whose vertical boundaries is
as delineated on a sheet of that floor plan and
which has horizontal boundaries as ascertained under subsection (2), but does
include any structural cubic space unless that structural cubic space has
boundaries described as prescribed and is described in
that floor plan as part
includes a door, window or other structure dividing a lot from
common property or from another lot.
Sub-sections
5(2) to (4) of the 1973 Act provided:
(2) The boundaries of any cubic space referred to in paragraph
(a) of the definition of
in subsection (1):
(a) except as provided in paragraph (b):
(i) are, in the case of a vertical boundary, where the base of
any wall corresponds substantially with any line referred to in
paragraph (a) of
that definition—the inner surface of that wall, and
(ii) are, in the case of a horizontal boundary, where any floor
or ceiling joins a vertical boundary of that cubic space—the
upper surface
of that floor and the under surface of that ceiling, or
(b) are such boundaries as are described on a sheet of the
floor plan relating to that cubic space (those boundaries being described
prescribed manner by reference to a wall, floor or ceiling in a building to
which that plan relates or to structural cubic
space within that building).
(3) A reference in this Act to cubic space includes a reference
to space contained in any three-dimensional geometric figure which
(4) The fact that any boundary is defined in a plan in terms of
or by reference to:
(a) a wall that is not vertical, or
(b) a floor or ceiling that is not horizontal,
does not prevent that plan from being a floor plan.
8(1) of the 1973 Act provided that a plan intended to be registered as a strata
plan must include, as sheets of the plan:
(a) a location plan, (b) a floor plan,
and (c) a schedule of unit entitlements.
1A of the 1973 Act set out the requirements with which a strata plan was
required to comply (see s 8(2)(c)). Clause 1 of
Schedule 1A provided:
1 Floor plans
(1) Each wall, the inner surface or any part of which
corresponds substantially to a line shown on the floor plan as a boundary
proposed lot, must exist.
(2) Each floor or ceiling, the upper or under surface or any
part of which forms a boundary of a proposed lot, must exist.
(3) Each wall, floor, ceiling or structural cubic space, by
reference to which any boundary of a proposed lot is determined, must
regulations made under the 1973 Act the
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development)
Regulation 1997
(NSW) (the 1997 Regulation), as in force on 23 December
2015, provided by regulation 8(1):
8 Floor plans: sections 8, 8A, 9
(1) A floor plan must show the following:
(a) by continuous lines, the boundaries of lots or whole
separate parts of lots, so that boundaries defined by walls or other structural
features are clearly distinguished from boundaries defined by lines only,
(b) if the boundary of a lot is defined by reference to the
surface of a wall, linear connections to that surface and such linear
of that boundary as the Registrar-General may require,
(c) if the boundary of a lot is defined by reference to
the surface of a floor or ceiling, such vertical connections and notations
are necessary to define that boundary,
(d) notations sufficient to ensure that each cubic space
forming the whole of a lot or a whole separate part of a lot is fully
(provided that if it is intended that a lot boundary is to be defined in
accordance with the formula set out in section 5
(2) (a) of the Act, but not
otherwise, no notation need be made for the purpose of defining that boundary).
2015 Act relevantly provides:
4 Definitions
(1) In this Act—
common property
, in relation to a strata scheme or a proposed
strata scheme, means any part of a parcel that is not comprised in a lot
any common infrastructure that is not part of a lot).
means a plan that—
(a) defines by lines (each a
) the base of the
vertical boundaries of each cubic space forming the whole of a proposed lot, or
the whole of a part of a proposed
lot, to which the plan relates, and
(i) the floor area of each proposed lot, and
(ii) if a proposed lot has more than one part—the floor area of
each part together with the aggregate of the floor areas of
the parts, and
(c) if a proposed lot or part of a proposed lot is superimposed on
another proposed lot or part—shows the separate base lines
of the proposed
lots or parts, by reference to floors or levels, in the order in which the
superimposition occurs.
, in relation to a strata scheme, means one or more cubic
spaces shown as a lot on a floor plan relating to the scheme, but does not
include any common infrastructure, unless the common infrastructure is described
on the plan, in the way prescribed by the regulations,
as a part of the lot.
6 Boundaries of lot
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the boundaries of a lot shown on a floor
(a) except as provided by paragraph (b)—
(i) for a vertical boundary in which the base of a wall corresponds
substantially with a base line—the inner surface of the
(ii) for a horizontal boundary in which a floor or ceiling joins a
vertical boundary of the lot—the upper surface of the floor
and the under
surface of the ceiling, or
(b) the boundaries described on the floor plan relating to the lot,
in the way prescribed by the regulations, by reference to a
wall, floor or
ceiling in a building to which the plan relates or to common infrastructure
within the building.
(2) In this section—
—see paragraph (a) of the definition
in section 4 (1).
is a debate in the Owers-Brown submissions and the owners corporation
submissions whether the definitions in the 1973 Act or
the 2015 Act apply.
Owers-Brown submits that, because of Cl. 4 of Sch. 8 of the 2015 Act, the 2015
Act provisions apply. The Nakkan
submissions state, in one sentence, that the
1973 Act applies. The owners corporation submissions state the 1973 Act applies,
do not address the savings and transitional provisions of the 2015 Act. The
owners corporation relies on the principle of statutory
construction that
amending legislation is construed as operating prospectively rather than
retrospectively unless it involves a procedural
amendment (
[1957] HCA 7
(1957) 96 CLR 261
(per Dixon CJ at 267);
Fisher v Hebburn Ltd
[1960] HCA 80
(1960) 105 CLR 188
(per Fullagar J at 194) and the provisions of
Interpretation Act 1987
The Owners-Strata Plan No 68255 v Downs; Downs v The Owners-Strata Plan No
[2021] NSWCATCD 34
, Robertson SM held at [51] that the 1973 Act
applied in circumstances where the strata plan was registered on 1 July 2002 and
proceedings were commenced in 2020. In
Melani v The Owners-Strata
Plan No 22214
[2017] NSWCATCD 73
, the Tribunal held (at [27]) the 1973 Act
applied, although the circumstances were different because those proceedings had
been commenced
in the Tribunal before repeal of the 1973 Act, and the savings
and transitional provisions under Cl. 9 of Sch. 8 of the 2015 Act
relevant savings and transitional provisions of the 2015 Act are as
3 General savings
(1) Any act, matter or thing done or omitted to be done under a provision
of a former Act and having any force or effect immediately
commencement of a provision of this Act that replaces that provision, is, on the
commencement, taken to have been done
or omitted to be done under the provision
of this Act.
(2) This clause does not apply to the extent that its application—
(a) is inconsistent with any other provision of this Schedule or a
provision of a regulation made under this Schedule, or
(b) would be inappropriate in a particular case.
Existing strata schemes
On the repeal day, each of the following is taken to be a strata scheme under
(a) a strata scheme in existence under the
Strata Schemes
(Freehold Development) Act 1973
immediately before the repeal day,
(b) a leasehold strata scheme in existence under the
Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
immediately before the repeal
Continuation of plans and notices
(1) On the repeal day, a plan or a notice of conversion that, immediately
before the repeal day, is registered under a former Act
is taken to be
registered under this Act.
(2) In this clause—
means a strata plan, strata plan of subdivision, strata
plan of consolidation or building alteration plan.
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) relevantly states:
30 Effect of amendment or repeal of Acts and statutory
(1) The amendment or repeal of an Act or statutory rule does not—
(b) affect the previous operation of the Act or statutory rule or
anything duly suffered, done or commenced under the Act or statutory
(2) Without limiting the effect of subsection (1), the amendment or repeal
of an Act or statutory rule does not affect—
(d) the operation of any savings or transitional provision contained
in the Act or statutory rule.
parties submit that there is no relevant difference between the provisions of
the 1973 Act and the 2015 Act in respect of the
definition of lot property and
common property. Accordingly, no substantive rights of any party are affected
whether the 1973 Act
definition or the 2015 Act definition is applied, and the
debate about whether the 1973 Act or the 2015 Act applies is, to a significant
degree, esoteric.
to the extent that it is necessary to determine this issue, the Tribunal is
satisfied the 1973 Act applies to the relevant
definitions of Lot property and
common property. Clauses 3-5 of the 2015 Act are clarifying that schemes
registered prior to the
2015 Act continue to be regarded as schemes registered
under the 2015 Act. If that were not the case, schemes registered before 30
November 2016 would cease to have legal effect. However, that does not mean that
the applicable statutory definitions under the 1973
Act cease to operate. In the
context of the statutory definition of Lot property and common property,
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) applies, and the savings
and transitional provisions in the 2015 Act are not inconsistent with s
30(1)(b). Accordingly,
Interpretation Act 1987
does not apply.
Cl. 10 of Sch. 4 of the 2015 specifically preserves the amendments to the 1973
Act which changed the definitions of Lot property
and common property (in
respect of the boundaries of Lots) in the
Conveyancing (Strata Titles) Act
(NSW). If Owers-Brown’s interpretation of the savings and
transitional provisions of the 2015 Act was correct, there would
be no need for
Cl. 10 of Sch. 4.
What Are The Boundaries Of the Lot?
The Registered Strata Plan
parties agree that the registered strata plan does not clearly delineate the
wooden decking of the terraces of Lots proximate
to Lots 3 and 4 as lot
property. The registered strata plan refers to the areas with a “T”
that in the plan “denotes
terrace.” At certain areas, the terraces
abut plantar boxes.
are 4 Notations. Notation 2 & 3 state:
2. Terraces & plantar boxes are limited in height to 2.7 metres above the
upper surface of their respective concrete floor unless
covered within this
3. The concrete structure of the pool is common property. However, all other
components including pump, pipes etc form part of that
pool is in an area between the plantar box proximate to Lot 3 and the
Accordingly,
s 5(2)(b) of the 1973 Act does not define whether the wooden decking on the
terraces is Lot property or common property.
The Statutory
provisions of s 5(2)(a) are the critical provisions. The have been set out
previously, but it assists to extract the following
parts (emphasis
The boundaries of any cubic space referred to in paragraph (a) of the definition
in subsection (1):
(i) are, in the case of a vertical boundary, where the base of any
wall corresponds substantially with any line referred to in paragraph
that definition—the inner surface of that wall, and
in the case of a horizontal boundary, where any floor or
ceiling joins a vertical boundary of that cubic space
surface of that floor and the under surface of that ceiling, or
The NSW Court of Appeal Decision in Seiwa
key authority regarding the interpretation of s 5(2) of the 1973 Act is
Owners SP 35042 v Seiwa Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 272
; (2007) NSW Title
Cases 80-122.
was the owner of a Lot that comprised the whole top floor of a strata building.
It included an uncovered external terrace. The
terrace area included certain
rectangular steel uprights which provided the framework that enclosed a balcony.
The relevant floor
areas was covered in tiles. There was water ingress into the
lot by reason of failure of the waterproofing membrane that lay beneath
tiles and the concrete slab. The director of Seiwa and his family moved out of
the lot and sued for damages due to the owners
corporation’s breach of its
statutory duty to keep and maintain common property in a state of good
the hearing at first instance (before Brereton J), the owners corporation
conceded that the tiles had been laid prior to the registration
of the strata
plan, the lower horizontal boundary was the upper surface of the tiled floor by
reason of s 5(2)(a)(ii) of the 1973
Act. However, the owners corporation argued
that the notation on the registered plan that defined the upper boundary of the
space of the terrace as “2.5 Above The Upper Surface of the Concrete
Floor” by inference also described the lower horizontal
boundary which
therefore constituted a description on the sheet of the floor plan relating to
the cubic space within the meaning
of s 5(2)(b), thus overriding s 5(2)(a)(ii).
Accordingly, the owners corporation argued the lower horizontal boundary was the
surface of the concrete slab, not the waterproofing membrane and
owners corporation’s argument on the s 5(2)(b) of the 1973 Act was
rejected by Brereton J, and the tiles and waterproofing
membrane were held to be
common property. Damages were awarded for the owners corporation’s breach
of its statutory duty to
keep and maintain the common property in a state of
good repair.
owners corporation appealed to the Court of Appeal. The appeal was dismissed.
Tobias JA wrote the leading judgement (Giles JA
and Basten JA agreeing).
Court of Appeal identified that there were two issues for determination in the
appeal. The first was “were the membrane
and tiles covering the membrane
part of common property or part of the lot?” The second was whether there
was an error in the
assessment of damages. The second issue does not require
exploration.
paras [25]-[37], Tobias JA provides reasons why s 5(2)(b) of the 1973 Act does
not apply and why the appellant’s arguments
regarding s 5(2)(b) were
in the course of those reasons, and in particular at paragraphs [38]-390 there
are comments relevant to the interpretation
of s 5(2)(a). Those comments are as
“27...Section 5(2)(a) lays down a statutory formula pursuant to which, for
instance, the lower horizontal boundary of a cubic
space is identified as the
“upper surface” of a floor where it joins a vertical boundary of
that space. However, s 5(2)(b)
operates as an alternative to s 5(2)(a)...”
28 Although the term “
” is not relevantly defined in s
5(1), contrary to the suggestion referred to in the preceding paragraph, in my
view it has
the same meaning in both limbs of s 5(2). But that is not to the
point. The first limb (s 5(2)(a)(ii)) defines the relevant boundary
by reference
upper surface
” of the floor...
29 Of course, there is still the question of what is the upper surface of a
floor even where s 5(2)(a)(ii) applies. Is it the upper
surface of the floor
slab or, where tiles are affixed to that surface as in the present case, the
upper surface of the tiles? As
a matter of common sense and common parlance I
would have thought the latter. The appellant conceded as much...
37 Accordingly, in my opinion the primary judge was correct in construing the
notation on Sheet 8 of the Strata Plan as describing
for the purposes of s
5(2)(b) only the upper horizontal boundary of the cubic space of which the
terrace formed the base. As the
notation did not purport to define the lower
horizontal boundary of that space, that boundary is to be determined in
accordance with
s 5(2)(a)(ii), namely, as the upper surface of the floor of the
terrace being the upper surface of the tiles. It follows, therefore,
membrane is part of the common property to which the provisions of s 62(1) apply
to impose upon the appellant the statutory
duty to keep the membrane in a state
of good and serviceable repair, which it failed to do.
38 For completeness, I should make it clear that where s 5(2)(a)(ii) applies to
define the lower horizontal boundary of a cubic space
as the upper surface of
the floor of that space, that surface fixes the boundary as at the date of
registration of the strata plan.
If at that date the floor comprises only the
bare concrete floor slab, then its upper surface will constitute the lower
39 However, if at the date of registration a tile or timber floor has been laid
over and affixed to the concrete slab, then the boundary
will be the upper
surface of the tiles or timber flooring. If that upper layer of flooring is
later removed and replaced by tiles
or timber flooring the upper surface of
which is higher than the surface as at the date of registration of the strata
plan, it is
the level of the original surface which remains the lower horizontal
boundary, not the level of the new surface. The boundary remains
fixed: it is
not ambulatory. The same principle applies to the determination of the upper
horizontal boundary being the ceiling to
the relevant cubic space as well as to
a vertical boundary of that space being a wall.
40 I am not unmindful of the practical effect of what I have written above.
Careful consideration will need to be given by, for instance,
a developer who is
constructing a building which is proposed to be the subject of a strata scheme
to what is intended to constitute
the vertical and horizontal boundaries of the
cubic space or spaces comprising a lot. Are they to be the surfaces of the
floor and ceiling slabs or brick walls or the surface of any tiles,
timber or other material affixed to those slabs or walls?
41 The present case points up the importance of determining these matters prior
to the registration of the strata plan. If they are
not given attention, then
the relevant boundaries will be determined under s 5(2)(a) by reference to the
state of the floor, ceilings
and walls at the date of registration, in all
probability thus giving rise to unintended consequences in terms of the division
responsibility for repairs and maintenance between the owners corporation and
the proprietors of the individual lots. It would seem
ridiculous, for instance,
if the owners corporation was required to take such responsibility for the state
of the internal paintwork
of a lot. Disputes over such matters can be simply
avoided by utilising s 5(2)(b) to fully and clearly describe the relevant
of the cubic space or spaces forming each lot of the strata plan.
42 I also appreciate that what I have said above will not necessarily assist the
avoidance of disputes as exemplified by the present
case with respect to many
existing strata plans where advantage has not been taken of s 5(2)(b). In many
cases it will be the luck
of the draw dependent on the condition of the relevant
floors, ceilings and walls at the date of registration of the particular strata
plan. This is unfortunate and unavoidable as to the past but avoidable for the
owners corporation submits that passages of
relied upon by Owers
Brown and Nakkan is obiter dicta. Irrespective of technical arguments as to what
is, or is not, the ratio decidendi
, they are comments of the
Court of Appeal which, as a superior appellant court, are binding on the
Tribunal. Even if this approach
is incorrect, they are comments that are highly
persuasive within the principles discussed by the Appeal Panel in
Pty Ltd v Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority; Niraula v Independent Liquor
and Gaming Authority
[2020] NSWCATAP 200
any event, the owners corporation has not referred to any authorities that have
found the principles in Seiwa are legally incorrect,
merely that it has been
distinguished on the facts in
The Owners-Strata Plan 32735 v Lesley-Swan
[2012] NSWSC 383
Lesley-Swan
reference by the owners corporation to paragraphs [191]-[198] of
Lesley-Swan
does not advance its argument. Those paragraphs deal with the
findings of Brereton J in the first instance decision in
whether a lot owner may obtain damages under the tort of nuisance for
“abating” the nuisance by repairing
common property. That is
irrelevant to the issues for determination in these proceedings.
owners corporations’ arguments regarding the interpretation of s
5(2)(a)(ii) of the 1973 boil down to following:
(1) The timber decking (that is clearly attached to the concrete slab, by way of
battens attached to the slab upon which timber decking
boards are installed and
located into the battens) cannot be the horizontal boundary of the lot, because
the “floor”
does not join “a vertical boundary of that cubic
space;” and/or
(2) The evidence does not establish the timber decking on the terraces was
installed at the date of registration of the strata plan
on 23 December 2015.
Does the Timber Decking Join a Vertical Boundary of the Cubic
NSW Court of Appeal decision in
does not contain any detailed
discussion of what is meant by the phrase “where any floor or ceiling
joins a vertical boundary
of that cubic space” under s 5(a)(ii) of the
of the parties refer to any authorities where the phrase is considered in any
detail. By reason of different facts, the Tribunal
decisions in
are not of any great assistance on this issue.
High Court stated in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
(per McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
‘However, the duty of a court is to give the words of a statutory
provision the meaning that the legislature is taken to have
intended them to
have. Ordinarily, that meaning (the legal meaning) will correspond with the
grammatical meaning of the provision.
But not always. The context of the words,
the consequences of a literal or grammatical construction, the purpose of the
the canons of construction
may require the words of a
legislative provision to be read in a way that does not correspond with the
literal or grammatical meaning.
legislature has used the word “join” a “vertical boundary of
the cubic space” in s 5(2)(a)(ii) of the
1973 Act. The definition of
“join” in the Macquarie Dictionary 2025 edition is as
to bring or put together, in contact
or connection.
to come into contact, connection, or union
the brook joins the river.
to bring together in relation, purpose, action,
coexistence, etc.:
to join forces.
to become a member of (a society, party, etc.); enlist in
(one of the armed forces).
to come into the company of:
I’ll join you
to unite in marriage.
to meet or engage in (battle, conflict, etc.).
his land joins mine.
to draw a curve or straight line
(of animals) to mate with.
to come into or be in contact
or connection, or form a junction.
to be contiguous or close; lie or come together; form a
to meet in battle or conflict.
a place or line of joining; a seam.
, to make the connections necessary to lead to a complete or
comprehensive understanding.
, to take part with others.
to enlist in one of the armed forces.
to meet; come together:
I joined up with the
let’s join up later for dinner.
to bring or put together, in contact or connection.
, to become united, associated, or
combined with; associate or ally one
definition of “connection” includes “anything that
connects” and an “association.” The definition
“union” includes:
the act of uniting two or more things into one.
the state of being so united; conjunction; combination.
something formed by uniting two or more things; a
combination.
owners corporation submits that the timber decking does not “join”
any vertical boundary of the cubic space. This
is primarily based on the
following evidence in the affidavit of Mr Weir:
I supervised the installation and observed that the timber decking was laid. The
steps in constructing the decks were:
(b) Leaving an air gap on not less than 5 mm around the edge of the decking in
accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines;
owners corporation also refers to certain parts of the report of Mr Buckley
dated 1 August 2022 regarding construction of the
timber decking.
Importantly,
the legislature in s 5(2)(a)(ii) of the 1973 Act uses the word
“join”. It does not use the word “fix”
“affix.” Whether the timber decking “joins” vertical
boundaries of the cubic space (which includes walls
and plantar boxes) is a
matter of degree. It is, quintessentially, a question of fact to be determined
on consideration of the evidence.
Tribunal is satisfied that the timber decking joins the vertical boundaries of
the cubic space. The photographic evidence contained
in the expert evidence (in
particular, the photographs contained in Mr Wilkie’s report) clearly show
the timber decking boards
being immediately adjacent to the various structures
that form the vertical boundaries of Lots 3 and 4.
owners corporation’s expert Mr Calandra refers to the limited gaps at the
perimeter of the decking boards. He states at
paragraph 4.9 of his report (p 5
of the report; p 1278 of the Court Book):
4.9 I can confirm that the timber decking boards are installed with minimum
clearance around the perimeter of the floor and wall
junctions, which would not
allow for the treatment of timber decking boards and preservation procedure in
maintaining a deck.”
Buckley, in his report (pp 12 and 20 of the report; pp 1165 and 1173 of the
Court Book) refers to “compromised or missing
perimeter expansion”
and “lateral expansion” of the timber decking boards.
Wilkie, in his report (p 11 report; p 1218 of the Court Book) refers to gaps
between decking boards being “inconsistent”
and “ranging
between 0 mm to 5 mm”.
evidence of Mr Weir that he supervised construction of the decking and believes
it was installed with a “not less than 5
mm” gap around edges in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions is given reduced weight
due to the period of
time between him giving evidence and the construction of
the decking; and that it is inconsistent with the evidence of the experts
regarding the lack of adequate gaps between the decking boards and the various
structures that form the vertical boundaries of Lots
even if the Tribunal was satisfied that there were perimeter gaps of “no
less than 5 mm” (presumably to allow
the natural expansion and contraction
of decking boards) in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications,
there is still
sufficient physical proximity to the vertical boundaries of the
lot for the timber decking to “join” the vertical
boundaries.
Was The Timber Decking Installed As At the Date of
Registration of the Strata Plan (23 December 2015)?
Tribunal does not accept the owners corporation’s submission that
Owers-Brown and Nakkan have failed to prove the timber
decking was installed at
the date of registration of the strata plan. Rather, it is satisfied that the
timber decking was installed
by the date of registration of the strata
owners corporation relies on the evidence of Mr Weir. However, his evidence as
to the dates upon which the timber decking was
constructed was vague. In his
affidavit, there is only very brief reference to the time at which the timber
decking was constructed
(paragraph [19]) with a reference to “2016”.
His answer in cross examination (T:4/6/24:P32:L4-6) that construction occurred
“around 2015, 2016, it went for 24 months” was also vague. It is not
logical that installation of timber decking of a
strata building would take 24
months to complete. Mr Weir may have been referring to other aspects of the
construction of the entirety
of the strata building.
is contemporaneous documentary evidence to support a conclusion that the timber
decking was installed as of 23 December 2015.
tax invoices for decking materials from Woodform Architectural (the manufacturer
of the timber decking system) to Sammut Developments
attached to the affidavit
of Mr Weir are dated 9 April 2015; and 20 May 2015. The combined amount of those
two invoices (which are
clearly in respect of the timber decking system of the
strata building) exceed $120,000. Those invoices are more than 6 months prior
the date of the registration of the strata scheme. It is logical that the
builder would install the timber decking system a relatively
short period of
time after purchasing the materials, and there is no evidence from Mr Weir that
the materials were stored for any
period of time before installation.
Level 1 Sanitary, Plumbing and Drainage plan of the strata building attached at
Annexure E of the affidavit of Mr Buckley (p 1186
of the Court Book) shows the
timber decking identified. There is also an earlier Level 1 Sanitary, Plumbing
and Drainage Plan dated
“Nov 12” (p 1706 of the Court Book) that
shows the timber decking identified.
interim occupation certificate for the building was issued by the local Council
on 20 November 2015; and the final occupation
certificate for the building was
issued on 3 December 2015 (20 days before registration of the strata plan).
Those dates are referred
to in the report of RHM Consultants dated 25 November
2021 (p 108 of the Court Book, with the report attached to the first affidavit
of Ms Owers-Brown). No submission or evidence is pointed to by the owners
corporation that those dates were incorrect. Considering
the requirements to
obtain an occupation certificate, it is inferred the timber decking had been
completed by no later than the date
the final occupation certificate was
owners who had purchased “off the plan” commenced moving into the
strata building in January 2016 and the first general
meeting of the owners
corporation occurred on 4 January 2016. This is a very short period of time
after the date of registration
of the strata plan. There is nothing to indicate
in the evidence of the owners corporation (other than the vague evidence of Mr
regarding the dates of construction) that there was construction work to
the timber decking on level 1 of the building, or timber
decking on any other
level of the building that was ongoing after lot owners had moved into the
the above evidence, an inference is drawn that the timber decking on level 1 of
the strata scheme building had been installed
prior to the date of registration
of the strata plan. The factual evidence is sufficient to establish that
inference (
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 340 ALR 368
[18]). Evidence is assessed in the context of the ability of a particular party
to adduce evidence on the relevant factual issue
(1994) 181 CLR 387
at 391-392). In that regard, other than the vague
evidence of Mr Weir, it is notable that the owners corporation has not referred
in its submissions to any cogent evidence that the timber decking on level 1 the
subject of these proceedings had not been installed
after the date of
registration of the strata plan.
above factual findings are sufficient to deal with the issue of whether the
applicant had established, on the balance of probabilities,
the timber decking
to the terraces on level 1 of the strata building had been installed by the date
of registration of the strata
the sake of completeness, the Tribunal notes the submission of Owers-Brown that
the owners corporation had not pleaded in its
Points of Defence that the timber
decking of the terraces on level 1 of the strata building had been installed
after 23 December
2015, and that it cannot, as a matter or procedural fairness,
now argue Owers-Brown (and Nakkan) has to prove that they were installed
before 23 December 2015.
Owers-Brown Annexure A to the application (Orders Sought and Reasons for Seeking
Orders) relevantly assert as follows:
5. The timber decks were installed during the original construction of the
Property and form part of the common property of the Respondent.
Nakkan Points of Claim relevantly assert:
4. The strata scheme was constructed between approximately 2013-2015. The Strata
Plan 92562 was registered on 23 December 2015.
6. The floor of the terrace consists of a concrete slab wholly covered by timber
decking. The timber decking was installed and fixed
to the concrete slab prior
to the date of registration of the strata plan.
Points of Defence relevantly asserts:
1. Since the developer sold units in the property to the initial lot owners in
2016, the lot owners had always been informed, and
believed, that the lot owners
owned each of the timber decks for each unit or lot. Each of the lot owners were
provided with instructions
for the care of the timber decking to their
respective properties.
owners corporation’s Points of Defence do not assert that the timber
decking was not installed as of the date of registration
of the strata plan,
despite that issue being clearly pleaded in the Points of Claim (in the Nakkan
proceedings) and the application
(in the Owers-Brown proceedings). It is not
even clear from the Points of Defence that the owners corporation denies the
timber decks
are common property, as distinct from lot owners “being
informed” and “believing” they were lot property.
role of ‘pleadings’ in the Consumer and Commercial Division of the
Tribunal was recently discussed in
Dr N Kalokerinos Pty Ltd v Jain
(which was an Appeal Panel decision where the issue of
whether a concession or admission made by a respondent in Points of Defence
bound the respondent). The principle that pleadings are fundamental to a
procedurally fair hearing unless the parties choose to disregard
the pleadings
and fight the case on issues chosen at trial is well established (see, for
Dare v Pulham
(1982) 148 CLR 658
[1982] HCA 70
Legally represented parties are also usually bound by the strategic decisions
they make in the way they argue their case
(see the discussion of these
principles in
Hawach v A & A Building Services Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 138
the commencement of the first day of the hearing, before Ms Owers-Brown was
called to give evidence, the only issue raised by the
owners corporation’s
Counsel to amend the Points of Defence, was in respect of raising s 106(3) of
the SSM Act in regard to
the Resolution passed at the general meeting of the
owners corporation on 30 March 2023 (T:10/11/23: P 11-13). Nothing was raised
the commencement of the hearing that the owners corporation was asserting
Owers-Brown and Nakkan had to prove that the timber
decking on level 1 of the
strata building had been installed on or before 23 December 2015.
it was necessary to determine this issue, the Tribunal would find that the
failure to clearly respond in the Points of Defence
(or seek to amend them at
the hearing) to deny, or not admit, the assertion by Owers-Brown and Nakkan that
the timber decking had
been installed as of the date of registration of the
strata plan meant that the owners corporation could not raise this as an issue
in dispute.
for reasons expressed previously, the evidence satisfies the Tribunal that the
timber decking on the terraces of level 1
of the strata building had been
constructed and installed by the date upon which the strata plan was
registered.
Conclusion-Is The Terrace Timber Decking Common
terrace timber decking on level 1 of the strata scheme building the subject of
this dispute is common property, not lot property.
Accordingly, it is the owners
corporation’s responsibility to keep and maintain it in a state of good
repair, subject to the
further issues that will be discussed.
Duty of the Owners Corporation to Keep and Maintain Common Property in a State
of Good Repair
Applicable Legal Principles
106 of the SSM Act states:
106 Duty of owners corporation to maintain and repair
(1) An owners corporation for a strata scheme must properly maintain and
keep in a state of good and serviceable repair the common
property and any
personal property vested in the owners corporation.
(2) An owners corporation must renew or replace any fixtures or fittings
comprised in the common property and any personal property
vested in the owners
corporation.
(3) This section does not apply to a particular item of property if the
owners corporation determines by special resolution that—
(a) it is inappropriate to maintain, renew, replace or repair the
property, and
(b) its decision will not affect the safety of any building,
structure or common property in the strata scheme or detract from the
of any property in the strata scheme.
(4) An owners corporation may defer compliance with subsection (1) or (2)
in relation to damage to common property until after the
taking of action
(a) the action is taken by the owners corporation against an owner or
another person in relation to the damage, and
(b) the deferment will not affect—
(i) the safety of buildings, structures or common property in the
strata scheme, or
(ii) a person’s access to or use of the common property or a
lot in the strata scheme.
(5) An owner of a lot in a strata scheme may recover from the owners
corporation, as damages for breach of statutory duty, any reasonably
foreseeable
loss suffered by the owner as a result of a contravention of this section by the
owners corporation.
(6) An owner may not bring an action under this section for breach of a
statutory duty more than 6 years after the owner first becomes
aware of the
(7) This section is subject to the provisions of any common property
memorandum adopted by the by-laws for the strata scheme under
this Division, any
common property rights by-law or any by-law made under section 108.
(8) This section does not affect any duty or right of the owners
corporation under any other law.
s 232(1)(e) of the SSM Act, the Tribunal can make orders, on application by an
interested person; original owner or building
manager to “settle a
complaint or dispute” about “an exercise of, or failure to
exercise, a function conferred
or imposed by or under this Act or the by-laws of
a strata scheme”.
definition of “interested person” under s 226 of the SSM Act
includes a lot owner.
240 of the SSM Act states:
240 Tribunal may make order of another kind
The Tribunal may deal with an application for an order under a specified
provision of this Act by making an order under a different
provision of this Act
if it considers it appropriate to do so.
s 241 of the SSM Act the Tribunal has the power to order “any person the
subject of an application” to do, or refrain
from doing, a specified act
in relation to the strata scheme.
powers of the Tribunal under ss 232 and 241 of the SSM Act broad, but are not
unlimited (see, for example,
Coscuez International Pty Ltd v The
Owners-Strata Plan No 46433
[2022] NSWCATAP 147
House Developments Pty Ltd v The Owners-Strata Plan No 70276
[2025] NSWCATAP
The Owners-Strata Plan No 55468 v Silberstein
NSWCATAP 102
[112-117]). For example, the Tribunal does not have the general
power under s 232 of the SSM Act to grant the relief of a declaration
v The Owners-Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
is well established that the remedial powers under ss 232 and 241 of the SSM Act
include order an owners corporation to take appropriate
action to repair common
property or replace common property if the owners corporation is in breach of
its duty under s 106 of the
applicable principles were summarised by the Appeal Panel in
The Owners -
Strata Plan No 33368 v Gittins
[2022] NSWCATAP 130
“The scope of the duty of an owners corporation to maintain and keep in a
state of good repair common property has been the
subject of extensive judicial
consideration (e.g.
Seiwa Australian Pty Ltd v Owners Strata Plan
[2006] NSWSC 1157
Ridis v Strata Plan
[2005] NSWCA 246
Stolfa v Owners Strata Plan 4366 &
[2009] NSWSC 589
Stolfa v Hempt
[2010] NSWCA
The Owners Strata Plan No 50276 v Thoo
[2013] NSWCA 270
Glenquarry Park Investments Pty Ltd v Hegyesi
[2019] NSWSC
The Owners-Strata Plan SP 20211 v Rosenthal; Rosenthal v The
Owners-Strata Plan No 20211
[2018] NSWCATAP 243
Loneragan v The Owners-Strata
Plan No 16519
[2020] NSWCATAP 177
Appeal Panel summarised the principles applicable to the duty of an owners
corporation under s 106 (1) and (2) of the
SSM Act as follows
at [29]-[41]). The pertinent
principles (excluding authority references) are:
(1) The owners corporation has a strict duty under s 106 (1) of the SSM Act to
maintain and keep in a state of good and serviceable
repair the common property.
That duty is not merely to take reasonable steps or use best endeavours.
(2) The duty under s 106 (1) of the SSM Act includes keeping common
property in order by acts of maintenance before it falls out
condition. The duty includes taking preventative measures to ensure there is not
a malfunction. The duty also includes remediation
of defects in the original
construction of the common property.
(3) As soon as something in the common property is no longer operating
effectively or at all, or has fallen into disrepair, there
has been a breach of
the s 106 (1) duty.
(4) Breach of the duty under s 106 (1) of the SSM Act gives each Lot owner a
statutory cause of action.
(5) Repairs to common property (including renewal or replacement of common
property) that does not involve alteration or addition
for the purpose of
improving or enhancing the common property does not require a special resolution
of the owners corporation under
s 108 of the SSM Act.
(6) Renewal or replacement of common property under s 106 (2) of the SSM
Act is only engaged when the item of common property is
no longer operating
effectively, or at all, or has fallen into a state of disrepair.
(7) Renewal or replacement of common property under s 106 (2) of the SSM Act is
limited by a concept of reasonable necessity.
Further, in
, Parker J referred to the scope of the
remedial powers of the Tribunal under s 232 of the SSM Act. In the context of
remedial work
orders for breach of s 106 of the SSM Act, Parker J held:
(1) Orders must be focussed upon the minimum necessary for the owners
corporation to comply with its duty to maintain and keep in
a state of good
repair the common property (paras [111]-[112]).
(2) Orders for repairs must be sufficiently specific so that the owners
corporation understands what needs to be done to comply with
the orders, and not
vague or indeterminate (paras [104]; [113]-[114]).
Owers-Brown’s Submissions In Chief
Owers-Brown’s
submissions regarding breach of s 106 of the SSM Act and the appropriate
remedial orders to make are contained
at pp 10-26 of the submissions dated 9
August 2024. There are further submissions at 27-29 regarding damages under s
106(5) of the
SSM Act (Owers-Brown claiming her legal costs as damages) and the
By-law passed on 30 March 2023 (but not registered).
Owers-Brown
has also provided a proposed scope of works. That proposed scope of works is
deficient, for reasons that will be explored
later in this decision. However, at
this juncture, it is appropriate to summarize the submissions. The Tribunal does
not attempt
to summarize every sentence or point raised in circumstances where
there are many pages to cover.
submissions are summarised as follows:
Buckley gave evidence the entire decking system is defective, notwithstanding
his clarification in joint expert evidence that only
decking boards in exposed
areas require replacement. Mr Calandra conceded in cross examination that he
agreed with Mr Buckley’s
assessment of the inadequacies of the decking
experts agree that the uncovered areas of the decks needed to be
remediated.
experts agree that:
(a) Timber decking boards must be removed.
(b) The removed boards should not be replaced ‘like for like.’
Non-perishable material should be used.
(c) The balcony is required to be waterproofed.
(d) The balcony has a waterproofing membrane which sits underneath timber
battens, on top of which sit decking boards.
(e) If an item which penetrates the waterproofing membrane is removed, it has
the potential to affect the waterproofing membrane.
(f) If the waterproofing membrane is affected in the rectification of the deck,
the DABP Act applies to the remediation work.
Tribunal should find the battens in the uncovered area are “in
disrepair” and must be removed as part of any scope
of works to repair the
terrace decking.
screws, not booker rods, were used to install the battens into the slab.
waterproofing membrane would, or would reasonably be likely, to be damaged if
battens are removed.
Calandra, in his report, had opined that all damaged decking boards and timber
battens would need to be removed to replace the
decking in the uncovered deck
Calandra had made concessions in the first two joint expert reports that battens
needed to be removed and replaced. It was only
in the final Joint Expert Report
(and at the hearing) where Mr Calandra clearly stated that battens did not need
to be replaced in
the course of replacing decking boards.
Wilkie’s evidence on replacement of battens should be accepted. He
observed battens whilst performing his inspection and
believed that they were
sufficiently deteriorated, or likely to be deteriorated, that one or more of
them required replacement.
Mr Buckley stated in cross examination that the battens may be structurally
sufficient to support replacement decking boards,
that needs to be taken in the
context of his other evidence that: (a) if a batten is soft to touch it is not
structurally sound;
(b) if battens are not structurally sound they need to be
replaced; and (c) Mr Wilkie’s evidence the battens he inspected felt
to touch was a “concern” and “was the most conclusive evidence
that there may be decay”.
Wilkie was not challenged in cross examination about what he observed when he
touched the battens.
Wilkie’s evidence should be given more weight because he viewed the
battens and touched them, unlike Mr Buckley and Mr Calandra.
Calandra did not give any evidence disputing Mr Wilkie’s opinion that if a
batten was soft to touch, it was not structurally
evidence of Mr Wilkie that the battens are connected to the slab/substrate using
bugle screws and that to remove a bugle screw
interferes with the waterproofing
membrane should be accepted. Mr Calandra assumed in his report that was the
system used. The Tribunal
should not accept the evidence of Mr Weir that a
booker rod system was used, nor Mr Calandra adopting a position at the hearing
with Mr Weir that a booker rod could remain in place and not compromise
the waterproofing membrane to replace the decking boards.
Mr Wilkie explained at
the hearing what he observed and why he believed bugle screws rather than booker
rods were used. He was not
challenged about that aspect of his evidence. The
evidence of Mr Weir is to be given little weight due to the length of time
the installation of the deck and his evidence; and that it is clearly
inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Wilkie who performed an
investigation where he actually looked at the battens and the system used to
locate them into the slab/substrate.
Mr Wilkie’s opinion about bugle screws being used is consistent with the
evidence of Mr Schneller that when he replaced
the timber decking on his terrace
with tiles, he observed battens located by screws (approximately 150 mm in
if the Tribunal found that booker rods were used, Mr Wilkie stated in cross
examination that they “would be a major place
for wood decay” and
that he remained of the view that battens would need to be replaced and the
replacement would compromise
the waterproofing membrane.
the Tribunal finds that some or all battens need to be replaced and to do so
will damage the waterproofing membrane (causing it
to need to be replaced) the
appropriate scope of works for the “uncovered area” is set out in
Annexure A to the submissions.
However, any building work must be performed in
compliance with the DABP Act because the works involve external waterproofing
and a design will need to be performed.
repair the “uncovered areas” there are also ancillary areas that
will need to be repaired (proximate to the pool and
outdoor kitchen area), as
set out in Mr Wilkie’s report. The Tribunal should not accept Mr
Calandra’s evidence assuming
these areas are lot property not common
“covered area” of the decking also needs to be replaced, after a
design is obtained from an appropriately qualified
designer under the DABP Act,
for the following reasons:
(a) Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley agreed there were some undercover areas of the
decking board with damage.
(b) Even if some undercover decking boards require replacement, Mr
Wilkie’s opinion should be accepted, and the waterproofing
membrane will
be affected.
(c) Even if the battens in the undercover area do not need to be replaced, the
Tribunal should accept Mr Wilkie’s opinion that
remedial work will likely
damage the waterproofing membrane, which is reaching the end of its useful life.
The membrane needs to
be replaced. Further, Mr Wilkie stated at the hearing the
membrane cannot be replaced in part-the whole membrane needs to be replaced.
(d) The Tribunal should accept Mr Wilkie’s evidence that there is more
significant disrepair of the undercover area over Mr
Calandra and Mr Buckley,
who “do not respond to this evidence in any of the joint reports, relying
largely on a visual assessment
of the covered area.
(e) Even if the Tribunal does not accept Mr Wilkie’s evidence about
defects in the undercover area, the entire decking system
should be replaced due
to: the extent of defects identified in Mr Buckley’s report; the
acceptance of all experts that some
decking boards in the covered area need to
be replaced; and Mr Wilkie’s opinion that the waterproofing membrane was
end of its lifespan.
(f) Replacement of some decking boards with artificial material (the original
timber decking system no longer being manufactured
and all experts agreeing that
artificial/PVC decking boards should be used as replacement boards) would not be
aesthetically pleasing.
Tribunal should not accept the opinion of the Mr Calandra in the final Joint
Expert Report that “ancillary works”
to the areas proximate to the
kitchen and pool are not required. Rather, the Tribunal should accept the
evidence of Mr Wilkie on
the nature of the defects and the method of
rectification.
Tribunal should reject the evidence of Mr Calandra that any damage to the
decking board was caused by the Lot owners. The evidence
of all the experts (in
particular, Mr Buckley and Mr Wilkie) regarding damage to decking boards and
defects in the terrace decking
system is inconsistent with such a finding. Mr
Calandra’s assertion in cross examination that inadequate maintenance was
causal factor should be rejected.
Calandra should not be accepted as a creditable or reliable witness, for the
reasons set out in paragraphs [113](a)-(e) of the
submissions.
the Tribunal accepts the Owers-Brown submissions on the nature of the defects
with the decking system and the need to replace it
with a new decking system
“the historical conduct or credit of Ms Owers-Brown has no relevance to
the Applicant’s proposed
scope of works.” That submission is
elaborated upon at paragraphs [115]-[122] of the
submissions.
Owers-Brown’s Submissions on the Claims for
Damages Under s 106(5) of the SSM Act and Invalidating the By-Law Passed on 30
respect of Owers-Brown’s claim that her legal costs are reasonably
foreseeable damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act, Owers-Brown
relies upon the
breath of the concept of reasonably foreseeable loss, and refers to a number of
authorities including
The Owners Strata Plan No 50276 v Thoo
[2013] NSWCA
17 BPR 33,789
The Owners-Strata Plan No 2661 v Selkirk
[2024] NSWSC
Vickery v Owners-Strata Plan No 80412
[2020] NSWCA 284
(2020) 103 NSWLR 352.
Owers-Brown submits that “cases such as
The Owners-Strata Plan No 32735
v Lesley-Swan
[2012] NSWSC 383
precedes the introduction of s 106(5) of the
SSM Act and does not apply”. Notably, notwithstanding Owers-Brown’s
submissions
regarding the breadth of the concept of “reasonably
foreseeable loss” by reason of the breach of the statutory duty under
106 of the SSM Act, the submissions point to no evidence to quantify what Ms
Owers-Brown’s purported loss is in respect of
her legal expenses.
respect of the claim under s 150 of the SSM Act Owers-Brown submits that because
the owners corporation did not lodge the By-law
with the Registrar General
within 6 months of the resolution was passed, it has no legal effect (ss 141(2)
and (2) of the SSM Act).
It is submitted that the owners corporation cannot
obtain an order to register the By-law, as set out in the owners
corporation’s
Points of Defence. Further, there is “no issue to
resolve” in respect of s 24 of the SSM Act and the owners corporation,
despite being granted leave, never amended their Points of Defence to assert
that the resolution passed on 30 March 2023 was a special
resolution, so
“the applicability of s 106(3) of the SSM Act was not raised and as such
will not be addressed by the Applicants”.
Submissions in Chief
submissions in chief of Nakkan filed on 9 August 2024 (19 pages, plus a scope of
works extracted from opinion of Mr Wilkie in
the final Joint Expert Report) are
consistent with the submissions of Owers-Brown. It is unnecessary to set them
Owners Corporation’s Submissions in Chief
owners corporation’s submissions in chief comprise of 41 pages, including
extensive footnotes.
submissions on whether the terrace timber decking have been set out previously
and that issue has been dealt with.
submissions on other issues (including, if the terrace timber decking is found
to be common property, what is an appropriate scope
of works to repair) are set
out from p 10. They are summarized as follows:
Repair of the
Timber Decking
Owers-Brown
and Nakkan have not established that he timber decking needs to be replaced.
Their case is primarily based on preventing
future deterioration occurring.
There is no current “adverse impact on the use of the deck.” The
covered areas of the
deck are in good condition and do not need to be replaced.
The battens and underlying structure are in a state of good repair. There
evidence of any damage to underlying waterproofing and any need for such work
would only arise if the waterproofing was damaged
during any repair works.
the Tribunal finds the decking repair, the necessary repairs are limited to
replacement of a small amount of decking boards that
are in the uncovered area.
The submission that the decking system needs to be replaced is based on
“speculation.”
Owers-Brown’s
claim for damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act must be dismissed because (a)
legal costs are not damages; and
(b) there is no evidence of any costs incurred,
and accordingly no evidence of loss or damage.
decking system is a fixture as it is secured to the concrete slab. The owners
corporation relies upon the definition in the Macquarie
Dictionary regarding
what is a “fixture.” Renewal or replacement of fixtures under s
106(2) of the SSM Act can only be
ordered if the fixture has fallen into such a
state of disrepair that it has to been replaced because it can no longer be kept
a state of good repair (
The Owners Strata Plan 50276 v Thoo
Owers-Brown and Nakkan brought their proceedings seeking an order that the
terrace decks be repaired under s 106(1) of the SSM
Act, not that they be
replaced with a new decking system under s 106(2) of the SSM Act. By reason of
failing to “address the
correct statutory provision” they have
“failed to address the appropriate test for the relief they now
the authorities referred to by Owers-Brown and Nakkan (such as
Ridis v Strata Plan 10308
[2005] NSWCA 246
(2005) 63 NSWLR 449
Glenquarry Park Investments Pty Ltd v Hegyesi
[2019] NSWSC 425
) do not address the duty under s 106(2) of the SSM Act. Owers-Brown
and Nakkan “are not permitted to stretch the scope of “repair”
under s 106(1) of the SSM Act to cover the complete replacement, renewal and
upgrade they now seek”.
evidence as to moisture and deterioration under the surface of timber decking
boards “relates to future issues that have
yet to adversely impact the
safety and use of the decks.” The orders sought by Owers-Brown and Nakkan
involve “a level
of perfection” that is not required by the concept
of “good and serviceable repair.”
evidence of Mr Buckley and Mr Wilkie “is effectively in contest with
evidence of Mr Buckley is that the undercover areas of the decks (approximately
40% of the Owers-Brown decking and 50% of the
Nakkan decking) have
“performed well” and in his initial report it is stated
“remedial measures would be considered
necessary in exposed areas
to the submission of Owers-Brown, Mr Calandra in his initial report stated that
repair works were only required to the decking
Wilkie is the only expert witness who asserts the decking system needs to be
replaced in its entirety.
Wilkie’s evidence should not be accepted because he expresses his views as
“findings” rather than setting out
observations and opinions. His
opinion that 80-90% of decking boards are damaged is not supported by any
photographic materials or
by Mr Buckley.
Wilkie’s opinion that battens need to be replaced is
“speculative” and does not take into account Mr Weir’s
evidence that the battens are located into the substrate/slab by booker rods.
The evidence of Mr Weir should be accepted.
Wilkie’s assertion that the DABP Act applies to remedial works is
speculative and beyond his area of expertise.
Wilkie has raised a new matter in the final Joint Expert Report, being works in
the decking area proximate to the pool; the pool
handrail; glass panels and
gate. Further, Mr Wilkie has not explained the why the work is necessary
(paragraph [92] of the submissions).
If the Tribunal to was to accept such
evidence it would be “effectively accepting that Mr Wilkie as the sole
Tribunal of fact
in the case.”
Wilkie’s evidence in the final Joint Expert Report is, in effect, reply
evidence masquerading as evidence in chief and has
“damaged the ability of
the respondents and the Tribunal to scrutinise the evidence under the normal
procedures for applicants
to establish their case” (paragraph [93] of the
submissions).
Wilkie’s evidence that the decking system needs to be entirely replaced is
the “outlier” of the experts, and
there is “significant
danger” in accepting an “outlying expert.”
was Mr Wilkie’s fault no coherent joint expert report was obtained prior
to the final Joint Expert Report, and only the final
Joint Expert Report of 11
June 2024 assists the Tribunal.
the final Joint Expert Report, only Mr Buckley and Mr Calandra agree with each
other in any “substantive” way. Mr Calandra
makes the concession
from his original report that damaged decking boards in the uncovered area
require replacement with synthetic
boards, not timber boards. Mr Wilkie makes no
concessions.
Buckley and Mr Calandra agree that the condition of the decking boards in the
uncovered areas need to be considered separately
from the decking boards in the
covered areas.
Wilkie’s evidence that the DABP Act applies is outside his field of
expertise, and should be rejected. Mr Wilkie is an advocate
in the Owers-Brown
case, and his evidence should be rejected on that basis, although “the
Tribunal need not go that far...it
is sufficient for the Tribunal not to be
persuaded by the reasoning demonstrated in Mr Wilkie’s analysis”
[116] of the submissions).
Buckley and Mr Calandra agree that there is no likelihood of damage to the
membrane when decking boards are replaced. In this regard,
Mr Buckley stated in
the final Joint Expert Report:
“Providing the current batten and waterproofing system is intact and fit
for purpose, the replacement of the current timber
decking with a PVC
alternative decking board could proceed without the need for a design being
sought. That is, there would be no
waterproofing or structural works, nor works
considered to fall under the scope of the
Design and Building Practitioners Act
joint expert evidence at the hearing, Mr Buckley agreed with Mr Calandra in
substance that the damaged decking boards could be
replaced without damaging the
membrane, although “there were risks” (paragraph [119] of the
submissions).
Wilkie’s opinion that battens needed to be replaced, or if decking boards
were replaced there may be damage to the membrane
was “speculative”
in respect of the potential conduct of contractors replacing decking boards. The
evidence that any
battens needed to be replaced was “scant at best.”
Mr Wilkie was “grasping at straws to reach a predetermined outcome
paragraph [125] of the submissions, there is a lengthy dissertation on what is
asserted occurred in cross examination of the experts
at the hearing. The owners
corporation submitted that “the only evidence of battens” in Mr
Wilkie’s report is the
photograph at page 45. No other photographs were
taken. Assessment of one batten is not sufficient to opine that it, or other
need to be replaced. Mr Calandra stated that drilling a booker rod
through a silicone bead was an effective measure or maintaining
a waterproofed
seal. There was no evidence the battens in the deck of the Nakkan property were
not structurally sound, and the waterproofing
membrane to both decks was
different. There was no basis established to replace the decking on both the
Owers-Brown terrace and the
Nakkan terrace. All experts agreed that aesthetic
issues regarding a mixture of existing timber boards and PVC/synthetic boards
the damaged boards in the uncovered areas did not affect the
structural integrity of the decking board system.
paragraphs [126]-[129] of the submissions the owners corporation sets out its
proposed scope of works (if the Owers-Brown and Nakkan
proceedings are not
dismissed), which is based on the “high degree of agreement” between
Mr Buckey and Mr Calandra. That
scope of works (at [129]), like the scope of
works propounded by Owers-Brown in Annexure A of the Owers-Brown submissions, is
precisely replicated in one of the expert’s scope of works, but has
been drafted by the lawyers. The proposed scope is, in
essence, that damaged
timber decking boards are to be removed and replaced by PVC substitute decking
boards, with “all works
to be undertaken carefully to preserve the
concrete render and waterproofing membrane.”
Owers-Brown Claim for Damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act in Respect of Her
Legal Costs
essence, the owners corporation submits that legal costs are distinct from
damages for breach of statutory duty under s 106(5)
of the SSM Act, and relies
upon the Appeal Panel authority of
The Owners-Strata Plan No 21563 v
[2023] NSWCATAP 326
in respect of the distinction between
“costs” and “damages”. The submissions at [137] give a
detailed exposition
of why the authorities referred to in the Owers-Brown
submissions are factually and legally distinct from Owers-Brown’s claim
that legal costs are recoverable damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act.
paragraphs [140]-[147] of the submissions, it is submitted that the Tribunal
should “preserve” its “jurisdiction
and processes” under
s 60 of the NCAT Act and r 38 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
paragraphs [148]-[151] it is submitted that, even if legal costs were damages
recoverable under s 106(5) of the SSM Act, there
is no evidence of what has been
paid (or payable) and accordingly, no evidence to establish loss.
paragraphs [152]-[153] it is submitted that Nakkan does not make a claim for
damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act.
The Claim Under s 150 of
the SSM Act and the Owners-Corporation Being “Released from Its
Undertaking” not to Register
the By-law Passed at the Meeting on 30 March
paragraphs [145]-[179] of the submissions, the owners corporation asserts
Owers-Brown
and Nakkan “abandoned” any claims under ss 24 and 150 of the SSM Act
on the first day of the hearing. However,
they did not “release” the
owners corporation from its “undertaking” that the owners
corporation would not
register the By-law.
owners corporation makes a submission that there is “utility” in the
Tribunal considering the unregistered By-law
and “seeks release”
from its “undertaking” not to register the By-law.
is difficult to understand the submissions in circumstances where:
(a) The Tribunal has no general power to make declarations.
(b) Even if there was an “undertaking” to the Tribunal rather than a
mere assertion that the By-law would not be registered
whilst the proceedings
were on foot, the By-law passed at the meeting on 30 March 2023 cannot be
registered. It has gone stale.
(c) There is no explanation as to how the Tribunal has the power to make orders
under s 232 and/or 241 of the SSM Act to “release”
corporation from its “undertaking”.
(d) The claim by the owners corporation was not the subject of its own
proceedings. Rather, it was raised in the context of its opposition
orders sought by Owers-Brown and Nakkan.
submissions of the owners corporation at paragraphs [149]-[179] appear to invite
the Tribunal to give a commentary on the purported
benefit of a By-law (which
cannot be registered because of the lapse of time) and would have to be put
again to a general meeting
of the owners corporation. It is entirely unclear
from the submissions as to how this would be within the power of the Tribunal
why it would have any utility.
submission is made that the passing of the Resolution on 30 March 2023 (even in
the absence of registration of a By-law) is a special
resolution that relieves
the owners corporation from any obligation to repair and maintain the timber
decking proximate to Lots 3
Submissions in Reply
Owers-Brown
Owers-Brown
reply submissions are dated 30 September 2024. The comprise of 14 pages.
is unnecessary to set out the submissions that repeat, in a slightly different
form, the submissions in chief.
[2]-[12] of the reply submissions deal with the issue of whether the terrace
timber decking is common property or lot property.
The Tribunal has previously
made findings on that issue, and so there is no utility to set out the reply
submissions.
[13]-[31] deal with the distinction between ss 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act.
Owers-Brown submits that there has been no
election only to rely on s 106(1) of
the SSM Act, and it has been clear from the way the case has been run that
Owers-Brown seeks
replacement of the decking system. The submission refer to an
overlap between ss 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act. In that regard, authorities
Proprietors of Strata Plan No 6522 v Furney
[1976] 1 NSWLR
submissions do not definitively argue whether or not the timber decking system
is a fixture. In essence, Owers-Brown submits it
makes no difference, because
the condition of the decking is sufficiently defective that the whole decking
system needs to be replaced.
[32]-[52] deal with the owners corporation’s evidence about the expert
evidence. It is submitted that Mr Wilkie’s
evidence should be accepted
over Mr Calandra’s. Most of the submissions repeat what has been referred
to previously in these
reasons. It is submitted that Mr Wilkie is not the
“outlier” in respect of damage to the waterproofing membrane of the
slab when replacement of decking timbers are performed, with Mr Buckley agreeing
with important aspects of Mr Wilkie’s evidence.
It is submitted that there
is an inconsistency between the opinion of Mr Calandra expressed in the
“first joint expert report”
and the final Joint Expert Report.
[53]-[55] refer to the issue of Ms Owers-Brown’s legal costs being damages
recoverable under s 106 (5) of the SSM
Act. Owers-Brown submits the only damages
being sought are her costs up to the commencement of proceedings, and thereafter
would be dealt with under s 60 of the NCAT Act. It is submitted that the
legal costs for removing a caveat are recoverable under
Property Act 1900
(NSW) (RP Act), relying upon
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
[2009] NSWSC 362
, and s 106(5) of the SSM Act is
“analogous” to s 74P of the RP Act.
submission is made in reply to the owners corporation’s submission that
there is no evidence quantifying any loss or damage;
nor do the reply
submissions of Owers-Brown make any submission dealing with the Appeal Panel
decision in
The Owners-Strata Plan No 21563 v Rutherford
[2023] NSWCATAP
[56]-[62] deal with the claim under s 150 of the SSM Act in respect of the
Resolution to pass a By-law making Lot owners
responsible for repair and
maintenance of timber decking on 30 March 2023. Owers-Brown “does not
understand” the owners
corporation’s submissions on that issue. By
reason of s 141(3) of the SSM Act, the By-law cannot be registered. Owers-Brown
sought relief in the Tribunal proceedings during the period it could be
registered. It was raised on the first day of the hearing
orders under ss 24
and/or 150 of the SSM Act were “not pressed”.
it is submitted that Ms Owers-Brown’s credit is “not relevant to any
issue in dispute” and criticisms of
her in the owners corporation’s
submissions are unfounded.
reply submissions were filed on 25 October 2024 and comprise of 7 pages.
[3]-[11] refer to the issue of whether the timber decking is common property or
Lot property. In light of the previous
findings of the Tribunal on this issue,
it is unnecessary to detail the submissions.
[12]-[19] refer to the Appeal Panel decision in
. It is submitted
that the principles in Gittins apply to this dispute.
[21]-[34] deal with the type of repairs. It is submitted that the evidence of Mr
Buckley demonstrates the decking system
was “defective from day 1”
and allows the build-up of moisture damaging decking boards due to inadequate
ventilation
and drainage.
submits, without reference to any authorities, that the decking is “simply
one component of the floor.” It is not
clear as to whether or not it is
submitted the decking system is a fixture. It is submitted that the decking
“does not exist
independently of the concrete slab and
waterproofing,” and there is a restaurant (commercial Lot) situated
submits the repairs proposed by Mr Calandra are a “minimalist method of
repair” which will lead to further disputes
in the future because the
inadequate design and performance of the decking system will lead to further
deterioration of the decking
boards, which can only be properly dealt with by
replacement of the decking system.
submits that Mr Wilkie’s evidence that a “partial repair”
cannot be done in accordance with the DABP Act
or warranted by a builder should
be accepted, and any breach of the integrity of the waterproofing membrane will
“likely cause
extensive damage to the restaurant below.” It is
submitted “the whole of the respondent’s submission regarding
versus replacement becomes redundant.”
paragraphs [35]-[38] it is submitted that Nakkan’s claim for damages
“is maintained”. No discussion is proffered
regarding the legal
authorities referred to in the owners corporation’s submissions.
paragraphs [39]-[40] the submissions refer to the “registration of
By-law”. It is submitted that the owners corporation’s
criticism of
the conduct of Ms Owers-Brown is not levelled at Mr Nakkan, and “there is
no basis on which the Nakkan interest
should be diminished or any of their
rights to an order in relation to the breach by the respondent of section 106 as
a result of
the respondent’s undertaking in relation to the proposed
By-law”. No submission is made about the operation of s 141(3)
Breach of the Duty Under s 106(1) or (2) of the SSM Act and
What Repair Orders Are Appropriate?
Determination
of these issues involves making findings about various sub-issues. It is
unnecessary to make a finding about every single
issue raised by the parties in
the submissions, but legal and factual issues sufficient to determine the real
issues in dispute (ss
36(1) and (3) of the NCAT Act).
Decking System On Level 1 Proximate to Lots 3 and 4 a Fixture, And If So, Does
an object is a fixture is a complex issue that has been the subject of
considerable judicial consideration (e.g.
May v Ceedive
[2006] NSWCA 396
National Australia Bank v Blacker
[2000] FCA 1458
Power Rental Op Co
Australia, LLC v Forge Group Power Pty Ltd (in liq) (receivers and managers
[2017] NSWCA 8
Saunders v South Canberra Holdings Pty
[2023] ACAT 71.)
an item becomes a fixture is a question of fact in the particular circumstances,
and involves consideration of matters including
the intention of the parties;
the degree of attachment to the real property; and whether there was intention
for the item to remain
on the real property for a long period or short period.
, a mechanical exhaust ventilation system in a strata building was
held to be a fixture.
this matter, the decking system is attached to the slab by battens which are
either screwed or bolted into the slab, and the decking
board are attached to
the battens. As discussed previously, the decking system was in place when the
strata scheme was registered.
Tribunal is satisfied that the decking system is a fixture, and (as discussed
previously) forms part of the common property.
the waterproofing membrane that has been applied between the decking system and
the concrete slab is not a fixture. It is
part of the concrete slab and is not
affixed in the same manner as the decking system.
The Duty Under
Section 106(2) of the SSM Act Regarding Fixtures
remains a critical authority.
involved a Lot owner who owned a number of lots in a strata building, and sought
to lease one of those lots for commercial cooking/food
takeaway. There was an
existing mechanical exhaust system in the building. To be able to lease the lot
for the purpose of operating
a commercial cooking/food takeaway shop, Thoo
needed to satisfy the local Council that there was adequate ventilation in
of the cooking facilities being connected to the mechanical exhaust
system. The owners corporation argued the current mechanical
exhaust system was
operating effectively, but was at capacity in circumstances where there were
already a number of commercial cooking/food
takeaway shops in the building. Thoo
argued that to comply with the duty under the (relevantly identical) predecessor
provision of
s 106(2) of the SSM Act, the owners corporation had to replace the
existing system, or install a supplementary system, with a greater
capacity so that he could meet the local Council requirements.
NSW Court of Appeal allowed the appeal from the trial judge’s decision
that the owners corporation was in breach of its
duty by not replacing or
supplementing the exhaust system.
AJA wrote the leading judgement. Barrett JA agreed, but published additional
“observations.” Preston CJ of LEC
agreed with Tobias AJA and Barrett
JA’s observations.
AJA stated (in respect of the duties under the predecessor provisions of ss
106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act) at [128]-[130]:
“128 There is a clear relationship between subsections 62(1) and (2). The
former applies to any part of the common property;
the latter to any fixtures or
fittings comprised in the common property. However, it does not follow that a
fixture or fitting that
is not in a state of good and serviceable repair must be
renewed or replaced.
129 The first obligation on the owners corporation is to keep the fixtures and
fittings in such a state. But if that cannot be achieved,
then the defective
fixture or fitting must be renewed or replaced subject, of course, to s 62(3).
The point is that s 62(3) is only
engaged when the fixture or fitting can no
longer be kept in a state of good and serviceable repair. This is consistent
with McColl
JA’s dicta in
that both subsections are directed
and, I would add, only directed, to the circumstances where a fixture or fitting
is no longer operating
effectively or at all, or has fallen into disrepair.
130 I would therefore accept the submission of the Owners Corporation that
common property fixtures or fittings must be renewed or
replaced under s 62(2)
only when they are no longer operating effectively or have fallen into disrepair
to the point where their
renewal or replacement is called for as they can no
longer be kept in a state of good and serviceable repair pursuant to s 62(1).
Once it was found, as his Honour did, that the system had not fallen into
disrepair but was operating according to its original design
capacity, there
could be no breach of s 62(2) by reason of the refusal of the Owners Corporation
to replace the system. Accordingly,
in my respectful opinion the statement by
his Honour at [115] of his reasons that there was a specific duty on the Owners
Corporation
under s 62(2) to keep common property operating efficiently so it
could be used and enjoyed by all lot owners, subject only to the
passing of a
special resolution for its exclusive use, is too broad.”
JA stated (at [7]-[8]):
“7 Generally speaking, renewal or replacement of fixtures or fittings
will, of its nature, involve improvement because old
will be superseded by new.
It may also entail alteration or addition, in that the new or replacement item
may be larger than or otherwise
different from the old. To the extent that
alteration or addition is, in that way, incidental to renewal or replacement, s
both requires and allows it. But s 62(2) does not, at a particular time,
impose a positive requirement for superior functionality,
compared with that
inherent in the nature and quality of the relevant part of common property as
most recently fixed in the way I
have mentioned.
8 In the present case, the duty imposed by s 62(2) in relation to the mechanical
exhaust ventilation system did not require, at any
given time, any alteration or
addition for the purpose of improvement or enhancement. The duty was discharged
by renewal or replacement
that produced performance and functional efficiency at
least equivalent to those that had pertained at the time that was, in the
to which I have referred, the then most recent reference point. While the degree
of performance and functional efficiency as
at that most recent reference point
continued, s 62(2) was not the source of any duty to act.”
can be discerned from the above, there is a relationship between s 106(1) and
(2) of the SSM Act. Section 106(2) is not considered
in isolation, but in
conjunction with s 106(1). If an item of common property is in a state of
disrepair, the owners corporation
has a duty to repair it., whether or not it is
a fixture. The issue is whether that repair involves a “renewal or
replacement”
of the fixture, rather than a repair of the existing fixture
that does not involve renewal or replacement. If it is a fixture, the
only “renewed or replaced” in its totality if it can no longer be
kept in a state of good and serviceable
repair. If so, there is no positive
requirement that the renewal or replacement achieves “superior
functionality,” but
it has to achieve functionality that is “at
least” equivalent to the fixture that is being renewed or replaced.
dispute in this matter also has to take into account the waterproofing of the
slab upon which the decking system is connected.
If repair to the decking system
will cause another part of the common property to fall into a state of
disrepair, then the interaction
between ss 106(1) and (2) means that it may be
appropriate to renew or replace the fixture to ensure the non-fixture component
the common property remains in a state of good repair. Further, if there is
item of common property that is not a fixture, and is
not in a state of good
repair in breach of s 106(1), then repair of that item may cause an attached
fixture to be renewed or replaced,
even if that fixture (if considered in
isolation) could be kept in a state of good repair by conducting repairs that
did not extend
to renewing or replacing the fixture.
duty under s 106(1) was summarised by Leeming JA in
The Owners-Strata Plan No
2661 v Selkirk
[2024] NSWSC 760
as follows: (at [16]-[21])
Brereton J influentially analysed the duty owed by an owners corporation under s
62(1) of the predecessor statute, which in this
respect is materially identical
to s 106(1), in
Seiwa Pty Ltd v Owners Strata Plan 35042
12 BPR 23,673
Section 62(1) imposes on an owners corporation a duty to maintain, and keep in a
state of good and serviceable repair, the common
property. That duty is not one
to use reasonable care to maintain and keep in good repair the common property,
nor one to use best
endeavours to do so, nor one to take reasonable steps to do
so, but a strict duty to maintain and keep in repair.
His Honour went on to explain how that duty required maintenance before a
malfunction occurred, such that:
as soon as something in the common property is no longer operating effectively
or at all, or has fallen into disrepair, there has
been a breach of the s 62
An appeal was dismissed:
The Owners SP 35042 v Seiwa Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 272
13 BPR 24,789.
Subsequently, speaking of Brereton
J’s decision at first instance, in
Riley v The Owners - Strata Plan
[2012] NSWCA 410
Ward JA said, with the agreement of Macfarlan
and Barrett JJA:
However, as made clear in
, as soon as something in the common
property is no longer operating effectively or at all, or has fallen into
disrepair, there has
been a breach of the s 62 duty.
Brereton J’s analysis was also cited with evident approval in
Brotherhood of St Laurence v Sarina Investments Pty Ltd
[2024] VSCA 46
Brereton J also dismissed the submissions on behalf of
the owners corporation that it was not to the point that the owners corporation
had used all reasonable steps, or that the lot owner was guilty of contributory
negligence: at [21]. This aspect of
was approved in
The Owners -
Strata Plan No 74232 v Tezel
It is convenient to describe the duties imposed upon an owners corporation by ss
106(1) and (2) as “strict”. That adjective
conveniently captures the
fact that they are not discharged by the exercise of reasonable care. Nor,
consequently, does
Civil Liability Act 2002
(NSW) apply.
Obviously, they are neither universal nor unqualified. The duties may be
disapplied by s 106(3), and they may be qualified
by s 106(4) and (7)...
Glenquarry Park Investments Pty Ltd v Hegyesi
[2019] NSWSC 425
), Parker J gave a detailed analysis of the authorities
regarding ss 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act (in particular
Strata Plan 10308
63 NSWLR 449
[2005] NSWCA 246
Stolfa v Owners Strata Plan 4366 and Ors
[2009] NSWSC 589
(2010) 15 BPR 28,253
[2010] NSWCA 218
; and Thoo.
J’s analysis of
is as follows (at [63]-[64];
and [71]-[78]):
“The difference in the approaches of the Judges who sat in Ridis lies in
the degree to which sub-section (2) should be read
as being controlled by the
obligation in sub-section (1). On the view expressed by Hodgson JA, the
obligation in sub-section (2)
to renew or replace an item of common property
arises only when it is “necessary” or “appropriate” to
so as part of complying with the obligation to maintain the common property
in good serviceable repair under sub-section (1). I do
not read his Honour as
deciding between whether the repair or replacement is “necessary” or
only merely “appropriate.”
Tobias JA expressly said that something less than necessity was required and
instanced the removal of a reasonably foreseeable safety
risk as falling within
sub-section (2). But although McColl JA did not address the question in quite
the same way, her view at [169]
was that the relevant fixture or fitting needed
to have deteriorated, to have been damaged or to be operating inadequately.
that the majority in the case rejected the idea that the safety glass
should have been upgraded as part of a risk assessment, I consider
the view of
McColl JA best reflects the ratio of the Court’s decision. I think that
Tobias JA accepted that in the later case
of Thoo, which is discussed below.
There is force in the contention that practicality requires allowing a degree of
judgment and latitude to an owners’ corporation
in determining how far to
go with repair and replacement work in a maintenance context. Often, the
replacement of an old and obsolete
item may be cheaper and more effective in the
long run than continuing to try to patch it up. There is also a textual basis
for allowing
a degree of latitude to an owners’ corporation in deciding
what and when should be replaced. Maintenance is not necessarily
confined to
responding to a breakdown; the term usually also includes preventative
maintenance, that is, replacing something which
has reached the end of its
service life before it fails:
Hamilton v National Coal Board
Greetings Oxford Koala Hotel Pty Ltd v Oxford Square Investments
(1989) 18 NSWLR 33
at 40 per Young J.
On the other hand, the purpose of s 65A was clearly to protect minority
in a building from having the costs of enhancement imposed on them
by the majority. The minority may prefer to continue to eke out
the existing
facilities even if in the longer run, that may prove more expensive or
inefficient. They may have less money to spend,
or their priorities may be
different. The legislative purpose behind s 65A could arguably be subverted if
unnecessary costs could
be imposed on the minority at the discretion of the
majority just because some, much less extensive, repair or maintenance is
The lift in the building the subject of these proceedings illustrates this
tension very well. It is clear from the Pitfield report
that it would be
possible to continue to patch the lift up; but that may well not be the most
economical or practical course. On
the other hand, the replacement of the lift,
which the majority owners now characterise as a form of repairs and maintenance
s 62, was originally conceived as part of an overall plan for the
refurbishment of the building which was undoubtedly, taken as a
enhancement.
In my view, it is implicit in what Tobias AJA said in
obligation in s 62(2) to renew or replace items of common property is limited by
a concept of reasonable necessity. His
Honour stated at [129] that the provision
engaged where the item can no longer be kept in a state of good
and serviceable repair. He went on to say that the provision is
directed to circumstances where the item “is no longer operating
effectively or at all, or has fallen in to disrepair.”
The passages I have quoted from the judgment of Senior Member Ross (at [53]
above) are expressed in terms of the Tribunal not being
satisfied that the works
in question were necessary to comply with the Strata Corporation’s repair
obligations under s 62.
In expressing herself in this way, Senior Member Ross
may have reversed the onus of proof. No doubt if the work the subject of the
resolution fell within s 62 then the Strata Corporation had a legal obligation
to undertake it. But the majority owners had no obligation,
in responding to Ms
Hegyesi’s application, to demonstrate affirmatively that s 62 applied. It
was for Ms Hegyesi as applicant
in the Tribunal to show that the resolution fell
foul of s 65A.
In my view, Senior Member Ross should, strictly speaking, have asked herself
whether the works the subject of the resolution fall
within s 65A. But counsel
for the majority owners did not identify reversal of the onus as a ground of
appeal against Senior Member
Ross’ decision. The case was argued before me
by reference to the evidence and without any submissions from either party as
onus. This is understandable because in my view the question comes down to one
of statutory construction based on facts which
are not in dispute.
I think that, despite the “finding” by the Tribunal based on the
position taken by the parties in the proceedings that
the replacement of the
lift was “required,” the facts make it clear that the disputed works
associated with the lift
were not reasonably necessary in the sense implicit in
. The Pitfield report shows that it would be possible to continue to
maintain the existing lift and that it can be expected to operate
for many years
into the future. There is nothing in the evidence which establishes that a new
lift car is required, much less a new
lift shaft.
On the facts, the lift is operating in accordance with its design requirements
and can be kept operating into the future. It has
not reached the point where it
“can no longer be kept in a state of good and serviceable repair” to
use the language
of Tobias AJA in
. In the language of Barrett JA,
the existing functionality of the lift can be maintained without renewing or
replacing it. Installing
a new glass lift would be an improvement, not the
maintenance or reinstatement of the functionality of the existing lift.”
at paragraphs [111]-[112], Parker J stated:
Senior Member Ross appears to have considered that the majority owners are
responsible for the impasse about repairing the building.
But on any view the
Tribunal is not entitled to order an owners’ corporation to do things just
because the Tribunal considers
it desirable to do so. If, as seems to have been
assumed, the justification for the order was that the Strata Corporation had not
complied with its obligations under s 62, then the Tribunal’s order could
no further than the minimum necessary to comply with that obligation
(emphasis added)
In the present case, the Tribunal did not ask itself what needed to be done so
as to order to achieve a minimal compliance with s
62(1) and then frame orders
accordingly. In my view this means that there was no proper statutory foundation
for the orders.
relevant issue in dispute in
was whether an internal
mechanical lift in the strata building (constructed in 1936 and not complying
with current building standards)
needed to be replaced with a glass lift. If the
lift was replaced, an adjacent wooden staircase would need to be replaced with
stairs and other major structural changes to the building. The only
expert evidence regarding the lift (referred to at paras [51]-[51])
was that the
lift was operating effectively and if continued to be serviced regularly would
continue to operate until, eventually,
spare parts could not be obtained.
J found (on appeal from a Tribunal decision) that the Tribunal had erred in the
finding that the lift (and staircase) needed
to be replaced for the owners
corporation to comply with its duty to keep and maintain common property in a
state of good repair
under the predecessor of s 106, and did not need a special
resolution to approve the works under the predecessor of s108 of the SSM
There was consideration of whether the performance of “preventative
maintenance” would be open to the owners corporation
as in incidental
power under
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
but that issue did not require resolution as replacement of the lift was not
reasonably necessary (paragraphs [80]-[88]).
was also a separate issue in
involving the scope of repair
orders made by the Tribunal, not only in respect of the lift but other aspects
of repairing common
property. Parker J held that the orders (which involved
directing the owners corporation to undertake expert investigations, and
perform works with no scope of works being identified in the orders) were too
broad, uncertain and indeterminate to form the
basis of an appropriate remedial
respect of the expert evidence in this matter, critical issues for determination
are how the battens are located into the concrete
slab; and whether in respect
of replacement of decking boards, battens need to be removed which will
compromise the waterproofing
membrane of the concrete slab; or that membrane
will be otherwise damaged during repair works or otherwise needs to be replaced.
All of the experts agree some decking boards need to be replaced, because they
have fallen into a sufficient state of disrepair.
There is disagreement on the
issue of how many decking boards need to be replaced (particularly the
distinction between the covered
and uncovered areas). However, a critical
disagreement is whether battens upon which the decking boards sit need to be
removed and
How are the Battens Located Into the
is a factual dispute as to whether battens are located into the slab by bugle
screws (which have screw head) which penetrated
thorough a packer underneath the
batten held by an anchor within the concrete slab (oral evidence of Mr Wilkie
T:26/6/24:P 21:L 9-41)
or threaded booker rods (which allow the batten to be
lifted and removed without removing the booker rods located into the concrete
slab-the evidence of Mr Wilkie, which Mr Calandra relies upon-see, for example
T:26/6/24: P 17: L 11-17).
was extensive cross examination of Mr Wilke and Mr Calandra on this issue. It is
unnecessary to set out that cross examination
in detail. Mr Calandra had not set
out in any detail in his report how the battens were located into the slab, and
he did not physically
inspect the battens. It was submitted by Owers-Brown that
Mr Calandra had, in one of the attempts at providing a joint expert report
to the final Joint Expert Report, Mr Calandra had accepted that battens needed
to be replaced. However, it was not clear from
the cross examination of Mr
Calandra at the hearing what specific concession he was alleged to have made in
an earlier joint expert
report such that the Tribunal should not accept that his
opinion in the final Joint Expert Report was that the battens were located
the slab by booker rods; and that battens did not need to be replaced.
issue of whether battens need to be replaced when damaged decking boards are
replaced is considered separately.
was limited questioning of Mr Buckley on this issue. There was some questioning
of Mr Buckley, but in the context of whether
it would be necessary to remove one
or more battens when replacing the timber decking. The evidence was as follows
(T: 26/6/24: P
77: L:24-51):
Q: Is it therefore the case that despite having described the practice of
drilling thorough-basically pushing a bolt or screwing
a bolt through a silicone
bead to maintain a seal, you don’t know whether or not that would or would
not comply with the-
Wilkie: It would not comply with today’s standards and it wouldn’t
have complied with the standards back then. I’ve
actually never seen a
bulge screw puncture a membrane like that in accordance with Australian
Q: Mr Calandra, is it the case that removing a bugle screw and then using a
sealant of either silicone or epoxy or whatever into
the same hole, is that a
process that maintains the integrity of a waterproofing membrane?
Calandra: Yes.
Q: And is it fair to say Mr Buckley that you don’t express a view on that
Buckley: Other than understanding how a bugle screw works, because they’re
used in flooring all the time, I have no idea how
a timber bugle screw is being
screwed into concrete. I still don’t understand that. That doesn’t
work. So the silicone
would be sealing, not the bugle screw, the bugle screw
doesn’t screw into concrete. It would be screwing into some sort of
Wilkie: Yes, that’s what I said in my report.
Buckley: So the silicone is only a very small part of that process. I understand
fixings of battens and (inaudible) missing piece
of this puzzle that we’re
all discussion would be my opinion.
Wilkie: And just to let you know that the Design and Building
Practitioner’s Act (inaudible) element of the building, the
Building Practitioners Act
needs to kick in, as I said, because it’s like
having a water balloon, you’ve (inaudible) that water balloon, just
(inaudible)
the membrane.
Immediately
after this evidence (at T:26/6/24: P 78: L 1-17) Mr Calandra described how the
booker rods were located into slabs to
be sufficiently waterproofed, but that
even if bugle head screws were used there was “no evidence those bugle
heads...failed
in any way”.
do not accept the evidence of Mr Weir (adopted by Mr Calandra) that booker rods
were used to locate the battens into the concrete
evidence of Mr Weir relates to events that occurred more than 10 years ago. His
evidence in chief on this issue in his affidavit
was brief, as well as his oral
evidence when cross examined by Nakkan. There is no contemporaneous
documentation that Mr Weir points
to, such as photographs or invoices from the
manufacturer or suppliers, that refer to booker rods being used.
Owers-Brown and Nakkan did not directly challenge Mr Weir on his evidence on
this issue, Owers-Brown certainly challenged
Mr Calandra in cross examination
during the joint expert evidence at the hearing 26 June 2024 about how the
battens were located
into the slab, as well as Mr Wilkie giving his oral
evidence to explain what he saw when he removed decking boards and looked at
batten, and why he believed the battens were located into the slab by way of
bugle screws attaching into anchor points.
accept Mr Wilkie’s detailed evidence explaining his opinion as to why
bugle screws have been used. In this regard, the manual
of the manufacturer
(Woodform) referred to in the report of Mr Wilkie and the affidavit of Mr
Buckley (dated 24 August 2024; paragraphs
[21]-[22]; p 1144 of the Court Book)
show screws, with Mr Buckley stating, “the full diagram shows the boards
are affixed to
a timber structure underneath by screws”.
Mr Schneller, when cross examined at the hearing regarding his replacement of
timber decking with tiles refers in detail
to having viewed battens being
located into the concrete slab by “screws” (T:4/6/24: P22-23). There
was no mention of
bolts, nor was there any re-examination of Mr Schneller to
suggest that he needed to clarify what was meant by using the word
Are the Battens Sufficiently Damaged That
It is Necessary to Remove Them?
is a critical factual issue in dispute.
Irrespective
of whether the battens are located into the slab by booker rods or bugle screws,
the Tribunal must determine whether
there is sufficient evidence that some
battens need to be replaced in the course of replacing decking boards.
they do not need to be replaced, then much of Mr Wilkie’s evidence about
the waterproofing membrane being compromised and
needing to be replaced falls
Tribunal does not accept Mr Wilkie’s evidence that there is a significant
risk that tradespersons replacing decking boards
(whilst the battens remain in
place) will damage the membrane. There is a risk, but as Mr Calandra identified
in cross examination,
that risk is speculative. Mr Buckley his opinion as being
“somewhere in-between” Mr Wilkie and Mr Calandra, accepting
was “completely possible...to remove decking carefully with minimal risk,
not no risk...completely possible, but absolutely
inherent risk”
(T:26/6/24:P 97: L 1-21).
Wilkie’s opinion regarding the risk of damaging the membrane is made in
the context of his belief that battens are sufficiently
unsound that they cannot
support decking boards being attached to them, and need to be replaced.
essence, Mr Wilkie opines that battens need to be removed because they cannot
support new decking boards being affixed to them.
In his view, when you remove
the battens the membrane protecting the concrete slab will be punctured
(‘pop like a balloon’)
and the whole membrane must be replaced.
Mr Wilkie’s opinion on the condition of the battens is not detailed by any
extensive invasive investigations.
his report of 8 November 2023, Mr Wilkie had removed some decking boards and
viewed and photographed 1 batten (pp 15- 16 of the
report; Court Book p 1223,
with larger photographs at pp 57-58 of the report (Court Book pp 1264-1265).
Wilkie’s comment about the one batten he inspected (which was located in
the uncovered area of the balcony deck proximate
to the Owers-Brown lot) are
brief. Although he refers to the substrate area being “damp to all areas
that could be viewed,”
his specific comment regarding the batten viewed is
as follows (p 16 report; Court Book p 1223):
“The battens ran north to south and measured 70 mm x 35 mm, with a black
flashing installed on the top face. The gap between
the bottom of the batten and
the substrate was 10 mm.
A. Although only a small area could be observed, the flashing had no signs of
deterioration.
B. Although only a small area could be observed,
the batten appeared to have
no deterioration
.” (emphasis added)
is no reference in the report to Mr Wilkie having touched the batten and it
being soft to touch.
cross examination at the hearing, Mr Wilkie asserted that there were
“multiple areas” where he was able to gain access
and look at the
battens. However, he did not identify those areas in his report (other than the
small area where photographs were
Calandra stated at the hearing he believed there was no evidence any batten was
not structurally sound or had not lost its structural
high point of Mr Wilkie’s evidence regarding current battens not being
structurally adequate was that, on his inspection,
battens were “soft to
touch.” However, there is no detailed evidence in his report about
touching battens and that they
were “soft to touch;” nor was the
evidence he gave at the hearing in examination and cross examination detailed on
how many battens were “touched” by him; where they were
“touched” and how that demonstrates that the batten
is structurally
insufficient to accept a decking board fixing on top of it.
cross examination at the hearing (T:26/6/24: P 80: L 40-42) Mr Wilke stated that
he “made contact with several battens”.
However, as discussed
previously, that evidence was vague, and was not referred to in any detail in
his expert report of 8 November
the issue of the structural integrity of existing battens to take a decking
board fixing, Mr Buckley stated as follows: (T:26/6/24:
“So for the moisture and swelling of the decking boards to fail the
decking board itself before it pulled the screw fixtures,
which were smallish
gauge screw fixing through the batten, would actually make me believe that the
battens may actually be structurally
adequate to take a screw fixing.
That’s not a comment on the waterproofing or the appropriateness of any
other regards, but just in terms of the ability to
take a new screw fixing, I
think the battens undercover are highly likely to be structurally sound in terms
of taking a new screw
fixing and I think that it’s probable that a large
proportion of the exposed timber battens would also take a screw fixing,
on the performance of the current screw fixings under considerable
Buckley stated (at T: 26/6/24; P 37; L 48-50 and the following page) that Mr
Wilkie’s comment that battens were “soft
to touch” was a
“concern”, but that was not show up in the photographs.
debate about whether battens were “soft to touch” and whether one or
more of them were not sufficiently structurally
unsound that they could not
support replacement decking boards and needed to be removed was revisited
towards the end of joint expert
evidence at the hearing on 26 June 2025. The
relevant passage is T: 26/6/24: PP 74-75.
Calandra again stated that, in his opinion, the battens were sufficiently
structurally sound for replacement decking boards to
be attached. Mr Wilkie
remained of the opinion they were not.
Buckley, in an entirely fair and balanced way, said the issue was not
straightforward. He stated that he had not seen any evidence
that battens
require replacement, but that Mr Wilkie’s “recollection” that
battens were “soft to touch”
was a “concern.” He
accepted that if a batten is “soft to touch” it is not structurally
Calandra and Mr Buckey agreed that it would be prudent for a builder undertaking
decking board replacement to inspect the battens
and form their own view about
the structural integrity of the battens after the decking boards were
conundrum is that, in my view, Mr Wilkie’s evidence about battens being
“soft to touch” was vague. His expert
report did not clearly state
that he had inspected a number of battens and they were “soft to
touch” is not set out in
his report referred to previously in this
decision. There is only photographic evidence of a section of one batten, and Mr
stated that “although only a small area could be observed, the
batten appeared to have no deterioration.”
applicable principles regarding factual findings are well established, and
emanate from the High Court decision in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362. As Gordon J stated in
(2017) 340 ALR 368
and [18] (citations omitted):
“[15] However, the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or
the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question
whether an issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal...
[18] The tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of the occurrence or existence
of a fact before it can be found. Where direct proof
is not available and
satisfaction of the civil standard depends on inference, “there must be
something more than mere conjecture,
guesswork or surmise” —
there must be more than “conflicting inferences of equal degrees of
probability so that
the choice between them is [a] mere matter of
conjecture.” An inference will be no more than conjecture unless some
found which positively suggests, or provides a reason in the
circumstances particular to the case, that a specific event happened
specific state of affairs existed.
Ultimately,
I am not persuaded that there is sufficient evidence to find that any battens
are currently sufficiently structurally
unsound that they cannot support
replacement decking boards and need to be removed. Mr Wilkie’s evidence on
this issue is not
sufficiently detailed, when considered in the context of Mr
Calandra’s evidence and Mr Buckley’s evidence. I accept that
possible one or more of them are structurally unsound, but that rises no higher
than conjecture.
is not sufficient evidence to draw an inference that battens need to be replaced
in the course of replacing decking boards.
accept that there is evidence from all experts that the timber decking system
installed by the builder has deficiencies in respect
of ventilation, drainage
and access. However, the evidence of the experts on the deficiencies generally
does not obviate from the
critical factual finding as to whether Owers-Brown and
Nakkan have provided sufficient evidence that battens are currently sufficiently
structurally unsound that they need to be replaced.
also accept the evidence of Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley that the timber decking
in the covered areas is not in a state of significant
deterioration.
the Tribunal has to make factual findings in the context of the applicable legal
test under s 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act.
As the authorities of
state, if it is a fixture and replacement of the fixture
is sought, the Tribunal has to be satisfied that the fixture has gone past
point of being able to be repaired; and otherwise, the keeping of common
property in a state of good repair (including preventative
maintenance) is
constrained by the concept of reasonable necessity. It is not the
“optimal” repair, but the repair that
is the minimal necessary to
comply with the duty under s 106(1) that is the focus of the enquiry.
submissions and at the hearing, Counsel for Owers-Brown referred to an apparent
concession by Mr Calandra that battens needed to
be replaced in joint expert
reports that predated the final Joint Expert Report.
Tribunal has referred to the difficulties in getting the experts to prepare a
concluded and concise joint expert report previously
in this decision. Contrary
to the submissions of Owers-Brown and the owners corporation, the Tribunal does
not propose to explore,
or make findings about, why there were
difficulties.
submissions of Owers-Brown and the comments of Owers-Brown’s Counsel at
the hearing on 26 June 2024 about Mr Calandra having
previously made a
“concession” that battens must be replaced in earlier joint expert
reports did not clearly take the
Tribunal, nor Mr Calandra, to that purported
concession, or explored any proposition with Mr Calandra that the opinions he
had expressed
in the final Joint Expert Report or during oral evidence at the
the Court Book, three purported joint expert reports are included. One is from 3
June 2024; one is from 4 June 2024, and the final
Joint Expert Report (the
comprehensive document where experts have addressed the questions posed by the
Tribunal and prepared a Joint
Scott Schedule) is dated 11 June 2024.
report of 3 June 2024 was not signed by Mr Wilkie, and does not incorporate his
opinions. It is signed by Mr Calandra and states
Mr Buckley “agreed by
phone call and email.”
document contains a Scott Schedule, and there are two options for repair. The
extent of the repairs is not replacement of the
whole decking system as opined
by Mr Wilkie. Rather, it is based on the opinions of Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley
regarding the extent
of decking boards that need to be replaced, which is
primarily in the uncovered areas (unlike Mr Wilkie who asserts there is
damage in the covered areas as well).
the report of 3 June 2024, options 1 and 2 are similarly quantified
(approximately $18,500 for Lot 3 and approximately $15,500
for Lot 4). Option 1
involved “timber battens to remain as is” with “minimal
replacement of any rotten battens”
Replacement timber decking would be
used that would have to be milled and stained so the replacement boards would be
as close as
possible to the remaining boards.
report states (in respect of Lot 3, with similar comments about Lot
Whilst we were on site, it was agreed that the preferred option would be to have
a clear defined line leaving all timber decking
boards in place that are
currently undercover and removing and disposing of all timber decking boards and
battens that are exposed
to the elements. These are highlighted within the
attached floor plan highlighted in yellow and to an area that totals 26.5
We have also allowed for minor repairs and replacements as required using the
old timber decking boards that will be salvaged when
they are removed from the
areas in question.
The experts agree that he following scope found within our report titled
‘Joint Report/Scope agreed on site, option 2-Unit
103” would be
required to fulfill this alternative solution, and that being:
The removal and disposal of all timber members covering the timber decking
boards, battens, and all fixings associated encompassing
the timber floorboards
that are open to the elements/non-covered areas to a total are of 34.93 sqm.
To patch and make good or replace the existing membrane on the concrete
The supply and installation of external floor pavers bearings on pots in order
to allow for minimal obstruction for drainage between
the underside of the paver
and the top side of the concrete substrate.
The supply and installation of external floor pavers bearings on pods in order
to allow for minimal obstruction for drainage between
the underside of the paver
and the top side of the concrete substrate.
It was agreed by all experts that option 2 would be a better option for the
strata plan to consider, solely on the basis that this
would result in a defined
line between the covered timber deck area and the remedial work area having a
serviceable floor finish
that would result in a reduced liability for the strata
plan and individual unit owners were maintenance can be carried out to the
subfloor drainage system in place.
Should this option be adopted, we agree that the cost of this works concludes at
$33,482 GST inc.
There is a special consideration that needs to be adopted during the
construction in the event that a building contractor cannot
waterproofing contractor’s certificate where the old and new membranes are
to meet and connect in order to achieve
a compliant and warranted works for a
period of six years post this piece of work being completed.”
respect of this “joint report” (which in essence is a joint report
between Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley) “option
1” is broadly consistent
with Mr Calandra’s scope of works in his report. “Option 2”
clearly involves works
that will require further repair of the waterproofing
membrane, with a new membrane meeting an old membrane. However, the proposed
solution deals with some of the design deficiencies in the decking system
regarding access, ventilation and drainage.
was no clear questioning of Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley about this first
“joint expert report.” It is not an accurate
submission that Mr
Calandra had “agreed” that battens must be removed to repair the
decking. Rather, option 1 discusses
removal only if necessary, and it is clear
from the report and what Mr Calandra stated in cross examination at the hearing
opinion that minimal replacement of battens could be adequately made
waterproof such that the waterproofing of the concrete slab
was not compromised.
Mr Calandra was of the view that there was not sufficient evidence to currently
conclude that any battens needed
to be removed.
than Mr Calandra and Mr Buckley being questioned and about this ‘joint
report’ they had agreed to, the questioning
of the experts focussed on
other issues, such as the dispute about ‘batten rod/bugle screw’ and
whether battens were
“soft to touch.”
experts again provided proposed scopes of work in the final Joint Expert Report.
It is appropriate to point out that, in summary,
Mr Calandra’s view was
set out at pp 19-20; Court Book pp 1790-1791:
(1) If the battens did not need to be replaced, install replacement PVC decking
board in damaged areas (primarily uncovered areas).
(2) If the battens are found to be defective and the waterproofing in good
order, remove and replace decking boards and any damaged
battens. He elaborated
on this by stating in evidence that there could be adequate waterproofing
repairs to the substrate without
affecting or compromising the waterproofing
(3) If battens and waterproofing are required to be removed, a design
practitioner would be required to create a scope of works involving
joining old
and new membranes; all of the timber deck in the exposed areas removed and
replaced, and the entire exposed area “needs
to be waterproofed meeting
AS/BCA/NCC Guidelines.”
If Battens Need to Be Removed, Will The Whole or Part of the Waterproofing
Membrane of the Slab Need to Be Replaced?
experts agreed (and it is self-evident) that the concrete slab needs to remain
adequately waterproofed. If not, there will likely
be damage to the common
property that will expose the owners corporation to further liabilities,
including potential liability for
damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act.
Calandra’s view was that removal and replacement of battens can be done in
a manner that provides adequate waterproofing
to the slab without undue
compromise of the waterproofing membrane. That is on the basis that there is no
or minimal removal of battens.
As is made clear by Mr Calandra in the final
Joint Expert Report, if there is removal of a significant number of battens then
significant waterproofing measures need to be taken.
Calandra asserts in the final Joint Expert Report that this involves new
waterproofing membrane being “joined” to the
existing membrane.
However, he also acknowledges that if that needs to occur, a design practitioner
under the DABP Act would be required
to first create a scope of works (p 20
final Joint Expert Report; Court Book p 1791).
cross examination, there was some limited attempt by Mr Calandra to distinguish
between the substrate and the membrane. However,
that needs to be considered in
the context of what Mr Calandra asserted in the final Joint Expert Report.
this regard, I accept that the substance of Mr Wilkie’s and Mr
Calandra’s evidence is that if substantial damage to
the waterproofing
membrane occurs in the course of replacing battens, it will be necessary for
there to be a design performed by
an accredited designer under the DABP Act
before works are done to ensure the slab is adequately waterproofed.
as discussed previously, the Tribunal is not satisfied that there is sufficient
evidence to conclude that any battens need
to be replaced. The speculation that
they may have to be replaced and the waterproofing membrane may be damaged is
not sufficient
for the Tribunal to conclude that it is reasonably necessary to
replace battens and that the replacement of battens means that the
waterproofing
membrane will be compromised to the extent that the membrane needs to be
replaced (in whole or part).
those circumstances, it would be prudent for the owners corporation to conduct
further expert investigations when the damaged decking
boards are removed, and
before they are replaced, to ascertain whether the waterproofing membrane of the
slab so that the owners
corporation ensures compliance with its duty under s
106(1) of the SSM Act.
Tribunal has referred previously to the potentially expensive ramifications to
the owners corporation if the concrete slab allows
water ingress.
Owers-Brown and Nakkan have failed to establish that, in replacing decking
boards, it is reasonably necessary that the waterproofing
membrane of the slab
be entirely replaced, or the consequential works that would flow from that
(which, according to Mr Wilkie, means
the whole decking system needs to be
removed and replaced).
Ultimately,
depending upon further assessment of the condition of the battens and whether
replacement of the waterproofing membrane
is necessary to ensure the slab
remains adequately waterproofed, it may be necessary for the owners corporation
to perform further
works to achieve compliance with the duty of the owners
corporation under s 106(1) of the SSM Act. It would be prudent for the owners
corporation to undertake such an assessment using an appropriately qualified
expert (or experts).
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the evidence is sufficient for the Tribunal
to make an order that such an assessment be
performed, or that it could
formulate an order that achieves the degree of specificity required to satisfy
the principle set out
Glenquarry.
Waterproofing Membrane of the Slab Be Damaged When Decking Boards Are Replaced;
And Is the Waterproofing Membrane At the
End of Its Serviceable Lifespan Such
That It Needs to Be Replaced in Any Event?
is not in dispute that the waterproofing membrane of the slab on level 1 of the
strata building is not currently leaking or allowing
water ingress. There is no
evidence that it is leaking or deteriorating in any other areas of the strata
Wilkie asserted that the membrane of the slab was at the end of its useful life.
This referred to briefly in his expert report.
his opinion was not supported with cogent, detailed evidence explaining why the
membrane was at the end of its useful life.
In cross examination, he referred to
the membrane being “out of warranty.” The Tribunal infers that what
he meant was
the warranty for statutory defects from the builder and developer
had expired under s 18B of the HB Act.
that does not mean the membrane is at the end of its useful life, and is prone
by way of natural deterioration to be soon
liable to allow water ingress. If
there was sufficient evidence of this, the owners corporation would have to
replace the membrane
as part of its obligations regarding preventative
maintenance. Mr Calandra did not agree the membrane required replacement simply
because of its age, and Mr Buckley stated he was not qualified to comment on
this issue.
Tribunal is not satisfied that the membrane is in such condition that it needs
to be replaced independently of any works to the
How Many Decking Boards Are Damaged and Where Are They
Damages Such That It Is Necessary to Replace Them?
is significant divergence between Mr Wilkie on the one hand, and Mr Buckley and
Mr Calandra on the other hand, as to how many
decking boards are damaged such
that they require repair.
this issue, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Buckley and Mr Calandra
regarding the extent of the damage, and does not accept
the opinion of Mr
Wilkie. Mr Wilkie’s evidence regarding damage to the covered areas that
extend to the pool is not sufficiently
detailed for the Tribunal to accept his
evidence over the evidence of Mr Buckley and Mr Calandra that the damage is
almost exclusively
confined to the uncovered areas.
Replacing Some Decking Boards With PVC Boards or Milled Timber Boards That Will
Be Aesthetically Unpleasing Affect Compliance
with the Duty Under ss 106(1) and
(2) of the SSM Act?
Tribunal does not accept that a mixture of different types of boards being
potentially aesthetically unpleasing is a sufficient
reason, in whole or part,
to accept the position of Owers-Brown and Nakkan that the whole decking system
needs to be removed and
replaced. The decking boards are common property, and
the critical issue is what is reasonably necessary to repair them, not whether
they are aesthetically pleasing to the owners of Lots 3 and
Will the Owners Corporation Not Be Able to Get a Builder to
‘Warrant’ Repair Works?
Wilkie asserts that the scope of works proposed by Mr Calandra will be
unworkable because no builder will ‘warrant’
the works. However,
that is based on the premise that battens will need to be removed and the
waterproofing membrane will be significantly
affected. Having not accepted there
is sufficient evidence to conclude that any battens need to be replaced, the
Tribunal does not
accept that it will not be possible for the owners corporation
to engage a remedial builder. Any building works that fall within
will be the subject of statutory warranties under that Act.
Reliability of the Expert Evidence
parties legal submissions make numerous criticisms of the
‘credibility’ of the other parties experts.
regarding expert evidence in the Tribunal were discussed in detail in
[2024] NSWCATAP 28
. It is unnecessary to repeat those
principles. Fundamentally, the role of expert evidence is to assist the Tribunal
to make factual
the extent that the Tribunal has not accepted certain expert evidence, that is
not a personal criticism of the expert. I do not
accept any of the experts are
merely an advocate for their client and are not genuinely expressing opinions
that fall within their
field of expertise. However, the role of the Tribunal,
when making factual findings, is to assess the totality of the evidence in
context of the applicable legal principles and the burden of proof.
submissions of Owers-Brown and the owners corporation also refer to a
“danger” of accepting the evidence of the other
expert on certain issues. That submission is unhelpful If it is implied that
there is a “danger” there
will be an appeal, that is not a matter
that has any influence whatsoever on the decision of the Tribunal. The Tribunal
findings on the basis of its best endeavours to assess the evidence
and apply legal principles to the found facts. If a party wishes
to appeal the
decision under s 80 of the NCAT Act, that is a matter for the
The Scopes of Works Proposed by the Parties
referring to the appropriate remedial orders (scope of works) for the owners
corporation to repair the timber decking that
has fallen into a state of
disrepair, it is appropriate to refer to an immediate difficult with the orders
sought by Owers Brown
and Nakkan, even if the Tribunal had accepted the evidence
of Mr Wilkie that the whole decking system needs to be removed and
Wilkie’s own evidence is that, because such works would involve external
waterproofing works, prior to any work being performed
a design would have to be
engaged. In
Parker J made clear that any remedial orders under
ss 232 by reason of breach of s 106(1) or (2) of the SSM Act must be clear,
unambiguous,
and certain. Ordering an owners corporation to get an expert report
or investigation and then do unspecified work that is based on
that report, is
not appropriate.
the Tribunal were satisfied that the entire decking system needed to be removed
and replaced, based on the principles in
and the opinion
expressed by Mr Wilkie, the extent of its order would have been the owners
corporation engage a suitably qualified
designer under the DABP Act to provide a
report and design to the owners corporation for the removal and replacement of
the decking
system. It would not have ordered, as Owers-Brown and Nakkan seek,
to replace the decking system based upon the design, irrespective
of Mr Wilkie
proving a scope of works. As discussed previously, the missing piece of Mr
Wilkie’s report is a design from a
qualified designer under the DABP
Ultimately,
this issue does not arise because the scope of works the Tribunal regards as
reasonably necessary is based primarily upon
the ‘Option 1’ scope of
works set out in the Joint Report dated 3 June 2024 signed by Mr Calandra and
agreed to by email
by Mr Buckley, although taking into account the additional
areas identified in the document of Mr Buckley “Markup of the plans
showing the location of boards previously identified as requiring patching with
reclaimed boards” (p 39 final Joint Expert
Report; p 1810 of Court Book).
The work order of the Tribunal incorporates (a) that PVC decking boards are
appropriately used; and
(b) as best it can, the issues that will arise if rotten
battens are discovered.
proposed scope of works set out in the closing submissions of Counsel for the
owners corporation is also not helpful, lacking
detail. The Tribunal must craft
the appropriate orders as best it can from the expert evidence.
Tribunal regards 3 months as an appropriate period to perform the works.
should be noted that if the parties agree to vary the orders to perform repairs
by consent, that can be done under Regulation 9(1)(a)
Administrative Regulation 2022
(NSW). Otherwise, the Tribunal must do its
best to formulate final orders; and if there are further disputes they may be
by way of fresh Tribunal proceedings (if appropriate). The Tribunal
has previously referred to the provision of s 80 of the NCAT
Act regarding an
internal appeal.
The Difference Between ‘Defective’
Works in Breach of
(NSW) And the Duty of the
Owners Corporation Under ss 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act.
of the experts refer to inadequacies in the design of the decking system, that
has contributed to the deterioration of the decking
there are different legal tests for breach of statutory warranties under s 18B
of the HB Act which the builder and developer
owed to the owners corporation,
compared to the duty that the owners corporation has to lot owners under s 106
of the SSM Act. It
is unnecessary to repeat the legal principles previously set
out in respect of s 106(1) and (2) of the SSM Act. For a discussion
of the legal
principles for breach of statutory warranties, see
Deacon v National
Strategic Constructions Pty Ltd; National Strategic Constructions Pty Ltd v
[2017] NSWCATAP 185
. However, it is important not
to conflate the test for breach of statutory warranties with the test for
failing to keep and maintain
common property in a state of good
What Are the Appropriate Orders for Compliance With
Section 106(1) or (2) of the NCAT Act?
remedial powers of the Tribunal are contained in ss 232 and 241 of the SSM Act.
The Tribunal is satisfied the owners corporation
is in breach of its duty under
s 106(1) of the SSM Act, and has set out a scope of works in Schedule A of this
decision. The fixture
does not require replacement under s 106(2), but it
requires repair under s 106(1).
Is Any of the Damage to the
Decking Boards Caused By the Actions of Lot Owners?
Tribunal rejects the submission that the owners of Lots 3 and 4, or the
predecessor owners, caused any damage to the decking boards.
As discussed
previously, the decking boards are common property. It is the responsibility of
the owners corporation to keep and maintain
the decking boards in a state of
good repair. The evidence does not establish any damage caused by Lot owners,
either by what they
have placed on the decking boards; or any other matter.
The Claim By Owers-Brown and Nakkan for Legal Costs Incurred as
Damages Under s 106(5) of the SSM Act
are a number of flaws in the claim by Owers-Brown and Nakkan that the owners
corporation should pay legal costs and disbursements
incurred by them as damages
under s 106(5) of the SSM Act which are “reasonably foreseeable”
loss caused by the owners
corporation’s breach of ss 106(1) and/or (2) of
the SSM Act.
neither Owers-Brown or Nakkan have provided any evidence of the costs and
disbursements incurred which they claim as damages.
On this issue, Owers-Brown
submits that she should be awarded the costs and disbursements incurred by her
up to the date she commenced
proceedings. However, the Tribunal cannot simply
make a declaration that the owners corporation pay some unspecified amount to
Owers-Brown
and Nakkan. It is incumbent upon any party seeking damages to
provide sufficient evidence to establish loss (
McCrohan v Harith
and the authorities discussed therein). No evidence has
been provided to quantify what are the alleged damages, which is a sufficient
reason to dismiss the claim for damages.
there is a fundamental issue that the Owers-Brown and Nakkan submissions fail to
address. There is a distinction between
“costs of, and incidental”
to legal proceedings (which are bound by the provisions of
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act)) as modified (if
applicable) by r 38 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules) and damages recoverable under s 106(5) of the SSM Act.
The distinction between costs and damages is well established
(see, for example,
G.E. Dal Pont ‘
Law of Costs’
5th edition pp 185-188 at paras
[7.21]-[7.23]).
distinction was discussed in the Appeal Panel decision of
The Owners –
Strata Plan No 21563 v Rutherford
[2023] NSWCATAP 326
Rutherford involve whether costs of a pre-litigation mediation could be
recovered under s 106(5) of the SSM Act. Although the decision
partly involved
consideration of Reg 60 of the
Strata Schemes Management Regulations
(NSW), the reference to the principles regarding the distinction
between “damages” and “costs” remains apposite.
Appeal Panel (with discussion of applicable legal authorities at [53]-[94])
stated (at [52] and [95]-[97]):
The general principle applied in the courts is that a successful plaintiff
cannot recover, as damages, expenses which are properly
characterised
as costs of and incidental to the proceedings.
“Consistently with the principle outlined by the High Court
Anderson v Bowles
, the limitations upon the award of costs
in the Tribunal should not be circumvented
by characterising ”costs of, and incidental
proceedings” (which may involve obtaining legal advice and obtaining
expert evidence) as an element of damages for breach
under s 106 of the SSMA. As discussed previously, there is a critical
distinction between ”costs of and incidental
proceedings;” and expenses incurred that do not
constitute ”costs of and incidental to the proceedings.”
If the particular expenses are not ”costs of, and incidental to the
proceedings” then they may be recoverable as damages
of breach of the duty under s 106 of the SSMA, subject to the other
limitations on the award of damages for breach of duty
under s 106 of the
SSMA, including whether the type of loss is a ”reasonably
foreseeable loss suffered by the owner as a result
of contravention of this section by the owners
corporation” (s 106(5) of the SSMA); and whether the proceedings
have been brought
within the limitation period in s 106(6) of the SSMA. A
further limitation occurs by reason of reg 60.
The distinction between whether the relevant expenses incurred
are ”costs of and incidental” to the Tribunal
proceedings,
or are not, will involve assessment of the particular facts
and circumstances of the dispute. However, it is a distinction that must
made. A successful party to litigation in the Tribunal cannot simply
avoid the provisions of s 60 of the NCAT Act (which are subject
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW)) by characterising what are, in fact, costs of and
incidental to the Tribunal proceedings, as damages arising under s
of the SSMA.”
principles were also referred to in
Gray v Sirtex Medical Ltd
(2011) 193 FCR 1
(2011) 276 ALR 267
”A distinction has long been drawn between damages and legal costs,
such that a successful plaintiff cannot recover its costs
of the proceedings
from the defendant as damages, even though the defendant’s wrongful act
caused the plaintiff to incur those
[1881] UKLawRpCh 203
(1881) 18 Ch D 449
per Jessel MR at 459, per Brett LJ at
462 and per Cotton LJ at 463;
Ross v Caunters
[1980] 1 Ch
Hobartville Stud Pty Ltd v Union
Insurance Co Ltd
(1991) 25 NSWLR 358
Seavision Investments SA v Evennett & Clarkson
Puckle Ltd (The “Tiburon”)
[1992] 2 Lloyd’s Rep
Queanbeyan Leagues Club Ltd v Poldune Pty
[2000] NSWSC 1100
McGregor on
, 18th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2009) at [17-003]. A
plaintiff’s ability to recover its costs of the proceedings from
defendant depends instead upon the exercise of a judicial discretion; and the
amount (if any) that the plaintiff recovers is not
assessed in the same way as
damages, but “taxed” according to the applicable rules of court. As
Jessel MR put it in
... it is not according to law to give to a party by way of damages the costs as
between solicitor and client of the litigation in
which the damages are
recovered. The law gives a successful litigant his costs as between party and
party, and he cannot be said
to sustain damage by not getting them as between
solicitor and client.
Neither may a successful plaintiff or defendant recover the difference between
the legal costs awarded in its favour, or withheld,
as the case may be, in one
civil proceeding and the legal costs it actually incurred in that proceeding, as
damages in a subsequent
civil action against the same opponent:
[1951] HCA 61
(1951) 84 CLR 310
at 323.4–8 and
Quartz Hill Consolidated Gold Mining Co v Eyre
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 126
at 690.4–5;
Barnett v Corporation of
[1900] UKLawRpKQB 128
[1900] 2 QB 423
at 427.8, 428.5
; Ritchie v British
Insulated Callender’s Cables (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1960) 77 WN(NSW)
at 300.4–10 (RHC);
Berry v British Transport
[1962] 1 QB 306
at 317.1, 319.2–4,
320.9–321.4, 322.1, 329.6, 329.7–330.1, 336.4,
Lonrho Plc v Fayed (No 5)
[1993] 1 WLR
at 1497G–H, 1505G–H, 1510D–F;
Bristol & West Building Society
[1997] EWCA Civ 1416
[1997] 1 WLR
Avenhouse v Hornsby Shire
(1998) 44 NSWLR l at 36G–37C;
Queanbeyan Leagues
at [45] and [46];
Grainger v Williams
and [203]. Whether and to what extent a party is entitled
to recover its costs from the opponent is regarded as having been finally
determined in the first proceeding. Otherwise, most successful plaintiffs could
bring a second action against the defendant to recover
the costs they failed to
obtain upon taxation as damages flowing from the original
at 323.5–6 and 328.2.”
was cited with approval by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Transport for NSW v Hunt Leather Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 227
; (2024) NSWLR
489 (Hunt Leather) at [203]. In
Hunt Leather
, the NSW Court of Appeal
held a litigation funder’s commission was not reasonably foreseeable
damages recoverable pursuant
to the tort of nuisance (paras [193]-[210]).
evidence and submissions of Owers-Brown and Nakkan do not articulate how the
costs and disbursements incurred prior to commencing
these legal proceedings in
the Tribunal do not fall within the principle of “costs of, and incidental
to the proceedings”
such that they would be recoverable as reasonably
foreseeable damages. Rather, they adopt the position that legal costs and
disbursements
are reasonably foreseeable damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act
because they are a reasonably foreseeable type of loss caused by
the breach of
ss 106(1) and/or (2) of the SSM Act, irrespective of whether they are costs of,
and incidental to, the proceedings.
That is not consistent with the authorities
referred to in
Tribunal is not satisfied the legal costs and disbursements of Owers-Brown and
Nakkan are reasonably foreseeable damages under
s 106(5) of the SSM Act. This
aspect of their proceedings is dismissed. Whether those costs and disbursements
are recoverable under
s 60 of the NCAT Act will be considered later in these
The Claim By Owers-Brown and Nakkan Regarding the By-law
Passed on 30 March 2023 Being Unlawful, and the Claim by the Owners Corporation
That It Should Be ‘Released’ From and Undertaking Not to Register
is acknowledged in the submissions of Owers-Brown and Nakkan, the By-law passed
on 30 March 2023 cannot be registered as it gone
stale under s 141(3) of the SSM
141 of the SSM Act states as follows:
141 Changes to and consolidation of by-laws
(1) An owners corporation may, by special resolution, change the by-laws
for the strata scheme.
If the special resolution is a sustainability infrastructure resolution, fewer
votes are needed to pass it. See section 5(1)(b).
(2) The change to the by-laws has no effect until—
(a) the owners corporation lodges a notice, in the approved form,
with the Registrar-General, and
(b) the Registrar-General makes an appropriate recording of the
notice in the folio of the Register for the common property for
the scheme.
(3) The owners corporation must lodge the notice within 6 months of the
day the special resolution is passed.
(4) An owners corporation may, by special resolution, consolidate the
by-laws for the scheme, whether or not a by-law is amended,
repealed or
(5) The written consent of the owners on whom a common property rights
by-law confers rights or special privileges is not required
to consolidate the
by-laws for the scheme, if the consolidation does not involve the amendment,
repeal or addition of a common property
rights by-law.
(6) The secretary of the owners corporation must keep a consolidated
up-to-date copy of the by-laws for the scheme.
owners corporation could have registered the By-law. Had it done so, the
Tribunal would have had to consider the claims by Owers-Brown
and Nakkan that
the meeting was not validly held (s 24 of the SSM Act) and/or the By-law was
harsh, unconscionable or oppressive
(s 150 of the SSM Act).
in circumstances where the By-law was not registered in accordance with s 141(3)
of the SSM Act, there is no By-law to invalidate
under s 150 of the SSM Act, and
no utility in considering whether it was passed in circumstances where there was
allegedly non-compliance
with the provisions of the SSM Act and its Regulations
such that it should be invalidated (see the discussion of the relevant
Harris v The Owners-Strata Plan No 34056
[2022] NSWCATAP
application for orders under ss 24 and 150 of the SSM Act was withdrawn at the
hearing. It was the Tribunal who raised the issue
of s 141(3) of the SSM Act
with Counsel for Owers-Brown (T: 10/11/23: P3 :L44-48). Ultimately, Counsel for
Owers-Brown stated that
Owers-Brown withdrew the s 150 application, but
“reserved her rights” if a resolution was passed in the future
(T:10/11/23:
P 14: L 18-25). There was no reference to the s 24 application
being withdrawn at the hearing, but the submissions of Owers-Brown
indicate the applications are not pressed. It is unnecessary to explore the
position of Nakkan, because throughout the proceedings
there was no material
departure by Nakkan from the position of Owers-Brown.
respect of the submission by the owners corporation that it should be
“relieved” of its “undertaking” that
the By-law would
not be registered, there are a number of flaws.
the owners corporation never brought its own proceedings in the Tribunal. It has
only raised this issue in response to the
proceedings by Owers-Brown and
there is no evidence pointed to that this was a formal undertaking to the
Tribunal. There are circumstances where the Tribunal
has the power to make
orders regarding undertakings (see, for example,
CCS 251 Elizabeth Street
Sydney Pty Ltd v Hellenic Club Ltd
[2016] NSWCATCD 88
in respect of the
‘usual undertaking as to damages’ in retail lease interim orders).
However, all the owners corporation
refers to is an “undertaking”
not to register the By-law until the proceeding have concluded to another party.
noted that at the hearing, Counsel for Owers-Brown referred to the
“undertaking” being given to Nakkan, not Owers-Brown.
There is no
documentary evidence referred to by the owners corporation that shows the
“undertaking” or its terms.
discussed previously, the Tribunal has no general power under the SSM Act to
make a declaration. It’s only powers regarding
declarations are those the
subject of specific provisions of the SSM Act. Even if the Tribunal had the
power to make an order under
ss 232 and or 241 of the SSM Act to
“relieve” the owners corporation from its “undertaking”
to another party
(which is a vexed issue, and the written submissions of the
owners corporation to not refer to any legal authorities that clearly
the proposition that the Tribunal has the power to make such an order), there is
no utility in making such an order.
simple terms, the owners corporation chose not to register the By-law. It now
cannot be registered. The owners corporation would
have to call a fresh general
meeting and pass a fresh By-law. It is entirely a matter of speculation as to
whether it will do so,
and if it did, whether that By-law would (if registered)
be the subject of challenge under the SSM Act.
Section 106(3) of
the SSM Act
SSM Act. That submission is correct (see the discussion of the relevant
principles in
Davenport v The Owners-Strata Plan No 536; The Owners-Strata
Plan No 536 v Davenport
[2018] NSWCATAP 301
) although it does
not explain why the owners corporation sought (and was granted) leave to amend
the Points of Defence at the hearing
to rely on s 106(3) (even as an alternative
argument to its central proposition that the terrace timber decking was not
common property),
yet concedes in its submissions that the Resolution does not
satisfy the requirements of s 106(3).
The Issue of Costs
Tribunal is satisfied that it makes a costs order in this decision, and if any
party seeks to vary that order, it can do so. This
has been an approach taken by
the Tribunal and Appeal Panel in a number of matters (e.g.
Wells Group Pty
Ltd v Betts
[2025] NSWCATAP 70).
Tribunal is not satisfied that this is a type of proceedings where r 38 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) applies (
The Owners-Strata
Plan No 63341 v Malachite Holdings Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP 256).
Owers-Brown and Nakkan sought damages under s 106(5) of the SSM Act in respect
of legal costs and disbursements, the amount
was unquantified in any pleading or
submission, and there was no evidence provided to quantify loss. The Tribunal is
not satisfied
the amount “claimed or in dispute” in the proceedings
exceeded $30,000, irrespective of the evidence of Mr Wilkie that
the cost of
repairs may exceed $100,000 (although this was speculative in the sense that Mr
Wilkie also stated that a design by an
appropriately qualified person under the
DABP Act was required before rectification works could occur).
if the Tribunal was wrong in that conclusion, and r 38 of the NCAT Rules
applied, the parties have had substantial successes
and failures on different
issues. If the provisions of s 60(1)-(3) of the NCAT Act did not apply, and the
Tribunal was considering
the issue of costs under ‘common law’ costs
principles, the Tribunal would be satisfied that the appropriate order would
each party bear its own costs:
Hogan v Trustee of the Roman Catholic Church
[2006] NSWSC 74
any party to be awarded costs, the Tribunal must be satisfied that there are
“special circumstances” under s 60(2)
of the NCAT Act, taking into
account the matters in s 60 (3) of the NCAT Act.
principles applicable to ss 60(1)-(3) are well established (see, for example,
The Owners-Strata Plan No 63731 v B & G Trading Pty Ltd (No 2)
NSWCATAP 273).
The Tribunal needs to be satisfied (a) there are special
circumstances; and (b) those special circumstances are sufficient for the
Tribunal to exercise its discretion to depart from the usual principle under s
60(1) of the NCAT Act that each party pay its own
this matter, the parties had arguable positions on most of the claims and
defences. Some of the claims and defences of the parties
were not obviously
strong (or not pursued), such as the issues involving the claim for s 106(5)
damages; the operation of s 106(3);
and the owners corporation being relieved of
its ‘undertaking’. Further, just as the owners corporation failed in
argument regarding the timber decking being lot property, Owers-Brown and
Nakkan failed to obtain the order they were seeking regarding
replacement of the
timber decking; and also failed to adequately grapple with the issue that their
own expert asserted his scope
of works could not be actioned until a design was
performed under the DABP Act.
proceedings were lengthy and complex. However, the parties contributed to this
and bear equal responsibility. The parties each
sought to canvass a significant
amount of lay evidence and cross examine lay witnesses, when the critical issues
for determination
involved (a) whether the timber decking was common property;
(b) whether the duties under s 106 (1) or (2) of the SSM Act were breached;
(c) if so, what were appropriate remedial orders in respect of the condition of
the common property.
well, the time taken to conclude the proceedings was extended by the failure of
the experts to adequately confer and prepare a
Joint Expert Report until the
final Joint Expert Report. Responsibility for that delay does not fall solely at
the feet of one expert
or one party.
any party seeks to vary the Tribunal’s cost orders it may do so, in
accordance with the procedural orders made.
Annexure A-Scope of
(1) Remove and replace timber floorboards of terrace of level 1 of the strata
building in the areas identified in the document “Phil
Inclusions-Markup of the plans showing the approximate locations of boards
previously identified as requiring patching with
reclaimed boards” marked
in yellow, blue and green that is set out at p 1810 of the Court Book.
(2) Replacement boards to be PVC boards of similar colour to the existing
(3) Painter to apply a clear coat of suitable deck coating material to all
old and new decking boards.
(4) Battens to remain as is unless it is necessary to remove any battens
because they are structurally insufficient to support replacement
(5) If any battens are removed, the concrete slab to be adequately
waterproofed to ensure that the slab is resistant to water ingress.
(1) By 3 months from the date of this order The
Owners-Strata Plan No 92562 is to engage a suitably licensed builder or builders
and/or tradespersons to perform the works set out in Schedule A of this
(2) All works are to be performed by suitably licensed
persons exercising due care and skill and in accordance with any applicable
legislation, including (to the extent applicable) the
Design and Building Practitioners Act 2020
(3) The owners of Lots 3 and 4 of the strata building are to
give reasonable access to the owners corporation and all builders and
tradespersons engaged by the owners corporation so that the works can be
performed and completed.
(4) There is no order as to costs, with each party to bear
its own costs.
(5) If a party seeks to vary the costs order the following
orders apply:
(a) Costs applicant is to file and serve costs submissions and documents by
14 days from the date of these orders.
(b) Costs respondent is to file and serve costs submissions and documents by
28 days from the date of these orders.
(c) Costs applicant is to file and serve costs submissions in reply by 35
days from the date of these orders.
(d) Any party can apply to vary the procedural timetable for the filing and
serving of costs submissions and documents by way of an
application in writing
to the Tribunal and the other parties by no later than the date of compliance
with the relevant timetable
obligation.
(6) The proceedings in Case Number 2023/00401663 and Case
Number 2023/00406758 are otherwise dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (879 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter