URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Henderson [2000] NSWFTT 1 (10 August 2000)
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
2000] NSWFTT 1
REHEARING DECISION
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR REHEARING UNDER
SECTION 63 OF THE FAIR TRADING ACT 1998
REHEARING APPLICANT:
Ms HENDERSON
CO2000-6468
DATE OF REHEARING DECISION:
10 AUGUST 2000
P. H. MOLONY
SENIOR MEMBER
The application for rehearing by Ms Henderson received 31
July 2000 is granted.
The rehearing is to be listed before a Member who has not previously heard
the application.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE BACKGROUND TO THE REHEARING APPLICATION
By an instrument of delegation dated 22 October 1999 the Chairperson of the
Fair Trading Tribunal, pursuant to section 10(4) of the
Fair Trading Tribunal
1998, delegated to me, as a Senior Member of the Tribunal, the exercise
of the Chairperson’s powers with respect to rehearings
under section 63 of
This application for rehearing relates to an application made by Ms
Henderson as Applicant against Jacob Motor Sales Pty Ltd trading
Prestige as Respondent. Ms Henderson claimed $2,000 from the Respondent being
monies she claimed she had won from the
Respondent, in a sales promotion
conducted by the Respondent, for which she was entered by a salesman when
inspecting vehicles at
the Respondent’s premises .
An examination of the Tribunal file reveals the following chronology of
events which are relevant to my determination of this application
Original Application filed
30 May 2000
Hearing – all parties appeared – order made
11 July 2000
Notices of Order sent to parties by post
18 July 2000
Application for Rehearing lodged
31 July 2000
The order made by the Tribunal dismissed the application on the basis that
the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the application
as it had no connection
with the supply of goods or services as required by the
Consumer Claims
In her application for rehearing Ms Henderson claimed she had suffered a
substantial injustice as a result of the order.
As a result of my
attendance at promotion I was placed in the drawer of which I was the winner,
thereby creating a contract between
myself and the promoter & I being the
winner, entitled me to the prize of $2,000.
Ms Henderson claimed that the decision of the Tribunal was not fair and
equitable because:
The Tribunal erred in that it held not in trade & commerce, when in
fact it was – the service was the invitation/promotion
of the dealer to
encourage customers to buy product. I was induced to buy a product as a direct
result of my attendance at promotion
although I later rescinded deal.
Section 63 of the
Fair Trading Tribunal Act
1998 empowers the
Chairperson to grant a rehearing where an applicant may have suffered
substantial injustice for any of the grounds
set in sub-section (1), namely
the decision of the Tribunal was not fair and equitable, or
the decision of the Tribunal was against the weight of evidence, or
evidence that is now available was not reasonably available at the time of
the hearing.
The threshold issue in this application for rehearing is whether the
Member’s decision that the application was not within the
the Tribunal was fair and reasonable. This requires a consideration of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In
Archcom Pty Ltd v Consumer Claims Tribunal
(unreported Simpson J 29 September 1995) her Honour
Whether jurisdiction exists must be determined by
reference to the claim made by the claimant. The alternative meanings of the
"claim" were considered by Hunt J, as the Chief Judge then was, in
Thomson v Consumer Claims Tribunal
(1981) 1 NSWLR 68.
His Honour rejected
the proposition that "claim" was to be equated with the existence of the legal
right itself which is asserted
by the claimant. So to interpret "claim" would
amount to finding that the jurisdiction of a tribunal depended upon the outcome
the dispute. "Claim" is to be equated with what is asserted by the claimant;
that is, what the claimant, rightly or wrongly asserts.
upon the correct analysis of the assertion made by the claimant in the claim
WD & HO Wills (Australia) Pty Ltd v Consumer Claims
(unreported Ireland J, 19 October 1995 at page 9).
Bearing in mind this approach to the question of whether or not the Tribunal
has jurisdiction, it is then necessary to consider the
Tribunal in the light of the claims made by Ms Henderson. The Fair Trading
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear
and determine consumer claims made under
Consumer Claims Act
Consumer Claims
Fair Trading Tribunal Act
1998. Consumer claim is defined in
Consumer Claims Act
consumer claim
(a) a claim by a consumer for the payment of a specified sum of
(b) a claim by a consumer for the supply of specified
services, or
(c) a claim by a consumer for relief from payment of a
specified sum of money, or
(d) a claim by a consumer for the delivery,
return or replacement of specified goods or goods of a specified description,
(e) a claim by a consumer for a combination of two or more of the
remedies referred to in paragraphs (a)–(d),
that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the
consumer, whether under a contract or not, or that arises under
a contract that
is collateral to a contract for the supply of goods or services.
There is no doubt that Ms. Henderson’s claim was for a specified sum
of money: $2,000. This issue that the Member identified
was whether the claim
arose from a supply of goods and services by the supplier (the Respondent) to
the consumer (Ms. Henderson).
Goods and services are defined in
means any tangible thing that is or may be the subject
of trade or commerce, but does not include money or an interest in
includes any rights (including rights in relation to,
and interests in, property), benefits, privileges or facilities that are, or
to be, provided, granted or conferred in trade or commerce and, without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, includes:
(a) the performance of work
(including work of a professional nature), whether with or without the supply of
(b) the provision of gas or electricity or the provision of any
other form of energy,
(c) the provision, or the making available for
use, of facilities for amusement, entertainment, recreation or
instruction,
(d) the letting of premises for vacation or recreational
(e) the conferring of rights, benefits or privileges for
which remuneration is payable in the form of a royalty, tribute, levy or
(f) the provision of insurance cover (but not assurance
cover in respect of a person's life),
(g) a contract between a banker
and a customer of the banker entered into in the course of the carrying on by
the banker of the business
of banking,
the provision of credit,
A consumer claim must arise from a supply of goods and services by a
supplier to a customer. Supply is given an extended definition
(a) in relation to goods, includes supply goods by way of a contract for
the sale, exchange, lease, hire or hire-purchase of goods
or an alleged contract
for the sale, exchange, lease, hire or (b) in relation to services, includes
provide, grant or render services
for valuable consideration under a contract or
for valuable consideration claimed to have been agreed to under an alleged
(2) In this Act:
(a) a reference to supply in
relation to goods includes a reference to resupply, and
reference to the supply of goods includes a reference to agreeing to supply
(c) a reference to the supply of services includes a
reference to agreeing to supply services, and
a reference to the supply of goods includes a reference to the supply of
goods together with services, and
a reference to the supply of services includes a reference to the supply
of services together with goods
It is not necessary that the consumer claim be one in contract relating to
the supply of those goods or services, it must arise from
the supply, which as
can be see from section 3(2) includes an agreement to supply goods or services:
Probiz Business Software Pty Ltd & Anor v Jeremy Owen Magee & Ors
[1998] NSWSC 36
per James J; and
Fairey Australasia Pty Ltd v Joyce
(1981) 2 NSWLR 314
per Yeldham J. In
As I have earlier said I consider that the expression
"arising out of a contract for the supply of goods or the provision of services"
is sufficiently wide to bring within the definition of "consumer claim", a claim
by a person for money or performance of work (or
otherwise, as is provided in
the definition itself) being an obligation arising out of a contract of the
relevant kind, to which
the respondent to the claim against whom an order is
sought is not a party. Provided a contract between a consumer and the person
engaged in a business activity for the supply of goods or services does exist it
is necessary only, to constitute a "consumer claim",
that such claim be one
"arising out of "the contract. Whether it is in tort or under the
Sale of Goods
or in contract is to my mind an irrelevant consideration.
It should be borne in mind that Yeldham J’s comments in Fairey related
Consumer Claims Tribunals Act
1974. In that Act consumer claim
was defined as:
(a) a claim by a person
(i) the payment of money;
(ii) the performance of work; or
(iii) the payment of money and the performance of work; or
(b) a claim by a person for relief from an obligation to pay money, being,
in the case of paragraph (a), a claim or, in the case of
paragraph (b), an
obligation arising out of a contract for the supply of goods or the provision of
services or for the supply of
goods and the provision of services between that
person as a consumer and a person who, in relation to those goods or services,
those goods and services, is engaged in a business activity as referred to in
sub-section 3(A);
The notable difference is that the
Consumer Claims Act
require that the supply of goods or services be under a contract: see also the
definition of consumer in the Act which,
among other things, defines a consumer
as one to whom goods and services have been supplied, or agreed to be supplied,
whether under
a contract or not.
Turning to Ms. Henderson’s claim the Member, in finding that there was
no jurisdiction, concluded that there was no connection
to the provision of
goods or services under the
Consumer Claims Act
. There was evidence
before the Member that Ms. Henderson’s name had been put in a barrel for a
cash prize draw when she attended
a promotional event conducted by the
Respondent. The evidence before the Member was that there were no conditions
attached to this
prize draw.
In my opinion, it is clear that the offering of a prize at a promotional
event conducted by a business is conduct in trade or commerce.
Such events are a
common tool used by dealers to promote their business and attract potential
customers. In
Re Ku-ring-gai Company-operative Building Society (no. 12) Ltd
[1978] FCA 50
(1978) 36 FLR 134
Bowen CJ at p. 139 said:
The terms "trade"
and "commerce" are ordinary terms which describe all the mutual communings, the
negotiations verbal and by correspondence,
the bargain, the transport and the
delivery which comprise commercial arrangements (W. & A. McArthur Ltd. v.
State of Queensland
[1920] HCA 77
(1920) 28 CLR 530
, at p 547 ). The word "trade" is used with
its accepted English meaning: traffic by way of sale of exchange or commercial
(Commissioners of Taxation v. Kirk
(1900) AC 588
, at p 592 per Lord
Davey; W. & A. McArthur Ltd. v. State of Queensland
[1920] HCA 77
(1920) 28 CLR 530
commercial character of trade was mentioned more recently by Lord Reid in Ransom
(1974) UKHL 5
(1974) 1 WLR 1594
. His Lordship there said:
"As an ordinary word in the English language 'trade' has or has had a
variety of meanings or shades of meaning. Leaving aside obsolete
or rare usage
it is sometimes used to denote any mercantile operation but is commonly used to
denote operations of a commercial character
by which the trader provides to
customers for reward some kind of goods or services (1974) 1 WLR, at p 1600
Deane J observed at p.167:
The terms "trade" and "commerce" are not terms of art. They are
expressions of fact and terms of common knowledge. While the particular
instances that may fall within them will depend upon the varying phrases of
development of trade, commerce and commercial communication,
the terms are
clearly of the widest import (see, generally, W. & A. McArthur Ltd. v. State
of Queensland (1920) 28 CLR, at pp
546 et seq and Bank of New South Wales v. The
Commonwealth (1948) 76 CLR, at pp 284 et seq, 381 et seq ). They are not
to dealings or communications which can properly be described as
being at arm's length in the sense that they are within open markets
strangers or have a dominant objective of profit-making.
While the definition of goods in the
Consumer Claims Act 1998
specifically
excludes money, the definition of services is wide and includes benefits,
privileges or facilities that are, or are
to be, offered provided or granted in
trade or commerce. The chance to win a prize as part of a promotion conducted
dealer is, in my view, a benefit offered, provided and granted by the
motor dealer to participants in trade and commerce. That being
the case, I am
of the opinion that on the face of her claim Ms Henderson disclosed that the
claim related to a supply of services
as required by the definition of consumer
Mention should be made of the definition of supply in
Consumer Claims Act
which on first examination requires a contract
(of specified kinds) to which the supply of goods relates, or a contract for
consideration in relation to the supply of services. This is clearly
inconsistent with the provision in both the definition of consumer
and consumer
claims, that the supply be to a consumer, ‘whether under a contract or
not’. The definition of supply is,
however, an inclusory definition, the
purpose of which is to include a supply of goods or services under contracts of
the kind there
mentioned, within the meaning of supply under the Act. The
definition amplifies the meaning of supply and does not restrict it.
not operate to impose a requirement that a consumer claim relate to the supply
of goods or services under a contract.
Further, it is clear from the Member’s notes of the hearing that there
was evidence that Ms Henderson had agreed to purchase
a vehicle from the
Respondent at about the time she was entered in the prize draw. This agreement
was subsequently cancelled, for
reasons I am unable to ascertain. That
agreement was clearly one for the supply of goods. It is arguable that Ms
Henderson’s
entry in the prize draw arises from that agreement, and this
also brings Ms Henderson claim within the jurisdiction. This is so as
Consumer Claims Act
extends the meaning of supply in
the definition of consumer claims, to agreeing to supply goods.
In the light of the above I conclude that the dismissal of Ms
Henderson’s claim on the basis that the Tribunal did not have
to hear it was not fair and equitable, and
have resulted in her
suffering a substantial injustice by being deprived of her right to pursue her
claim. She is entitled to a
The application for rehearing by Ms Henderson received 31 July 2000 is
The rehearing is to be listed before a Member who has not previously heard
the application.
P. H. MOLONY
Senior Member, as delegate of the Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter