URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners of Strata Plan 50422 v Fair Trading Administration Corporation [2000] NSWFTT 13 (18 September 2000)
Owners of Strata Plan 50422 –v- Fair Trading Administration
Corporation
[2000] NSWFTT 13
(18 September
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL NSW
BU 1999/6293
Owners of Strata Plan 50422
RESPONDENT:
Trading Administration Corporation
PRESIDING MEMBER:
Ian McDonell, Deputy Chairperson
DECISION ON PRELIMINARY MATTER
Issue to be Determined
This decision relates to an issue raised by the parties for determination as
a preliminary matter. The substantive action arises out
of the rejection by the
Fair Trading Administration Corporation (“FTAC”) of an insurance
claim lodged by the owners of
Strata Plan 50422 (“the Applicant”)
under section 7 of the Building Services Corporation comprehensive insurance
(“the Scheme”). The Scheme is governed by Part 6 of the
Building Services Corporation Regulation
Regulation”) and is set out in Form 4 Schedule 1 of the Regulation.
The Regulation
was made pursuant to
section 140
Building Act
(“the Act”).
The Building Services
Corporation formerly administered the Scheme. The functions of the Building
Services Corporation are now performed
by FTAC pursuant to
section 110
FTAC rejected the Applicant’s claim on the ground that the
Applicant failed to notify the claim within the time specified under
7(1)(c) of the Scheme. An appeal from that decision lies to the Fair Trading
Tribunal pursuant to
section 85(d)
of the Act. The Applicant exercised its right
to appeal by an Application to the Tribunal dated 21 October 1999 (“the
Application”)
and the Application is currently before this
The matter was listed before me for a case conference on 18 May
2000. The parties requested that the Tribunal determine, as a preliminary
the question of:
section 54(1)
Insurance Contracts Act
(Commonwealth) is applicable to the Respondent.
to that course of action and set a timetable for the filing of submissions with
respect to the issue.
In the event that the Tribunal determines that the
Insurance Contracts Act
(“the Commonwealth Act”
is not applicable to the Respondent then the substantive Application fails
unless the Tribunal is satisfied that it should exercise
the discretion given to
the Director General of the Department of Fair Trading to extend the time for
lodgement of the claim.
Applicant’s Submissions
The Applicant submits that section 54(1) of the Commonwealth Act is
applicable to the Scheme. The relevant provision of section 54(1)
Subject to this section, where the effect of a contract of
insurance would, but for this section, be that the insurer may refuse to
claim, either or in whole or in part, by reason of some act of the insured or of
some other person, being an act that occurred
after the contract was entered
into, ....... the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of that
act but the insurer’s
liability in respect of the claim is reduced by the
amount that fairly represents the extent to which the insurer’s interests
were prejudiced as a result of that act.
The Applicant argues
that its failure to notify FTAC within the time specified under section 7(1)(c)
of the Scheme is an omission
which falls within the ambit of section 54(1) of
the Commonwealth Act. This section denies FTAC the right to refuse a claim by
of that omission.
The application of the Commonwealth Act is set
out in Part 1 of that Act. The provisions relevant to these proceedings are
sections 5, 7, 8 and 9 of the Commonwealth Act. Those sections
Crown to be bound
(1) This Act binds the Crown in right of the Commonwealth or of a
Territory in which this Act applies or to which this Act extends
but does not
bind the Crown in right of a State.
Nothing in this Act renders the Crown in right of the Commonwealth or of
a Territory liable to be prosecuted for an offence arising
Effect of Act on other laws
It is the intention of the Parliament that this Act is not, except in so
far as this Act, either expressly or by necessary intendment,
provides, to affect the operation of any other law of the Commonwealth, the
operation of law of a State or Territory or
the operation of any principle or
rule of the common law (including the law merchant) or of equity.
Application of Act
(1) Subject to section 9, the application of this Act extends to
contracts of insurance and proposed contracts of insurance the proper
which is or would be the law of a State or the law of a Territory in which this
Act applies or to which this Act extends.
For the purposes of subsection (1), where the proper law of a contract or
proposed contract would, but for an express provision to
the contrary included
or to be included in the contract or in some other contract, be the law of a
State or of a Territory in which
this Act applies or to which this Act extends,
then, notwithstanding that provision, the proper law of the contract is the law
that State or Territory.
Exceptions to application of Act
(1) Except as otherwise provided by this Act, this Act does not apply to
or in relation to contracts and proposed contracts:
reinsurance;
(b) of insurance entered into, or proposed to be entered
into, by a registered health benefits organization, as an insurer, in respect
its business as a registered organization within the meaning of Part VI of the
National Health Act 1953
(c) of insurance entered into, or proposed
to be entered into, by a friendly society or by the Export Finance and Insurance
Corporation;
(d) to or in relation to which the
Marine Insurance Act
applies; or
(e) entered into or proposed to be entered into for
the purposes of a law (including a law of a State or Territory) that relates
(i) workers’ compensation; or
(ii) compensation
for the death of a person, or for injury to a person, arising out of the use of
a motor vehicle.
(2) This Act does not apply to or in relation to
contracts and proposed contracts of insurance entered into, or proposed to be
into, in the course of State insurance or Northern Territory insurance,
including contracts and proposed contracts entered into,
or proposed to be
entered into, by:
(a) a State or the Northern Territory;
(b) some other insurer;
(3) Sections 37, 41, 58, 59, 60, 63, 69 and 74 do not apply
in relation to contracts, and proposed contracts, of insurance against
of the loss of an aircraft, or damage to the hull of an aircraft, as a result of
The Applicant submits that, notwithstanding the clear
words of section 5 and section 7, the Commonwealth Act is binding in respect
the Scheme due to the operation of
section 5(1)
Insurance (Application
of Laws) Act
(“the 1986 Act”):
The general purpose
of the 1986 Act is apparent from the long title of that Act:
provide for the application of certain Commonwealth insurance legislation to
State insurance.”
Section 4 of the 1986 Act relevantly
Crown bound
This Act and the applied provisions bind the Crown in right of New
South Wales and also, so far as the legislative power of Parliament
permits, the
Crown in all its other
capacities.
Section 5 of the 1986
Act provides:
“Application of
Insurance Contracts Act
of the Commonwealth etc.
the extent to which the regulations otherwise provide and subject to any
modifications specified in the regulations, the
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
of the Commonwealth, as in
force from time to time; and
(b) any instrument in force under that
apply as laws of New South Wales to and in respect of all
contracts of insurance and proposed contracts of insurance entered into,
proposed to be entered into, in the course of State insurance, including
contracts and proposed contracts entered into, or proposed
to be entered into,
by the State and some other insurer as joint insurers.
Subsection (1) does not operate so as to apply
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
of the Commonwealth as a law of New South
It is the Applicant’s position that section 54(1)
of the Commonwealth Act applies to the Scheme as a consequence of the
application
of section 5(1) of the 1986 Act. In its submission, insurance under
the Scheme is “insurance entered into ... in the course
insurance”. Essentially the Application turns on whether or not the Scheme
falls within the ambit of these provisions.
Each of the parties has
submitted with respect to the approach to be taken by the Tribunal in
determining this issue.
The Applicant submitted that the relevant
provisions are to be considered according to the rules prescribed in the
Interpretation Act
(NSW) (“the
Interpretation Act
particular, the Tribunal is referred to
Interpretation Act
which provides:
33 Regard to be had to purposes or objects
of Acts and statutory rules
In the interpretation of a
provision of an Act or statutory rule, a construction that would promote the
purpose or object underlying
the Act or statutory rule (whether or not that
purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act or statutory rule or, in the
of a statutory rule, in the Act under which the rule was made) shall be
preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose
Interpretation Act
provides that
extrinsic material may be considered in determining the meaning of a legislative
provision. That section provides:
34 Use of extrinsic
material in the interpretation of Acts and statutory rules
In the interpretation of a provision of an Act or statutory rule, if any
material not forming part of the Act or statutory rule is
capable of assisting
in the ascertainment of the meaning of the provision, consideration may be given
to that material:
to confirm that the meaning of the provision is the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the text of the provision (taking into account its
context in the
Act or statutory rule and the purpose or object underlying the Act or statutory
rule and, in the case of a statutory
rule, the purpose or object underlying the
Act under which the rule was made), or
(b) to determine
the meaning of the provision:
(i) if the provision is ambiguous or
obscure, or
if the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision (taking
into account its context in the Act or statutory rule and the
purpose or object
underlying the Act or statutory rule and, in the case of a statutory rule, the
purpose or object underlying the
Act under which the rule was made) leads to a
result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable.
(2) Without limiting the effect of subsection (1), the
material that may be considered in the interpretation of a provision of an
or a statutory rule made under the Act, includes:
(a) all matters not
forming part of the Act that are set out in the document containing the text of
the Act as printed by the Government
(b) any relevant report
of a Royal Commission, Law Reform Commission, committee of inquiry or other
similar body that was laid before
either House of Parliament before the
provision was enacted or made,
(c) any relevant report of a
committee of Parliament or of either House of Parliament before the provision
was enacted or made,
(d) any treaty or other international agreement
that is referred to in the Act,
(e) any explanatory note or
memorandum relating to the Bill for the Act, or any other relevant document,
that was laid before, or
furnished to the members of, either House of Parliament
by a Minister or other member of Parliament introducing the Bill before the
provision was enacted or made,
(f) the speech made to a House of
Parliament by a Minister or other member of Parliament on the occasion of the
moving by that Minister
or member of a motion that the Bill for the Act be read
a second time in that House,
(g) any document (whether or not a
document to which a preceding paragraph applies) that is declared by the Act to
be a relevant document
for the purposes of this section, and
any relevant material in the Minutes of Proceedings or the Votes and
Proceedings of either House of Parliament or in any official
record of debates
in Parliament or either House of Parliament.
determining whether consideration should be given to any material, or in
considering the weight to be given to any material,
regard shall be had, in
addition to any other relevant matters, to:
(a) the desirability
of persons being able to rely on the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of
the provision (taking into account
its context in the Act or statutory rule and
the purpose or object underlying the Act or statutory rule and, in the case of a
rule, the purpose or object underlying the Act under which the rule
was made), and
(b) the need to avoid prolonging legal or other
proceedings without compensating advantage. “
The Applicant
submits that as the words of section 5 of the 1986 Act are neither ambiguous nor
obscure, consideration of extrinsic
materials is not warranted. Further, the
object and ordinary meaning of section 54(1) of the Commonwealth Act is
sufficiently clear
and unambiguous.
It is a statutory provision intended
to deny the insurer the right to refuse a claim made under a contract of
insurance by reason
of an act of the insured or of some other person. In this
case, the failure by the Applicant to notify the Respondent within the
specified under section 7(1)(c) of the Scheme is an omission that falls within
the ambit of section 54(1) of the Commonwealth
In moving the
Tribunal to adopt this approach, reference is made to the text
Insurance Law
in Australia
, Sutton, Third Edition.
In particular Sutton observes
at page 764:
"Where a statute is involved and the words in the relevant
section are clear and unambiguous, there is no warrant for reading restrictive
words into the section, and the provision should be given full
"The words of a statute must be read in their
" If the statute is a remedial one, it should he
beneficially construed so as to provide a complete remedy of the situation with
it is intended to deal."
The Applicant submits that in
determining whether the Scheme provides for "contracts of insurance entered into
....in the course of
State insurance", the Tribunal should have regard to the
ordinary meaning of the following phrases as applied in section 5(1) of
Act in the context of the Scheme:
(i) "contracts of insurance";
"entered into"; and
(iii) "State insurance".
(i) Ordinary
meaning of the phrase "contracts of insurance"
It is conceded that
neither the Act, the 1986 Act nor the Commonwealth Act defines “contracts
of insurance”. However,
it is argued, the Scheme provides that the FTAC
(as insurer) agrees in return for a “prescribed premium” paid by a
builder to pay to the person for whom the work is done (the assured
as set out in
the Scheme.
The operation of the Scheme is therefore conducted by way of
contracts of insurance.
(ii) Ordinary meaning of the phrase "entered
The Applicant submits that Tribunal should adopt the ordinary
meaning of this expression as defined in Butterworths Australian Legal
Dictionary. The term "entered into" is defined as meaning "to become a party to"
or "to accept the obligations".
The builder becomes a party to or accepts
the obligations of the Scheme by the payment of the premium and as such "entered
"contract of insurance".
(iii) Ordinary meaning of the
phrase "State insurance"
The Applicant referred the Tribunal to the
"Australian Insurance Law"
Tarr, Liew and Holligan, second edition
where the authors state in reference to the ordinary meaning of the phrase
“State insurance”:
"By analogy with the interpretation of
"State banking" in s. 51(xiii), as construed in Melbourne Corporation v.
Commonwealth, "State
insurance" means insurance conducted by a
It is further argued that the Scheme is insurance
conducted by the State. This is so due to terminology formerly used in section
of the Act whereby the Building Services Corporation “
the insurer ...
Further, the Act provides that the FTAC is
for the purposes of any act, a statutory body representing the
”. The effect of the two sections read together lead to the
conclusion that the Scheme is “insurance conducted by the
It follows, in the Applicant’s submission, that as
the Scheme provides for contracts of insurance entered into in the course
State insurance, the requirements of section 5 of the 1986 Act are satisfied.
Consequently, the Commonwealth Act applies to this
insurance and therefore the
provisions of section 54 are applicable.
Respondent’s Submissions
The Respondent argues that the Applicant is seeking to avoid the effects of
failing to comply with clause 7(1)(b) and 7(1)(c) of the
Scheme. These
provisions place limits on the time within which a claim can be made by an
applicant under the Scheme. Shortly put,
notification of a claim must be made
within 6 months of the applicant first becoming aware of the major structural
defect. In the
event of other than major structural defects, the claim must be
made within 6 months of the applicant becoming aware of the relevant
defects and
in any event within 3 years from the commencement of the insured building
By seeking the benefit of section 54 of the Commonwealth Act the
Applicant seeks to avoid the operation of the relevant clauses. The
contends that the Scheme is not governed by the 1986 State Act.
common ground that the 1986 Act was brought into existence primarily in respect
of the general insurance business carried out
by the Government Insurance Office
of NSW (“the GIO”). Prior to the Act, the GIO carried on a number of
businesses in
respect of general insurance in direct competition with commercial
insurers. Prior to the commencement of the 1986 Act, there was
a perception that
commercial insurers operated in NSW at a competitive disadvantage compared with
the conditions of operation of
The 1986 Act was constructed in
response to expectations of commercial insurers that they would not suffer
commercial disadvantage
because of the differential benefits enjoyed by the GIO.
The Respondent argues that the Applicant’s submissions misdirect
attention from the 1986 Act to the Commonwealth Act and poses
the correct line
of inquiry thus:
Did NSW intend to apply the Commonwealth Act to the
The Respondent argues that the NSW legislature did not intend
the Commonwealth Act to govern the operation of the Scheme. The
Respondent’s
position is clearly that the object and purpose of the 1986
Act was not to bring coverage of the Scheme under the aegis of the Commonwealth
This is so, in the contention of the Respondent, because of the
object and purpose of the 1986 Act. The Respondent also argues that
consideration of the applicability of the terms of the Act to the Scheme clearly
points to the exemption of the Scheme from coverage
by the Commonwealth Act.
FTAC argues that there is no “contract of insurance” in the
meaning of the term used in the Commonwealth Act and that
indeed therefore,
there is no “contract in the relevant sense”.
The 1986 Act
requires a "contract of insurance", or at least a "proposed contract of
insurance". If there is no “contract”
in the Scheme, then the 1986
Act cannot apply. It is submitted that relevantly, the essential elements of a
contract are:
“(1) an agreement, conventionally by way
(a) an offer (usually a proposal for insurance), and
(b) acceptance
(usually by the issue of the policy)
(2) for consideration (usually the
premium), and
(3) an intention to create Legal relations (usually being
inferred from (1) and (2) above).”
It is argued that the Scheme provides a statutory entitlement to indemnity,
which is not dependent upon consideration and is independent
of the intention of
the beneficiary, the appropriate licence holder and the Respondent.
consequence there is no proposal, no acceptance and no consideration and finally
no intention to create a legal relationship.
It follows therefore, it is
argued, that there is neither a proposed or actual “contract of
insurance” in the Scheme to
which the provisions of section 5(1) of the
1986 Act attach.
The threshold issue to be determined by the Tribunal requires consideration
of the inter-relationship, if any, between the Commonwealth
Act and the 1986
It is clear from the ordinary meaning of sections 5 to 9 of the
Commonwealth Act that the Commonwealth Act will not apply to the Scheme
than as a consequence of the 1986 Act. In my view, it is clear that the purpose
of section 5(1) of the 1986 Act is to apply
the Commonwealth Act to contracts of
insurance entered into in the course of State insurance.
As urged by the
Applicant, it is necessary to consider the meanings of the expressions
"contracts of insurance and “State insurance"
as found in section 5(1) of
the 1986 Act. I do not accept the Applicant’s submission that the meaning
of section 5(1) is so
clear and unambiguous that reference to extrinsic material
is not warranted. In particular, the meaning of “State insurance"
means clear.
I accept the Respondent’s submission that for the
Applicant’s argument to succeed, the Applicant must make out that there
a contract or proposed contract of insurance; otherwise the 1986 Act does not
The Respondent characterises the scheme, not as a contract of
insurance, but as a statutory entitlement to indemnity that is not dependent
the indicia of a contract, such as, payment of a premium or the intention of the
parties to be bound.
The Commercial Tribunal of NSW adopted this view in
David Smith and Janice Smith v The Building Services Corporation
unreported 22 December 1995 Deputy Chairman Hoeben presiding. The Tribunal
stated at pages 8 – 9 of its decision:
“s91(3) of the Act
recognises that beneficiaries under the scheme are still faced with limits and
exceptions which may be imposed
upon either the making or payment of claims
under the Scheme. Such limitations ... cannot be ignored by the
The Scheme is an insurance policy which covers consumers
once they engage in residential building work as either owner-builders or
contracting out residential building work. It is not a scheme involving general
principles of insurance contract law where there
are the essential commercial
characteristics such as voluntariness, negotiation and agreement. If a consumer
comes within the Act
he or she is automatically insured under the Scheme
subject, of course, to its terms, limitations and exceptions.
language of the Scheme does not reflect the traditional remedies available under
contract law nor does the Scheme attempt to fully
indemnify all losses which
could be pursued in tort. The Scheme does not attempt to make full restitution
for the wrong suffered
nor to put the claimants in the same position as they
would have been had they not suffered the wrong for which they are being
compensated.”
In my view, this is a correct statement of the
nature of the Scheme. The Scheme provides a statutory entitlement to indemnity.
is not a scheme involving general principles of insurance contract law. It
follows in my view, that there is neither a proposed or
actual “contract
of insurance” in the Scheme to which the provisions of section 5(1) of the
1986 Act attach.
Further, an analysis of the expression “State
insurance" leads me to the view that the Scheme does not involve “State
insurance". The term is not defined in the 1986 Act. As noted above, the
Applicant has submitted that “State insurance" is
simply insurance
conducted by the State. Under the circumstances it is reasonable for the
Tribunal to look to extrinsic material
in order to determine the meaning of the
expression.
The second reading speech made by the then Attorney General
and Minister for Co-operative Societies for the State of NSW on the 20
1986 says at page 1350 of Hansard :
It is not intended that
the Commonwealth legislation should be applied to those classes of insurance
which are basically social in
nature, such as compulsory third party motor
vehicle insurance and government worker’s compensation insurance. The Bill
exempts from the application of the applied provisions business
conducted by the GIO’s Insurance Funds Administration Business
that is, the noncommercial insurance funds administered by the
Earlier on the same page the Attorney General said
The insurance industry has called on the Government to avoid any
competitive advantage that might be enjoyed by the GIO by virtue
having to comply with the new Commonwealth laws. In turn, the GIO has indicated
its desire to be subject to the same constraints
and regulations as the private
sector, in order to maintain a position of competitive neutrality in the market
The Second Reading Speech indicates that the intention
of the 1986 Act was to place the GIO on the same footing as commercial insurers
in the State so as not to afford the GIO a competitive market place advantage.
In my view, the Scheme is not in a category of insurance which was
intended to be covered by the 1986 Act. Rather, the Scheme was,
to adopt the
terminology of the Attorney General introducing the Bill, in a category or class
of insurance which is “
basically social in nature .......
While the Scheme was not mentioned by name, nevertheless the scheme operated and
its successors continue to operate in an
environment which could not reasonably
be characterised as general insurance. In effect the scheme operates
independently of general
insurance supplied competitively in the market place.
It exists to offer protection to home owners where insurance is not otherwise
readily available.
It is relevant that the scheme under consideration
was introduced well after the 1986 Act. It was open to the Parliament to provide
that the 1986 Act ought to apply to the scheme but it did not do so.
follows, in my view, that the Commonwealth Act does not apply to the Scheme for
two reasons. Firstly, there is no contract of insurance
for the purposes of
section 5(1) of the 1986 Act. Secondly, the Scheme is not State insurance for
the purposes of section 5(1) of
the 1986 Act.
It is therefore not open
to the Applicant to rely on the provisions of section 54(1) of the Commonwealth
Act as denying FTAC the right
to refuse a claim by reason of the
Applicant’s failure to notify FTAC within the time specified under section
7(1)(c) of the
Section 54(1)
Insurance Contracts Act
(Commonwealth) is
not applicable to the Respondent.
The matter is to be relisted for a further Case Conference to allow the
Tribunal to make further directions as to the progress of
Application.
Ian McDonell
Chairperson
18 September 2000.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter