URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1340.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
State of New South Wales v Christopher Rizzo [2025] NSWSC 1340 (14 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
State of New South Wales v Christopher Rizzo
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1340
Hearing Date(s):
16 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
McNaughton J
As to the subpoena to produce issued to Aussie Lawyers Pty Ltd:
Except in relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam Canceri
sworn on 4 April 2025 and/or over which privilege
is not claimed as set out in
the Privilege Log annexed to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 9 September
2025 the subpoena be
As to the subpoena to produce
issued to The Legal Costs Consultants Pty Ltd:
(1) Except in relation to the
documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025
and/or over which privilege
is not claimed as set out in the Privilege Log
annexed to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 9 September 2025 the subpoena
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE — subpoenas — objection to production of
documents or things — client legal privilege — privileged
not to be produced
CIVIL PROCEDURE — subpoenas —
objection to production of documents or things — compliance burden
Legislation Cited:
Evidence Act 1995
Legal Profession Uniform
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Regulation 2015
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 33.4
Cases Cited:
Gilmore Finance Pty Ltd v Aesthete No 3 Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 114
Capital Group Pty Ltd v Xinfeng Australia International Investment Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 266
Racing New South Wales v Racing Victoria Ltd (No 2)
Hancock v Rinehart (Privilege)
[2016] NSWSC 12
McLure v Lam
[2025] NSWSC 1272
Sweeten v Haggerty
[2025] NSWSC 673
Secretary of the
Department of Planning, Industry and Environment v Blacktown City Council
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
State of New South Wales (Plaintiff) (Respondent)
Christopher Rizzo
(Defendant)
Aussie Lawyers Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Representation:
M Green SC, M Castle (Plaintiff) (Respondent)
E Chrysostomou
(Applicant)
Solicitors:
Norton Rose Fulbright (Plaintiff)
(Respondent)
Aussie Lawyers (Applicant)
File Number(s):
2024/00190108
Publication Restriction:
way of Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 2025, the
seek to set
aside two subpoenas issued on 10 April 2025 at the request of the
of New South Wales (the plaintiff/respondent).
be more precise, the orders sought are:
In relation to the subpoena to produce addressed to Aussie Lawyers dated 10
April 2025:
(1) Order that the Court set aside categories 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
), and order that Aussie Lawyers only be required to produce
those documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 4
in respect of the said categories.
In relation to the subpoena to produce addressed to The Legal Costs Consultants
dated 10 April 2025:
(2) Order that the Court set aside categories 2 to 4 pursuant to
the UCPR, and order that The Legal Costs Consultants only be required to produce
those documents exhibited to the affidavit of
Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025
in respect of the said categories.
applications arise in the context of an appeal against a costs assessment, yet
to be heard, brought by the State by way of summons
against the defendant
arising from his successful action against the State for
malicious prosecution (
the substantive matter
). This action arose from Mr
Rizzo’s encounter with the New South Wales police on 18 December 2021 and
is referred to as the
second proceedings
because it is the second of two
such actions taken by Mr Rizzo against the police. The earlier proceedings (the
first proceedings
) related to an encounter with the police on 30 December
2021, which were finalised in favour of Mr Rizzo prior to hearing. The
of these matters becomes apparent below.
applicants are respectively Mr Rizzo’s solicitors
Aussie Lawyers
Pty Ltd, and Aussie Lawyers’ costs consultants, The Legal
Consultants
Pty Ltd. Mr Canceri is Mr Rizzo’s solicitor and is the
principal of Aussie Lawyers.
way of overview, the subpoena to Aussie Lawyers seeks all file notes of
conversations with counsel relating to Mr Rizzo’s
proceedings, all time
sheets of Mr Canceri regarding
his matters over the periods 4 - 10
October 2022 and 3 - 14 March 2023 with the names of clients redacted, and all
communications
with the Costs Consultants
over periods covering some days
relating to Mr Rizzo’s proceedings. The subpoena to the Costs Consultants
seeks in essence all
communications with Aussie Lawyers and documents regarding
the second proceedings.
second proceedings were settled in favour of Mr Rizzo on the first day of
hearing on 14 March 2023 (following a failed mediation
on 10 October 2022) at
the District Court of New South Wales for $35,000 (following evidence from Mr
Rizzo in chief and in cross-examination),
with Mr Rizzo’s costs to be paid
by the State as agreed or assessed. The costs were not agreed. Ultimately,
Aussie Lawyers
issued an invoice for $401,083.10. That was subject to an
assessment by a costs assessor, Mr Mansfield, who determined Mr Rizzo’s
fair and reasonable costs were $171,225.93 and issued Certificates of
Determination. The State was not content with that assessment
and on 1 December
2023, sought a review of that determination before a Review Panel.
April 2024, the Review Panel assessed costs for the
$236,915.68 (including interest and filing fee).
22 May 2024, the State appealed the Review Panel’s determination by way of
summons filed in the District Court of New South
Wales under
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act
alleging error including as to proportionality,
procedural fairness and adequacy of reasons. The appeal was transferred, by
to this Court on 18 September 2024
on the plaintiff’s
application.
Condon, solicitor and the Director of Tort and Compensation Law at the office of
the General Counsel, NSW Police Force (
), filed an affidavit in
support of the transfer to this Court dated 31 July 2024. Included in that
affidavit was information in relation
to the high volume and value of
intentional tort claims made against the NSW Police Force and the assertion that
a large portion
of the State’s expenses were on account of legal costs
paid to the plaintiffs upon settlement. Mr Condon also stated:
“Aussie Lawyers has become a firm that represents a large portion of the
total intentional tort claims that are brought against
the State of New South
Wales involving conduct by officers of the NSW Police Force. Given their growing
presence as a plaintiff firm,
the issues arising in this Proceeding are likely
to have an impact across a number of claims in which Aussie Lawyers act for
plaintiffs,
as well as have a significant impact across the portfolio
generally.”
31 January 2025, the State filed another affidavit of Mr Condon, which asserted
numerous errors made by the Review Panel, and also
included, amongst other
things, allegations of overcharging on the part of Mr Rizzo’s solicitors
on three particular days:
3 March, 8 March and 13 March 2023. It can be noted
that there is no allegation of fraud made against the applicants, and this was
confirmed with Senior Counsel at the hearing.
Canceri filed an affidavit on 4 April 2025 in response to Mr Condon’s
affidavit conceding some overstatements of time and
annexing his file notes for
3 March and 8 March 2023.
It is conceded that privilege has been waived
in respect of these file notes.
Evidence on the Notice of Motion
following affidavits were read without objection on the Notice of
(1) For the applicants: three affidavits of Adam Canceri dated respectively 4
April 2025, 24 June 2025 and 9 September 2025;
(2) For the State: two affidavits of Christopher Condon dated respectively 31
July 2024 and 31 January 2025.
tendered for the State were:
(1) A letter dated 30 July 2025 from the State’s firm of solicitors,
Norton Rose Fulbright, setting out its contentions as
to the legitimate forensic
purpose of the subpoenas (Exhibit 1); and
(2) A summary document setting out times claimed by Adam Canceri for 4–10
October 2022 and 3–14 March 2023 (Exhibit 2).
provided to the Court, and marked for identification, was a one page
“Concessions Schedule” prepared by the State
indicating the adjusted
costs figure of $231,092.08 following allowance for errors conceded by Mr
Canceri of $5,823.60 deducted from
the Review Panel figure of
$236,915.68.
Summons in the substantive matter
stated above, the substantive matter in relation to which the subpoenas have
been issued is the State’s appeal against the
Review Panel’s
decision. Pursuant to
of the LPULAA,
“an appeal is to be
by way of a rehearing, and fresh evidence or evidence in addition to or in
substitution for the evidence
before the review panel or costs assessor may,
with the leave of the Court, be given on the appeal”. It is not a de novo
Gilmore Finance Pty Ltd v Aesthete No 3 Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 114
cited by Payne JA in at
Sweeten v Haggerty
[2025] NSWSC 673
argument was faintly put on behalf of the applicants that leave to file further
evidence should have been obtained
to the issuance of the
subpoenas. They conceded there was no authority to support that proposition,
and I can see no persuasive
reason why that course should be followed. I note
the second order sought in the Summons is in the following terms: “to the
extent necessary, leave to adduce fresh evidence or evidence in addition to or
in substitution for the evidence before the review
panel”. Whether this
order is made will be a matter ultimately for the judge hearing the summons.
That does not need determination
prior to the issuance of a subpoena.
order to consider the application in context, it is necessary to set out the
appeal grounds of the summons which are:
(1) The Review Panel failed to properly apply
Legal Profession
Uniform Law 2004
of the LPULAA and in
doing so failed to determine a quantum of costs which was fair and reasonable
and, in particular, proportionate.
(2) The Review Panel misapplied
LPULAA by allowing costs
which were not within the scope of the order for costs, and related to different
(3) The Review Panel failed in its duty to inform itself of relevant matters.
(4) The Review Panel denied procedural fairness to the plaintiff.
(5) The Review Panel failed to have proper regard to the evidence and to the
submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff.
(6) The Review Panel gave inadequate reasons for its determination.
Relevant evidence summary
noted, neither of the deponents were required for cross-examination. In that
light, I note the following relevant facts.
Canceri is the principal solicitor of Aussie Lawyers, who act for Mr Rizzo. The
second Rizzo proceedings were set down for a four
day hearing to commence on 14
March 2023, which (as noted above) settled on the first day, with costs as
agreed or assessed.
prior to the 14 March 2023 hearing (that is, on 3 and 10 March 2023) the State
provided Aussie Lawyers with two notices of
motion claiming privilege and public
interest immunity over certain documents subpoenaed from the Commissioner of
Police at the request
of Mr Rizzo. These notices of motion required an extensive
amount of work to be undertaken over a relatively short period of time
urgent basis. Both notices of motion were dismissed with costs ordered as
“costs in the cause” and the material
sought by Mr Rizzo was
required to be produced.
Canceri stated that Ms Morson from the Costs Consultants was given the legal
file for Mr Rizzo’s matter to prepare the bill
of costs. This was
consistent with Mr Canceri’s usual practice to outsource costs dispute
work as he does not have the necessary
time or requisite costs experience to run
a costs assessment himself.
Canceri did not recall reviewing the draft bill of costs before it was served on
Canceri sent a draft Costs Assessment Application and Bill of Costs
application for assessment
) to Ms Panos, (solicitor from Norton Rose
Fulbright, the firm instructed by the OGC), in accordance with reg 35 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Regulation 2015
(NSW), on 22
June 2023. The plaintiff was required to serve any objections to the application
for assessment within 21 days. No reply
was received within the required time.
A follow-up email was sent to Ms Panos on 7 August 2023.
Canceri stated that Ms Morson signed the certification on the Costs Assessment
Application. On 4 September 2023, Mr Canceri received
an email from Ms Morson
advising about a filing fee incurred when Ms Morson had filed the Costs
Assessment Application with the Supreme
Court on or about 4 August 2023. Mr
Canceri paid the filing fee.
14 September 2023,
costs assessor
, Mr Paul Mansfield, sent a
letter to the parties requesting further particulars and submissions on certain
matters including calling
for submissions on proportionality. Mr Canceri
complied with this request by way of letter dated 26 September 2023 and provided
copy to Ms Panos (minus enclosures already included, except for the Aussie
Lawyers Costs Agreement).
27 September 2023, Mr Canceri was copied into an email to Ms Panos from the
costs assessor. That same day, Mr Canceri was copied
into an email sent by Ms
Panos to the costs assessor stating she had not received the 14 September 2023
letter and that she would
seek instructions regarding the 14 day time
4 October 2023 and 9 October 2023 further correspondence was exchanged between
the costs assessor and the parties. One of
the matters clarified by Mr Canceri
at the request of the costs assessor was the existence of the first proceeding.
On 9 October
2023, the costs assessor sent an urgent letter to Ms Panos to the
effect he had received no submissions from the State and was allowing
until 12 October 2023 to provide objections or submissions.
4:49pm on 12 October 2023, Aussie Lawyers received the State’s Notice of
Objections via email. No further submissions were
made by Aussie Lawyers. Mr
Canceri stated that at the time the Notice of Objections were received he did
not read them and left it
with the Costs Consultants to attend to. No further
timetable was provided by the costs assessor for Aussie Lawyers to reply to the
State’s objections.
23 October 2023, the costs assessor advised the parties that the costs
assessment was complete. Mr Canceri stated he was surprised
given Mr Rizzo had
not been afforded a right of reply but did not think there was much he could do
1 December 2023, the State filed an application for review of the costs
assessor’s assessment. Mr Terence Stern and Mr Gordon
Salier constituted
the Review Panel. The Review Panel set a timetable for evidence and submissions
from the parties. Mr Canceri was
again assisted by Ms Morson. Mr Canceri
emailed Ms Morson on 6 December 2023, requesting her to draft a response to the
review application
within the required timeframe. On 15 February 2024, Mr
Canceri sent a further email to Ms Morson asking her to advise if there were
further steps they needed to take in relation to the review. Mr Canceri does not
recall receiving a response from Ms Morson.
Mr Canceri stated that Ms Morson did
not prepare a response to the review application and due to his workload, he did
not realise
that until after the review was completed.
Canceri was notified that the review panel had completed its review on 10 April
2024, and the Certificate of Determination was
issued on 24 April 2024
specifying the total amount payable by the State to Mr Rizzo is
$236,915.68.
relation to some claimed duplication of costs entries between the first and
second proceedings allegedly identified by Mr Condon
in his affidavit of 31
January 2025, Mr Canceri conceded there was a mix up in some entries made by Ms
Morson. This included some
entries incorrectly claimed in relation to the second
proceedings when they in fact related to the first proceedings. He denied any
duplication as alleged by Mr Condon.
to the alleged excessive costs claimed by the defendant, Mr Canceri stated that
he had undertaken a “complete review of the
disputed items in
detail” identified in paragraphs 43 and 44 of Mr Condon’s affidavit.
Amongst other things he stated:
“I am informed by Ms Morson that the items of work claimed under my name
on 3 March 2023, was an error on her part as a result
of misreading my
handwritten file notes as to time spent on tasks.
I have now also reviewed
my file notes and records
, and it appears that
the costs consultant has incorrectly claimed
hours for work carried
out on 3 March 2023 (see items 217, 218, 221–222, 224–231,
235–246 of the Bill of Costs).
I have now undertaken a review of the items in relation to 3 March 2023 and
having refreshed my collection [sic] based on a review
of the file, I estimate
that about 17.5 hours of the time claimed by my costs consultant should not have
been claimed. So only 15.4
hours should have been claimed on that day.
I have set out my analysis and the results of my review of the items in the bill
of costs on 3 March 2023 in the table at pages 245–248
of Exhibit AC-1.
The relevant material and/or file notes that pertain to those relevant items of
work carried out by me on 3 March
2023 are at pages 249–272 of Exhibit
I accept that 15.7 hours on one day is a large amount of time. However, on that
day I was preparing for the substantive proceedings
but then our office was
served with the First Notice of Motion and affidavit in support at approximately
3:30pm on 3 March 2023 which
required me to continue preparing for the
substantive hearing whilst at the same time also attending to all necessary
attendances
in relation to the First Notice of Motion [...].”
[Emphasis in italics added]
Canceri also undertook a review of the items in the bill of costs claimed on 8
March 2023 and concedes that 8.4 hours of the time
claimed by the Costs
Consultants should not have been claimed. Rather, only 11.6 hours should have
been claimed. He also produced
“the relevant material and/or files notes
that pertain to those relevant items of work carried out by [him] on 8 March
Canceri disagreed with Mr Condon’s opinion in relation to the amount
claimed for work undertaken on 13 March 2023.
to his affidavit of 24 June 2025 is a letter from Mr Canceri to the Registrar of
this Court dated 13 May 2025 formally objecting
to the production of documents
sought in paragraphs 2–7 of the Subpoena to Aussie Lawyers (noting
paragraph 1 simply seeks
a copy of the subpoena itself). It sets out detailed
submissions including that there has been no waiver of client legal privilege,
advice privilege or litigation privilege. In addition, Mr Canceri sets out his
general objection on the grounds that the subpoena
is oppressive, lacking any
legitimate forensic purpose and disproportionate to the issues in the
proceeding. In particular, Categories
2 and 3 which seek “all timesheets
for all work performed by fee earner Adam Canceri on all matters” over
multi-day periods,
with redactions to be made only for client names is claimed
to be not only overbroad, but fundamentally improper, as it demands that
firm manually inspect and review every matter across the practice, estimated in
excess of 1,500 files to locate potentially responsive
Mr Canceri’s affidavit of 9 September 2025 he set out a more detailed
response in relation to the various categories of the
subpoena, including the
compliance burden involved with complying with each category. As an example, as
to Categories 2 and 3 (timesheets),
“The timesheets requested include entries for multiple client matters
across specified date ranges. They contain confidential
descriptions of work
performed, much of which records legal advice to, and communications with,
clients. Any entries pertaining to
Mr Rizzo’s matter were created and
maintained for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice or conducting
litigation.
Compliance would require inspection of more than 1,500 client files
and redaction of unrelated privileged material. Compliance with
a time frame
narrowed down to one day would require the physical inspection of each and every
single file to ascertain all work performed
on a particular day/days and this
would also require going through approximately 200 hundred [sic] files involving
similar civil
claims against the State for intentional torts. This is because we
keep both handwritten and electronic work records in relation
to all work
performed on each matter that the firm handles. [...] The compliance burden is
extremely onerous, involving more than
1,500 files and would consume an
inordinate amount of time, resources and costs. This is especially so given the
practice employs
two other solicitors and four casual administrative assistants,
making it difficult to divert sufficient resources to the task without
disruption to client services.”
to Category 5 (timesheets for costs assessment/bill of costs), to Mr
Canceri’s knowledge there are no time sheets in relation
to the specific
work performed in the course of reviewing the costs assessment application and
the bill of costs.
Canceri otherwise maintains the claim of privilege and also claims privilege in
relation to the material sought by the other subpoena
to the Costs Consultants.
Canceri also annexed to his affidavit of 9 September 2025 a Privilege Log
which identifies, by reference to date, author, recipient, general
description, subpoena category and grounds of claim, the documents
responsive to
the Subpoenas that are withheld on the basis of client legal privilege,
confidential communications with Counsel and,
where applicable, on the grounds
of oppression due to overbreadth or intrusion into other clients’
confidential affairs. He
further stated that the descriptions provided have
been framed in general terms so as not to reveal the substance of any privileged
communications, and that he prepared the Privilege Log after reviewing the Rizzo
file, with assistance from his team at Aussie Lawyers.
also note that included in the material before me as an annexure to Mr
Condon’s affidavit of 31 January 2025 is the ‘Costs
Respondent’s Notice of Objection to Costs Applicant’s Bill of Costs
in Respect of Proceedings in the District Court of
New South Wales at
Sydney’ filed in relation to the substantive proceedings. This document
sets out in some detail the submissions
made by the State as to why Mr
Rizzo’s claimed costs are excessive and unreasonable and particularises
the basis for this contention
with some granularity. Detailed submissions are
made supporting allegations that the costs claimed involved unreasonable hourly
unreasonable time claimed for work concerned, unnecessary involvement of
three solicitors, excessive preparation and administrative
Relevant Law
Court has a broad discretion to set aside a subpoena, in whole or in part, or to
grant other appropriate relief: UCPR r 33.4.
subpoena must be issued for a legitimate forensic purpose. Such a purpose may be
presumed if the documents called for by a subpoena
have “apparent
relevance”, which must be assessed by reference to the issues in the
proceedings. It must not be a mere
“fishing expedition”, nor should
it be oppressive to the subpoenaed party by placing an excessive burden on that
Secretary of the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment v
Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
. In considering the
question of oppression, it is appropriate to take into account the
proportionality of the task to be undertaken
as compared to the apparent
relevance and forensic need for the documents:
[2025] NSWSC 1272
per Garling J.
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides, relevantly, that the
privilege and waiver provisions, including
subpoenas to produce documents.
Evidence Act
is headed “Legal Advice” and
Evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection by a client, the court finds
that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure
(a) a confidential communication made between
the client and a lawyer; or
(b) a confidential communication made between 2 or
more lawyers acting for the client; or
(c) the contents of a confidential document (whether
delivered or not) prepared by the client, lawyer or another
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or one or more of the lawyers,
providing legal advice to the client.
Evidence Act
is headed “Litigation” and
Evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection by a client, the court finds
that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure
(a) a confidential communication between
the client and another person, or between a lawyer acting
for the client and another person,
that was made; or
(b) the contents of a confidential document (whether
delivered or not) that was prepared—
for the dominant purpose of the client being provided with
professional legal services relating to an Australian or overseas proceeding
(including the proceeding before the court), or an anticipated or pending
Australian or overseas proceeding, in which the client
is or may be,
or was or might have been, a party.
Evidence Act
is headed “Loss of client legal privilege
– consent and related matters”.
Section 122
relevantly provides:
(2) Subject to subsection (5), this Division does not prevent
the adducing of evidence if the client or party concerned
in a way that is inconsistent with
the client or party objecting to the adducing of the
evidence because it would result in a disclosure
of a kind referred to
section 118
(3) Without limiting subsection (2),
a client or party is taken to have so acted if—
(a) the client or party knowingly and
voluntarily disclosed the substance of the evidence to another person; or
(b) the substance of the evidence has been disclosed with the
express or implied consent of the client or party.
(4) The reference in subsection (3)(a) to a knowing and
voluntary disclosure does not include a reference to a disclosure by a
who was, at the time of the disclosure, an employee or agent of
the client or party or of a lawyer of
the client or party
unless the employee or agent was
authorised by the client, party or lawyer to make the
disclosure.
relevant principles in relation to waiver by conduct were summarised by
Macfarlan JA (McCallum JA and Simpson AJA agreeing) in
Group Pty Ltd v Xinfeng Australia International Investment
[2020] NSWCA 266
as follows:
“1. The test is one of inconsistency between
the privilege holder’s conduct and its maintenance of
the privilege, not
one of general fairness or of relevance to an issue
in the proceedings.
2. Enquiring whether the privilege holder has made express or
implied assertions about the contents of the confidential communications,
whether its conduct has therefore “laid open the communications to
scrutiny”, assists in ensuring that the court’s
on inconsistency rather than simply relevance. If
the privilege holder is understood to be asserting something
contents of the communications, it is but a short step to
conclude that it would be inconsistent for it to prevent those contents
scrutinised.
3. On the other hand mere relevance of the content of the
privileged communications to an issue raised in the
proceedings by the
privilege holder does not equate to
inconsistency – something more is needed. It is of the essence
of legal professional privilege
that, if maintainable, it entitles a party
to withhold potentially relevant documents from inspection by the other
4. The determination of whether there has been an
express or implied assertion about the contents of privileged
communications
giving rise to a relevant inconsistency is an
evaluative decision to be made after consideration of the whole of the
circumstances
of the case. No hard and fast rules can be formulated. Those
circumstances will include the degree of relevance of any advice to
issues in the proceedings, the centrality of the relevant issues in the
proceedings and the likelihood of advice having been
given, informed, as the
High Court said in
Mann v Carnell
, by considerations of
5. Having considered all those circumstances, the court must
decide whether it would be inconsistent with the privilege holder’s
conduct for it to maintain privilege. The line between relevance to an issue and
inconsistency in this context may be very fine and
therefore one on which views
might well differ.”
Rees J helpfully set out some relevant principles relating to onus and privilege
Racing New South Wales v Racing Victoria Ltd (No 2)
[2024] NSWSC 312
“The onus to establish the facts upon which claims for privilege are
based is on the party claiming privilege:
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
at 689 (per Stephen, Mason and
Murphy JJ). That onus may be discharged by direct
evidence, “by reference to the nature of the
documents supported by
argument and
submissions” and by inferences drawn from other
proven facts:
AWB Ltd v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
[44(1)] (per Young J);
Hastie Group Ltd
(in liq) v Moore
[2016] NSWCA 305
(2016) 339 ALR 635
(per Beazley P and Macfarlan JA).”
at [14] Rees J set out the following relevant principles in relation to whether
a document attracts client legal privilege:
“In respect of
, a document has not been “prepared”
for the dominant purpose of obtaining legal advice where it has simply been
or collated” for that purpose; the document must be
brought into existence for the relevant purpose:
Guirina v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic)
[2020] VSC 1
(per Daly AsJ). As the learned
authors of Stephen Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(18th ed, 2022, Thomson
Reuters) observe, “It is the purpose in existence at the time of the
making of the communication or
the preparation of the document which is
determinative. Thus, a document will not be privileged merely because it was
handed to a
lawyer for the purpose of obtaining legal advice”: at 1057,
[EA.118.360] (citations omitted).”
Submissions
State contends that there is a legitimate forensic purpose to both subpoenas,
that oppression is not made out, that any claim
for privilege has not been made
out or, alternatively any privilege has been waived. Accordingly, the Notice of
Motion to set aside
the subpoenas should be dismissed with costs.
its written submissions, the State asserts that the source of Ms Morson’s
claimed misunderstanding which led to the errors
conceded by Mr Canceri, could
only have arisen by reference to the materials provided by Mr Canceri to Ms
Morson in drawing the bill.
To test whether that constituted a misunderstanding
“or something else” the State submits that reference to other
sought in the subpoena is also required. I note that given there is
no allegation of fraud made, the cryptic reference to “or
else” remains unexplained.
to the issue of oppression, the State observes that documents have already been
produced by both subpoenaed parties, and while
the fact of production does not
preclude an objection on the basis of oppression, it is a relevant matter for
the Court to consider.
can be noted that the State’s written submissions were submitted prior to
Mr Canceri’s affidavit of 9 September 2025.
Accordingly, the written
submission that there is no evidence of oppression is no longer accurate.
to the claim for privilege, the State relied upon
Rinehart (Privilege)
[2016] NSWSC 12
, for the proposition that the
applicants are required to adduce sworn evidence in relation to the precise
documents which have been
produced and to establish that the documents are
privileged. Again, this submission was made prior to Mr Canceri’s
of 9 September 2025 which annexed a privilege log. Further, in my
view, the factual situation in
is distinguishable and provides
little guidance in the circumstances of this case.
to the State’s contention that privilege has been waived, the State points
to the “essence” of Mr Canceri’s
evidence which is claimed to
be to the following effect: by reference to the file, I can now say there were
some errors. They were
not my fault, they were the fault of Ms Morson.
State thus asserts that Mr Rizzo’s defence of the substantive matter rests
on the basis of documents consulted and referred
to but in respect of which
privilege is sought to be maintained. It is contended that these positions are
clearly inconsistent and
the unfairness is that the State cannot test the
veracity of the evidence which Mr Canceri gives about the documents which he
provide the basis for his identification of the mistakes made in the
response, the applicants submit that the subpoenas are an abuse of process,
especially in light of the State’s model litigant
obligations. On any
view, it is submitted, some costs are payable, and the litigation of the matter
of costs is now very expensive
itself. The applicants further submit that the
subpoenas are overly broad and include documents which lack apparent relevance,
a fishing expedition “par excellence”; and in any event
call for documents which are privileged and that privilege has
relevantly waived either by Mr Rizzo or, via ostensible authority, by Aussie
Lawyers. To the extent that a limited number
of file notes have been produced
they have been specifically and “surgically” nominated.
Court has been informed that Mr Rizzo has offered to settle the matter for
$125,000, but that offer has not been accepted by the
State. As I understand
the position, the State only concedes costs in the realm of $41,000.
applicants contend that the State seeks broad categories of documents, many of
which are not apparently relevant to any issue
in the substantive matter, are
protected by legal professional privilege, and are unduly burdensome and
oppressive. It is submitted
that despite the assertion that the subpoenas are
justified by the need to test the affidavit evidence of Mr Canceri, the scope
intrusiveness of the categories far exceed what is permissible and
constitute an improper fishing expedition. In particular, the
attempt to obtain
time records for unrelated work over wide-ranging periods merely to
check for consistency or error is fishing
par excellence.
Consideration
will deal with each of the categories in turn. But first I make the following
general observation. Whilst I acknowledge that the
State has expressed concerns
Force and the noticeable
lack of apparent proportion between amounts claimed and
the costs of proceedings, I also keep in mind the issues in dispute in the
substantive matter, noting that they do not encompass any allegation of fraud.
It is alleged that the costs claimed involved unreasonable
hourly rates,
unreasonable time claimed for work concerned, unnecessary involvement of three
solicitors, excessive preparation and
administrative work, and that in making
its assessment the Review Panel made errors of law, denied procedural fairness
to have proper regard to the material before it. The matters in
dispute are thus matters which can be determined on material which
appears to be
available already. I also take into account the lack of challenge to any of the
affidavits read on behalf of the applicants
to Aussie Lawyers
Categories 2 and 3:
[2] All timesheets for all work performed by fee earner Adam Canceri on all
matters in the period 4 October 2022 to 10 October 2022,
with redactions made
for client names other than the Defendant;
[3] All timesheets for all work performed by fee earner Adam Canceri on all
matters in the period 3 March 2023 to 14 March 2023 with
redactions made for
client names of clients other than the Defendant.
first period (category [2]) is a period immediately preceding the mediation
which took place on 10 October 2022 and the second
period (category [3]) is a
period immediately preceding the hearing and ultimate settlement.
noted, the State seeks to justify this category on the basis that it wishes to
“test” Mr Canceri’s explanation
of the conceded error of 3
March 2023.
accept the material has apparent relevance. However, I agree with the
applicant’s contention that this category of documents
is oppressive. The
file note relating to 3 March 2023 has been produced. The uncontested evidence
is that in order to produce the
documents sought would require manual inspection
and then redaction of over 1500 files, most unrelated to Mr Rizzo’s
Further, in circumstances where the State has already been able to make
detailed submissions as to the lack of a fair and reasonable
basis for many of
the items claimed by Mr Rizzo, it is disproportionate to the forensic value of
the material to require the recipient
of the subpoena to undertake this work:
at [23]. That Mr Canceri has conceded certain errors but not
others does not alter the position. That Ms Morson has not come forward
witness is a matter for the judge in the substantive matter to deal with as that
judge thinks fit.
Accordingly,
I set aside Categories 2 and 3 of the Aussie Lawyers subpoena (except in
relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit
of Adam Canceri sworn on 4
April 2025).
Categories 4 and 5:
[4] All file notes by fee earner Adam Canceri of conversations with Adrian
Canceri of Counsel relating to
Christopher Rizzo v State of New South
– District Court of NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828;
[5] All time sheets for all work performed by fee earner Adam Canceri reviewing
the costs assessment application and the bill of
costs relating to
Christopher Rizzo v State of New South Wales
– District Court of
NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828
to Category 4, these documents are apparently relevant. However, in my opinion
this category is subject to client legal privilege
and/or litigation privilege
and privilege has not been waived (except in relation to the documents exhibited
to the affidavit of
Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025). As to privilege, such
an assessment can be made in this instance on the basis of the description
the documents themselves. As to the issue of waiver, whilst the State pointed
to Mr Canceri’s account set out in [
] above (especially what was stated by him at his
paragraph [76]), I am not of the view that it amounts to conduct inconsistent
the maintenance of the privilege in accordance with the principles in
set out at [
] above. The concessions Mr Canceri made were narrow
and he produced the related file notes. In the circumstances of this case I do
not accept that Mr Canceri’s narrow concession waived privilege.
to Category 5, I note that it was indicated in the course of the hearing that it
was initially not included in the Notice of Motion
as subject to challenge
because there was nothing to produce. However, I permitted (without objection)
the Notice of Motion to be
amended to include this paragraph.
any event, Aussie Lawyers have confirmed to the Court through their barrister
that there is nothing to produce. I will therefore
not deal further with this
light of the above, I set aside Categories 4 and 5 of the Aussie Lawyers
subpoena (except in relation to the documents exhibited
to the affidavit of Adam
Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025).
Categories 6 and 7:
[6] All documents and material provided to Charlotte Morson or any other staff
member of The Legal Costs Consultants Pty Ltd in relation
to the matter of
Christopher Rizzo v State of New South Wales –
District Court of
NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828;
[7] All correspondence exchanged between Aussie Lawyers Pty Ltd and The Legal
Costs Consultants Pty Ltd in respect of
Christopher Rizzo v State of New
South Wales –
District Court of NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828 in
the period 13 March 2023 to 24 April 2024 in relation to:
a. the preparation of the bill of costs;
b. the review of the bill of costs;
c. the process of submitting the bill of costs;
d. response to submissions on the bill of costs; and
e. preparation of submissions to the review panel on appeal of
the bill of costs.
Category 6 documents comprise the legal file and supporting documents given to
the Costs Consultants to prepare the bill. I accept
that the material has
apparent relevance. I further accept that the purpose of Aussie Lawyers
providing this material to Ms Morson
was for Ms Morson (a solicitor and costs
expert) to provide expert legal advice as to the appropriate costs in the
context of a costs
Lawyers submits that this latter fact alone means that litigation privilege
attaches to the whole file and it has not been
waived (except in relation to the
documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025).
However, as I understand
Evidence Act
, that submission
cannot be accepted. It is not the provision of the file to Ms Morson which
attaches privilege to the whole file,
even though the provision
file was made for the purposes of legal advice in the context of litigation.
Rather, it is necessary to consider whether each
document within the file
contained or comprised a confidential communication made for the dominant
purpose of the client being provided
with professional legal services in
relation to (relevantly) an Australian proceeding in which the client is a
this approach, it is still appropriate to consider the question of privilege. I
take into account Mr Canceri’s Privilege
Log which has listed each
document in the file in relation to which privilege is claimed, and the basis
for such claim. He has not
claimed privilege in relation to every document.
Despite some oral submissions by Senior Counsel for the State to the effect that
the Privilege Log consisted, in part, of rote claims for privilege, and the
claim for privilege in some instances did not appear
to be justified, I am not
in a position, without Mr Canceri being cross-examined, to second-guess the
matters set out by him in the
Privilege Log. As set out above at [
], Mr Canceri stated
that the descriptions given were framed in general terms so as not to reveal the
substance of any privileged
communications. I accept the claims for privilege
made by Mr Canceri.
Accordingly,
I set aside Category 6 of the Aussie Lawyers Subpoena
extent that it requires Aussie Lawyers to produce the documents over which
privilege is
claimed as set out in the Privilege Log annexed to the
affidavit of Adam Canceri dated 9 September 2025, and also
relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 4
April 2025.
to Category 7, it is submitted on behalf of Aussie Lawyers that the
correspondence sought by the subpoena is privileged, other
than sub-category
(c), which relates to the process of submitting the bill of costs. First, as to
sub-category (c), I cannot see
the apparent relevance of this sub-category. As
to the remaining sub-categories, they are apparently relevant, but I am of the
on the basis of the description of the documents themselves, that they
attract client legal privilege and/or litigation privilege.
Further, I am not of
the view that that privilege has been waived (except in relation to the
documents exhibited to the affidavit
of Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025). I
cannot see why the concession of mistakes and the production of file notes by Mr
in relation to two of the three days particularly targeted by Mr Condon
is conduct inconsistent with the maintenance of privilege,
especially when
considered in light of the contested issues in the substantive matter.
Accordingly,
I set aside Category 7 of the Aussie Lawyers Subpoena (except in relation to the
documents exhibited to the affidavit
of Adam Canceri sworn on 4 April
Subpoena to the Costs Consultants
Categories 2, 3 and 4:
[2] A copy of all correspondence between Charlotte Morson or any other staff
member of The Legal Costs Consultants Pty Ltd, and Aussie
Lawyers Pty Ltd in
relation to the matter of
Christopher Rizzo v State of NSW
District Court of NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828.
[3] All documents provided by Aussie Lawyers Pty Ltd to The Legal Costs
Consultants Pty Ltd in respect of the preparation of the
bill of costs in
Christopher Rizzo v State of NSW
– District Court of NSW proceeding
number 2022/00159828.
[4] All correspondence between The Legal Costs Consultants Pty Ltd and Aussie
Lawyers Pty Ltd in respect of submissions in respect
of the bill of costs and
the costs assessment appeal process in
Christopher Rizzo v State of NSW
– District Court of NSW proceeding number 2022/00159828.
to all of these categories, I am of the view, based on the description of the
documents themselves, that they are subject to client
legal privilege and/or
litigation privilege and for the reasons set out above that has not been waived
to the extent that it requires Aussie Lawyers to produce the
documents over which privilege is
claimed as set out in the Privilege
Log annexed to the affidavit of Adam Canceri dated 9 September 2025, and also
in relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam
Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025).
Accordingly,
I set aside categories 2–4 of the Costs Consultants subpoena pursuant to
UCPR r 33.4 and order that the Costs Consultants
only be required to produce
those documents referred to in the above paragraph.
for completeness, I note that paragraph 1 of each of the subpoenas simply seeks
a copy of the subpoena itself.
to the subpoena to produce issued to Aussie Lawyers Pty Ltd, I make the
following order:
(1) Except in relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam
Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025 and/or over which privilege
is not claimed as set
out in the Privilege Log annexed to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 9
September 2025 the subpoena be
to the subpoena to produce issued to The Legal Costs Consultants Pty Ltd, I make
the following order:
(1) Except in relation to the documents exhibited to the affidavit of Adam
Canceri sworn on 4 April 2025 and/or over which privilege
is not claimed as set
out in the Privilege Log annexed to the affidavit of Adam Canceri sworn on 9
September 2025 the subpoena be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter