URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DNV [2013] NSWGT 21 (27 May 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 21
(27 MAY 2013)
REVIEW OF ORDER RECOGNISING THE APPOINTMENT OF A FINANCIAL MANAGER AND
APPLICATION FOR A FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDER
Application Concerning:
Financial manager at time of hearing:
The Trust Company (Australia) Ltd
Date and place of hearing:
27 May 2013 at Newcastle
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Rhonda Booby
Professional Member:
Dr Ivan Beale
Community Member:
Ms Kerrie Laurence
Review of interstate recognition – brain
injury – compensation awarded in QLD – Trust Company appointed to
compensation amounts – Guardianship Tribunal had recognised Trust
Company in NSW – recognition revoked.
Financial management
– application for financial management order – subject person now
resides permanently in NSW - Trustee
Companies as FM - Corporations Act –
trustee companies - GDR v EKR
[2012] NSWSC 1543
– whether a private
financial manager may charge fees - Trust Company appointed as manager.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 27 May 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal made a financial management order and appointed The Trust Company
(Australia) Limited as Mr DNV's financial manager,
subject to the authorities
and directions ordered by the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Tribunal revoked the order made on 10 October 2012 recognising the appointment
of The Trust Company (Australia) Ltd as the administrator
of the estate of Mr
DNV (Mr DNV) is 23 years old and resides with his parents in Regional NSW. He
previously resided in Queensland. Mr DNV sustained
injuries in a motor vehicle
accident on 16 July 2009 and was awarded compensation by the Supreme Court of
Queensland on 10 September
2012. The Trust Company (Australia) Ltd was appointed
administrator of Mr DNV’s estate.
TAT and Mrs BAT, who are the parents of Mr DNV, are his carers.
DNV and his parents now reside permanently in New South Wales.
The Hearing
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. There was
no dispute in this matter.
Application for a Financial Management Order - What did the
Tribunal have to decide?
issues for the Tribunal in respect of the application for financial management
incapable of managing his affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Mr DNV’s affairs and is it in his best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing his affairs?
person’s capability to manage his or her affairs was discussed by Campbell
J in the NSW Supreme Court in
Re GHI (a protected person)
when His Honour affirmed the approach enunciated by Powell J in
[1982] 2 NSWLR 70.
Powell J said:
is my view that a person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own
financial affairs unless, at the least,
it appears:
(a) that he or she is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion
with the ordinary routine affairs of man; and
(b) that by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real risk
that either
he or she may be
disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
that such moneys
or property that he or she may possess may be dissipated or lost ... It is not
sufficient in my view merely to demonstrate
that the person lacks the high level
of ability needed to deal with complicated transactions or that he or she does
not deal with
even simple or routine transactions in the most efficient
Mr Justice Young in
(unreported NSW Supreme Court Equity Division
Protective List 20
March 2000) in dealing with the capacity test as
it has been enunciated in NSW, said that dealing with the “ordinary
of man” does not simply mean being able to go to the bank and draw
out housekeeping money. Most people’s affairs, His
Honour said,
“are more complicated than that, and the ordinary affairs of
mankind involve at least planning for the future, working out how
one will feed
oneself and one’s family and how one is going to generate income and look
after capital. Accordingly, whilst
one does not have to be a person who is
capable of managing complex financial affairs, one has to go beyond just
managing household
relevant time for considering whether a person is incapable of managing his/her
affairs is not merely the day of the hearing but
the reasonably foreseeable
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
the matter of
, the case cited above, Justice Campbell added two
further factors that are relevant when determining whether or not a person is
of managing his or her affairs. These were:
Whether or not
the person is willing to seek and take appropriate advice. In general the taking
of advice can remove the risk that
the lack of ability will cause the person to
be disadvantaged in the conduct of his or her affairs.
Whether the
person has the ability to identify and deal appropriately with those who may be
attempting to benefit from his or her
assets through unfair dealing. The lack of
this skill could create risk that the person might be disadvantaged or that his
estate might be dissipated or lost.
the more recent matter of
[2012] NSWSC 1006
(31 August 2012),
White J considered it appropriate to determine the matter with reference to the
particular circumstances of the
protected person and referred with approval to
the following statement by Barrett J in the matter of
[2003] NSWSC 819:
"The task of the court ... is to make
a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the person concerned to cope with
the ordinary
routine affairs of living, particularly so far as they concern the
person's property ... The point to be emphasised is that the requisite
is to be made in the light of objective physical facts concerning the relevant
person's property, money and other assets
and the way the person is able to look
after them. If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does not
Tribunal had regard to a letter dated 21 December 2011 addressed to “the
Court” by Dr Z, a Neurologist. In the letter
Dr Z describes the following
conditions which the Tribunal was satisfied reflect on Mr DNV’s ability to
manage his affairs:
attention span with poor concentration;
memory problems;
language problems
Tribunal also had regard to an Occupational Therapy Report dated 23 December
2011 compiled by Ms Y. In the report Ms Y refers
an earlier cognitive assessment
completed on 28 May 2011 by an occupational therapist which identifies that at
that time Mr DNV had
moderate difficulties in the areas of foresight, planning
and problem solving. Ms Y refers to the following conditions, noted during
assessment, which reflect on Mr DNV’s ability to manage his affairs:
memory deficits
with limitations in visual and verbal memory, new learning, future planning and
recall of events;
insight regarding his capabilities;
difficulty with
abstract thoughts;
some difficulty
with more complex mathematical skills such as those involved in budgeting,
planning and organising;
limitations with
respect to planning and organising especially regarding complex multifactorial
tasks such as those involved in budgeting,
planning and shopping for a
difficulties in speaking.
Tribunal noted that according to a Schedule of Investments as at 16 January 2013
provided by the applicant, Mr DNV’s total
investments were valued at over
$4 million.
the hearing Mr TAT said that in his opinion, there has been no improvement in Mr
DNV’s ability to manage his affairs
since the date of the health and
medical professionals’ assessments referred to above.
DNV said that he believes that he continues to require another person to manage
his affairs for him.
all of these matters into account the Tribunal was satisfied that Mr DNV is not
able to manage his affairs, including his invested
funds in excess of four
million dollars.
Is there a need for another person to manage Mr
DNV’s affairs and is it in his best interests for a financial management
to be made?
Tribunal had regard to the order of the Supreme Court of Queensland which
endorsed an agreement that Mr DNV be paid the sum of
$5,150,000 being primary
damages of $4,400,000 and fund management fees of $750,000.
noted in the preceding section of these Reasons, Mr DNV’s investments were
valued by the applicant at over $4 million as
at 16 January 2013.
noted in the preceding section of these Reasons, Mr DNV was of the view that he
required another person to manage his affairs for
into account these matters the Tribunal was satisfied that Mr DNV is unable to
manage an estate of this nature and that he
requires another person to manage
his affairs.
the hearing Mr DNV and his parents confirmed that the family now resides
permanently in NSW where Mr DNV has purchased a property
which he shares with
his parents and siblings. They advised that:
exception of Mr DNV’s older sister, all the family resides in NSW in the
Sydney to Central Coast region.
The property has
been remodelled so that Mr DNV has his own living quarters including a
lounge/dining area and an ensuite bathroom.
Trust Company (Australia) Ltd, the administrators of the Mr DNV’s estate,
have applied to the Tribunal seeking a financial
management order for Mr DNV and
the revocation of the recognition of their appointment under the order of the
Supreme Court of Queensland.
Tribunal was satisfied that as Mr DNV has moved permanently to New South Wales
it is appropriate and in his best interests that
it make a financial management
order as opposed to having his affairs managed under the order made by the
Supreme Court of Queensland.
all of these matters into account the Tribunal decided to make a financial
management order.
Who should be appointed financial
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(‘the Act’), the Tribunal must act with
the interests of the person concerned as the paramount consideration and in
with the other principles set out in
of the Act.
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial
management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the person’s
or may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and
deciding whom to appoint as the financial manager, the Tribunal took into
account matters raised in the Supreme Court of NSW in
respect of financial
management by private companies.
the matter of
[2012] NSWSC 1543
, White J. considered whether a
private company should be appointed as a financial manager. His Honour referred
section 911A
Corporations Act 2001
which requires
that (subject to some exclusions) a person who carries on a financial services
business must hold an Australian Financial
Services Licence covering the
provision of financial services.
Section 911A(4)(b)
establishes that a person is
not exempted from this requirement if the service provided is a traditional
trustee service.
the matter of
White J also referred to
section 766A
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) which establishes that the provision by a
trustee company of a traditional trustee company service constitutes the
of a financial service.
Sub-section
601RAC(1)(a) and 610(2)(e) of the
Corporations Act 2001
) establish
that acting as manager or administrator of the estate of an individual
constitutes an “estate management function”
which in turn
constitutes a “traditional trustee company service”.
into account the above matters the Tribunal concluded that, as the manager of Mr
DNV’s estate, The Trust Company (Australia)
Ltd would be required to
possess a financial services licence. Mr X of The Trust Company advised the
Tribunal that The Trust Company
(Australia) does have the requisite licence and
provided the Tribunal with an outline of The Trust Company Group Structure
that The Trust Company (Australia) possesses an Australian Financial
Services Licence number 235145.
Tribunal noted that the Income Payments Schedule provided by the applicant
indicates that a management fee had been paid from
Mr DNV’s estate to the
Trust Company.
the matter of
White J considered the issue of whether or not a
private manager is entitled to remuneration.
paragraph 32 White J states:
“it has been long established
that a private manager is not entitled to payment of remuneration out of the
protected persons’
estate, although the Court may authorise payment of
remuneration where it is in the protected person’s interest to do so. The
position concerning remuneration of financial managers (apart from the NSW
Trustee and Guardian and trustee companies that have a
statutory right to
remuneration) is analogous to that of trustees. Unless the trust deed provides
otherwise a trustee is required
to act gratuitously ...”
paragraph 33 White J refers to section 115 of the
NSW Trustee and Guardian
which provides that the Supreme Court or the NSW Trustee and Guardian
may order costs to be paid out of an estate, including remuneration
specified amount to the manager of an estate.
Corporations Act 2001
establishes that a licenced
trustee company may charge fees for the provision of traditional trustee company
Corporations Act 2001
establishes that a
“licensed trustee company” means a trustee company holding an
Australian Financial Services Licence
covering the provision of one or more
traditional trustee services
Corporations Act 2001
) establishes that a
“trustee company” includes a company prescribed in the Regulations
to the Act as a trustee company.
Corporations Regulations 2001
lists The Trust Company
(Australia) Ltd as a Trustee Company.
noted at paragraph 33 (above) sub-section 601RAC(1)(a) and 610(2)(e) of the
Corporations Act 2001
) establish that acting as manager or
administrator of the estate of an individual constitutes an “estate
management function”
which in turn constitutes a “traditional
trustee company service”.
into account the matters outlined in paragraphs 37 to 43, above, the Tribunal
was satisfied that as a licenced trustee company
providing a traditional trustee
company service, The Trust Company (Australia) Limited is likely to be entitled
to be remunerated
as a manager of an estate.
Manager Liaison of the NSW Trustee and Guardian said that the NSW Trustee and
Guardian considers the fees charged to be commensurate
with those charged by
similar bodies.
TAT said that the family was aware of the fees being charged and was satisfied
that they are reasonable.
Schedule of Investments in respect of Mr DNV’s estate indicates that much
of his estate is invested in a pension account
with a current estimated value of
over $3 million. Mr X for The Trust Company Ltd said that there is no
relationship between The
Trust Company and the pension fund service provider. He
said that the decision to invest Mr DNV’s funds in the pension fund
service provider was made because that fund charges no commission and has a
cheaper administration fee than similar funds.
X advised that the amount invested in the superannuation scheme is net of $1.4
million paid out for the purchase, renovation and
furnishing of Mr DNV’s
house and a cash advance to Mr DNV when the house purchase was finalised.
TAT and Mrs BAT said that they are satisfied with The Trust Company (Australia)
as Mr DNV’s financial manager.
Tribunal noted that a significant sum had been spent on the purchase and
renovation of Mr DNV’s home. In response to a question
from the Tribunal,
Mr TAT and Mrs BAT indicated that should Mr DNV wish to live in his home without
his family they would accept
that decision and vacate the premises.
Tribunal noted that on 17 October 2012 the NSW Trustee and Guardian had issued
Directions and Authorities to the Trust Company
(Australia) Ltd in respect of
the management of Mr DNV’s estate.
into account all of these matters the Tribunal was satisfied that The Trust
Company (Australia) Ltd was suitable to be appointed
as financial manager for Mr
DNV subject to the authorities and directions of the NSW Trustee and
Review of the Recognition of the Appointment of the
Administrator
Guardianship Act
provides for the recognition by the
Tribunal of the appointment of a person appointed as the manager of the estate
of another person
under a corresponding law.
10 October 2012 the Tribunal made an order recognising the Interstate
Appointment of a Financial Manager and recognised The Trust
Company (Australia)
Ltd as the administrator of the estate of Mr DNV.
Guardianship Act
provides that the applicant’s
recognition may be reviewed, varied or revoked as if it were an appointment
under the Act.
reviewing the recognition of the interstate appointment of The Trust Company
(Australia) for Mr DNV, the Tribunal must confirm,
confirm and vary or revoke
the recognition of the financial management order. In doing so it must act to
achieve the best interests
In an application received by the Tribunal on 17 January 2013 The Trust Company
(Australia) Ltd sought the revocation of the recognition
of its appointment
under the order made by the Supreme Court of Queensland, and its appointment as
Mr DNV’s financial manager
under a financial management order.
Taking into account its decision to make a financial management order and to
appoint The Trust Company (Australia) Ltd as Mr DNV’s
financial manager
the Tribunal was satisfied that there is no longer a need to recognise the
appointment of The Trust Company Australia
under the order made by the Supreme
Court of Queensland
into account all of these matters the Tribunal was satisfied that it was in the
best interests of Mr DNV to revoke the recognition
of The Trust Company
(Australia) Ltd as the administrator of Mr DNV’s estate.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (408 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter