URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/135.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Turnberry Builds Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Customer Service; Young v Secretary, Department of Customer Service [2025] NSWCATOD 135; (2 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Turnberry Builds Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Customer Service; Young
v Secretary, Department of Customer Service
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 135
Hearing Date(s):
2 September 2025
Date of Orders:
2 September 2025
Decision Date:
2 October 2025
Occupational Division
K Ransome, Principal Member
File Number 2025/00244650
(1) The request by
Turnberry Builds Pty Ltd for interim orders in relation to the decision made by
the respondent to cancel the
applicant's licence and to disqualify it from
holding a licence for a period of five years is refused.
Number 2025/00244686
(1) The request by Nathanial
Young for interim orders in relation to the decision made by the respondent to
cancel the applicant's
licence and to disqualify him from holding a licence for
a period of four years is refused.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – administrative review of disciplinary decisions
– applications to stay operation of decisions –
factors relevant to
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Cases Cited:
AVS Group of Companies Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police
[2010] NSWCA
McGufficke v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2022] NSWCATOD 176
Protection Security Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAP 113
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
File Number 2025/00244650
Turnberry Builds Pty Ltd
(Applicant)
Secretary, Department of Customer Service
(Respondent)
File Number 2025/00244686
Nathanial Young
(Applicant)
Secretary, Department of Customer Service (Respondent)
Representation:
A Martin (Applicants)
Solicitors:
Kells Lawyers
(Applicant)
Department of Customer Service (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00244650 & 2025/00244686
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
16 April 2025 the Secretary, Department of Customer Service (“the
respondent”) determined to take disciplinary action
against Turnberry
Builds Pty Ltd (“Turnberry”) and Nathaniel Young (“the
disciplinary decisions”). Mr Young
is the sole director of Turnberry and
was the nominated supervisor for Turnberry. The licences of both were cancelled
and both are
disqualified from, in essence, being involved in the building
industry for some years – Turnberry for five years and Mr Young
years. The disciplinary decisions were affirmed on internal review on 3 June
26 June 2025 Turnberry and Mr Young sought administrative review of the
disciplinary decisions by the Tribunal. On 8 August 2025
Turnberry and Mr Young
sought a stay of the disciplinary decision relating to them. I refused those
applications on 2 September 2025.
Turnberry and Mr Young have requested I
provide my reasons for doing so.
disciplinary action was taken on the basis that Turnberry and Mr Young had
breached several provisions of the
allegations against Turnberry and Mr Young which formed the basis of the
disciplinary action were:
(1) In November 2022 Turnberry entered into an oral contract with the owners to
do residential building work at a property in Figtree.
(2) On 13 November 2022 Turnberry issued an invoice to the owners for $30,000
being a 15% deposit for the building work. The deposit
was paid in full by the
owners. The deposit was in excess of the maximum amount of a deposit for
residential building works of 10%
of the contract price prescribed by
(3) Turnberry failed to provide the owners with a signed copy of the contract
within five clear business days after entering into
the contract as required by
. The owners were provided with a formal written
contract on 6 January 2023.
(4) Turnberry did residential building work and received payments without home
warranty insurance in place in contravention of
Building Act
(5) On 20 February 2024 Turnberry submitted an application for home warranty
insurance which contained false information which included
a fraudulent contract
bearing the date 14 February 2024, an estimated start date for the works of 14
February 2024 when works had
commenced in November 2022, and seven items missing
from the agreed scope of works.
(6) Turnberry breached statutory warranties under
as an Inspection Report showed 27 items of defective or incomplete work at
the Figtree property.
(7) Turnberry completed residential building work at a property in Austinmer in
October 2024 without obtaining home warranty insurance.
Turnberry and Mr Young were found by the respondent to have engaged in improper
conduct arising out of these allegations.
and Mr Young do not appear to dispute that the conduct complained of by the
respondent occurred, although they put forward
several mitigating factors and
argue that the penalty imposed is unduly harsh.
disciplinary decisions be stayed?
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (“ADR
Act”) empowers the Tribunal to make an order staying or otherwise
affecting the operation of the decision
under review as it considers appropriate
to secure the effectiveness of the determination of the application. While the
term “stay”
is used in these reasons it is recognised that the power
under s 60(2) of the ADR Act is one that enables the Tribunal to
temporarily
reinstate a licence that has been cancelled pending the hearing of
an application for review of a decision to revoke the licence:
AVS Group of
Companies Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police
[2010] NSWCA 81
principles relevant to the exercise of the discretion under provisions such as s
60(2) of the ADR Act are set out in
QLD Protection Security Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2018] NSWCATAP 113.
principles can be summarised as follows:
(1) whether the order is appropriate to secure the effectiveness of the
determination of the application for review;
(2) whether the order is desirable taking into account:
(a) the interests of any persons who may be affected by the determination of the
application for review;
(b) any submission made by or on behalf of the administrator who made the
decision to which the application relates;
(c) the public interest;
(3) the applicant’s prospects of success on the application for review.
circumstances that are relevant in any particular case to the considerations
identified above may well overlap or be interrelated.
at [129] the Court of Appeal held that securing the effectiveness of the
determination of the application involves matters such as
ensuring that the
lapse of time before the determination is actually made does not deprive the
review of practical point. The Court
went on to say that it also involves
considering the possibility that the result of the review might be that the
decision is affirmed,
with the consequence that, if stay is granted, the
decision has not been implemented during the period of the stay.
Young has provided two affidavits in support of the stay application. He states
that he is currently unable to work as a builder
for Turnberry or as a nominated
supervisor for another company. Similarly, Turnberry is unable to work as a
builder. He states that
this has had a significant impact on his business and on
his personal finances. He also provides background information concerning
Figtree property.
primary matter relied upon by Mr Young concerning whether a stay is necessary to
secure the effectiveness of the review relates
to the viability of Turnberry. Mr
Young states that the company now has significant debts and has provided
invoices dating back to
March 2025 which he indicates remain unpaid. He states
that the company is at risk of external administration which would likely
the business come to an end and his creditors not paid in full.
Young also refers to his family’s financial circumstances and states that,
if he is not able to work, he would need a further
$38,000 a year to cover his
family expenses. He is concerned about the impact on his wife and three young
children if he is unable
to meet these expenses, including his ability to repay
his mortgage.
Young states it is likely that, if a stay is not granted, there will be no
remaining business to be licenced should his application
for review be
successful. He notes that the period in which the licences would be reinstated
is relatively short, the substantive
hearing being listed in February 2026. He
states that there would not be any risk to the public if the licences were
reinstated as
there is “zero risk” of him acting again in the way he
did. He notes that he has not had other complaints against him
or the company
during the time they have held licences.
Mr Young has provided some invoices which he indicates remain unpaid, he has not
provided any evidence of the current financial
position of either the company or
himself. It is therefore not possible for me to make any assessment of the
likelihood of Turnberry
going into administration. It does not appear that any
action has been taken to date, even though the company has not been trading
since March 2025. I note that a stay was not sought at the time the applications
to the Tribunal were made and it is now a relatively
short period of time until
the final hearing. In the absence of any evidence that the company is facing
external administration,
I am not satisfied that a stay is required to secure
the effectiveness of the review.
accept that there are other people whose interests may be affected by the
determination of the review. Mr Young refers to employees
who have lost their
jobs. I note that the licences were suspended on 12 March 2025 and that it is
now many months since the company
has traded. While the situation of his
employees is unfortunate, at least one has found other employment. Mr Young
states that the
two apprentices he employed have not found anyone to take on
their apprenticeships. It is not clear whether they have found alternative
employment.
Young has not provided any substantial evidence concerning his family’s
financial situation, but I accept that his loss of
income would have had an
adverse effect upon the family’s finances. Mr Young also states the family
income has been further
reduced as his wife is currently on workers
compensation. He has not, however, provided details of the family’s
expenditure
to enable a proper assessment to be made of the impact of his loss
Young states that projects he had underway at the time the licences were
suspended and then cancelled have had to be completed
by others. He does not
provide any evidence that those homeowners are waiting for him to return. He
does say, however, that prior
to the suspension Turnberry was in the final
stages of quoting on two projects. The homeowners for one of these projects have
a letter of support for Mr Young and speak highly of his
professionalism. They state, however, that they are not privy to the
circumstances
which led to the cancellation of the licences.
Young also refers to three smaller projects which he states would enable the
company to stay afloat. The homeowners in relation
to those three projects state
that the continued involvement of Mr Young is essential.
of the above projects are on foot and, while I accept that it may take the
owners some time to find a replacement builder (if
they have not done so
already), that course is open to them, particularly in circumstances where work
has not commenced. I also accept
that they may incur some additional
respondent submits that, as Mr Young, has been dishonest in his application for
to obtain insurance in the future
which would mean he would be limited to work not requiring home warranty
insurance. The respondent
notes that all projects mentioned by Mr Young require
insurance. I agree with Mr Young that, in essence, the respondent’s claim
with regard to the availability of insurance is speculative.
I accept that there are people whose interests may be affected by the outcome of
the determination of the review application,
this factor must be weighed against
the other considerations.
respondent makes submissions concerning the protective nature of the
Building Act
for consumers in the contracting for and the construction of
residential buildings:
McGufficke v Commissioner for Fair Trading
NSWCATOD 176
. She submits there is a broad public interest in the
integrity of the residential building sector and ensuring compliance with the
regulatory regime.
Young seeks to characterise the relationship between himself and his wife and
the Figtree homeowners as one of friendship. That
may be so, but that does not
explain why Mr Young failed to provide a written contract, failed to obtain home
warranty insurance
and provided false information to the insurer when he did
make such an application. It also does not explain his behaviour in failing
obtain insurance for the Austinmer property.
Young also argues that the respondent failed to take into account that he
rectified the defects found in the work at Figtree. As
the respondent points
out, however, his obligation was to undertake work without defects.
allegations against Mr Young and Turnberry are serious, particularly the
prospect of leaving homeowners with work that is uninsured.
Mr Young does not
dispute these matters but his current tendency to downplay their importance
does not suggest he fully appreciates
the seriousness of his conduct.
is always very difficult to assess an applicant’s prospects of success in
an administrative review application. As noted,
Mr Young does not challenge the
matters relied upon by the respondent in the disciplinary decisions. Rather, he
disputes the penalty
which he describes as harsh and unreasonable. Mr Young
states his actions were an aberration and an isolated incident. He also submits
that the penalty is out of keeping with that imposed in other cases. Overall,
the question of whether Mr Young and Turnberry would
be successful in their
review applications is finely balanced.
matters which led to the disciplinary action against Mr Young and Turnberry
involve serious non-compliance with their legal obligations.
The seriousness of
these matters lead me to conclude that these matters outweigh the interests of
Mr Young and others and the business
of Turnberry. I am also not satisfied it
would in the public interest to allow him and Turnberry to operate on an interim
basis pending
the outcome of the reviews.
Young has proposed that he give an undertaking to notify all customers of these
proceedings and to comply with the
. He also undertakes to
offer reemployment to the employees stood down following the suspension of the
licences. It is Mr Young’s
and Turnberry’s legal obligation to
comply with the
. Any undertaking in that regard can offer no
further protection to the public. As to the former employees, it is not clear
offer of employment, possibly for a few months only, is significant.
While notifying perspective clients of these proceedings may
offer some comfort,
I am not satisfied that this would sufficiently counter my other concerns.
applications for interim orders staying the operation of the decisions under
review are therefore refused.
File Number 2025/00244650
(1) The request by Turnberry Builds Pty Ltd for interim orders in relation to
the decision made by the respondent to cancel the applicant's
licence and to
disqualify it from holding a licence for a period of five years is refused.
Number 2025/00244686
(1) The request by Nathanial Young for interim orders in relation to the
decision made by the respondent to cancel the applicant's
licence and to
disqualify him from holding a licence for a period of four years is refused.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter