URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Abercrombie [2025] NSWPICMR 32; (24 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Abercrombie [2025] NSWPICMR
Kimberlee Abercrombie
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
24 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
dispute under
section 6.24
; whether a request for further information and
documents in connection with a claim for reimbursement of costs of care is
and whether the claimant has a reasonable excuse for failing to
comply; inconsistencies in the evidence; credit issues; insurer seeks
documents to determine the validity of the claim and whether any part of the
claim may be fraudulent;
– the insurer’s request for
further information and documents is reasonable and the claimant does not have a
excuse for their failure to comply.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
reviewable decision is about the duty of the claimant to co-operate with the
insurer pursuant to s 6.24 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
MAI Act) and is therefore a merit review matter under Schedule 2(1)(x) of the
The following determinations are made:
the purposes of s 6.24 of the MAI Act a request for the claimant to provide to
the insurer executed authorities to the following
is reasonable:
(a) Department of Home Affairs;
(b) Dr Matthew Tait;
(c) Hills Doctors Medical Practice;
(d) NIB Health Fund;
(e) Medicare and PBS;
(f) NDIS, and
(g) Sir Joseph Montefiore Jewish Home.
the purposes of s 6.24 of the MAI Act, a request for the claimant to provide the
following further information to the insurer
is reasonable:
(a) the particulars requested in the insurer’s email dated 4 March 2025,
(b) the particulars requested at paragraphs 4(a) to (j) and paragraph 5 of the
letter from the insurer’s solicitors to the
claimant’s solicitors
dated 16 April 2025.
the purposes of s 6.24 of the MAI Act, a request for the claimant to provide the
following documents is reasonable:
(a) bank statements for the period 1 April 2024 to date.
the purposes of Schedule 2(1)(x) of the MAI Act, the claimant does not have a
reasonable excuse for failing to comply with the
claimant’s legal costs are assessed as nil.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Kimberlee Abercrombie (the claimant) and the insurer about
the duty of the claimant to co-operate with
the insurer pursuant to s 6.24 of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
claimant was involved in a motor accident on 18 May 2024.
claimant lodged an application for personal injury benefits and has made claims
for statutory benefits for reimbursement of carer
costs (the care claim).
16 April 2025, in correspondence from their solicitors, the insurer notified the
claimant of concerns regarding documents submitted
by the claimant in relation
to, inter alia, care provided by a carer named Sydney and requested certain
signed authorities to release
documents and an explanation about matters by way
of a signed statement from the claimant. The insurer requested a response from
the claimant by 14 May 2025.
22 May 2025 the insurer’s solicitor wrote to the claimant’s
solicitor, noting no response had been received and requested
provision of the
outstanding material by 29 May 2025.
27 May 2025 the claimant’s solicitor acknowledged receipt of the letter
22 May 2025 and advised they would seek instructions and respond in
due course.
10 June 2025 the insurer’s solicitor emailed the claimant’s
solicitor following up a response to the above correspondence.
16 June 2025 the insurer’s solicitor wrote to the claimant’s
solicitor setting out the above history and advising that
failing a response
within 14 days, the insurer would consider alternative means to obtain the
information which might include a merit
review application.
4 July 2025 the insurer’s solicitor emailed the claimant’s solicitor
noting no response had been received and advising
that if a response was not
forthcoming by 14 July 2025, a merit review application would be filed with the
Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
response was received from the claimant. The insurer seeks a merit review as to
whether the outstanding documents and information
is reasonably required by the
insurer and whether the claimant has a reasonable explanation for failing to
comply with the request.
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s submissions
insurer submits their requests for further information and documents are
reasonable, and that the claimant has failed to comply
with the request to
furnish specified information, as required by s 6.24(2) of the Act.
insurer notes the objects of the MAI Act, including s 1.3(f) which places an
obligation on the insurer to deter fraud in connection
with compulsory third
party insurance and s 1.3(g) which provides an obligation to encourage the early
resolution of motor accident
claims and the quick, cost effective and just
resolution of disputes.
insurer submits it has brought to the claimant’s attention the
inconsistences in the documentation provided and requested
provision of signed
authorities and evidence for consideration by the insurer in connection with
their obligation to deter fraud.
insurer seeks provision of authorities to release documents executed by the
claimant to the following:
(a) Department of Home Affairs;
(b) Dr Matthew Tait;
(c) Hills Doctors Medical Practice;
(d) NIB Health Fund;
(e) Medicare and PBS;
(f) NDIS, and
(g) Sir Joseph Montefiore Jewish Home.
(The authorities.)
insurer also seeks the following information in a statement from the claimant
setting out:
(a) the care provided to the household, including to the claimant’s
children in the
pre-accident period and any changes to care provided after
the accident;
(b) details as to whose care the children were in on the day of the accident;
(c) details of who provided care to the children during the claimant’s
hospitalisation;
(d) the reason for the change to the children’s schooling in June/July
(e) details of all work performed by the claimant in the post-accident period;
(f) details of all work performed by the claimant in the two years before the
(g) the nature of the claimant’s carer’s allowance and the care
(h) details of any NDIS funding provided to the claimant or her children, and
(i) details of any child support paid to the claimant or her children.
(The particulars.)
addition, the insurer seeks copies of the claimant’s bank statements from
1 April 2024 to date (the bank statements).
request for the claimant to execute an authority to Centrelink is no longer
pressed, as the insurer has now requested documents
from Centrelink via the
Centrelink portal.
9 October 2025 the claimant provided executed authorities to for Hills Doctors
Medical Practice and Dr Mathew Tait. As such, these
authorities are also no
longer in dispute.
the preliminary conference with the parties on 7 October 2025 the insurer
indicated the particulars may be provided by the
claimant by way of provision of
further and better particulars rather than a signed statement. I will therefore
not address whether
the particulars should be provided in a signed statement
from the claimant.
insurer submits the authorities, particulars and bank statements are relevant to
issues to be considered and/or determined by
the insurer for the following
(a) the claimant was examined by Medical Assessor Jones, psychiatrist, in the
threshold injury dispute. During this assessment the
claimant advised she had
been offered a job and had signed a contract to work as a clinical director
overseas in Abu Dhabi. She also
stated she was working with Montefiore in the
interim while she waited for her visa and paperwork to come through. The
claimant reported
that “all of that went to crap as well”;
(b) clinical notes from Movement Mill Physiotherapy include clinical entries for
attendances on 10 February 2025 and 14 February
2025 which note the claimant
would likely be travelling to the Philippines in March;
(c) the claimant has lodged a claim for common law damages;
(d) records held by the Department of Home Affairs are relevant to a claim for
past and/or future economic loss, given the claimant
alleges she was offered a
job and had signed a contract for a role which required overseas travel but says
the role did not eventuate
because of the accident;
(e) records held by the Department of Home Affairs would assist the insurer to
test the veracity of the claimant’s assertions
as such records should
reveal, inter alia, what, if any steps the claimant had taken to secure a visa
for the role, and
(f) the claimant alleges she sustained psychiatric injuries in the accident and
a key element considered when assessing the psychiatric
injury is whether the
claimant has any impairment in the domain of travel. Records from the Department
of Home Affairs will assist
the insurer to investigate whether the claimant has
travelled internationally, which is directly relevant to assessment of quantum.
insurer maintains their request is entirely reasonable, and the claimant has,
without a reasonable excuse, failed to cooperate
and furnish the requested
information.
Claimant’s submissions
claimant acknowledges the further information has not been provided to date but
says it should be noted the insurer has made serious
allegations against the
claimant and the particulars sought relate to complex matters.
claimant says a response to the request is being prepared and will be provided
in due course.
claimant acknowledges the alleged matters raised by the insurer are important
but says the insurer has not provided reasons for
the urgency.
claimant says it should be taken into account that the claimant sustained
serious injuries in the accident, including a serious
psychiatric injury and the
matters raised by the insurer are distressing for the claimant.
claimant’s submissions do not address the failure to provide the bank
statements.
It is understood the only contentious authority is to
the Department of Home Affairs. Following the preliminary conference the insurer
provided further submissions specifically addressing the relevance of this
authority. The directions provided the claimant an opportunity
to provide any
further documents and/or submissions both in relation to the authority to the
Department of Home Affairs and generally.
No further documents or submissions
were received from the claimant.
Legislation
Relevantly,
the claimant has a duty under s 6.3(2) of the MAI Act to
“act honestly, not to mislead and to disclose all
information in a timely
addition, s 6.24 of the MAI Act provides:
Duty of claimant
to co-operate with other party
6.24 Duty of claimant to co-operate with other party
(1) A claimant must co-operate fully in respect of the claim with the other
party to the claim (being the insurer on the claim or,
if there is no insurer,
the person against whom the claim is made) for the purpose of giving the other
party sufficient information--
(a) to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim and, in particular, to
assess whether the claim or any part of the claim, may
be fraudulent, and
(b) to be able to make an early assessment of liability, and
(c) to be able to make an informed offer of settlement in the case of a claim
for damages.
(2) In particular, the claimant must comply with any reasonable request by
the other party--
(a) to furnish specified information (in addition to the information furnished
in the claim) or to produce specified documents or
records, or
(b) to provide a photograph of and evidence as to the identity of the claimant.
(3) The reasonableness of a request may be assessed having regard to
criteria including the following--
(a) the amount of time the claimant needs to comply with the request,
(b) whether the information sought is cogent and relevant to a determination of
liability or quantum of loss, having regard to the
nature of the claim,
(c) the amount of information which has already been supplied to or is
available to an insurer to enable liability and quantum of
loss to be assessed
and an offer of settlement made,
(d) how onerous it will be for the claimant to comply with the request,
(e) whether the information is privileged,
(f) whether the information sought is sufficiently specified,
(g) the time of the request and whether the claimant will be delayed in
commencing proceedings for damages by complying with the
(4) A duty under this section in respect of a claim for damages applies only
until court proceedings are commenced in respect of
the claim but if the
claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with this section, court
proceedings cannot be commenced
in respect of the claim while the failure
continues.”
claimant had submitted the care claim, being a claim for reimbursement by the
insurer of carer costs the claimant said she has
4 March 2025, in response to the care claim, the insurer wrote to the claimant
as follows:
“As there is a new carer engaged, can you please
confirm the following:
• Rita's ABN
• Rita's contact details
• The date Rita's services commenced
• The date Sydney's services ceased
• Was there a particular reason Sydney ceased working in this
16 April 2025 the insurer wrote to the claimant about concerns arising from the
care claim documents submitted by the claimant,
including concern the
claimant’s assertions may represent false and misleading statements in
breach of the MAI Act. The insurer
put the claimant on notice that in the event
the claimant has received statutory benefits by deception, the insurer will seek
of same under s 3.34 of the MAI Act. The insurer contends the claimant
has received $31,439.34 in overpayments relating to post-accident
domestic care
of her children. The insurer seeks to recover this sum from the claimant.
their 16 April 2025 letter the insurer outlined their investigations into the
claim and their findings as follows:
(a) the claimant declared in her application for personal injury benefits that
she was employed full-time and was in receipt of a
Centrelink carer’s
(b) at the Rehab Co ADL and home assessment the claimant informed the
rehabilitation specialist that since the accident, she had
been paying a
qualified NDIS sole trader $45 per hour to assist her with household tasks and
caring for her children, including assistance
with washing, groceries, cooking,
bed linen, driving her children to and from school and doing their hair;
(c) the claimant reported these tasks were all independently completed by her
prior the motor vehicle accident, and
(d) the claimant also reported that prior to the accident she drove the children
to speech therapy, physiotherapy, occupational therapy
and psychology
appointments each week and that she completed all of the above tasks, as her
children did not have NDIS support worker
funding in their programs.
13 January 2025 the claimant swore a statement in which she declared:
(a) as she is unable to drive her daughters’ support worker, Sydney, drove
to the pharmacy to collect medication;
(b) Sydney comes over and she pays her to take care of her daughters out of her
own funds and is reimbursed by the insurer;
(c) she previously had Sydney come and help her daughters with their homework
and since the accident she is more available to help,
(d) she was in receipt of some financial help to cover the payment of Sydney but
believed that should be increased based on NDIS
support worker, Sydney, provided a statement to the insurer’s investigator
5 March 2025 and also had other communications with the insurer in
which she stated:
(a) she applied for a nannying job listed by the claimant on Facebook and
started working for the claimant sometime in late March
or April 2024. At that
time, the claimant’s two daughters were in a home school care program
called Eagles Wings, which they
attended on a Tuesday and Thursday;
(b) she worked approximately 20 hours per week until late June 2024, when the
claimant’s daughters left the home school program,
at which time, her
hours of work increased to approximately 40-50 hours per week;
(c) in November 2024 the claimant started paying her too much money. The
claimant advised the overpayment was a mistake and requested
part of the money
(d) the claimant continued to pay her too much money. She again asked the
claimant about it and was told the insurer had stopped
reimbursing her for the
Uber rides and that she wanted to get the money back;
(e) the claimant had informed her she was sending her running sheets to the
insurer and that she was charging them more to get her
money back on the Ubers;
(f) the overpayments had occurred over a period of one month;
(g) on 20 November 2024 she contacted the insurer to report the overpayments and
at the same time, spoke to New South Wales Police
due to her concerns the
invoices were in her name and that she may be somehow implicated;
(h) she never forwarded an invoice to the insurer herself and was concerned the
claimant may have been overcharging since the date
of the accident;
(i) she subsequently contacted the insurer to advise she no longer worked for
the claimant. She stated on the occasions she was overpaid
the overpayment
ranged between $500 to $1,000;
(j) after she went on a holiday to Bali, she received a payment when she had not
(k) in a text message to the claimant resigning from her position, she asserted
the claimant was charging the insurer more under
her name and pocketing the
extra money, and
(l) she was under the impression the insurer was covering her wages but, had
come to the realisation the claimant was pocketing extra
money which, on some
weeks, amounted to a significant sum.
claimant reported to Medical Assessor Jones that the insurer subsidises a
support worker who spends most of her time driving the
claimant’s daughter
to appointments, with each daughter having up to four appointments per week, in
addition to performing
practical tasks around the home. The claimant denied any
NDIS support worker funding.
relation to pre- and post-accident care by Sydney, the insurer cross referenced
the run sheets of employment provided by Sydney
with those submitted by the
claimant, as well as referencing the evidence set out above, and made the
following observations:
(a) carer Sydney was paid/claimed an hourly rate of $36 per hour whereas the
claimant was charging the insurer $46 per hour (although
reported to Rehab Co
she was paying $45 per hour);
(b) Sydney was employed by the claimant prior to the accident;
(c) timesheets for the period 8 to11 April 2024 and 16 to 17 April 2024 reflect
28 hours per week and 431km of travel. This arrangement
continued after the
accident, until the claimant’s children’s schooling changed in late
June 2024, approximately six
weeks after the accident, when the level of care
(d) on 31 May 2024 the claimant submitted a receipt for reimbursement of care
for her daughters, which included transportation to
and from school as well as
therapy appointments which were tasks the claimant was unable to do due to
injuries sustained in the accident;
(e) on 19 June 2024 the insurer received a call from the rehabilitation provider
advising if the care for the claimant’s children
was only organised after
the motor vehicle accident;
(f) the claimant reported to Rehab Co she was responsible for the
children’s care needs prior to the accident and performed
transportation of the children to and from school; to medical appointments,
etcetera, independently, and
(g) time sheets submitted by Sydney reflect less hours worked than hours claimed
in the timesheets submitted by the claimant. Further,
they itemise out of pocket
expenses which are not payable by the insurer but for which it appears have been
claimed/incorporated
into the invoices submitted by the claimant.
relation to a care costs claim by the claimant in respect of another carer,
Rita, the insurer observed that invoices submitted
by the claimant as having
purportedly been issued to her by Rita appeared to have been created by the
claimant using Canva.
request made by the insurer on 4 March 2025 (followed up by the insurer a number
of times) for the claimant to provide details
relevant to the care purportedly
provided by Rita remains outstanding.
insurer has also raised issues about the claimant’s assertions about her
post-accident employment, noting Sydney stated
the claimant continued working
after the accident until she secured a solicitor to help her with her CTP claim
and stopped working
in August or October.
matters set out at paragraphs 32 to 39 above were put to the claimant in the
letter to her solicitors dated 16 April 2025. That
letter also included the
request for the authorities, the particulars and the bank statements for the
purpose of, inter alia, the
insurer determining the validity of the claim.
Consideration
task is not to make any determination as to any of the underlying issues in
dispute, namely whether the claimant has obtained statutory
benefits by
deception/whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent.
role is to assess whether the insurer’s request for further information
and documents for the purpose of the insurer considering
the issue of whether
there has been a deception/fraud by the claimant is reasonable (s 6.24(2) of the
MAI Act) having regard to the
particular circumstances of this matter and the
criteria in s 6.24(3). The criteria for consideration set out in s 6.24(3) is
in my view, exhaustive noting the word “including”. I am of the
view I may also consider any other matter I consider
to be relevant.
insurer is under an obligation to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim.
Pursuant to s 6.24 a claimant is under a mandatory
obligation to
“co-operate fully” with the insurer for such purpose.
to s 6.3(2) of the MAI Act the claimant has a duty to
“act honestly, not to mislead and to disclose all
relevant information
in a timely manner”.
insurer seeks further documents from the claimant for the purpose of verifying
the validity of the claim and assessing whether
any part of the claim may be
fraudulent. The insurer alleges the claimant has obtained in excess of $30,000
in statutory benefits,
potentially by deception through deliberate and conscious
conduct of the claimant, including allegedly creating false documents.
amount in issue is not insignificant.
purpose for which the further information and documents are sought is permitted
by s 6.24. This together with the criteria as
to reasonableness in s 6.24 is
considered below.
Documents relevant to determining the validity
of the claim and whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent
agree with the insurer that the state of the evidence is such that the veracity
of the claimant’s contentions regarding relevant
matters, including about
her post accident employment and pre- and post-accident provision of care is in
the material before me there is a reasonable basis for the insurer to believe
the claimant may have obtained statutory benefits
by deception, including that
the claimant may have created and provided false documents to the insurer. As a
result, under the MAI
Act the insurer is required to investigate the validity of
the claim and whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent.
have considered the further information and documents sought by the insurer,
including the documents caught by the authorities and
consider it reasonable for
the insurer to require the further information and documents for the purpose of
investigating the validity
of the claim and whether any part of the claim may be
fraudulent.
statements, for example, would assist the insurer to test the validity of the
claimant’s assertions about post-accident
employment in addition to
testing whether payments to carers by the claimant reconcile with the amounts
claimed by the claimant from
the insurer. The authority to the Department of
submissions
above. Other authorities to treatment providers will assist the
insurer to test the claimant’s assertions about employment
circumstances
and care arrangements pre- and post-accident, in addition to other matters
relevant to the claim, as the treatment
records may reveal histories about these
matters given by the claimant to the treatment providers.
all the circumstances I conclude the insurer’s request for further
information and documents in connection with assessing
the validity of the claim
and whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent is reasonable.
Section 6.24(3):
the amount of time the claimant needs to
comply with the request
claimant has had ample time to comply with the insurer’s request (s
6.24(3)(a)).
claimant suggests in their submissions that the insurer has not explained why
provision of the information and documents is urgent.
In the circumstances of
this matter, however, I do not consider any explanation required by the insurer
in the circumstances.
insurer has raised serious allegations of allegedly obtaining statutory benefits
by deceit, including by allegedly creating and
submitting false documents to the
insurer. The allegations relate to conduct that cannot be described as trivial
or inadvertent on
the claimant’s part and the amount alleged as having
been obtained by deception is in excess of $30,000. The insurer seeks
that sum. In the context of a statutory benefits scheme and other considerations
such as limitation periods, an insurer
would be expected to act in a timely
manner in relation to any recovery, or proposed recovery action.
claimant is legally represented. All of the insurer’s concerns were put to
the claimant in a letter to her solicitors dated
16 April 2025. Despite the
insurer requesting the claimant’s urgent attention to the matter in that
letter, the claimant was
given a reasonable period of
28 days to respond.
insurer followed up with the claimant’s solicitor by letter or email on
four occasions. The only response received is a
letter from the claimant’s
solicitor dated 27 May 2025 acknowledging the insurer’s 22 May 2025 follow
up correspondence
and simply stating:
“We will seek
instructions from our client and respond in due course. The matters asserted by
your client are serious and complex.
If there has in fact been an overpayment
the insurer may seek a deduction upon determination of the common law damages
my view, whilst reference is made to the issues raised by the insurer being
“serious”, the above correspondence from
the claimant does little to
acknowledge the seriousness of the issues. It also ignores the insurer’s
entitlement to recover
immediately (rather than await the outcome of the damages
claim) in circumstances where the amount in issue has already been paid
claimant (s 6.42(2)(b) of the MAI Act).
claimant did not take any steps to request an extension of time from the
insurer. Nonetheless, the insurer granted at least two
extensions. Further, it
is now late October 2025, being more than six months since the insurer requested
the further information
and documents in the 16 April 2025 letter and five
months since the claimant’s solicitors foreshadowed a response in their
May 2025 letter yet other than provision of two authorities by the claimant, the
further information and documents remain outstanding.
of whether there is any urgency, I consider this delay to be both significant
and unacceptable in all the circumstances.
submissions lodged in reply to this merit review dated 25 September 2025 the
claimant’s solicitors again foreshadowed a response
course”. A month has since lapsed, and it is understood that other than
provision of two authorities the further
information and documents remain
outstanding.
has been no adequate explanation from the claimant as to why they have been
unable to provide the further information and documents
in a period of over six
months, a period which I consider to not only be more than reasonable but to
also be generous.
Section 6.24(3)(b): whether the information
sought is cogent and relevant to a determination of liability or quantum of
loss, having
regard to the nature of the claim
have set out reasons above as to why I consider the information sought to be
cogent and relevant to a determination of issues arising
Section 6.24(3)(c): the amount of information which has
already been supplied to or is available to an insurer to enable liability
quantum of loss to be assessed and an offer of settlement made
the veracity of information and documents provided by the claimant to date is in
question, the amount of information already
supplied or available to the insurer
is, in my view, insufficient for the purposes in s 6.24(3)(c). The available
information and
documents give rise to a need by the insurer to further
investigate various aspects of the claim, including in relation to quantum
Section 6.24(3)(d): how onerous it will be for the claimant
to comply with the request
do not agree with the claimant’s assertion there is a complexity to the
matter that is relevant in any way to the failure
to provide the information and
documents to date.
insurer’s request for further information and documents is basic and is
(a) particulars about care arrangements that ought to be in the direct and
immediate knowledge of the claimant;
(b) copies of bank statements which ought to be readily available to the
claimant, and
(c) provision of authorities (prepared by the insurer and provided to the
claimant) signed by the claimant in respect of documents
which are unlikely to
attract any claim of privilege by the claimant.
claimant has not provided any adequate reasons to establish provision of any of
the above might be onerous for the claimant.
Section 6.24(3)(e):
whether any of the information is privileged
of the documents requested by the insurer could be the subject of a valid claim
of privilege and no claim of privilege is asserted
by the claimant in any
Section 6.24(3)(f): whether the information sought is
sufficiently specified
information sought by the insurer is clear and therefore sufficiently
Section 6.24(3)(g): the time of the request and
whether the claimant will be delayed in commencing proceedings for damages by
with the request
noted above, the claimant has had ample time to comply with the request and
compliance with the request would not delay commencement
of any proceedings for
the reasons set out above I conclude all of the insurer’s requests for
further information and documents in their 4 March
2025 email and 16 April 2025
letter are reasonable in the circumstances.
Whether the claimant
has a reasonable excuse for failing to provide the information and
claimant has not expressly provided any reasonable excuse for failing to provide
the information and documents. The only matters
raised in reply to this merit
review in the claimant’s submissions are:
(a) the insurer’s allegations are serious;
(b) the request for further information and documents relates to complex
(c) the insurer has not explained the urgency, and
(d) the claimant’s injuries include psychiatric injury and the issues
raised by the insurer are distressing for the claimant.
it is that the insurer’s allegations are serious. However, this is not an
explanation for the claimant’s failure
to provide the information and
documents. To the contrary, it is reason why the claimant ought to have given
the matter immediate
contended complexity is not explained by the claimant but in any event, the
complexity of the matter is not an explanation for
the claimant’s failure
to provide the information and documents. There may be complexities in relation
to the overall claim
for personal injury benefits and/or damages but the
insurer’s request in isolation is a basic, uncomplicated request, which
ought not be time consuming or onerous in any other way for the claimant. The
information and documents requested ought to be within
the claimant’s
immediate and direct knowledge (particulars about her care arrangements) and/or
readily available to the claimant
(bank statements). The authorities requested
by the insurer call for production of documents from third parties of a kind
often sought, particularly in connection with a claim for damages. Any
complexity about the matter is not an explanation for the
failure to sign and return the authorities.
have dealt with the claimant’s position there is no urgency above. The
claimant has neither acted promptly or in a timely
manner in response to the
insurer’s request and more than six months has now lapsed since the
request was made on 16 April
2025. Even for a non-urgent matter this is a
significant delay not adequately explained by the claimant. The lack of urgency
any) is not an explanation for the claimant’s failure to provide the
information and documents to date.
I appreciate the issues raised by the insurer in the insurer’s 16 April
2025 letter may be distressing for the claimant
there is no evidence or
submission made to the effect this has impacted the claimant’s ability to
provide the basic information
and documents requested by the insurer in over six
months. Whilst the distressing nature of the 16 April 2025 letter is
understandable,
it does not adequately or reasonably explain the
claimant’s failure to provide the information and documents in a period of
over six months, particularly given she was able to prepare and submit the
documents submitted in support of the care claim.
the reasons set out above I conclude the claimant does not have a reasonable
excuse for failing to comply with the insurer’s
request for further
information and documents dated
4 March 2025 and 16 April 2025. The claimant
is therefore in breach of s 6.24 of the MAI
the reasons set out above I consider the request for the claimant to provide the
following authorities is reasonable:
(a) Department of Home Affairs;
(b) Dr Matthew Tait;
(c) Hills Doctors Medical Practice;
(d) NIB Health Fund;
(e) Medicare and PBS;
(f) NDIS, and
(g) Sir Joseph Montefiore Jewish Home.
the reasons set out above I consider the insurer’s request for the
claimant to provide the particulars requested in the
insurer’s email dated
4 March 2025 and at paragraphs 4(a) to (j) and five of the insurer’s
letter of 16 April 2025 to
be reasonable.
the reasons set out above I consider the insurer’s request for the
claimant’s bank statements for the period 1 April
2024 to date to be
reasonable.
the reasons set out above I conclude the claimant does not have a reasonable
excuse for failing to provide the further information
is a regulated merit review matter for the purposes of costs meaning prima
facie, the claimant is entitled to costs of this merit
review up to the maximum
fixed by the Regulation.
insurer submits the claimant’s costs of this merit review should be
assessed as nil given the numerous times the insurer
has sought compliance by
the claimant with s 6.24 of the MAI Act. The insurer submits it would be unfair
and inappropriate to award
costs to the claimant in circumstances where it is
the claimant’s failure to respond to numerous requests that has led the
insurer to having to lodge the merit review application to resolve the
addition to recoverable costs being limited by the maximum prescribed by the
Regulation, s 8.10(1) of the MAI Act prescribes that
only “reasonable and
necessary” legal costs incurred in connection with a claim can be
to Schedule 2(1)(aa) of the MAI Act, as Merit Reviewer, I have jurisdiction to
assess the claimant’s legal costs by
determining the extent to which the
costs and expenses incurred by the
reasonable and necessary.
history of this matter is set out in detail above. In short, the insurer’s
request for further information and documents
has been outstanding for over six
months. During this period the claimant has been largely non-responsive, with
only one letter sent
by the claimant’s solicitors on 27 May 2025 in which
a response to the outstanding request was foreshadowed (but has not
materialised).
claimant was given ample opportunity to provide the further information and
documents without the need for this merit review,
including that the insurer
foreshadowed a merit review application if the claimant’s non-compliance
with s 6.24 continued in
letters to the claimant’s solicitors dated 16
June 2025 and 4 July 2025.
claimant did not take steps to remedy the non-compliance, after the insurer
foreshadowed a merit review application and before
it was lodged with the
Commission.
after the merit review application was lodged the claimant did not take steps to
remedy the non-compliance before the preliminary
conference on 7 October 2025,
which may have caused the insurer to discontinue these proceedings.
the purpose of the merit review the claimant’s solicitors provided a
three-page document comprising an index on page 1,
brief submissions taking up
approximately half a page on page 2 and a copy of their 27 May 2025 letter to
the insurer’s solicitor.
Despite having the opportunity to do so, no
further submissions or documents were received from the claimant.
claimant’s brief, half page submission does not make any submission
challenging the reasonableness of the insurer’s
request. Nor does it
provide any clear explanation for the claimant’s failure to comply with s
6.24. Instead, complaint is
made about the seriousness and complexity of the
matter (without any detail provided) and the claimant otherwise says again, that
a “response to the request is being prepared and will be provided in due
for the sake of completeness I have dealt with the balance of the
claimant’s submissions (being paragraphs 6, 7 and
8) when considering the
question of whether the claimant has a reasonable excuse above, these
submissions are in fact directed to
the question of costs. In this regard the
claimant says the following should be considered when assessing the
claimant’s costs:
(a) the unusual nature of the particulars which require review of a significant
amount of material and conferences with the claimant;
(b) that the insurer has not provided reasons for the urgency, and
(c) that the claimant has sustained serious injuries in the subject accident,
including a serious psychiatric injury and the matters
raised by the insurer are
distressing.
disagree with the claimant that the nature of the particulars requested by the
insurer is unusual. The claimant made a claim for
reimbursement of care costs in
relation to two carers. The claimant prepared and submitted the claim with
supporting documents. In
these circumstances (and in the absence of evidence
that might displace this presumption) the claimant must be presumed to know
and understand her care arrangements with the two carers both before and
after the accident and be able to respond in a timely manner.
request for particulars is a request for basic detail about the carer
arrangements but to the extent the claimant might need to
review documents she
could presumably readily review the documents already submitted to the insurer
and any other relevant documents
such as bank statements or receipts or invoices
given to her by the carers not provided to the insurer.
of the particulars, authorities and bank statements should only require a short
conference with the claimant. As at the
time of the preliminary conference it
was understood the claimant’s solicitors had no instructions from their
client about
these matters and were still chasing their client.
is difficult to understand how the insurer’s failure to explain any
urgency is relevant to the question of costs, particularly
given the insurer has
given multiple extensions of time to comply in their correspondence dated 22 May
2025 and 16 June 2025. The
claimant had six months to comply with the 4 March
2025 request before the insurer lodged the merit review application on 9
2025 (she has now had over seven months) and almost five months to
comply with the 16 April 2025 request before the merit review
application was
lodged (she has now had over six months to comply).
is not clear how the distressing nature of the insurer’s allegations
should impact assessment of costs. No substantive submission
is made in this
have concluded the insurer’s request is reasonable and the claimant does
not have a reasonable excuse under s 6.24. The claimant’s
submissions do
not seem to dispute either of these matters but merely attempt (inadequately) to
explain the delay and are otherwise
directed to the question of costs. However,
the delay is significant such that the claimant has had ample opportunity to
need for the insurer to seek a merit review by remedying their
non-compliance with s 6.24.
costs likely incurred by the claimant in response to the merit review also
appear to be negligible or incidental, being the costs
of providing the
three-page document referred to above containing only a very brief submission
and a copy of a single letter already
provided by the insurer in the
insurer’s merit review document bundle. There was participation in a
preliminary conference,
but the preliminary conference was largely for the
purposes of clarifying, as a matter of procedural fairness, whether the claimant
wanted the opportunity to put on a more substantive submission in reply to the
merit review application. Directions were issued given
the claimant this
opportunity, but the claimant did not lodge anything further with the
Commission.
all of the circumstances, I have reached the conclusion that the legal costs,
which must be both reasonable and necessary, incurred
by the claimant are not
reasonable and necessary. The merit review likely would not have been necessary
if the claimant had provided
the response foreshadowed in the claimant’s
solicitor’s letter dated 27 May 2025 in a timely manner before the insurer
lodged the merit review application over 3 months later on 9 September
regard to all of the above the claimant’s entitlement to legal costs is
assessed as being nil.
LEGISLATION AND GUIDELINES
making this decision, I have considered the following:
the Application,
Reply and supporting documentation;
Motor Accident
Guidelines, and
Regulation.
During the preliminary
conference on 7 October 2025 the claimant only requested particulars from the
insurer as to how the authority
to the Department of Home Affairs is relevant.
The balance of the authorities do not appear to be subject to any significant
by the claimant.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (583 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter