URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of David Sharp [2007] NSWDRGC 1 (8 February 2007)
of New South Wales
In the matter of David Sharp
[2007] NSWDRGC 1
Sharp, David
FILE NUMBER(S) :
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
CATCHWORDS:
:- Compulsory Drug Treatment Orders – removal of participant prisoner
from Compulsory Drug Treatment Correctional Centre –
review of removal
decision – revocation of Compulsory Drug Treatment Order – mandatory
conditions of Compulsory Drug
Treatment Orders – violence and threats of
violence by participants.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
Crimes (Administration of Sentences)
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
CASES CITED:
DATES OF HEARING:
5 February 2007
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
8 February 2007
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
Regina: R. Atkins, Director of Public Prosecutions
Offender: S Flood
of counsel, instructed by the Legal Aid Commission
1 In August 2006 a prisoner, David Sharp, was
referred to the Drug Court of N.S.W. for the consideration of the making of an
that would allow him to serve his sentence in the Compulsory Drug
Treatment Correctional Centre (“CDTCC”). The necessary
assessments
were made, and the Drug Court made a Compulsory Drug Treatment Order in relation
to Mr Sharp on 23 November 2006.
2 Mr Sharp was in the closed detention
of Stage 1 of his Compulsory Drug Treatment Order (“CDTO”) when
there was an incident
on 20 December 2006. Mr Sharp is alleged to have assaulted
a fellow participant, Mr Brendan Symonds.
3 Ms Astrid Birgden, the
Director of CDTCC, exercised the powers of the Commissioner of Corrective
Services under
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
and ordered the removal of Mr Sharp from the CDTCC. That order required him
to be taken to another correctional centre, and to be
held in separate custody.
Much to the concern of Mr Sharp, he has been retained in segregation at Parklea
Correctional Centre for
50 days since that transfer, and that segregated custody
has been difficult and unpleasant for him.
Section 106P(5)
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
requires the Drug Court to review the Commissioner’s s 106P order
within 21 days (or such other period as determined by the
Drug Court) of
receiving notice of the removal order. The orders the Drug Court can make on
review include revoking, confirming,
or amending the Commissioner’s order,
or revoking, in accordance with
, the offender’s CDTO.
requires the Drug Court to have regard to, and give substantial weight
to, any recommendations of the Commissioner. In Mr Sharp’s
recommendation is for the CDTO to be revoked.
5 It is apparent that any
revocation of the CDTO would be under
s 106Q(1)(d)
, as the Compulsory Drug
Treatment Personal Plan for Mr Sharp had not been finalised or formally approved
at time of the incident.
A Personal Plan imposes conditions on the offender
regarding the offender’s drug treatment and rehabilitation under the CDTO,
and is firstly prepared by the Commissioner, and then comes into operation when
the Drug Court approves it
. The legislation specifies some mandatory
conditions of a CDTO, including a mandatory condition that the offender must not
to violence or make any threat of violence
. As I indicated
during the hearing, and as conceded by Mr Flood (who appeared for Mr Sharp), I
am of the view that the criteria in
s 106Q(1)(a)
regarding failures to comply
with a Personal Plan are relevant in any consideration of revocation under the
more general provisions
s 106Q(1)(d).
6 Accordingly, I am of the view
that whilst this court can revoke the CDTO for any reason the Drug Court sees
fit, in this case it
is appropriate to look to whether there has been a failure
to comply with a significant expectation regarding the behaviour of an
in the CDTCC, whether that failure is of a serious nature, and whether the
offender poses a significant risk of harming
7 To provide an opportunity for this issue under new
legislation to be fully considered, the court sought the assistance of the
of the Director of Public Prosecutions (which assists the Drug Court in
its general jurisdiction) to put material before the court
on behalf of the
Director of the CDTCC. The court appreciates that assistance of Ms Atkins of the
ODPP, and that of Mr Flood of counsel,
instructed by the Legal Aid Commission,
who assisted Mr Sharp.
The legislation
8 The legislation
with principal relevance to these proceedings comes from recent additions made
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
106PCommissioner of Corrective Services may make regression and removal
orders in special circumstances
(1)The Commissioner may order that an offender serving his or her sentence:
(a) in semi-open detention (Stage 2) regress
to closed detention (Stage 1), or
(b) in community custody (Stage 3) regress to closed detention (Stage 1),
(c) in community custody (Stage 3) regress to semi-open detention (Stage
(2)The Commissioner may order that an offender serving his or her sentence in
closed detention (Stage 1) or semi-open detention (Stage
2) be removed from the
Compulsory Drug Treatment Correctional Centre and taken to another correctional
centre and held in separate
(3)The Commissioner may make an order referred to in subsection (1) or (2)
only if the Commissioner believes, on reasonable grounds,
(a) the security of the community is
threatened, or
(b) the good order and discipline of a correctional centre may be
jeopardised if the offender is not regressed or removed, or
(c) the offender may be about to commit an offence, or
(d) another reason exists to regress or remove the offender.
(4)The Commissioner must immediately notify the Drug Court if the
Commissioner makes an order under this section and must give the
Drug Court his
or her reasons for making the order.
(5)Within 21 days (or such other period determined by the Drug Court) after
receiving the notification of the Commissioner, the Drug
Court must review the
Commissioner’s order and make an order:
(a) revoking the Commissioner’s order,
(b) confirming the Commissioner’s order, or
(c) confirming the Commissioner’s order, but amending its terms,
(d) revoking, in accordance with
section 106Q
, the offender’s
compulsory drug treatment order.
(6)The Drug Court when reviewing a Commissioner’s order under
subsection (5) is to have regard to and give substantial weight
recommendations of the Commissioner.
(7)No appeal lies against the Drug Court in relation to a decision regarding
an order under subsection (5).
106QRevocation of compulsory drug treatment order
(1)The Drug Court may by order revoke an offender’s compulsory drug
treatment order:
(i) the offender has failed to comply with a condition of the
offender’s compulsory drug treatment personal plan, and
(ii) that failure is of a serious nature, and
(iii) in the opinion of the Drug Court, the offender:
(A) is unlikely to make any further progress in the offender’s
compulsory drug treatment program, or
(B) poses an unacceptable risk to the community of re-offending,
(C) poses a significant risk of harming others or himself or herself,
(b) if the non-parole period for the offender’s sentence has expired
or is about to expire and the offender is serving his or
her sentence in closed
detention (Stage 1) or semi-open detention (Stage 2), or
(c) if the offender ceases to be an eligible convicted offender (within
the meaning of the
Drug Court Act 1998
(d) for any other reason the Drug Court sees fit.
(2)In making a decision under
as to whether to make a parole order for
an offender whose compulsory drug treatment order has been revoked under this
section, the
Parole Authority is to have regard to the circumstances that led to
the revocation.
(3)No appeal lies against the Drug Court’s revocation of a compulsory
drug treatment order.
9 Additionally, I note
Drug Court Act 1998
, the Drug Court is to conduct
proceedings with as little formality and technicality as the proper
consideration of the matter before
the court permits, and that the Drug Court is
not bound by the rules of evidence, but may inform itself on any matter in such
as it considers appropriate.
The Evidence
11 In accordance with the directions given by the court
regarding the conduct of the case, Ms Atkins provided a bundle of materials
relied upon by the Director of the CDTCC relevant to this review of the
Director’s Removal Order. That material included:
A progress report
regarding Mr Sharp, which included the recommendation that his CDTO be
A transcript of a phone
conversation between Mr Symonds and his
girlfriend.
The observations and report
of Assistant Superintendent
Photographs of injuries to Mr
Photographs of Mr
Sharp’s hands.
A report by
Assistant Superintendent Mastrone.
Justice Health Incident/Report Form regarding injuries to Mr Sharp’s
Case notes relating to Mr
Sharp’s behaviour in segregation at Parklea Correctional
The Prisoner
12 Mr Sharp
gave evidence as to his confrontation with Mr Symonds, and as to his assault
upon Mr Symonds. He freely acknowledged that
he went to Mr Symonds’ cell,
and went into that cell, and asked Mr Symonds questions about alleged threats
made by Mr Symonds.
Mr Sharp gave evidence of lashing out at Mr Symonds,
physically attacking him, and hitting him 3 or 5 times with open and closed
fists. Mr Sharp told the court that he “sort of lost it”, and that
it was a spur of the moment thing.
13 Mr Sharp also gave evidence of the
long lead up to this assault, whereby he had originally had a good relationship
with Mr Symonds,
but that the relationship declined, to the point whereby there
was “pent up frustration” over ongoing issues, and he
told Mr Symonds to stay away from him. Those ongoing issues involved the
possibility, and then failure, of Mr Symonds
to divert his Buprenorphine
pharmacotherapy to Mr Sharp.
14 Mr Sharp also gave evidence of still
being “dirty with the bloke”, which, whilst honest, does not auger
well for the
safety of Mr Symonds, should Mr Sharp again have possible contact
with Mr Symonds. However, Mr Sharp also told the court that he
would like to sit
and talk with Mr Symonds about the problems.
15 Mr Flood tendered into
evidence a copy of e-mails exchanged between the Director of the CDTCC and the
Legal Aid Commission regarding
the manner in which another scuffle at the CDTCC
was dealt with. That scuffle did not led to the removal of the protagonists, or
any revocation proceedings.
16 I find as a fact
that there was an assault by Mr Sharp upon Mr Symonds, and that the assault
caused the relatively minor injuries
that can be seen on the photos of Mr
Symonds, and the photos of Mr Sharp’s hands. It is apparent to this court
that the incident
was indeed an assault, and not a fight, and that Mr Symonds
covered up in the assault, and did not retaliate.
17 I also accept, as Mr
Sharp acknowledged through Mr Flood, that Mr Sharp may well have made the
alleged threat to stab Mr Symonds,
and that he tells the court that he has no
intention of carrying out that threat, which was made in the heat of the
The arguments
18 The Court acknowledges that the
environment of the CDTCC is a new and different gaol environment, and that no
doubt it will take
some time and effort for prisoners, especially experienced
prisoners, to settle into the new expectations placed upon them. It is
case that if prisoners are to be allowed to progress to the freedoms of Stages
II and III of the CDTCC, they will be required
to acquire considerable skills
and techniques to cope with the frustrations, difficulties and temptations of
ordinary lawful community
19 It has clearly come as something of a
shock and a disappointment to Mr Sharp to be transferred out of the CDTCC, and
into segregation
at another gaol. He now finds himself facing the very severe
consequences of the possible revocation of his CDTO, and the possible
all the advantages that flow from a CDTO. He sees that as a very harsh possible
outcome from an incident that is not an uncommon
event in our prisons.
On the other hand, it is a mandatory condition of all Compulsory Drug Treatment
Personal Plans that offenders must not resort to
violence or make any threat of
violence. It is conceded that the behaviour of Mr Sharp would have been a
failure to comply with that
mandatory condition, but, as noted above, a Personal
Plan for Mr Sharp had not been formally adopted or approved at the time of the
21 Such a mandatory condition was no doubt included in the
legislation to reflect the nature of this unique Correctional Centre, and
programs it will run. It is this Court’s understanding that the CDTCC is
neither designed nor staffed to provide for the
segregation and separation of
prisoners – for example, there is no protection classification available
within the CDTCC. So
safety has to be achieved in other ways, such as an ongoing
emphasis on no violence whatsoever.
22 Mr Flood has rightly emphasised
that the court has a discretion, given that the court “may” decide
to revoke an order
under s 106Q(1).
23 It is also suggested that given
the segregation that Mr Sharp has endured for 50 days, that he may have indeed
been sufficiently
punished for his assault, and that his extensive time in
segregation might be regarded as a reason not to exercise this Court’s
discretion to revoke his CDTO.
The essential issues:
1)The question of revocation before the Court is a very serious issue, as the
ramifications for Mr Sharp if the CDTO is revoked are
very severe. Hence the
Court is mindful of those severe consequences in the consideration of this
determination.
2)The Director, on behalf of the Commissioner, has recommended the revocation,
and the legislation requires the court to have regard
to, and give substantial
weight to, any such recommendation.
3)Mr Sharp has behaved violently, causing injury to Mr Symonds, and has also
threatened further serious violence.
4)The incident is a serious, and not a trivial matter, and breaches a basic
tenet of the program.
24 Given the evidence
before the court, in my view there is a real risk that Mr Sharp may further
assault Mr Symonds if the opportunity
presented itself. There would be extensive
opportunity of further violence against Mr Symonds if Mr Sharp were allowed to
to the CDTCC.
25 Having considered all of the material before the
court, I am of the view that Mr Sharp’s Compulsory Drug Treatment Order
should be revoked.
Section 106F
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
Section 106H
Crimes (Administration of Sentences)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (50.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter