URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/131.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murray v Insurance and Care NSW t/as iCare [2025] NSWCATCD 131; (25 September 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Murray v Insurance and Care NSW t/as iCare
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 131
Hearing Date(s):
30 June 2025
Date of Orders:
25 September 2025
Decision Date:
25 September 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
JA Rose, Senior Member
(1) Nicholas Murray is removed as an applicant to the
proceeding.
(2) The proceeding is dismissed
pursuant to
section 55(1)(b)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), on the grounds that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction under
(NSW) to hear or determine the
(3) There is no order as to costs, with the
intent that each party is to bear its own costs.
Catchwords:
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION —
Building dispute — Jurisdiction — NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Consumer and Commercial Division
— Jurisdiction and powers
— whether a claim by a building owner for a refund of insurance premium
paid by a builder for
compulsory home building compensation insurance is a
“building claim”
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Fair Trading Act 1987
NSW Self Insurance Corporation Act 2004
Cases Cited:
Amirbeaggi v NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2023] NSWCATCD 171
Amirbeaggi v NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2025] NSWDC 10
Barry v Royal
& Sun Alliance Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCTTT 805
Benson v NSW Self Insurance
Corporation
[2023] NSWCATCD 103
BTR Engineering (Australia) Ltd v Dana
Corporation
[2000] VSC 246
CN1 Pty Limited v NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2024] NSWCATCD 38
David Securities Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[1992] HCA 48
(1992) 175 CLR 353
Defence Housing Authority v Building Insurers’
Guarantee Corporation
[2005] NSWSC 206
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd [2008]
HCA 13; (2008) 234 CLR 124
Grygiel v Baine & Ors
[2005] NSWCA
Hawli v NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2017] NSWCATCD 38
[2012] NSWCA 95
(2012) 95 NSWLR 221
Stevens v Gary Lewin trading as Gary Lewin
Architecture
[2006] NSWSC 1232
TCL Airconditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel
Electronics Pty Limited
[2009] VSC 553
Texts Cited:
Philip Bambagiotti, Building Disputes & The
(NSW) Thomson Reuters [2012]
Principal judgment
Nicholas Murray (First Applicant)
17 Wylde Street Co-operative Ltd
(Second Applicant)
Insurance and Care NSW, trading as iCare
(Respondent)
Representation:
N Murray, in person (Applicants)
D Farinah, counsel
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
NSW Crown Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an interlocutory decision addressing only the question of whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the
claim in this proceeding
applicant (
) is the owner of a residential apartment building at
[address] NSW (the
). The respondent is a statutory body that
administers the Home Building Compensation Fund (
) under the HB Act
on behalf of the NSW Self-Insurance Corporation, providing home building
compensation (
) insurance under the terms of the HB Act.
is set out in more detail below, 17WSC engaged an original builder (Remedial
Building Services Australia Pty Limited –
), to undertake fire
systems upgrade works at the building. The value of the works was well in excess
of $20,000, which required RBS
to obtain HBC insurance under the Act (which I
will refer to as the
). The terms of the contract
with RBS required 17WSC to pay RBS the cost of that insurance, in addition to
the contracted price of
that work. Accordingly, 17WSC paid RBS $33,523 to cover
the cost of that insurance.
abandoned work under the contract shortly after beginning the project. 17WSC
then engaged a second builder (
) to complete the work. That builder
was also required to obtain an HBC insurance policy from iCare, which involved
the payment of
a separate premium. On a similar basis, the second builder
charged 17WSC the cost of that insurance policy as an “over extra”
cost. On completion of the works by the second builder, 17WSC sought a refund
from iCare of a large proportion of the premium that
17WSC had paid RBS (and RBS
had paid to iCare) on the first HBC policy.
has denied that 17WSC is entitled to receive any refund of the premium that was
paid for the first HBC policy, principally on
the ground that 17WSC is not a
party to the policy, which is between iCare and RBS. That denial has prompted
17WSC to commence this
proceeding, seeking to recover that money from iCare
under section 48O of the HB Act.
conjunction with its denial of liability, iCare disputes that the Tribunal has
the HB Act; asserting that
17WSC’s claim is not a “building claim” as defined in
section 48A of that Act. To that
end, iCare has lodged a Miscellaneous
Matters application in the proceeding (
iCare application
), seeking an
order that the proceeding be dismissed under
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
), on the ground
that the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious or otherwise misconceived or
lacking in substance.
objection to jurisdiction was then listed for this separate hearing, in advance
of the substantive claim. Both parties were directed
to lodge and give to the
other party the documents that they relied on in relation to iCare’s
challenge to the Tribunal’s
and submissions. Both parties were also given leave to be legally represented at
the reasons set out below, the Tribunal has determined that 17WSC’s claim
against iCare is not a “building claim”
under section 48A of the HB
Act, Consequently the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the claim
under section 48K of
that Act. The proceeding must therefore be
The hearing
Daniel Farinah of counsel represented iCare at the hearing, instructed by the
NSW Crown Solicitor, while 17WSC was represented
by Mr Murray, one of its
officers. The hearing proceeded in the usual manner, with iCare (as the
applicant on the jurisdiction application)
having the burden of proving any
facts that it relies on in support of its application to the balance of
probabilities.
was agreed at the start of the hearing that Mr Murray does not have standing to
be an applicant in the proceeding, as he is not
a party to any of the relevant
dealings outside his capacity as an officer of 17WSC. Mr Murray can therefore be
removed as a party
to the proceeding.
each party made brief opening statements the parties presented the evidence that
they relied on in respect of the iCare application,
relying solely on the
bundles of documents that they had lodged in accordance with the
Tribunal’s earlier directions:
(1) iCare relied on the bundle of documents that it had lodged with the Tribunal
on 8 April (exhibit R1, comprising 68 pages) which
(a) the policy wording of the iCare insurance HBC policy, as at 1 June
(b) extracted pages of the building contract between 17WSC and RBS, dated
18 October 2021;
(c) the iCare HBC policy certificate for that contract, dated 23 February
(d) a bundle of emails between Mr Murray and iCare, dated variously.
(2) 17WSC relied on the bundle of documents that it had lodged with the Tribunal
on 22 April (exhibit A1, comprising 21 pages), which
(a) a bundle of emails between Mr Murray and iCare, dated variously;
(b) an extract of sections 28 and 55 of the CAT Act;
(c) extracts of sections 48A and 48O of the HB Act;
(d) the iCare HBC policy certificate for the building contract between 17WSC and
(e) the iCare HBC policy certificate for the building contract between 17WSC and
(f) iCare’s HBCF Homeowner Fact Sheet.
Neither party objected to any of those documents being used as evidence in
the proceeding.
parties also relied on the written outlines of submissions that they had lodged
with their documents, which they supplemented
orally at the hearing. They also
had the opportunity to respond to the arguments made by the opposing party. I
then reserved my decision.
The issues to be determined
28(1) of the CAT Act provides that:
“The Tribunal has such jurisdiction and functions as may be conferred or
imposed on it by or under this Act or any other legislation.”
Consequently, the Tribunal’s power flows from the enabling legislation
that imposes jurisdiction on the Tribunal. In this case,
that is Part 3A of the
Part 3A, there are several provisions that work together to give the Tribunal
of a claim under the HB Act:
Firstly, the
claim must be a “building claim”, as that term is defined in section
48A of the Act; if it is not a building
claim then it automatically falls
outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the Act.
Secondly, a
building claim must satisfy the procedural preconditions for the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to be engaged, as outlined
in section 48J –
such as the obligation to have most building claims investigated or mediated by
NSW Fair Trading before the
claim can be lodged (unless exempted under the
Thirdly, the
building claim must fall within the jurisdictional limits imposed by section 48K
– including limits on the value
of the claim and the time in which the
claim may be brought in the Tribunal.
Lastly, section
48O gives the Tribunal specified powers that may be used in “determining a
building claim” within its
power to order payment of a monetary sum.
However, for
sections 48J, 48K and 48O to have any function, it is first necessary to confirm
that an applicant’s claim is a
“building claim” over which the
Tribunal has jurisdiction.
iCare application only takes issue with whether 17WSC’s claim is a
“building claim” within the meaning given
to that term in section
48A of the HB Act. No other arguments were raised on the subsequent provisions.
Consequently, the only question
to be determined in identifying whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine 17WSC’s claim, is whether
claim is properly characterised as a “building claim”
under the definition in section 48A.
The applicable law
48A(1) of the HB Act defines “building claim” in the following
(1) In this Part--
building claim
” means a claim for--
(a) the payment of a specified sum of money, or
(b) the supply of specified services, or
(c) relief from payment of a specified sum of money, or
(d) the delivery, return or replacement of specified goods or
goods of a specified description, or
(e) a combination of two or more of the remedies referred to
in paragraphs (a)-(d),
that arises from a supply of building goods or services whether under a contract
or not, or that arises under a contract that is
collateral to a contract for the
supply of building goods or services, but does not include a claim that the
regulations declare
not to be a building claim.
(2) Without limiting the definition of “
”, a building claim includes the following--
(a) an appeal against a decision of an insurer under a
building cover contract required to be entered into under this Act,
(b) a claim for compensation for loss arising from a breach of
a statutory warranty implied under Part 2C.
The definition of “building cover contract” in Schedule 1 of the
HB Act includes a HBC insurance policy obtained by a
builder from iCare.
goods or services”, “goods”, “services” and
“supply”, as used in that definition,
are also defined in section
building goods or services
” means goods or services supplied
for or in connection with the carrying out of residential building work or
specialist work,
being goods or services--
(a) supplied by the person who contracts to do, or otherwise
does, that work, or
(b) supplied in any circumstances prescribed by the
regulations to the person who contracts to do that work.
” have the same meanings as
Fair Trading Act 1987
Relevantly,
sections 79D
Fair Trading Act 1987
(1) “services” to include “the provision of insurance
cover”, and “any other rights (including rights
in relation to, and
interests in, property), benefits, privileges or facilities that are, or are to
be, provided, granted or conferred
in trade or commerce”; and
(2) a supply of services to include (a) providing, granting or rendering
services for valuable consideration; (b) agreeing to supply
services; and/or (c)
supplying services together with goods.
NSW Self Insurance Corporation (
) is a statutory body established
NSW Self Insurance Corporation Act 2004
(NSW). It plays a
central role in managing insurance schemes for the New South Wales Government,
including the HBCF. SICorp is the
insurer of record under all HBC insurance
insurance policies are generally arranged by a broker, acting on behalf of
either a builder or an owner. Under Part 6 of the HB
Act, no residential
building work may be commenced without a HBC insurance policy. The standard
terms and conditions of HBC insurance
policies were in evidence as part of
exhibit R1.
is a government agency tasked with administering the HBCF on behalf of SICorp.
iCare handles the day-to-day operations of the
Fund, including assessing builder
eligibility, issuing certificates of insurance and managing claims and dispute
resolution. iCare
also ensures compliance with Part 6 of the HB Act. Pursuant to
iCare’s premium guidelines, the premium and the total price
insurance policies are set by reference to the value of the contracted works to
be covered by the policy.
(as “The Principal”) and RBS (as “The Contractor”)
entered into the first building contract on 18 October
2021 – under which
17WSC engaged RBS to undertake the remedial work defined by the contract for a
lump-sum price of $752,514.40,
including GST. The notes to the contract excluded
the cost of HBC insurance from the value of the contract, noting that this cost
would be an “over-extra cost”. RBS then obtained the first HBC
policy from iCare, to cover the work to be undertaken
at the property under that
contract. 17WSC was named as the “Homeowner” on the certificate of
certificate of insurance issued by iCare for the first HBC policy recorded the
contract amount ($752,514), the premium paid ($33,522.99)
and that the total
price for the policy, including GST and stamp duty, was $40,194.07. The
certificate also recorded that the policy
covered both the construction period
and the warranty period for the work. RBS issued an invoice to 17WSC for the
price of that insurance
as an over-extra cost, which 17WSC duly paid.
began work under the contract in 2022. However it stopped work in about July
2022 after undertaking some initial or preliminary
work, and never returned to
the project. After an unspecified process, 17WSC entered into a fresh contract
with FJG on 1 November
2023, under which 17WSC engaged FJG to undertake fire
hydrant and sprinkler works at the property for a new contract sum of $357,994.
15 November 2023, Mr Murray wrote to iCare in his capacity as a board member of
17WSC, setting out the above facts and indicating
that 17WSC wished to apply for
a refund of the premium on the first HBC policy. iCare responded on 17 November
2023, referring to
section 20.9.4—
Early Termination of the Building
in iCare’s underwriting manual, stating:
Should the building contract [have] been terminated with the below mentioned
builder [RBS]. Please kindly request builder to forward
required supporting
information to their HBCF Insurance broker so the HBCF Certificate can be
amended accordingly.
We will also notify the builder’s builder [sic – broker?] with the
below email received so broker can advise the builder
and request the
appropriate supporting information for next step of action.
obtained its own HBC insurance policy from iCare on 30 November 2023, covering
the work to be undertaken at the property under
FJG’s contract with 17WSC.
17WSC was again named as the “homeowner” on the certificate of
insurance, which recorded
the contract amount under the new contract ($357,994)
the premium paid ($14,871.61) and the total price, including GST and stamp
($17,831.06). 17WSC similarly reimbursed FJG for the cost of obtaining that
Murray wrote back to iCare several months later, on 21 June 2024, referring to
his letter of 17 November and writing (my underlining):
We have attempted to contact the builder RBS to get them to inform iCare about
their cessation of work. The result was they have
now come after us via a lawyer
for work they haven’t done. This is the first contact from RBS for
approximately 18 months.
I can’t see how we can get RBS to agree to iCare releasing the part
premium to us. The premium was based on a contracted amount
of $684,104
(excluding GST). The work they actually completed was valued at only $43,550
(excluding GST) made up of concrete core
drilling ($15,800) and dry fire
penetration sealing ($27,750). I have copies of the 2 progress claims to support
The rest of the work has now been completed by others covered by a separate HBCF
policy, meaning we have paid twice for the cover.
There must be a method where a part premium can be reclaimed while a builder and
client are in dispute and the contract is no longer
being pursued.
Could you please assist us receiving a part refund of the premium which was
$36,700.06 (excluding GST). Any refund should not be
paid to RBS. It was paid by
17 Wylde Street Cooperative Limited.
responded to Mr Murray about four weeks later, on 17 July, informing him that
RBS had responded by claiming that it had completed
the work to the full
contract value covered by the first HBC policy, and asking Mr Murray to review
and confirm whether the work
the builder claimed as completed was correct. Mr
Murray responded on 18 July, asserting that RBS’s numbers did not
with the claims they made at the time or what was approved by the
project manager and paid.
responded on 23 July, advising that:
(1) iCare is unable to cancel a HBC policy in circumstances where a building
contract between the builder and homeowner is terminated
after work has started
or monies have been paid under the building contract and before the work is
completed, as iCare is at risk
in those circumstances.
(2) iCare HBCF has determined to treat any early termination of the contract as
a variation and to amend the premium to reflect the
value of the works
completed. The partial refund of the premium in those circumstances would be the
difference between the premium
(including GST and Stamp Duty) paid on the
original contract price (including variations) and the revised premium
(including GST
and Stamp Duty) based on the amount of the final
accounts/invoice.
(3) For a refund to occur, iCare must:
• obtain the original Certificate of Insurance
• obtain a statutory declaration from the Builder detailing the stage
of works completed
• confirm the final contract
• get confirmation that there is no
dispute between the parties as to the value of the work
• confirm that there are no monies
outstanding to icare
(4) Where there is a dispute between the customer and the builder, it will
not be possible to partly refund the premium until the
dispute is resolved.
Murray wrote a long email in response on 15 August 2024, pressing for a refund
and asking whether there was an avenue of appeal
where the builder would not
respond or engage at all. iCare responded the same day, suggesting that Mr
Murray contact the Tribunal
or otherwise seek independent advice.
then lodged its claim in the Tribunal. As noted above, the claim seeks payment
of money from iCare, being a refund of a large
part of the premium paid for the
first HBC policy.
The HBC insurance scheme
6 of the HB Act sets out the scheme for provision of home building warranty
insurance under that Act. In short compass:
(1) By section 92, a contractor must not do residential building work under
a contract unless a contract of insurance that complies
with the Act is in force
in relation to that work in the name of the contractor and a certificate of
insurance evidencing the contract
has been provided to at least one other party
to the contract.
(2) By section 99, the insurance contract must insure the person on whose behalf
the work is being done against the risk of loss
resulting from non-completion of
the work because of the insolvency, death or disappearance of the contractor,
and against the risk
that they would be unable to have the contract to rectify
the breach of statutory warranty, or recover compensation from the contractor
for any such breach, because of the insolvency, death or disappearance of the
contractor.
(3) Section 92C provides that the benefit of a contract of insurance taken out
by a contractor under the HB Act extends to any non-contracting
relation to the land at the time the contract to do residential building work
was entered into, as if the non-contracting
owner were a person on whose behalf
the work is done.
(4) Section 102 provides for the general requirements for that insurance,
including through regulations made under the HB Act.
(5) Section 103BD enables the State Insurance Regulatory Authority to issue
“Insurance Guidelines” that may provide for
the determination of
insurance premiums for contracts of insurance required to be entered into under
Part 6, including the manner
in which premiums are to be determined on the
factors to be taken into account in determining premiums.
by the State Insurance Regulatory Authority in December 2021 provides
(1) [At 7.1]: Licensed insurers must quote a premium for all contractors the
licensed insurer has deemed eligible in accordance with
the home building
compensation (eligibility) insurance guidelines.
(2) [At 7.3.1]: Factors that a licenced insurer must consider in pricing each
contract of insurance include (amongst other things)
the contract value.
(3) [At 7.8]: Licensed insurers must price contracts of insurance in accordance
with the contract price of the contract for the works
to be insured, excluding
the cost of the home building compensation insurance and excluding any
applicable taxes and insurance intermediary
contained in exhibit R1, the terms of the iCare insurance contract under Part 6
of the HB Act provide:
(1) [At 1.1(a)]: The policy covers “you” [which is defined to mean
the person on whose behalf the work is done or is
to be done including any owner
of the land at the time the building contract is entered into, on which
residential building work
is done and any successor in title to that person] for
specified losses or damage in respect of the work covered by the policy, namely:
(a) loss or damage resulting from non-completion of the work because of the
insolvency, death or disappearance of the builder [which
is defined to mean the
builder described in the insurance application for the policy]; and
(b) loss or damage arising from a breach of statutory warranty by the builder,
the loss or damage in respect of which “you”
cannot recover
compensation from the builder or have the builder rectify because of the
insolvency, death or disappearance of the
(2) [At 2]: There are specific time limits on the coverage of the policy,
referred to as the “period of insurance”.
(3) [At 4.1]: The conditions for making a claim under the policy, including that
the claim must be made during the period of insurance.
Consideration
described above, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction must be tethered to the
statute. In this case, that is Part 3A of the HB Act.
The authorities confirm
that the Tribunal cannot extend its jurisdiction under Part 3A by implication.
aside section 48A(2) for the moment, the part of the definition of building
claim that is contained in section 48A(1) is not
framed by reference to any
particular causes of action as such. A building claim can therefore represent a
right of action in one
or more aspects of law, such as contract, tort, statutory
duty or other rights, provided that it: (a) seeks one or more of the defined
remedies, and (b) has a sufficient relationship with building work – by
(1) arising “from” the supply of “building goods or
services” (as defined) (the
(2) arising “under” a “collateral” contract (the
second limb
relationship of those types of claims to “building goods or
services” is wide and expansive - not only does it include
services supplied “for” the carrying out of residential building
work or specialist work by a person who contracts
to do that work or otherwise
does that work; but it also includes goods or services supplied by such a person
“in connection
with” the carrying out of residential building work
or specialist work.
expanded definitions of building claim in section 48A(2) add further layers to
that definition, adding complexity to the definition
of building claim –
including by introducing as a building claim the concept of “an appeal
against a decision of an insurer
under a contract of insurance required to be
entered into under this Act”.
was set out in its written and oral submissions, iCare asserts that
17WSC’s claim:
(1) is not a claim that arises from a supply of building goods or services
(whether under a contract or not), under the first limb
of section 48A(1);
(2) is not a claim that arises under a contract that is collateral to a contract
for the supply of building goods or services under
the second limb of section
48A(1); and
(3) is not an appeal against the decision of an insurer under a building cover
contract required to be entered into under the HB
Act under the additional limb
in section 48A(2)(a).
17WSC’s argument in response disputes that assertion, submitting that
the claim is a building claim within the second or third
of those categories
– as it either arises from a collateral contract or as an appeal against a
relevant decision that has been
made by an insurer (iCare).
is appropriate to consider the grounds on which iCare has opposed the claim
separately, by reference to each of those limbs.
claim one “that arises from a supply of building goods or
submitted that the phrase “arising from” in the first limb of the
definition in section 48A(1) (which it asserted
was a relational term that
requires a causal connection) means that the dispute must be
supply of building goods or services. This, it argued, means that the subject
matter of the dispute must concern the supply of
building goods or services. It
argued that a dispute about the refund of part of an insurance premium does not
fall within the scope
of this first limb because the subject of the claim was
not the supply of building goods or services, but an insurance premium.
contrast, 17WSC submitted, that the first HBC insurance policy was
“absolutely essential to any major residential building
“an insurance policy without which no building work can commence”,
arguing that the Tribunal was the
appropriate forum for the issue to be
agree with iCare that the phrase “arising from” in section 48A(1)
requires there to be a causal connection between an
applicant’s claim and
a supply of building goods or services. Without establishing a causal connection
between the claimed
payment and the “supply” of “building
goods or services”, as both of those terms are defined, the claim cannot
be considered a building claim:
Grygiel v Baine
(Basten JA, Mason P agreeing).
definition of “services” is defined by reference to the FT Act. The
provision of insurance cover is expressly included
within the scope of
“services” for the purpose of that Act: section 79F(1). It also
constitutes the conferral or provision
of an intangible benefit or privilege in
trade or commerce – granting the benefitted party a statutory right to
claim compensation
in certain circumstances. This fits squarely with the
definition of services under section 79F of the FT Act.
noted above, “supply” is also defined by reference to the FT Act,
where it is defined inclusively (and not exhaustively).
The definition of
“supply” in section 79G(2) of that Act in relation to services, as
so defined, expressly includes the
rendering or granting of such services, such
as the provision of insurance coverage..
FT Act (and, to a significant extent, the HB Act) is a consumer protection
statute. Australian courts and tribunals have consistently
taken a functional
and expansive view when interpreting consumer protection statutes. This extends
to the consideration of what constitutes
a “service” for the purpose
of consumer protection law. Under that broad interpretation, third-party
beneficiaries can
be considered as recipients of services if the benefit of the
service is deliberately conferred on the beneficiary, particularly
statutory mandate.
this together, the benefit of insurance coverage provided to a building owner
under the HBCF scheme constitutes a “service”
under the FT Act
provisions, that is supplied by iCare to the building owner even though the
building owner is not a party to the
insurance contract. This interpretation
aligns with both the consumer protection purpose of the legislation and the
broad judicial
approach to defining “services” in similar contexts.
On this basis, the insurance coverage benefit provided by iCare
to 17WSC is a
service to which the HB Act applies. The next question is whether it is within
the scope of “building goods or
services” under the definition in
section 48A?
definition of “building goods or services” in section 48A of the HB
Act has several components: assuming that a relevant
good or service is
identified, in order to come within the definition the good or service concerned
(1) (firstly) supplied “for or in connection with” the carrying out
of residential building work or specialist work;
(2) (secondly) either:
(a) supplied by the person who contracts to do, or otherwise does, that
(b) supplied in circumstances prescribed by the regulations to the person who
contracts to do that work.
words “for or in connection with” are words of wide application.
They are sufficiently wide to capture goods or services
that are supplied by a
third party where the third party’s goods or services are supplied either
for or have a logical connection
with the carrying out of residential building
work or specialist work by a particular builder. On this analysis, third-party
coverage provided by a statutory insurer and which is connected with
(because it covers) the conduct of residential building work
or specialist work
would arguably fall within the first part of the definition of “building
goods or services”. Assuming
that this is the case leads to an analysis of
the two alternate limbs mentioned at (2) above.
with the second limb first, the
(NSW) does not
prescribe any particular circumstances for the purpose of paragraph (b) in the
definition of “building goods
or services” under section 48A(1).
This renders limb (b) effectively inactive or empty, and the definition of
goods or services” is strictly limited to what the builder
supplies; the result being that any service that is supplied by
a third party is
excluded from the definition of “building goods or services”.
follows that the first HBC policy, while conferring insurance coverage for the
benefit of 17WSC as the building owner, is not a
service that was supplied by
RBS to 17WSC. RBS merely facilitated the procurement of the insurance policy;
the actual supply of the
insurance service was made by iCare, as a third-party
statutory insurer. There are no circumstances prescribed by the regulations
would bring the supply of that insurance service within the scope of paragraph
(b) of the definition of “building goods
or services” under section
48A(1). Accordingly, 17WSC’s claim for payment of money against iCare does
from a supply of building goods or services” within the
meaning of paragraph (a) of section 48A(1), and therefore does not
constitute a
“building claim” under that limb for the purposes of Part 3A of the
Is 17WSC’s claim one “that arises under a
contract that is collateral to a contract for the supply of building goods or
limb requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that 17WSC’s claim arises under
a contract that is collateral to the supply
of building goods or services
– in this case, the supply of building work by RBS to 17WSC under the
original building contract.
17WSC argues that the first HBC policy was a
collateral contract to that supply.
submitted that the phrase “collateral contract” in the second limb
of section 48A(1) does not simply mean any contract
that has some connection
with the building contract or work, arguing that a collateral contract in this
context will arise where
a contractual representation is made as to the terms on
which the building services are to be supplied, which is not apt to describe
building cover contract, which is a statutory precondition to any building
services being carried out.
opposition to that argument, 17WSC submitted that the first HBC policy was
collateral to a contract for the supply of building
... as it is a compulsory element of the building contract – ie the
requires an HBCF insurance contract to be entered into,
before any work can commence”.
... In the current dispute, the collateral contract (the HBCF policy) is a
requirement in the main building contract between [17WSC]
and the builder RBS at
clause 2.2.1.3 and mentioned in two other parts of the building contract.
[17WSC] would not have entered into the building contract with RBS but for the
promise in 3 places in that contract, that RBS would
enter into an HBCF
insurance contract with the Respondent. In those circumstances, particularly
where the Respondent is the only
issuer of HBCF policies, it seems clear that
the HBCF policy is a collateral contract for the purposes of clause 48A(1) of
17WSC further argued that:
... The repayment of a wrongly paid premium must logically arise
“under” the policy. The policy requires the payment
of the premium
before it commences (and the Applicant has an obligation under the building
contract to pay for that policy). The
policy would not exist but for the payment
of the premium. Accordingly payment of the premium and by extension, a refund of
the premium
is a fundamental element of any policy of insurance and therefore,
must be “under” the policy.
iCare sought to rebut each of those arguments in its reply submissions.
concerned a claim about legal services that were supplied to a
contract that was collateral to the supply of building services, under the
second limb in
section 48A(1).
At [8], the Court of Appeal (Basten JA; Mason P
agreeing) identified the issues arising on the second limb, as follows (my
underlining):
The second limb requires an address to the terms and factual settings of both
the supposed collateral contract and the supply contract
to produce a decision
whether or not the supposed collateral contract is collateral to the supply
contract. The question whether
a contract is collateral to the supply contract
requires reference to the terms, express or implied, of both contracts and
consideration
of how the terms of the first bear on the operation of terms of
the supply contract; collaterality is a characteristic of the collateral
contract, not a reference to acts done in performance of it, nor a reference to
contemporaneity of the two contracts. It seems that
consideration is required of
the bearing of the supposed collateral contract and the rights and obligations
under it on the supply
contract and the rights and obligations under it; and
that some commonality of parties is necessary.
examining what constitutes a collateral contract, Basten JA said at [66]-[69]
(my underlining):
The question is whether the statutory reference to a contract being
“collateral to” another contract invokes a term of
art, having a
particular legal connotation. The concept of a collateral contract was developed
in relation to a promise or representation
by one party to another, as a result
of which the latter either enters into a separate contract with a third party,
or enters into
a contract with the representor. In each case, the promise or
representation is the consideration for the subsequent contract: see
Heilbut Symons & Co. v Buckleton
[1913] AC 30 at 47;
[2001] NSWCA 79
Matland Holdings Pty Ltd v NTZ Pty Ltd
[2004] FCA 710 (Kenny
J). It follows that a “collateral contract”
cannot be formed after the main contract has come into existence, as otherwise
that contract would constitute an inadequate (past) consideration for the new
contract: see
Hercules Motor Pty Ltd v Schubert
(1953) 53 SR(NSW) 301.
The term “collateral contract” may be used in relation to a contract
involving at least one third party, namely a person
not party to the principal
contract, to which the other was collateral. As is illustrated by
Authority of New South Wales v Heath Outdoor Pty Ltd
(1986) 7 NSWLR 170
pre-contractual representations could attract equitable relief where “the
enforcement of strict rights is unconscionable because
the assurances given
before the execution of a written contract were made orally”: per McHugh J
at p.195C. Relief of a similar
kind may now be obtained under the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) or the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW). Indeed, these
considerations suggest that reliance on a collateral contract will rarely be
necessary if the supplier or recipient
of building services has some claim for
payment of money (or other relevant relief) arising from the supply. Where
services are supplied
which fail to meet some expectation based upon a
representation, the supply will be an inevitable element of the claim and the
will, in that sense arise from the supply, as well as from breach of the
representation.
Even if there are some cases in which it is necessary to rely upon a contract
collateral to the contract for supply, this reasoning
suggests that no
constrained meaning should be given to the word “collateral” in this
statutory context. In this regard,
counsel for the Claimant took the Court to
David Securities Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[1992] HCA 48
(1992) 175 CLR
, where the High Court considered the meaning of the term “collateral
agreement” in s 261(5) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
That section related to payment of income tax on interest payable under a
mortgage and defined the term mortgage to include
“any charge, lien or
encumbrance to secure the repayment of money, and any collateral or
supplementary agreement ...”.
The case involved loan agreements and
securities by way of mortgage, and the argument below had turned upon whether
the concept of
a collateral agreement involved the notion of primacy and, if so,
which agreement was primary and which subordinate. In the course
of rejecting
such a notion, the joint judgment of Mason CJ and Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ stated, at 365:
“Collateral contracts are so-called not because they are subordinate or of
lessor importance (although they may well be, depending
on the facts of the
case), but because they impinge upon and are related to another contract. ...
Once the notion of primacy is jettisoned,
‘collateral’ must be
understood in the sense of ‘related to’ or even ‘in addition
There is no reason to be derived from the present statutory context not to apply
a similar analysis. (See also Spigelman CJ in
Solution 6 Holdings Ltd v
Industrial Relations Commission of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 200
This conclusion is supported by the fact that the definition in s 48A expressly
makes provision for the supply of services “whether
under a contract or
not”, and uses the term “arises” both in relation to a supply
and in relation to a contract.
Further, where there are both services for
residential building work and services “in connection with”
residential building
work there may be, as already noted, a causal nexus which
is not directly dependent upon contract. For these reasons, the concept
collateral contract, in this statutory context, will be satisfied where there is
an appropriate connection with the supply of
building services. In my view, that
connection will exist, as a matter of law, in a case where a representation is
made, or legal
advice provided, in relation to the terms or conditions upon
which building services are, or are to be, supplied.
J (as her Honour then was) applied those principles in
Stevens v Gary Lewin
trading as Gary Lewin Architecture
[2006] NSWSC 1232
ff, finding at
[57]-[58] that:
... The architect’s claim under the agreement on the pleadings seems to
have no appropriate connection with the supply of building
services by Woodfast
[the builder] and is not a claim that arises under a contract that is collateral
to the Woodfast contract”.
... The connection is as to the manner in which the Woodfast contract was
carried out and not to the terms of it. I do not consider
that this connection
is such as to characterise the Stevens claim as one that arises under a contract
that is collateral to the Woodfast
those authorities to this case, the first HBC policy also fails to meet the
concept of a “collateral contract”
within the meaning employed by
the second limb of section 48K(1), for several reasons. Firstly, the first HBC
policy was entered
into after the building contract between 17WSC and RBS, not
before it. It therefore does not “impinge upon” that building
contract in the way contemplated by the quoted passage from the joint judgment
David Securities Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
. Secondly,
the HBC policy is a statutory insurance arrangement between RBS, as the builder,
and iCare that is mandated under Part
6 of the HB Act, as a statutory
precondition to the carrying out of building work under a building contract
– and not the entry
into or the terms of that building contract. It is not
a separate bargain being made with 17WSC and it is not a promise that was
intended to induce 17WSC to enter the building contract, as it contains no
contractual representation to 17WSC as to the terms on
which RBS’s
building services were to be supplied which resulted in 17WSC entering into a
separate contract with either RBS
or a third party.
Separately,
for a claim in respect of a collateral contract to be considered as a building
claim, the second limb of section 48A(1)
requires that the claim arise
“under” the collateral contract – which is a narrower
construction than simply “relating
to”, or “arising out
of”, or being “in connection with” the contract concerned:
Rinehart v Welker
[2012] NSWCA 95
(2012) 95 NSWLR 221
[123] (per Bathurst CJ, McColl and Young JJA agreeing). A claim arises
“under” a contract when its outcome is
“governed, controlled
or bound by; in accordance with” the contract itself:
248-249 [125], citing
BTR Engineering (Australia) Ltd v Dana Corporation
[2000] VSC 246
, per Warren J (as her Honour then was) and
Airconditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel Electronics Pty Limited
per Hargrave J, adding:
As I indicated earlier (at [36]) the primary judge took the view that the words
“under this deed” in the present case
involved enforcing or invoking
some right created by the Settlement Deed. It seems to me that consistent with
the authorities to
which I have referred, if the outcome of the dispute was
governed or controlled by the Settlement Deed, then there would be a dispute
under the Settlement Deed irrespective of whether the claimant was invoking or
enforcing some right created by the Settlement Deed.
It may be that that was
what the primary judge was referring to when he said the dispute must derive
from or depend on the Settlement
cannot be said that 17WSC’s claim in this proceeding “arises
under” the first HBC policy. 17WSC’s claim:
(a) does not seek to
enforce a right created by the policy; (b) does not rely on or seek to enforce
any terms of the policy; and
(c) the claim is not governed or controlled by the
terms of the policy. To the contrary, 17WSC seeks to take issue with the pricing
of the premium payable for the policy, as a contract between iCare and RBS,
which is determined separately, outside the terms of
the policy, and in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the State Insurance Regulatory
Authority and iCare itself.
Consequently,
as 17WSC’s claim does not arise under a collateral contract to the
building contract with RBS, it does not constitute
a “building
claim” under the second limb of section 48A(1).
17WSC’s claim an appeal against a decision of an insurer under a building
cover contract required to be entered into under
the HB Act?
its written and oral submissions, iCare accepted that the first HBC policy is a
building cover contract that is required to be
entered into under the HB Act.
That conclusion is inescapable given the definition of “building cover
contract” in Schedule
1 of the HB Act, which defines a building cover
contract to mean a contract of insurance under Part 6 of the Act – which
the obligation to have HBCF insurance under section 92 of that Act.
iCare nevertheless argues that the applicant’s claim is
not an appeal
against a decision under that policy, asserting that iCare has not made any
decision under the first HBC policy because
no term of the policy provided for
the refund of the premium in circumstances where the building work did not
occur, and any decision
rights and duties created by the insurance policy.
opposition to those submissions, 17WSC argued that iCare had admitted that it
had made a decision on 24 February to refuse the
refund and that it made
decisions about, and issued HBCF policies, on behalf of the insurer, which made
this proceeding an appeal
against “a decision of an insurer”
pursuant to section 48A(2)(a) of the HB Act.
extended definition of “building claim” in section 48A(2)(a) of the
HB Act was enacted to ensure that homeowners could
challenge substantive
coverage outcomes in the Tribunal. It does so by giving homeowners and the
beneficiaries of a building cover
contract – including (but not limited
to) HBCF insurance policies – an express right to “appeal”
substantive
insurer decisions that are made “under” a building cover
“appeal” is a “creature of statute”, and is not a
procedure known to the common law. It is the proper construction
of the terms of
the particular statutory grant of a right of appeal which determines the nature
of the right:
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd
[2008] HCA 13; (2008) 234 CLR
124 at [2]. While the word “appeal”, as used in section 48A(2)(a),
is not defined in the
HB Act, an appeal to the Tribunal under section 48A(2)(a)
operates in practice as a suit for a breach of the insurance contract,
Tribunal exercising original, not appellate, jurisdiction:
Defence Housing
Authority v Building Insurers’ Guarantee Corporation
[2005] NSWSC 206
(Hidden J). The Tribunal determines an “appeal” brought under
section 48A(2)(a) on the basis of a re-hearing of the insurance
v NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2017] NSWCATCD 38
Member Sarginson (as the Deputy President of the Tribunal then was), citing
Barry v Royal & Sun Alliance Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCTTT 805
commentary in Bambagiotti
Building Disputes & The
Thomson Reuters [2012] at pp. 127-132. That statement has been cited
with apparent approval in several recent cases, including
Benson v NSW Self
Insurance Corporation
[2023] NSWCATCD 103
Amirbeaggi v NSW Self
Insurance Corporation
[2023] NSWCATCD 171
CN1 Pty Limited v NSW
Self Insurance Corporation
[2024] NSWCATCD 38
Amirbeaggi v
NSW Self Insurance Corporation
[2025] NSWDC 10
, per Cole DCJ.
extension of the definition of “building claim” in section 48A(2)(a)
of the HB Act was not designed to give the Tribunal
administrative or restitutionary claims about premiums. The observations made in
the authorities cited above, about
the use of the word “under” in
relation to a collateral contract, also apply to this part of the claim: the
to which the appeal must relate must arise “under” the
building cover contract, in the sense of being “governed,
controlled or
bound by; in accordance with” the contract itself. Accordingly, decisions
to which the subsection directly applies
typically includes (a) decisions to
refuse indemnity under the policy; (b) decisions to cancel or avoid the
policy; or (c) decisions
in a particular instance, all of which are normally made under the terms of the
applicable policy, and concern whether and how cover is provided. They do not
extend to premium payments, which are administrative
matters that are required
by the insurer and made by the builder as a condition for a HBC insurance policy
to be issued, and are
not part of the insurance policy itself.
the same way that 17WSC’s claim is not made under a collateral contract,
iCare’s refusal of 17WSC’s claim for
a disgorgement to 17WSC of part
of the premium that was paid by RBS to iCare is not a decision made by the
relevant insurer (iCare,
on behalf of SICorp) under the first HBC policy. The
claim is about insurance administration, not construction or workmanship issues.
The relevant premium was paid by RBS to iCare as a
the HBCF insurance policy under the HB Act, but it is not itself part of the
terms and conditions of the policy itself
– which was before the Tribunal.
claim for a refund of premium paid by RBS to iCare is a claim about money paid
for the policy. The refund request is
an administrative matter that concerns a
financial transaction that took place between RBS and iCare which is governed by
internal procedures and the oversight of the State Insurance
Regulatory Authority; and not an insurer’s decision under the
terms of the
policy about whether to grant, deny, or limit cover. It is therefore not an
appeal – or challenge – against
a decision of an insurer under a
building cover contract and does not fall within the extended operation of the
“building claim”
definition in section 48A(2)(a).
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, the Tribunal finds that 17WSC’s claim against iCare is not
a “building claim” within the meaning
of Part 3A of the HB Act.
Consequently the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the claim
under that Part. iCare’s
application to dismiss the proceeding for want of
note that the parties have agreed to bear their own costs of this jurisdictional
issue. The Tribunal should make an order to this
Tribunal therefore makes the following orders:
(1) Nicholas Murray is removed as an applicant to the proceeding.
(2) The proceeding is dismissed pursuant to
section 55(1)(b)
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), on the grounds that the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction under
(NSW) to hear or determine the claim.
(3) There is no order as to costs, with the intent that each party is to bear
its own costs.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (335 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter