URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/298.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Avery v Registrar Births Deaths and Marriages [2013] NSWADT 298 (24 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Avery v Registrar, Births Deaths and Marriages
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 298
Hearing Date(s):
17 July 2013
Decision Date:
24 December 2013
General Division
P H Molony, Judicial Member
(1) Affirm the Registrar's decision not to cancel the 2007 entry in the
Register with respect to Ms Avery's change of name; and
(2) Affirm the
decision to refuse to issue a certificate relating to Ms Avery's 1997 change of
name in the form she requests.
Catchwords:
Births, Death and Marriage Registration - change of name - cancellation of
- change of name certificate - contents of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decision Tribunal Act 1997
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1995
Births, Deaths and Marriages Regulation 2011
Cases Cited:
Avery v Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages
[2008] NSWADTAP 68.
Avery v Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages; Avery v State of New
South Wales (Attorney General's Department)
[2010] NSWCA 72
Registrar, Births Deaths and Marriages
[2010] HCASL 212.
Drake v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
Principal judgment
Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery (Applicant)
Registrar, Births Deaths
and Marriages (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
S Avery (Applicant in person)
Crown Solicitors Office
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
application involves a complex history dealing with matters associated with the
applicant's identity. She identifies herself
as Stephanie Tatiana Patricia
order to avoid putting on the record numerous facts dealing with Ms Avery's
identity I will adopt the device used in previous proceedings
relating to Ms
Avery of referring to her former names using synonyms. As a consequence, for the
purpose of these reasons, I will
refer to her name at birth as being Tatiana
Isabella Yurovich and her name, when she married, as Tatiana Isabella
is not the first time the Tribunal has heard proceeding involving the same
parties with respect to Ms Avery's names. There is
a long history of events
relating to issues she has had with the Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Marriages (the Registrar), which
I will briefly outline.
1997, the applicant applied to register a change of name from her married name
to Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery. The Registrar
registered that change of
name. Ms Avery subsequently obtained her Australian Citizenship in that
2007, Ms Avery applied to register a change of name from Stephanie Tatiana
Patricia Avery to her birth name, Tatiana Isabella Yurovich.
The Registrar
approved this change of name and issued a change of name certificate recording
the registration of that change of name.
In that certificate the Registrar
identified that Ms Avery had had four former names: the first was her name at
birth; the second
was Stephanie Tatiana Avery; the third was her married name;
and the fourth - which was included in the endorsement field rather
former names field -Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery.
then Ms Avery's name has been recorded on the register as Tatiana Isabella
Avery was extremely upset at the form of the certificate and has consistently
argued that it prevents her from being able to satisfactorily
prove her chain of
identity by (a) including a name she says she has never had, i.e. Stephanie
Tatiana Avery; and (b) not recording
which of her former names was the most
Avery unsuccessfully applied to this Tribunal to review the decision of the
Registrar to register her change of name in accordance
with her 2007
application. She unsuccessfully appealed that decision to an Appeal Panel of
this Tribunal in
Avery v Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages
NSWADTAP 68.
From there she appealed to the NSW Court of Appeal, but was again
unsuccessful: see
Avery v Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages; Avery v
State of New South Wales (Attorney General's Department
[2010] NSWCA 72.
Avery did not succeed in obtaining special leave to appeal the Court of Appeal's
decision to the High Court: see
Avery v Registrar, Births Deaths and
[2010] HCASL 212.
is clear that despite her many unsuccessful appeals Ms Avery does not accept the
decisions that have been made. In her affidavit
in support of her present
application she said -
6. I do not accept the allocated identity details proposed to the change of
name entry [in 2007] and will not accept arbitrated for
me identity history
record made in the BDM in the change of name entry ...
7. I do not accept and will not accept the change of name certificate with
the current presentation from NSW BDM Registry which does
not identify me and
does not provide evidence of a registrable event on that date.
has been a large and continuing volume of correspondent between Ms Avery, the
Registrar and others in the course of which, in
January 2013, Ms Avery requested
that the Registrar cancel the 2007 registration of her change of name to her
birth name, Tatiana
Isabella Yurovich. Ms Avery says that since 2007 she has
never used the name Tatiana Isabella Yurovich and that she has withdrawn
statutory declaration dated 24 December 2012. In that declaration she declared
that she was changing her name to Tatiana Isabella
Yurovich, and that the name
Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery would not be used.
Avery has also applied for the issue of an official document registering her
1997 change of name from her married name, Tatiana
Isabella Orlov to Stephanie
Tatiana Patricia Avery.
Registrar agrees that those requests are deemed to have been refused. As a
consequence Ms Avery sought review in this Tribunal.
matter came before me for hearing on 17 July 2013. The Registrar's position at
hearing was to refuse to cancel the 2007 change
of name entry in the Register,
arguing that there is no power to do so. The Registrar was prepared to issue a
certificate which certifies
that Tatiana Isabella Orlov and Stephanie Tatiana
Patricia Avery are registered as former names of Ms Avery. Indeed such a
certificate
was the subject of the proceedings considered by the Court of Appeal
The Registrar argues that the Register contains no other details
relating to the
1997 change of name and that any certificate issued certifying the contents of
the Register, ipso facto, can contain
no more the Register
Material before the Tribunal
considering this matter I have had regard to the following material relied on by
the parties:
The application
for review and attachments
The affidavit of
Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery affirmed on 9 April 2013.
submissions.
bundle of documents.
documents filed by the Registrar.
The Registrar's
written submissions.
addition both Ms Avery and Mr Della-Pozza made oral submissions that I have
considered.
is important to bear in mind that the parties and the Tribunal are bound by the
decision of the Court of Appeal in
Avery v Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Marriages; Avery v State of New South Wales (Attorney General's Department
[2010] NSWCA 72.
This is not a forum in which those issues can be re-litigated.
Insofar as I consider that Ms Avery's submissions invited me to embark
path I have eschewed them.
The relevant legislation
to an understanding of the legislative scheme with respect to changes of names
are a number of definitions contained in
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1995
(the BDMR Act). They are
of name includes an addition, omission
or substitution.
registrable event
means a birth, adoption or discharge of
adoption, change of name, change of sex, death or marriage.
5 of the BDMR Act is concerned with changes of name. Section 25 provides that
A person's name may be changed by registration of the change under
Relevantly,
section 31(1)provides
(1) The Registrar registers a change of name
by making an entry about the change of name in the Register including the
particulars
required by the regulations.
8 of the Births, Deaths and Marriages Regulation 2011 (the Regulation)
prescribes the particulars required -
(1) For the purposes of
section 31 of the Act, the following particulars are required:
(a) the sex and date and place of birth of the person whose change of name is
being registered,
(b) the full name of the person immediately before the change of name,
(c) the full name first given to the person after birth and any other name
shown on the person's birth registration,
(d) any other former names of the person,
(e) the new full name of the person,
(f) the full names of the parents of the person (as at the date of the
person's birth or registration of the person's birth).
(2) In this clause, former name of a person includes:
(a) a name acquired by the person informally by repute or usage, or
(b) (b) any other name used by the person.
Registrar has a limited power to correct the Register. Section 31G provides
(1) The Registrar may correct the Register under section 45 if a
change of name of a person has been registered in contravention of
(2) This section does not limit the power of the Registrar under section 45
to correct the Register.
8 of the Act is concerned with The Register. Importantly s 43(1) requires the
Registrar to maintain a register of registrable
events. Sub-s (2) provides that
(2) The Register:
(a) must contain the particulars of each registrable event required under
this Act, or another law, to be included in the Register,
(b) may contain such further information as the Registrar considers
appropriate for inclusion.
45 is in Division 3 of Part 8 and is concerned with correction of the Register
by the Registrar. It provides -
(1) The Registrar may correct the
(a) to reflect a finding made on inquiry under Division 2, or
(b) to bring an entry about a particular registrable event into conformity
with the most reliable information available to the Registrar
of the registrable
(2) The Registrar must, if required by a court, correct the Register.
(3) The Registrar corrects the Register by adding or cancelling an entry in
the Register or by adding, altering or deleting particulars
contained in an
44, in Division 2 of Part 8, provides that -
(1) The Registrar may
conduct an inquiry to find out:
(a) whether a registrable event has happened, or
(b) particulars of a registrable event, or
(c) whether particulars of a specific registrable event have been correctly
recorded in the Register.
(2) The Registrar may, by notice given to a person who may be able to provide
information relevant to an inquiry under this section,
require the person to
answer specified questions or to provide other information within a time and
manner specified in the notice.
(3) A person who fails, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a notice
under subsection (2) is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units.
49 of the Act is concerned with the issue of certificates. It relevantly
(1) On completing a search of the Register, the Registrar
may issue a certificate:
(a) certifying particulars contained in an entry, or
(b) certifying that no entry was located in the Register about the relevant
registrable event.
(2) A certificate under subsection (1) (a) is admissible in legal proceedings
as evidence of:
(a) the entry to which the certificate relates, and
(b) the facts recorded in the entry.
power of this Tribunal to review decisions of the Registrar is found in s 56,
part 9, of the Act. it says -
(1) A person who is dissatisfied with
a decision of the Registrar made in the exercise or purported exercise of
functions under this
Act may apply to the Administrative Decisions Tribunal for
a review of the decision.
(2) This section does not give a right of review of a decision of the
Registrar to refuse to register a change of name that was made
only because the
Commissioner of Corrective Services or the Commissioner of Police refused to
give approval under section 31F.
Administrative Decision Tribunal Act 1997
(the ADTA) says that
in determining an application for review the Tribunal is to make the correct and
preferable decision having
regard to the material before it, and any applicable
written or unwritten law. It is well established that in considering an
application
for review the Tribunal is not constrained to have regard only to
the material that was before the Commissioner, but may have regard
relevant material before it at the time of the review:
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
Consideration
reliance on s 45(3) Ms Avery submits that the Registrar has a general power to
correct an entry in the Register by cancelling it.
This she says is what the
Registrar should do with respect to her 2007 change of name form Stephanie
Tatiana Patricia Avery to Tatiana
Isabella Yurovich. The Registrar counters that
he does not have the power to do so.
am satisfied that the Registrar does not have a general and unrestrained power
to cancel an entry in the Register as and when he
sees fit. To the contrary, the
circumstances in which the Registrar may use the powers are set out in s 45. The
Registrar's powers
may only be used in the circumstances set out in s 45(1) and
(2). There are:
To reflect a
finding made by an inquiry under s 44 (s 45(1)(a) - there has been no such
To bring an
entry about a particular registrable event into conformity with the most
reliable information available to the Registrar
of the registrable event ( s
45(1)(b)) - this is discussed below.
When required to
do so by a Court (s 45(2)). It appears the Registrar did so, on an interim
basis, with respect to the 2007 certificate
when the Tribunal made a conditional
stay order under s 60 of the ADTA in Ms Avery's initial proceedings. That order
has since lapsed
and the original entry reinstated.
one considers the evidence with respect to Ms Avery's 2007 change of name from
Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery to Tatiana Isabella
Yurovich, it is apparent
that her dissatisfaction with the form of certificate issued by the Registrar
with respect to that event,
(and the difficulties she says are attendant on it)
have caused her resile for her stated intention to take up the name Tatiana
Yurovich and not use the name Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery. That
intention was verified by her on statutory declaration without
any express
conditions or qualifications. The Registrar accepted that unqualified
declaration as evidence of Ms Avery's intention
to change her name and
registered the change accordingly.
Avery's subsequent attempts to renounce her statutory declaration and disavow
her stated intention, do not change the fact of what
occurred i.e. that she
provided evidence of her intention to change her name and acting on that
intention the Registrar recorded
a change of her name to Tatiana Isabella
Yurovich. The most reliable information available as to what occurred
demonstrates that
Ms Avery changed her name to Tatiana Isabella
is not a change that the Registrar has power to cancel.
respect to Ms Avery's request that the Registrar now issue her with a change of
name certificate with respect to her 1997 change
of name from Tatiana Isabella
Orlov to Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery, it is important to understand that
this is an historical
change of name, that has been supplanted by her registered
change of name from Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery to Tatiana Isabella
Yurovich in 2007.
accept that the entry that now appears in the Register shows that Ms Avery's
present registered name is Tatiana Isabella Yurovich
and that her former names
Tatiana Isabella
Yurovich, her birth name;
Tatiana Isabella
Tatiana Avery ; and
Tatiana Patricia Avery.
The Register does not contain, and
clause 8 of the Regulation does not require it to contain, information as to
what names were changed
in 1997, before the most recent name change. Therefore,
any search of the Register conducted by the Registrar since the 2007 change
name will not discover the information Ms Avery wants the Registrar to include
in a certificate.
follows that the Registrar correctly refused to issue Ms Avery with a
certificate relating to the1997 change of name in the form
should also be noted that:
The Registrar
has offered to provide Ms Avery with a letter outlining her change of name
Ms Avery is in
possession of a change of name certificate dated 6 December 2007 with respect to
her 2007 change of name to Stephanie
Tatiana Patricia Avery. It shows her former
names as Tatiana Isabella Yurovich and Tatiana Isabella
follows from all of the above that I consider that the correct and preferable
decisions in this case are to:
(1) Affirm the Registrar's decision not to cancel the 2007 entry in the
Register with respect to Ms Avery's change of name; and
(2) Affirm the decision to refuse to issue a certificate relating to Ms
Avery's 1997 change of name in the form she requests.
Amendments : 13 August 2014
(1) Paragraph 10 should be amended to read:
There has been a large and continuing volume of correspondence between Ms
Avery, the Registrar and others in the course of which,
in January 2013, Ms
Avery requested that the Registrar cancel the 2007 registration of her change of
name to her married name Tatiana
Isabella Orlov. Ms Avery says that since 2007
she has never used the name Tatiana Isabella Orlov and that she has withdrawn
her statutory
declaration dated 10 December 2007. In that declaration she
declared that she was changing her name to Tatiana Isabella Orlov, and
name Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery would not be used.
(2) Where the name Tatiana Isabella Yurovich appears in [31] of the
Tribunal's decision, it should be replaced with the name Tatiana
Isabella Orlov.
(3) Where the name Stephanie Tatiana Patricia Avery appears at [36], it
should be replaced with the name Tatiana Isabella Orlov.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the amendments to
the reasons for decision of the Civil and Administrative
Decisions Tribunal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (169 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter