URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WANG v HCCC [2013] NSWNMT 18 (24 September 2013)
Edited: 19 October 2013
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
LIH-HUEY WANG
MATTER NUMBER: 22/2013
REGISTRATION NUMBER: Previously
RN1719268 (NSW)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
__________________________________________________________________
CITATION: WANG v HCCC
[2013] NSWNMT 18
PARTIES: Lih-Huey Wang
(Applicant) – self-represented and
accompanied by Sister M Knagge.
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Respondent) represented by Mr P
Griffin of Counsel instructed by Ms J Dinihan, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
FILE NUMBER: 22/2013
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
A/Prof Janette Curtis (Nurse
Ms Jennifer O’Baugh (Nurse Member)
Prof. Derek Anderson AM (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 30 July & 1 August 2013
DATE OF DECISION: 24 September 2013
FINDINGS (in summary): The application for review of an order for
de-registration was considered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal was
not satisfied
to the requisite standard that registration is appropriate at the current time.
Order that Application for Review is
CATCHWORDS: Health Practitioner - Nurse and Midwife – application to
review order of de-registration.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law) – s163B, s163C
CASES CITED:
HCCC v WANG
[2010] NSWNMT 9
Re Mansoor Haider
[2006] NSWMT 6
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 21
Nelson v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 7.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
document sets out the Reasons for Decision regarding an application made by Ms
Wang for the review of the decision that her name
be removed from the Register
of Nurses made by a Nurses and Midwives Tribunal on 15 March 2010 (2010
Tribunal). The 2010 Tribunal
fixed a minimum period of three years before which
this order could be reviewed.
2010 Tribunal considered complaints that the Applicant suffered from an
impairment and lacked competency required for the practice
of nursing. The
Particulars of these Complaints largely relate to the Applicant’s work at
the Royal Hospital for Women (RHW)
in 2006. The impairment alleged related to Ms
Wang’s intellectual and cognitive function which affected her verbal
reasoning, some aspects of her information processing skills, her
verbal memory and her ability to adapt and regulate her behaviour
in response to
Wang’s mental capacity, her nursing knowledge
and skill, her insufficient
communication skills, including an inadequate command of the English language.
Wang requested that this Tribunal review the deregistration order made by the
2010 Tribunal and in its place make an order that
her name be restored to the
Register without any conditions on her Registration.
full text of the Complaint (as amended) document relied upon by the HCCC before
the 2010 Tribunal forms annexure B hereto.
Summary of the 2010
Tribunal’s decisions
a reading of the entire Reasons for Decision published by the 2010 Tribunal is
appropriate, this Tribunal provides the following
summary of the findings for
convenience:
The Tribunal was
comfortably satisfied that Ms Wang suffered from cognitive deficits which
adversely affected her interpersonal interactions
and communications and that
these problems may be associated with an underlying psychiatric condition
although it could not be comfortably
satisfied on the evidence to identify the
psychiatric condition (see paragraph 83). The Tribunal noted that she failed to
Novice Competence performance standards.
The Tribunal did
not accept Ms Wang’s submission that the psychometric testing assessments
undertaken by Dr Wayne Reid (which
identified certain impairments) were not
objective (due to her suffering from psychological and physical stress as a
result of sinusitis)
(see paragraph 80).
The Tribunal
accepted Dr Reid’s findings regarding Ms Wang’s impulsivity and
deficits in cognitive functioning. In particular
he found deficits in verbal
abstract reasoning, in her ability to adapt or regulate behavior in response to
also accepted his view that all of these were likely to
detrimentally affect her capacity to practise (paragraph 81).
The findings of
Dr Reid were consistent with the evidence of Ms Wang’s performance at the
RHW in particular her capacity to
practise and to benefit from professional
training (paragraph 82).
serious deficiencies in the knowledge and skill demonstrated by Ms Wang in her
nursing practice and she lacks the requisite
competence to practise as a nurse.
With respect to her communication skills the Tribunal found there was a greater
problem with respect
to the receiving of communication rather than with
expressive communication which contributed to her impairment (see paragraphs 84
The Tribunal
accepted the evidence from the then Nursing and Midwifery Board of NSW that
based on the number of subjects and the nature
of these subjects undertaken by
Ms Wang at the University of Western Sydney (UWS) the degree course undertaken
was not sufficient,
given the nature of her previous qualifications, to
constitute completion of all of the academic and clinical requirements of the
prescribed Bachelor of Nursing (see paragraph 91).
The findings of
impairment and lack of competence appeared to be closely interrelated and
results in the resolution of the problem
being more complex. This is further
compounded by there not being a definitive diagnosis for the psychiatric
component of Ms Wang’s
impairment (paragraph 96).
Ms Wang lacked
insight into the way in which her interactions with colleagues were perceived
(paragraph 97).
The Tribunal was
of the view that the impairment issues would appear to need diagnosis and
treatment or other resolution before she
would be in a position to address the
deficits in her competence to practise (paragraph 98).
Removal of the
Ms Wang’s name from the Register of Nurses was necessary to protect the
public. A minimum period of three years
would be required for Ms Wang to address
the competency and impairment issues identified (paragraph 99).
further assessment and treatment should be undertaken by a suitably qualified
psychiatrist prior to making an application
for reinstatement to the Register.
Issues to be determined by this Tribunal
two issues to be determined by this Tribunal are whether or not the Applicant
still suffers from the impairment and the lack of
competence identified by the
2010 Tribunal. It is not the role of this Tribunal to determine whether or not
the orders made by the
2010 Tribunal were correct. This Tribunal has therefore
disregarded any submissions made that attempt to go behind the decision of
2010 Tribunal.
Suppression Orders
Tribunal notes that the 2010 Tribunal made a suppression order with respect to
the names of any member of staff of the Sydney
South West Area Health Service,
in particular those from Concord Repatriation and General Hospital or Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital.
This Tribunal continues the Suppression Order made in in
HCCC v WANG
[2010] NSWNMT 9.
Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal of New South Wales (the Tribunal) convened at the
Health Professional Councils Authority (HPCA)
Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney on
30 July & 1 August 2013 to conduct an Inquiry regarding the Application made
by Ms Wang to
review the decision of the 2010 Tribunal (which was then known as
the Nurses and Midwives Tribunal) ordering her name be removed
from the Register
of Nurses. The Complaint (as amended) considered by the 2010 Tribunal was dated
24 August 2009 (see annexure B
2010 Tribunal published its Reasons for Decision on 15 March 2010 and is
reported as
HCCC v WANG
[2010] NSWNMT 9.
Ms Wang wrote to the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales making an application to regain her
registration on 16 March
Wang was first registered as a nurse in New South Wales on 27 September 2002.
This registration was based upon a Bachelor of Nursing
degree formally awarded
by the University of Western Sydney in 2003.
Wang was suspended from the Register of Nurses on 1 October 2009. This
suspension remained until the deregistration ordered by
the 2010 Tribunal
occurred on 15 March 2010. The Tribunal notes that the Applicant’s CV
(exhibit A8) records that she worked
as a registered nurse at an aged care
facility from December 2008 to November 2009. When asked about this situation by
the Tribunal
the evidence given by the Applicant was inconclusive. On the
evidence before this Tribunal either the Applicant worked as a registered
after the time she was suspended from the Register or her CV is incorrect.
Either way, an error in the CV she provided to this
Tribunal is problematic
given the fact that she was asked questions on this specific topic when she gave
evidence before the 2010
Tribunal (was said see around T159).
earlier qualifications obtained by Ms Wang in her native Taiwan and other
relevant background are set out in the 2010 Tribunal
Relevant Law
163B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law NSW
Law) provides that a tribunal may conduct an inquiry into an application for
review. Section 163C provides that the review
determines the appropriateness of
the order as at the time of review. The review is not of the merits of the
original order.
allowances for the change in terminology used in the legislation in place at
relevant times, paragraph 5 of the HCCC submissions
in this matter (dated 30
August 2013) appropriately summarises relevant principles for consideration of
an Application for Review
as follows:
In Re Mansoor Haider Zaidi
[2006] NSWMT 6
the Medical Tribunal was dealing
with an application for reinstatement by a medical practitioner. The facts bear
no similarity to
those in the case of this Applicant. However, the Tribunal
does summarise the principles applicable to an application for reinstatement
follows at [42].
purpose of the jurisdiction which is exercised by the Tribunal is not for
punishment or further punishment of the former practitioner.
Instead the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is for the protection of the public which deals
with medical practitioners on the basis
that they are members of an honourable
profession who can be expected without reservation to conduct the affairs of
their patients
with honour and in whom the patients can place unbounded
confidence. What is in question in an application for reinstatement to
Medical Register is whether an applicant is fit and proper to be held out to the
rest of the profession, to patients and to the
whole of the community as a
person worthy of their confidence.
applicant who seeks to establish fitness to have his name restored to the
Register having been earlier removed from it bears the
onus of proving the case.
It is a heavy onus and the question whether the applicant is a fit and proper
person, is one to be trusted
to exercise the high responsibilities of the
profession is one to be determined on solid and substantial grounds and as an
for reinstatement to the Medical Register he is in a more
disadvantageous position than an original applicant. He must in effect
the decision for deregistration which has been made. That decision involves the
judgment that the applicant is probably
permanently unfit to have his name on
the Register. As a consequence, presumptions of fitness which might arise
otherwise than from
an absence of contrary suggestions can no longer advantage
him, precisely because of the removal of his name from the Register on
of unfitness.
ultimate issue is whether the Tribunal can conclude on the basis of all the
evidence that an applicant is now a fit and proper
person to join other members
of an honourable profession in the responsible and trusted activities which are
involved in the work
of the medical profession, what is at stake is not so much
the reputation of the applicant but the Tribunal’s assessment of
character, uprightness, honour and trustworthiness. ...
is not a question of what an applicant has suffered in the past. It is a
question of his worthiness and his reliability for the
future. What in this
respect the Tribunal must determine is whether it is satisfied that for the
future the applicant will act in
accordance with the high standards and
responsibilities of the profession. It is difficult to decide what a man will
do in the future
and the decision in a particular case is to a greater or lesser
extent dependent upon the Tribunal’s assessment of the applicant.
making that assessment, it may draw inferences from what he has done in the
past, and in particular what led to his being removed
from the Register. An
understanding of that may assist the Tribunal to determine what are his
standards and his understanding of
a practitioner’s responsibility, and
from this, what he is apt to do in the future. Where what has been done in the
been sufficient to indicate his probably permanent unfitness the
Tribunal will require solid and substantial grounds for the conclusion
standards have changed, his character has been reformed and that he will act
honourably.
onus of proving to the Tribunal that the former nurse is now of good character
and is both fit and competent to practise as a
nurse rests with the Applicant. A
person who applies to be reinstated to the Register must provide the Tribunal
with evidence that
allows comfortable satisfaction on the balance of
probabilities as to relevant matters.
Tribunal also accepts as an appropriate statement of relevant principles the
HCCC submissions at paragraphs 9 to 13 which read:
has been noted by the Tribunal that the matter of reinstatement must be
approached with healthy skepticism:
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 21
Nelson v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 7
capacity is not the only consideration in determining whether a person is
appropriate to practice nursing. The critical
issue is the applicant’s
worthiness and reliability for the future. In assessing this, the Tribunal can
draw inferences from
past conduct, particularly the conduct which led to the
nurse’s removal from the Register:
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 21
Nelson v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 7
, citing Mason P in
Zaidi v HCCC
[1998] NSWSC 335
(1998) 44 NSWLR 82.
as the Tribunal noted in
Hardy v HCCC
... it is well established that even though there are very real
difficulties facing an applicant in being reinstated to the Register,
no public interest in denying forever the chance of redemption and
rehabilitation to a former nurse. The view is that the
public is better served,
if in appropriate cases, those who have offended, once they have affirmatively
proved reform, are offered
a second chance under whatever conditions and after
whatever time the Tribunal considers appropriate.
if the Tribunal considers that it is unlikely the applicant will repeat the same
conduct, that in itself is may not be enough
for the Tribunal to be comfortably
satisfied that they have shown that they should be allowed to return to nursing:
See, for example,
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 21
Tribunal cannot assume that the applicant is a changed person merely because
some time has passed since he or she was deregistered.
The ‘mere effluxion
of time’ principle has been noted and approved by a long line of
HCCC provided three volumes of documents were marked as Volume R1 - exhibits 1
– 31, Volume R2 – exhibits 1 -15,
Volume R3 – exhibits 1 -
11. Those provided by the Applicant were marked as exhibits A1 – A18 as
set out in annexure
Applicant, Sister Margaret Knagge, Dr Kin Chiam, Dr Margaret Cooke and Dr
Anthony Samuels all gave evidence to the Tribunal (the
latter witness by
conference telephone).
Applicant provided the Tribunal with two documents listing a number of issues
she had addressed and information as to how these
issues had been addressed (a
short document - exhibit A2 and a lengthier document A 18). The issues
identified by the Applicant were
English language skills, psychiatric assessment
and competency.
conclusion of the longer written document provided by the Applicant
I have made mistakes in listening to poor advice in
the past and applied for one position for which I was not qualified. I am now
more mature and still have a desire to be a registered nurse. I have submitted
evidence of my good will and successful efforts to
respond to all Tribunal
directions.
Tribunal asked the Applicant questions relating to appropriate nursing actions
in certain common nursing scenarios. The Tribunal’s
findings with respect
to the Applicant’s evidence in this regard are set out below under the
heading of Findings.
Tribunal heard evidence from both the Applicant and Sister Knagge as to the
English tutoring that had been provided by Sister
Knagge to the Applicant. The
Applicant also provided evidence of having completed five TAFE courses around
the topics of the use
of English in the workplace in 2011 (a Transcript of the
Academic Record indicating the Applicant was ‘Competent’ in
courses is exhibit A5). The Applicant also gave evidence that she had completed
another year of study, including examinations,
in English at the University of
Technology (UTS) as part of her Chinese Medicine course.
Knagge gave evidence regarding the English tuition she had provided. When asked
by the Tribunal as to what content related
to the practice of nursing the
evidence was not conclusive. In the written submission made by the Applicant
there was an attempt
to clarify this evidence. The HCCC did not object to this
clarification. The Applicant submitted that Sister Knagge assisted her
completing assessment tasks in her UTS and TAFE courses thereby ensuring she
‘understood and could use medical terms more confidently within a
proper English sentence construction context’
(page 19 of the
Applicant’s written submissions received by the Tribunal on 13 September
his oral evidence Dr Samuels stated that he considered that the
Applicant’s English was slightly better than it had been
when he had
assessed her in 2009.
Tribunal also notes that the 2010 Tribunal did not make a finding that the
Applicant lacked competence on the basis of a lack
Psychiatric assessment
Applicant relied upon the evidence of various medical practitioners as well as a
statement dated 17 July 2013 from her parents
address ‘TO WHOM IT MAY
CONCERN’ in the format of answers to six questions. The Tribunal notes
that the last occasion
on which Dr Chiam saw the Applicant was 15 April 2013. Dr
Chiam also gave evidence that he had not had an opportunity to speak to
friends or colleagues (T24).
of the reports relied upon by the Applicant is the brief hand written report of
Dr Murray from 2003. The Applicant noted that
the report stated
my current professional opinion that Lih-Huey has no current psychological
problems that require treatment or medication’
. The Tribunal notes
that the background to this report was an allegation of harassment by the
Applicant having been made by another
nurse in a workplace. This Tribunal has no
further evidence from Dr Murray other than that which was before the 2010
Samuels provided a further report dated 12 July 2013 as well as oral evidence.
Dr Samuels also heard the evidence of Dr Chiam (see
below). In answer to
questions from the Applicant Dr Samuels stated that he did take into account the
stress created by undertaking
a medico-legal report and explained that the room
and manner of conducting the interview was not in any way out of the ordinary
for the interview being shorter in duration than usual due to Ms
Wang’s late arrival).
the cross examination of Dr Samuels the Applicant detailed to Dr Samuels the
facts and circumstances surrounding her conduct
at Concord Hospital, in
particular her conduct towards one particular senior nurse. During this evidence
Dr Samuels observed to the
Applicant that during the consultation
implied to me that
[name of senior nurse]
was your friend’
‘all this time that you lied to me, and also what you said to me about
[name of senior nurse]
was your friend, she was your boss, and you were
needing her at court to suggest or read whatever was required but given your
explanation
of events at the time you saw me was very different, and it was very
[T. 30-07-13, p.77, l.30 to p.78, l.39. See also T.
30-07-13, p.79, ll.4-11].
this point the Tribunal notes that the facts and circumstances detailed to Dr
Samuels (in brief) was that the communications written
by the Applicant to the
senior nurse were written in the affectionate and flattering terms on the advice
of colleagues with a view
to recruiting the senior nurse to support her 457 Visa
Application.
Applicant also provided a document from Dr Julie Son, a general practitioner
(GP) in relation to the psychiatric assessment. Details
are set out in the
Findings section of this document.
the Applicant relied on material from Ms Jacqui Winship, a clinical psychologist
with respect to psychiatric assessment.
This material is detailed in the
Findings section of this document.
document relied upon by the Applicant for support in relation to psychiatric
assessment is a document written by Dr Claire
Ka-Ming Lam on 6 March 2013. This
document is addressed ‘TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN’ and
I have become the general practitioner of Ms Lih-Huey Wang since 27
February 2013.
Based on the medical records and the letter from Dr Kin Chiam dated 22
July 2011, I believe that Lih-Huey has not suffered from any
psychiatric or
mental disorders.
In my opinion, there is no psychiatric impediment for her to continue her
nursing training or in other health fields.
Applicant gave evidence that she had been assessed by Dr Kin Chiam a consultant
psychiatrist. The Applicant gave evidence that
Dr Chiam provided a ‘fully
independent’ assessment. The Applicant quoted the report of Dr Chiam
wherein he stated that
he did not find sufficient evidence to support a
diagnosis of a pervasive development disorder such as Asperger’s Syndrome
and no evidence of a psychotic mood disorder.
Tribunal received two reports written by Dr Chiam which were produced under
summons. The first report dated 22 July 2011 was written
to Dr Son after he had
reviewed the Applicant on 20 and 22 July 2011. Some of the matters recorded in
this report include:
The Applicant
thought she was ill-prepared to work in neonatal medicine and made mistakes
which were compounded by her limited English
which had resulted in complaints
The Applicant
informed Dr Chiam that she had seen Dr Samuels and that he had formed the
opinion that she may have Asperger’s
The Applicant
would not consent to Dr Chiam obtaining a copy of Dr Samuels’ report on
the basis that she wanted Dr Chiam’s
assessment to be
‘independent’. Dr Chiam indicated that as a result he was unable to
further explore the basis of this
At this point
the Tribunal also notes that the Applicant gave evidence that she could not
provide any of the information from the
2010 Tribunal as it had all been
destroyed when she moved accommodation. She also gave evidence that she had
received advice that
providing such documentation would result in the report not
being ‘independent’ (T149).
Noting that his
clinical assessment was based on direct history from Ms Wang and his examination
of her mental state without corroborative
material Dr Chiam did not find
sufficient evidence to support the diagnosis of a pervasive development
disorder, a psychotic or mood
disorder and therefore made no formal psychiatric
diagnosis. He opined that there should be no psychiatric impediment for the Ms
Wang to pursue ‘nursing training’.
Tribunal also received a copy of a second report written by Dr Chiam. This
report included the following:
On 14 April 2013
Dr Chiam reported to Dr Lam that he had reviewed Ms Wang that day – being
the first occasion on which he had
seen her since 2011.
During this
conversation the Applicant had told him that she was keen to return to nursing,
particularly in the aged care area. He
found that she spoke rapidly which made
it difficult to follow what she was saying at times.
Dr Chiam found
her mood to be good with her affect reactive although ‘somewhat
awkward’ and no evidence of psychosis.
indicated that he was happy to review her again after the
‘meeting with
to work on future strategies.
cross-examination Dr Chiam stated that he would have preferred to have had
access to the report of Dr Samuels and other relevant
background information and
qualified his opinion as being limited to his direct clinical assessment at the
time of consultations.
Competency issues
the Tribunal does not doubt the sincerity of the references provided by two
senior nursing staff of aged care facilities in
which the Applicant worked
subsequent to her termination from RHW, the Tribunal is unable to afford them
sufficient weight to overcome
the significant competency deficits. There is
nothing in these references that indicates knowledge of the matters that
brought the Applicant before the Tribunal. The Tribunal notes the
2010 Tribunal held a similar view in that documents of this nature
do not carry
any great evidentiary value.
Submissions
Applicant’s Submissions
submissions in this matter were made in writing. Not only had the time allotted
for the hearing been exhausted by taking evidence
from the witnesses, but
written submissions allowed the Applicant time to carefully consider the
comprehensive written submissions
from the Respondent prior to making her
submissions.
Submission made by the HCCC
written submissions of the HCCC were provided to the Applicant prior to her
providing her written submissions to the Tribunal.
The HCCC did not have any
submissions in reply nor did either party request the Tribunal to reconvene for
the purpose of supplementing
the written submissions orally.
it does not go directly to the issues of impairment and competence that need to
be determined by this Tribunal, the account
of the causation of her conduct
towards senior nursing staff at Concord Hospital is relevant to credit. The
Tribunal is not persuaded
by the assertion of the Applicant that her conduct at
Concord Hospital was a result of having acted upon poor advice from nursing
colleagues. The Tribunal has nothing other than the Applicant’s assertion
for the first time before this Tribunal that this
was the prompt for her quite
bizarre conduct. The content and context of the communications with the senior
nurse, as well as the
explanation proffered by the Applicant together reveal a
significant lack of insight on her part.
Tribunal does accept the evidence of both Dr Samuels and Sister Knagge that
there has been some improvement in the Applicant’s
English language skills
since the time of assessment in 2009 and the 2010 Tribunal. This is also not
determinative of the questions
before this Tribunal as the 2010 Tribunal did not
find a lack of competence on the basis of Ms Wang’s English language
This Tribunal also notes the evidence from workplace referees indicating
that English was not the Applicant’s primary problem
in the workplace (see
paragraph 94 of the Reasons Document of the 2010 Tribunal).
is not to say that this Tribunal has no concerns regarding the ability of the
Applicant to communicate adequately in a nursing
setting. The deficits
identified by the psychometric testing have not been addressed by any of the
evidence before this Tribunal.
Further, as noted in the HCCC submissions, the
evidence from Sister Knagge regarding a focus of nursing terminology indicated
to be limited. The Tribunal had little that would allow the formation of a
conclusive position regarding a focus on nursing terminology
or addressing the
specific communication deficits identified by the psychometric testing. As
recently as April this year Dr Chiam
noted that there were still communication
issues created by the Applicant’s tendency to speak very rapidly.
leaving this topic the Tribunal notes that the Applicant has had the benefit of
the considerable and consistent support of
Sister Knagge over a substantial
period of time. Not only has Sister Knagge obviously provided hours of
assistance with English language
tuition she has no doubt been instrumental in
securing accommodation for the Applicant.
review of the Transcript of the current proceedings will reveal that
communication issues are still evident.
submissions of the Applicant regarding the training or otherwise that she
received at RHW and the issue of her ‘premature
registration’ are
matters that were considered by the 2010 Tribunal and not relevant to this
Tribunal’s decision.
nursing scenario questions asked of the Applicant by the Tribunal are properly
categorised as being at a student or beginning
practitioner level. The Tribunal
does not accept the Applicant’s submission that she provided answers that
were ‘basically
correct in three of the four questions’. In the
Tribunal’s view the answers provided by the Applicant were fundamentally
and seriously deficient. This deficit cannot in the Tribunal’s view be
explained by the ‘stress’ of cross-examination
as submitted by the
Applicant (paragraphs 23 & 24). The Tribunal accepts the submission of the
HCCC that the Applicant’s
answers were well below the standard expected of
a registered nurse.
Tribunal also notes the Applicant’s submission that with
‘refreshing’ of her memory she would have been able
to provide a
more ‘concise’ answer. At the time she gave her evidence the
Applicant had not worked as a nurse for approximately
33 months, well short of
the five year period of time that the Recency of Practice Registration Standard
published by the Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia uses as a benchmark.
Applicant’s Submission identified that she may have been able to provide
more concise answers to these clinical scenario
questions when she undertakes
‘upgrading course’
gains more practice in
General nursing skills’.
The Tribunal notes that the 2010 Tribunal
commented that the Applicant had not completed all of the requirements of the
Bachelor of Nursing qualification recognised by the Board nor had she
taken steps to address the lack of basic nursing competency.
Apart from courses
undertaken in her Chinese Medicine course this Tribunal has no evidence that the
Applicant has undertaken any
‘upgrading’ course relating to
addressing the deficits in her nursing qualification.
respect to the Applicant’s submission that she would be in a better
position to have answered the Tribunal’s scenario
questions when she
gains more practice in General nursing skills’
the Tribunal
notes the evidence of the Applicant is that she worked between 1997 and 1998 as
a nurse in the area of Adult Intensive
Care whilst still in Taiwan, then after
receiving registration in NSW she worked on rotation for a period of seven
months at Concord
Hospital followed by work in aged care setting in 2005. In the
first part of 2006 she was employed at the RHW and this was followed
work in other hospitals and aged care facilities. The Tribunal also notes the
2010 Tribunal’s findings that the RHW
had made significant efforts to
assist the Applicant to gain necessary competence and had provided her with
adequate training.
Tribunal does not accept that the Applicant’s time away from nursing or
the stress of cross-examination can explain the
inadequacy of her answers to the
scenario questions posed. Together with the failure of the Applicant to address
the inadequacy of
her qualifications, this Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied
that the Applicant has addressed the inadequacies in her competence
to practise
nursing on the basis of a lack of knowledge and skills identified by the 2010
Tribunal. At this point the Tribunal notes
that under cross-examination the
Applicant stated that she had not made enquiries of UWS regarding whether or not
she could undertake
those courses for which they had originally given her credit
the Tribunal acknowledges that the Applicant made enquiries with various people
regarding the upgrading of her qualification
after the 2010 Tribunal, she did
not undertake the further study that was identified in the evidence of Ms
Maureen Giddins Blues
as being deficient. The Applicant maintains in the
Submission provided to the Tribunal on 13 September 2013 that she still does not
understand why the degree conferred by UWS does not meet the requirements of a
prescribed Bachelor of Nursing recognised as a qualification
acceptable for
registration.
2010 Tribunal also found that the Applicant lacked competency based on mental
capacity and insufficient communication skills.
The submission of the Applicant
that she has reflected and become more mature does not permit the Tribunal to be
comfortably satisfied
that the Applicant had overcome the deficits in her mental
capacity and communication skills identified by the 2010 Tribunal.
respect to the question of impairment/psychiatric evidence the Tribunal makes
the following findings:
This Tribunal
has no additional evidence from Dr Murray. There is nothing in the additional
evidence placed before this Tribunal that
would persuade this Tribunal to take a
different view to the evidence of Dr Murray than that expressed by the 2010
Tribunal. It certainly
does not constitute a review by a suitably qualified
psychiatrist post the 2010 Tribunal.
While there is
additional evidence before this Tribunal from Dr Samuels the Tribunal does not
accept the Applicant’s submission
that his report is not
‘independent’
‘access to damaging
correspondence but no information regarding my nursing career and references or
. The correspondence that the Applicant refers to is
correspondence that was before Dr Samuels prior to the time he provided a report
and evidence to the 2010 Tribunal. In brief it is correspondence from the
Applicant to various senior nursing staff, in particular
to one senior nurse.
The relevance of this correspondence is patent from the content. The Tribunal is
not satisfied as to the relevance
of the references and reports regarding Ms
Wang’s nursing (provided by Ms Wang to the Tribunal) to the evidence of Dr
This was confirmed by Dr Samuels in his oral evidence to the Tribunal.
Dr Samuels stated that he considered Ms Wang’s nursing
skills to be a
different issue to her mental state issues (T134).
The letter from
Dr Julie Son dated 6 March 2013 stated it is written in response to a request to
provide a ‘character reference’.
Dr Son stated that she had been the
Applicant’s GP for the period 8 June 2011 to December 2012. During this
time the Applicant
had consulted her ‘several times’. Dr Son stated
that she had always found the Applicant
‘to be of sound mind with no
evidence of any mental health disorder’.
Dr Son stated that she
referred the Applicant to Dr Chiam and she concurred with his opinion and would
not hesitate to support her
application for registration. The weight that can be
given to this evidence is limited due to the lack of evidence as to the reason
Dr Son created this document, her limited contact with the Applicant and, at
least on the face of it, a limited understanding of
the background matters of
Winship, clinical psychologist wrote a report dated 4 July 2011 to a
psychiatrist, Dr Canaris (exhibit R3-9) which was produced
under summons
together with a page of handwritten notes. The report records that the Applicant
had been referred to her by a ‘Holy
Family Sister’ who was providing
accommodation for the Applicant. Noting that Ms Winship only saw the Applicant
on one occasion
prior to referring her to Dr Canaris the Tribunal notes the
following comments made in her report:
My impressions of Lih are
that she is rather anxious and has cultural and language barriers that make
accurate assessment more difficult.
She did not demonstrate any psychotic
behaviours. However she did return to ask me further questions about the mental
health care
plan on two occasions over the morning and there was something about
her behavior and presentation that left me wondering about Aspergers.
It is difficult
for this Tribunal to place much weight upon the document from Dr Claire Ka-Ming
Lam. The reservations arise from there
being an extremely limited period of time
that Dr Lam has been the Applicant’s GP and there being no clear
indication as to
what information was provided to her prior to the writing of
this document or her understanding of the exact use that would be made
‘TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN’ document.
evidence was significantly constrained by his limited access to relevant
materials. Further, the view expressed by
Dr Chiam regarding the
Applicant’s capability was for her to
‘pursue nursing
rather than to work as a registered nurse although he noted
earlier in his report that she had been de-registered.
The Tribunal
accepts the opinion expressed by Dr Samuels that Dr Chiam was not in receipt of
all of the pertinent information to reach
a conclusion.
The Tribunal
accepts the HCCC submission that neither Dr Son or Dr Lam are qualified to
provide a psychiatric diagnosis, particularly
one that this Tribunal may rely
upon for the purpose of considering the granting of
registration.
the evidence placed before the Tribunal by the Applicant relating to a
psychiatric assessment is at best inconclusive. The
Tribunal does not have a
recent comprehensive psychiatric assessment that takes into account all relevant
history. Without such an
assessment this Tribunal cannot address unequivocally
the question of the Applicant’s impairment and potentially overlapping
competence issues. The Tribunal notes that the 2010 Tribunal clearly indicated
that such an assessment would be required when a review
of its order to
de-register the applicant was made.
the 2010 Tribunal provided a clear indication of the type of evidence the
Applicant would need at the time of any future review,
the Applicant has not
demonstrated an appreciation of what a psychiatric review requires. The Tribunal
further notes that the Applicant
specifically denied Dr Chiam access to relevant
information such as the report of Dr Samuels. The Tribunal expects that a health
professional would appreciate that a full history and other background material
may be essential to the formation of a professional
opinion. To have denied Dr
Chiam’s request is to demonstrate a lack of insight on the part of the
Tribunal notes that the Applicant’s submission assumed that the
withholding of relevant information related to the letters
she had written to
the senior members of the nursing staff at Concord Hospital rather than the
report of Dr Samuels. While the letters
are likely to be documents pertinent to
a full psychiatric assessment it was the report of Dr Samuels that had been
requested by
Dr Chiam. The Tribunal notes at this point that the
Applicant’s submission states that because she believed
letters were taken out of context and that certain assumptions were made in
relation to them rather than any investigation
of the underlying reason for
that the absence of these letters allowed Dr Chiam
make a thorough impartial psychiatric assessment’.
the purpose of a Review Application a psychiatric report requires a suitably
qualified and experienced psychiatrist to be fully
appraised of the facts,
history and circumstances and findings. It may involve a number of assessment
sessions and testing. It will
involve full co-operation on the part of the
Applicant. If treatment is recommended then this may be required prior to the
being in a position to demonstrate to any future tribunal to which she
may apply to be satisfied that she has overcome the lack of
competencies
demonstrated by her conduct and the evidence before this Tribunal and the 2010
Applicant submitted that she demonstrated insight by transferring to aged care
nursing after her termination from RHW where she
had been working with neonates.
In the absence of informed and detailed references in relation to this work it
is difficult for the
Tribunal to draw this conclusion. Furthermore, the Tribunal
notes that the Applicant has stated on two review occasions that she
to or could not work with adults (R1-3D at page 9 and R2 -2 at page 6). The
Tribunal also notes that the Applicant gave
evidence before the Tribunal that
she was now able to work with adults
in any situation’
Tribunal cannot conclude this document without addressing a number of issues
raised by the Applicant in her submission. The Applicant
asserts that a finding
of impairment has been made on the basis of a
‘...25 minute assessment
conducted by Dr Samuels and not supported by any other psychiatric consultant
who assessed me...’
. A reading of the Reasons for Decision document of
the 2010 Tribunal does not support this assertion. Quite clearly the assessment
of Dr Reid was a significant part of the evidence considered by the 2010
Tribunal. Further, this Tribunal has found there is no evidence
Applicant has been comprehensively assessed by a psychiatrist. The
Applicant’s references to Dr Winship, Dr Son and
Dr Lam are misguided as
Ms Winship is a psychologist with an endorsement to work in the area of clinical
psychology (but not as a
psychiatrist) and Drs Son and Lam are general medical
practitioners.
to the Applicant’s submission that her work subsequent to RHW demonstrates
competence the Tribunal repeats that the few short
references from this period
do not substantively assist the Tribunal in forming a view that the significant
deficits found in her
practice have been rectified during this period. This
Tribunal notes that this evidence was considered by the 2010 Tribunal and the
same view reached.
Tribunal is not persuaded that the Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to
prove to the requisite standard that there has
been a material change in her
situation. Rather the Tribunal finds that it has been provided with evidence of
little substance in
this regard. The additional material provided by the
Applicant illustrates her attempts to manipulate situations to obtain a desired
outcome. The Applicant’s attempt to explain the motivation for the
improper communications with the senior nurse from Concord
Hospital, her failure
to engage in an appropriately complete psychiatric review and her failure to
disclose relevant information
are all matters that increase the concern this
Tribunal has for the Applicant’s insight and likelihood of rehabilitation.
Tribunal is of the view that the Applicant still suffers from an impairment and
lacks the necessary competence required for registration
as a nurse. At this
point the Tribunal indicates that it has formed the view that any psychiatric
assessment undertaken must include
the appropriately qualified and experienced
psychiatrist being provided with the Reasons for Decision documents from both
this Tribunal
and the 2010 Tribunal in addition to the transcript of the
evidence before both Tribunals.
the reasons set out above the Tribunal, exercising its power under s 163B(1)(a)
, intends to dismiss Ms Wang’s application for a review.
Based on the evidence placed before it this Tribunal is of the view
is no evidence that would allow it to be comfortably satisfied that the
appropriate order is one of reinstatement to the
Register, with or without
conditions on registration.
Applicant’s lack of insight in requesting registration without conditions
and failing to address the matters detailed by
the 2010 Tribunal as being, in
effect, pre-requisites for a review only act to reinforce the decision of this
Tribunal to dismiss
the Application for Review.
Supplementary
submissions will be sought from the parties regarding s163B(5) after this
Reasons for Decision document is published.
The Tribunal reserves on the question of an order in relation to s163B(5) and
costs and hereby makes the following order:
Application for Review made by Ms Wang is dismissed (s163B(1)(a) of the National
Publication
this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Applicant,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales, and
Proper Officer of the College of Traditional Chinese Medicine at the University
of Technology Sydney.
Dated: 24 September 2013
___________________
___________________
Janette Curtis
___________________
Jennifer O’Baugh
___________________
Derek Anderson AM
Annexure A – Index of Documents
Annexure B – Original
Complaint before the 2010 Tribunal
HCCC V LIH-HUEY WANG
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS
Formal Documents
Complaint dated 17 December 2008
Current Certificate of Registration –
to be provided at Hearing
Initiating Documents
Letter from the NSW Nurses and Midwives Board to the Commission dated 26
September 2006, attaching:
Letter from SESIAHS to the Nurses
and Midwives Board dated 23 August 2006
Final Report
concerning Ms Wang
SESIAHS Material
Letter from SESIAHS to the Commission dated 4 November
Letter from the Commission to SESIAHS dated 10 October
“Novice Competency Tool” used in the Assessment of Ms
First Performance Management Plan for Lih Wang dated 16 March
Level Two Competency – Novice assessed 2 May
Ms Wang’s Response to the Performance Management
Plan Assessment Report dated 9 May 2006
Performance Review
Report for period 27 March to 2 May 2006
Letter of Resignation dated 5 May 2006
Minutes of Performance
Management Meeting held on 9 May 2006
SESIAHS Material cont.
Second Performance Management Plan for Lih Wang dated 9 May
Minutes of Meeting held on 11 May 2006
Statement of NUM [omitted] concerning Ms Wang’s performance in the period
15 May 2006 to 22 May 2006
Debrief Meeting to discuss
Performance Management Plan held on 24 May 2006
[Nurse Manager] to [Acting Manager] dated 24 May 2006
Meeting to discuss Performance Management Plan held on 25 May
Debrief Meeting to discuss Performance Management Plan
held on 26 May 2006
Report of [omitted], Acting Manager,
Nursing and Midwifery Clinical Operations dated 7 June 2006
Level Two Competency – Novice assessed 7 June 2006
Letter from [Acting Manager] to Ms Wang dated 8 June 2006
Minutes of Meeting held on 13 June 2006
Final report
concerning Ms Wang
Daily Log for Second Performance Management Period: 15 May – 7 June
Royal Hospital for Women Employment Records for Ms Wang
Statement of [omitted], Nurse Manager, signed 24 April 2007
Performance Review for Lih Wang from Nurse Manager
Statement of [omitted], Clinical Nurse Educator, signed 6 April
Annexure A:
Performance Review for Lih Wang from Nurse
Statement of [omitted], Nursing Unit Manager, signed 26 March
Annexure A:
Contemporaneous supervision notes of NUM during the
second ‘Performance Evaluation Period’ commencing Monday 15 May
Annexure B:
Contemporaneous statement regarding Lih Wang from
Statement of [omitted], Nurse Educator, signed 19 February
Annexure A:
Contemporaneous supervision notes of Nurse Educator
during the second ‘Performance Evaluation Period’ commencing Monday
15 May 2006
Statement of [omitted], Clinical Nurse Consultant, signed 17
Annexure A:
Contemporaneous supervision notes of CNC during the
second ‘Performance Evaluation Period’ commencing 16 May 2006
Statement of [omitted], Clinical Nurse Educator, signed 14 February
Annexure A:
Contemporaneous supervision notes of CNE during the
second ‘Performance Evaluation Period’ commencing 24 May 2006
Statements cont.
Statement of [omitted], Nurse Manager Education, signed 22 February
Correspondence
Letter from the Commission to Ms Wang dated 10 October 2006
Letter from the Nurses’ Association to the Commission dated 4
December 2006, attaching:
Annexure A:
RHW Newborn Care Centre
Orientation Guide for nurses
Annexure B:
Letter from the Commission to the Nurses’ Association (section 40)
dated 6 August 2007
Letter from the Nurses’ Association to the Commission (section 40
response) dated 31 August 2007
Expert Report
Letter of request from the Commission to Professor Pat Brodie dated 10 May
Report of Dr Pat Brodie dated 26 June 2007
Email from the Commission to Professor Brodie dated 3 July 2007
Letter from Professor Brodie to the Commission dated 10 July 2007
Professional Standards
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Council:
National Competency Standards
for the Registered Nurse
Employment Records
Extract from Personnel File produced under summons
by Concord Repatriation General Hospital
Extract from Personnel File produced under summons by Royal Prince Alfred
University of Western Sydney
Extract from Student File produced under summons by the University of
Western Sydney
Statement of Maureen Giddins Blues signed and dated 19 August 2009
Psychometric Assessment
Letter of Instruction from the Commission to Dr Wayne Reid dated 13 August
Report of Dr Wayne Reid
Formal Documents
Letter of instruction from the HCCC to Dr Anthony Samuels dated 3 September
Report of Dr Anthony Samuels dated 15 September 2009
Supplementary Report of Dr Anthony Samuels dated 22 September 2009
Report of Dr Daniel Murray dated 8 December 2003
Extract from Ms Wang’s personnel file produced under summons by
Concord Hospital
Extract from Ms Wang’s personnel file produced under summons by Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital
Respondents responses to complaints and particulars
Annexures to Respondent’s responses
Statement of Janeen Bartholomeo
Statement of Emilia Mackay
Statement of Shelia O’Sullivan
Statement of Lih Huey Wang
Nurses and Midwives Tribunal Order and Reasons for Decision dated 15 March
Transcript of Tribunal Hearing - Lih Huey Wang, dated 28 September
Transcript of Tribunal Hearing - Lih Huey Wang, dated 29 September
HCCC Volume 3
dated 2 July 2013 to Dr Samuels from HCCC requesting report
of Dr Anthony Samuels dated 5 July 2013 and Supplementary Report dated 12 July
Vitae of Dr Anthony Samuels
dated 14 June 2013 to Health Professional Councils Authority from AHPRA
Competency Standards for the Registered Nurse – Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia
Language Skill registration Standard – Nursing and Midwifery Board of
of Practice Registration Standard - Nursing and Midwifery Board of
produced under summons by Dr Chiam
produced under summons from Ms Jacqui Winship (clinical psychologist)
of Ms Anne Samuelson dated 1 August 2013
produced under summons from the Nursing and Midwifery Council of
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
DESCRIPTION
Covering Letters to Mr McMahon and Ms Dinihan.
Issues to be addressed.
Bachelor of Nursing UWS, Academic Record.
UTS Student Record including current courses
NSW TAFE Institute Sydney Academic Record.
Psychiatric Report Dr Kin Chiam.
National Police Check
Reference St Mary’s Hospital Lotung Officer in Charge 1998
Reference Chatswood Community Nursing Home CEO/DON
Reference Nursesearch PTY PTD Office Manager
Reference Annandale Holy Family Convent Advisor Sr M Bieser
Dr Julie Son – character reference
Sr Margaret Knagge
Dr Claire Lam
To Whom it may concern letter from Applicant’s parents dated 17 July
Questions prepared by the Applicant for Dr Samuels
Summary of my application to regain my registered nurse status
HCCC V LIH-HUEY WANG
ORIGINAL COMPLAINT BEFORE THE 2010 TRIBUNAL
COMPLAINT ONE
Suffers from an impairment within the
meaning of s.4A of the Act.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
nurse suffers from a mental impairment, condition or disorder which
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect
her mental capacity
to practice nursing in that she suffers from;
(i) an erotomanic delusional disorder and / or
(ii) a paranoid schizophrenic illness and / or
(iii) an autistic spectrum disorder,
and has specific
impairments in her intellectual and cognitive functioning, and these
(iv) her verbal abstract reasoning,
(v) some aspects of her information processing skill,
(vi) her verbal memory, and
(vii) her ability to adapt and regulate her behaviour in response to
nurse commenced employment at the Royal Hospital for Women as a 3rd year
Registered Nurse in the Newborn Care Centre (NCC) on
25 January 2006. The nurse
undertook a two week orientation to the hospital and to the
27 March 2006 to 2 May 2006 a Performance Management Plan was instituted for the
nurse involving supervision, clinical instruction
and education. At the end of
this period the nurse was assessed using the “Novice Competency”
tool in use in the NCC.
a result of that assessment, a further 4 week period of supervised clinical
management was instituted for the nurse. The nurse
was reassessed using the
Novice Competency tool on 7 June 2006.
that assessment, the nurse resigned from her employment with the Royal Hospital
for Women, effective 23 June 2006.
her employment in the NCC:
(i) The nurse’s performance at the end of the two week orientation period
at the commencement of her employment was found to
be below the standard
(ii) On 28 March 2006 the nurse missed handover and failed to read the clinical
notes for a baby coming into her care, thereby failing
to inform herself that an
urgent metabolic screen was required, for which the baby’s urine needed to
be retained.
(iii) On 3 April 2006 the nurse twice left a baby unsupervised on a change
(iv) On 11 April 2006 the nurse did not check and/or adjust the oxygen
saturation alarms on the babies in her care.
(v) On 26 April 2006 the nurse prepared to administer a loading dose of caffeine
to a baby in her care. After having read the relevant
(a) calculated the drug dosage incorrectly; and/or
(b) failed to recognise that it was to be administered as an infusion;
(c) took 45 minutes to administer the drug under supervision.
(vi) On 27 April 2006 the nurse was unaware that a baby in her care was due to
have the Newborn Screen test despite the fact that
the consent form had been
signed, it was noted on the care plan and the nurse had completed the Newborn
Screen package.
(vii) On 27 April 2006 the nurse:
(a) failed to affix an identification label on a nasogastric tube in breach of
the Newborn Care Centre policy; and/or
(b) despite failing to affix it, indicated that an identification label was
present on the care plan.
(viii) On 2 May 2006 the nurse failed to achieve any of the elements of the
Novice Competency Assessment.
(ix) On 2 May 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a humidicrib, the
(a) failed to recognise the monitor alarm when the baby desaturated to 52%;
(b) failed to attend the baby; and/or
(c) failed to set the baby’s skin temperature on the servo temperature
control in accordance with unit protocol; and/or
(d) did not know the unit protocol for the servo temperature control;
(e) held the baby’s legs up too long when changing its nappy, thereby
compromising the baby’s airway and causing it to
desaturate to 78%;
(f) failed to react to the other baby in her care despite the alarm alerting;
(g) drew up expressed breast milk for the baby despite clear instructions for
formula feeding; and/or
(h) disturbed the baby by removing a blanket despite clear instructions not to;
(i) was unable to rationalise her actions when these were carried out against
instructions.
(x) On 2 May 2006, in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a cot with an IV
infusion running via a peripheral cannula in the
(a) checked the feeding tube position by aspirating the tube prior to
bottle-feeding, thereby causing unnecessary disturbance and
potential injury to
the baby; and/or
(b) allowed the IV site to become covered by a blanket, thereby preventing
hourly checking as required by the unit protocol; and/or
(c) positioned the baby incorrectly in the cot; and/or
(d) failed to acknowledge and communicate appropriately with the baby’s
mother; and/or
(e) filled out and attached identification bands despite being late with care
and feeding; and/or
(f) offered inappropriate assistance with breastfeeding when the baby’s
mother was already being assisted; and/or
(g) upgraded the baby’s bottle feeds too quickly despite prior clear
discussion, thereby causing distress to the baby and mother;
(h) gave too much formula to the baby despite clear instructions as to
(xi) On 15 May 2006 the nurse took a baby from the Newborn Care Centre to the
postnatal ward when the baby did not have the required
identification
(xii) On 18 May 2006 the nurse removed an IV cannula from a baby without wearing
(xiii) On 18 May 2006 the nurse used unclean forceps to secure a new IV piece to
(xiv) On 23 May 2006 the nurse failed to check the emergency equipment suction
apparatus for the babies in her care at the beginning
(xv) On 24 May 2006 the nurse needed to be prompted to respond to alarms on a
baby in her care who had a tachycardia of 220+ and
significant
desaturation.
(xvi) On 24 May 2006 the nurse needed to be prompted to wash her hands between
each baby in her care and to use alcohol hand rub.
(xvii) On 25 May 2006 in relation to a baby in her care the nurse required
prompting to:
blankets as the baby was sweating; and/or
(b) remove a blanket placed near the baby’s head by its parents;
(c) offer the unsettled baby a feed when the mother had advised that the baby
had last fed at 0200 hours; and/or
(d) administer the charted medication; and/or
(e) observe universal precautions when handling the baby given maternal
Hepatitis C; and/or
(f) attend both Neonatal Abstinence Scores for the shift.
(xviii) On 26 May 2006 the nurse contaminated a large piece of duoderm and then
prepared to return it to the general stock. The
nurse was unable to recognise
the risk of cross-infection this practice posed.
(xix) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not reach the required competency in the
Novice Competency Assessment.
(xx) On 7 June 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a humidicrib
with IVI therapy and IVI antibiotics, the nurse:
(a) left the baby’s bedside to wash her hands when the baby had
desaturated to 78% with a heart rate of 78bpm; and/or
(b) disturbed the baby throughout the shift in order to monitor erroneous
alarms; and/or
(c) failed to act as a patient advocate and initiate sucrose administration
prior to a painful procedure; and/or
(d) failed to initiate a blood sugar level check or collection of a urine
specimen for testing as per unit protocol for infants with
IVI fluids;
(e) told the baby’s parents that the baby had had bradycardic episodes
requiring stimulation when the baby had not; and/or
(f) failed to advise senior staff when she observed the baby having seizure
activity; and/or
(g) could not provide medical staff information about the nature of the seizure
she had observed; and/or
(h) required prompting to recognise that the expressed breast milk she was
drawing up for the baby had expired; and/or
(i) could not advise the expected rate of growth for the baby’s head
circumference; and/or
(j) could not provide a rationale for her actions in not checking a blood sugar
level when the baby had lost the IVI access that
was providing the majority of
the total fluid input; and/or
(k) ordered IVI antibiotics using a prescription which was in breach of protocol
and proceeded to administer the antibiotics despite
the breach of
(xxi) On 7 June 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a crib with an
IV infusion TPN running via long line, the nurse:
(a) without knowing the baby’s history, proceeded to replace the NG tube
and did not clean the baby’s bedside area prior
to placing equipment on
the bench; and/or
(b) touched the baby’s umbilical stump after changing the baby’s
nappy, thereby breaching infection control procedures;
(c) failed to check the expiry date on the label of the expressed breast milk as
per unit protocol; and/or
(d) despite being asked to remove the IVI line on the rounds, left the line in,
thereby increasing the risk of infection to the baby;
(e) did not attend to, or hand over, the request from night staff to initiate an
appointment with the lactation staff for the baby’s
mother for the
(xxii) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not check for the presence of appropriate
sized masks nor for the presence and functional capacity
of the suction
equipment at the bedsides of the babies in her care.
(xxiii) On 7 June 2006 the nurse breached occupational health and safety
guidelines by placing sharp objects into bins.
(xxiv) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not acknowledge the presence of medical
officers on the round and had to be asked more than once
for information
concerning the babies in her care.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is not competent to practise nursing in that she does not have sufficient
mental capacity, knowledge and skill to practise nursing
and has insufficient
communication skills for the practice of nursing, including an inadequate
command of the English language within
the meaning of s. 4B of the Act.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
name of the nurse was entered on List A of
the Register of Nurses on 27
September 2002. The Board was satisfied under section 18(1)(a) of the Act that
the nurse was entitled
to be registered as a nurse on the basis of a letter from
the University of Western Sydney (UWS), dated 26 September 2002. This
failed to disclose that:
(i) the course completed by the nurse, namely, a Bachelor in Health Science
– Nursing (Conversion), was not a pre-registration
course accredited by
the Nurses Board, and
(ii) the nurse did not complete all the academic and clinical requirements of
the prescribed Bachelor of Nursing qualification recognised
by the Board,
(iii) the English courses undertaken by the nurse were insufficient to meet the
English language requirements of the Board for registration.
nurse commenced employment at the Royal Hospital for Women as a 3rd year
Registered Nurse in the Newborn Care Centre (NCC) on
25 January 2006. The nurse
undertook a two week orientation to the hospital and to the
27 March 2006 to 2 May 2006 a Performance Management Plan was instituted for the
nurse involving supervision, clinical instruction
and education. At the end of
this period the nurse was assessed using the “Novice Competency”
tool in use in the NCC.
a result of that assessment, a further 4 week period of supervised clinical
management was instituted for the nurse. The nurse
was reassessed using the
Novice Competency tool on 7 June 2006.
that assessment, the nurse resigned from her employment with the Royal Hospital
for Women, effective 23 June 2006.
her employment in the NCC:
(i) The nurse’s performance at the end of the two week orientation period
at the commencement of her employment was found to
be below the standard
(ii) On 28 March 2006 the nurse missed handover and failed to read the clinical
notes for a baby coming into her care, thereby failing
to inform herself that an
urgent metabolic screen was required, for which the baby’s urine needed to
be retained.
(iii) On 3 April 2006 the nurse twice left a baby unsupervised on a change
(iv) On 11 April 2006 the nurse did not check and/or adjust the oxygen
saturation alarms on the babies in her care.
(v) On 26 April 2006 the nurse prepared to administer a loading dose of caffeine
to a baby in her care. After having read the relevant
(a) calculated the drug dosage incorrectly; and/or
(b) failed to recognise that it was to be administered as an infusion;
(c) took 45 minutes to administer the drug under
supervision.
(vi) On 27 April 2006 the nurse was unaware that a baby in her care was due to
have the Newborn Screen test despite the fact that
the consent form had been
signed, it was noted on the care plan and the nurse had completed the Newborn
Screen package.
(vii) On 27 April 2006 the nurse:
(a) failed to affix an identification label on a nasogastric tube in breach of
the Newborn Care Centre policy; and/or
(b) despite failing to affix it, indicated that an identification label was
present on the care plan.
(viii) On 2 May 2006 the nurse failed to achieve any of the elements of the
Novice Competency Assessment.
(ix) On 2 May 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a humidicrib, the
(a) failed to recognise the monitor alarm when the baby desaturated to 52%;
(b) failed to attend the baby; and/or
(c) failed to set the baby’s skin temperature on the servo temperature
control in accordance with unit protocol; and/or
(d) did not know the unit protocol for the servo temperature control;
(e) held the baby’s legs up too long when changing its nappy, thereby
compromising the baby’s airway and causing it to
desaturate to 78%;
(f) failed to react to the other baby in her care despite the alarm alerting;
(g) drew up expressed breast milk for the baby despite clear instructions for
formula feeding; and/or
(h) disturbed the baby by removing a blanket despite clear instructions not to;
(i) was unable to rationalise her actions when these were carried out against
instructions.
(x) On 2 May 2006, in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a cot with an IV
infusion running via a peripheral cannula in the
(a) checked the feeding tube position by aspirating the tube prior to
bottle-feeding, thereby causing unnecessary disturbance and
potential injury to
the baby; and/or
(b) allowed the IV site to become covered by a blanket, thereby preventing
hourly checking as required by the unit protocol; and/or
(c) positioned the baby incorrectly in the cot; and/or
(d) failed to acknowledge and communicate appropriately with the baby’s
mother; and/or
(e) filled out and attached identification bands despite being late with care
and feeding; and/or
(f) offered inappropriate assistance with breastfeeding when the baby’s
mother was already being assisted; and/or
(g) upgraded the baby’s bottle feeds too quickly despite prior clear
discussion, thereby causing distress to the baby and mother;
(h) gave too much formula to the baby despite clear instructions as to
(xi) On 15 May 2006 the nurse took a baby from the Newborn Care Centre to the
postnatal ward when the baby did not have the required
identification
(xii) On 18 May 2006 the nurse removed an IV cannula from a baby without wearing
(xiii) On 18 May 2006 the nurse used unclean forceps to secure a new IV piece to
(xiv) On 23 May 2006 the nurse failed to check the emergency equipment suction
apparatus for the babies in her care at the beginning
(xv) On 24 May 2006 the nurse needed to be prompted to respond to alarms on a
baby in her care who had a tachycardia of 220+ and
significant
desaturation.
(xvi) On 24 May 2006 the nurse needed to be prompted to wash her hands between
each baby in her care and to use alcohol hand rub.
(xvii) On 25 May 2006 in relation to a baby in her care the nurse required
prompting to:
(a) remove blankets as the baby was sweating; and/or
(b) remove a blanket placed near the baby’s head by its parents;
(c) offer the unsettled baby a feed when the mother had advised that the baby
had last fed at 0200 hours; and/or
(d) administer the charted medication; and/or
(e) observe universal precautions when handling the baby given maternal
Hepatitis C; and/or
(f) attend both Neonatal Abstinence Scores for the shift.
(xviii) On 26 May 2006 the nurse contaminated a large piece of duoderm and then
prepared to return it to the general stock. The
nurse was unable to recognise
the risk of cross-infection this practice posed.
(xix) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not reach the required competency in the
Novice Competency Assessment.
(xx) On 7 June 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a humidicrib
with IVI therapy and IVI antibiotics, the nurse:
(a) left the baby’s bedside to wash her hands when the baby had
desaturated to 78% with a heart rate of 78bpm; and/or
(b) disturbed the baby throughout the shift in order to monitor erroneous
alarms; and/or
(c) failed to act as a patient advocate and initiate sucrose administration
prior to a painful procedure; and/or
(d) failed to initiate a blood sugar level check or collection of a urine
specimen for testing as per unit protocol for infants with
IVI fluids;
(e) told the baby’s parents that the baby had had bradycardic episodes
requiring stimulation when the baby had not; and/or
(f) failed to advise senior staff when she observed the baby having seizure
activity; and/or
(g) could not provide medical staff information about the nature of the seizure
she had observed; and/or
(h) required prompting to recognise that the expressed breast milk she was
drawing up for the baby had expired; and/or
(i) could not advise the expected rate of growth for the baby’s head
circumference; and/or
(j) could not provide a rationale for her actions in not checking a blood sugar
level when the baby had lost the IVI access that
was providing the majority of
the total fluid input; and/or
(k) ordered IVI antibiotics using a prescription which was in breach of protocol
and proceeded to administer the antibiotics despite
the breach of
(xxi) On 7 June 2006 in relation to a baby in her care nursed in a crib with an
IV infusion TPN running via long line, the nurse:
(a) without knowing the baby’s history, proceeded to replace the NG tube
and did not clean the baby’s bedside area prior
to placing equipment on
the bench; and/or
(b) touched the baby’s umbilical stump after changing the baby’s
nappy, thereby breaching infection control procedures;
(c) failed to check the expiry date on the label of the expressed breast milk as
per unit protocol; and/or
(d) despite being asked to remove the IVI line on the rounds, left the line in,
thereby increasing the risk of infection to the baby;
(e) did not attend to, or hand over, the request from night staff to initiate an
appointment with the lactation staff for the baby’s
mother for the
(xxii) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not check for the presence of appropriate
sized masks nor for the presence and functional capacity
of the suction
equipment at the bedsides of the babies in her care.
(xxiii) On 7 June 2006 the nurse breached occupational health and safety
guidelines by placing sharp objects into bins.
(xxiv) On 7 June 2006 the nurse did not acknowledge the presence of medical
officers on the round and had to be asked more than once
for information
concerning the babies in her care.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (956 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter