URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ceccato v Australian Steel Mill Services Pty Ltd (No 2) [2021] NSWWCCPD 6 (29 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF A RECONSIDERATION APPLICATION IN RESPECT
OF A DECISION OF THE COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER
Ceccato v Australian Steel Mill Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] NSWWCCPD
Michael Ceccato
RESPONDENT:
Australian Steel Mill Services Pty Ltd
Employers Mutual NSW Ltd
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Ms C McDonald
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
28 April 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
14 September 2020
DATE OF RECONSIDERATION DECISION:
29 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Reconsideration application pursuant to s 350(3) of the
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms M Griffiths, solicitor
Melinda Griffiths Lawyers
Respondent:
Ms R Hickie, solicitor
Moray & Agnew lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON RECONSIDERATION:
appellant’s application pursuant to section 350(3) of the
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
to reconsider the
Commission’s decision dated 14 September 2020 is refused.
INTRODUCTION
matter involves a psychological injury suffered by Michael Ceccato (the
appellant) in the employ of Australian Steel Mill Services
Pty Ltd (the
respondent). The dispute was originally determined by Arbitrator McDonald on 28
April 2020.
The Arbitrator accepted
that the respondent had established a defence pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act). An award was entered in the
respondent’s favour. The appellant brought an appeal pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
1998 Act). The appeal was lodged out of time and could not be made in compliance
with s 352(4) of the 1998 Act in the absence
of an extension of time pursuant to
r 16.2(5) of the
Workers Compensation Commission Rules 2011
(the Rules).
dealt with that appeal and a decision was issued on 14 September 2020. After a
consideration of the grounds on their merits, I concluded
that the appeal did
not have reasonable prospects of success. Additionally, I found the appellant
had not demonstrated the presence
of ‘exceptional circumstances’
within the meaning of r 16.2(5) of the Rules. I concluded that loss of the
right to appeal
would not work demonstrable and substantial injustice. I
declined the appellant’s application to extend
factual background to the proceedings, together with a summary of the
Arbitrator’s reasons, are set out in the appeal
THE PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
appellant forwarded the reconsideration application to the Commission’s
Registry on 7 October 2020. It seeks the admission
of 15 annexed documents
as items of new evidence.
orders that the Arbitrator’s decision be rescinded and that a weekly award
be made in favour of the appellant.
It identifies 18 “Grounds for
Reconsideration”,
in the nature of appeal grounds alleging error. The application sets out
submissions dealing with why there was delay in
bringing the reconsideration
application.
It makes submissions
dealing with why the decision should be reconsidered rather than
The reconsideration
application then sets out 62 pages of submissions in support of the
18 identified grounds.
has 23 pages of attached
respondent’s solicitors lodged submissions in reply dated 27 October 2020.
These refer to the summation by Roche ADP, in
Samuel v Sebel Furniture
of the principles
governing reconsideration applications. (The appellant refers to the same
passage although attributes it to an
arbitral decision in which it was applied.)
The respondent submits that the material in the schedule of new evidence, on
appellant relies, involves material that had already been dealt with
on the appeal, material that was available at the time of the
arbitration
hearing, or material that could have been obtained at the arbitration hearing
with reasonable diligence. It submits that
the appellant seeks to cavil with the
arbitral and Presidential decisions, which is an improper use of the
reconsideration power.
It submits the position of the respondent also should be
considered. This includes costs implications. It submits there is a public
interest that litigation should not proceed indefinitely, and the discretionary
power to reconsider should not be exercised in the
circumstances. The respondent
submits the reconsideration power should not be used to correct alleged errors
of fact, law or discretion.
reconsideration application, in its heading, referred to both the arbitral
decision dated 28 April 2020 and the Presidential decision
September 2020. The orders sought identified the arbitral decision as that which
should be rescinded. The submissions referred
extensively to alleged error in
the arbitral decision, but also made some references to the Presidential
The Commission
initially proceeded on the basis that reconsideration was sought of the arbitral
decision and arranged a telephone
conference in the matter with the Arbitrator.
The Commission subsequently wrote to the appellant informing him that the
conference was cancelled and that I was to deal with the
reconsideration application.
appellant requested that an alternative member deal with the reconsideration
application as it “points out errors not only
in the findings of the
Arbitrator, but also the
He said he did not
believe that he would “receive a fair hearing”.
Commission’s Director, Legal Services, in an email dated 16 November 2020,
advised the appellant that the “pathway
for appeals is from an arbitrator
to a presidential member and then to the Court of Appeal”. The email
stated that in the “current
application the matters that are raised appear
to be arguments about errors of fact, law or discretion”. The letter
that an “arbitrator does not have the power to consider the
correctness of the decision of a presidential member”. It
reconsideration application “must be dealt with by a presidential
member”. The correspondence referred to Practice
Direction No. 17 which
provides that reconsideration applications will usually be determined by the
original decision maker. The
Director stated that disagreement with the outcome
did not of itself establish that there may be a lack of fairness. He said the
Commission would not depart from its usual practice. He asked whether the
appellant wished to proceed with the reconsideration application,
other recourse was an appeal to the Court of
appellant responded in a letter that was attached to an email dated 18 November
2020. It stated that the appellant wished to proceed
with the reconsideration
application. The appellant said that his concerns related to the handling of
evidence in the matter. The
letter set out approximately three pages of
submissions which were critical of alleged errors in both the arbitral and
Presidential
decisions. The Director responded in an email dated
19 November 2020. He noted that the appellant wanted his reconsideration
application
to proceed to a Presidential member. He stated that in accordance
with Practice Direction No. 17 the reconsideration application
referred to me.
Commission, on 19 November 2020, forwarded the further items of correspondence
from the appellant, that post-dated the reconsideration
application itself, to
the respondent’s solicitors, stating that it was “not clear what
parts of this correspondence
[have] been copied to the
respondent”.
respondent was given until 3 December 2020 to respond to those further
submissions. The respondent did not put on additional
submissions.
appellant, in the index to the reconsideration application, described himself as
the author of the “Grounds for Reconsideration”
and the various
submissions in that document. There was no reference in the lodged document to
him being legally represented on the
reconsideration application.
a query from the respondent’s solicitors regarding whether the appellant
was represented, the Commission on 19 November
2020 forwarded an email to the
appellant enquiring whether he was unrepresented, or represented by Melinda
Griffiths Lawyers, who
previously acted for him on the appeal. The appellant
advised by email on the same date that he was represented by Melinda Griffiths
Lawyers. On 20 November 2020 the Commission forwarded copies of the emails
exchanged, from 11 November 2020 onwards, to Melinda Griffiths
Lawyers. On 25
November 2020 Melinda Griffiths Lawyers confirmed, by email, that that firm was
acting for the appellant, and that
the appellant’s correspondence would be
forwarded through the firm.
appellant forwarded a further email to the Commission dated 23 November 2020. It
attached a 15 page document headed “Submissions
for Reconsideration
Application Teleconference”. It was described as a document that stated
“the principles I rely upon”
in considering the reconsideration
application, and a “summary of the main points that I prepared as
verbal submissions for
the teleconference”. It also sought to add an
additional document, an email from the managing director of Mentor Services
that neither the appellant or any representative of his had contacted
that firm requesting case notes, prior to the appellant’s
request on 29
April 2020.
SOME PRINCIPLES GOVERNING RECONSIDERATION APPLICATIONS
reconsideration power is to be found in s 350(3) of the 1998
“(3) The Commission may reconsider any matter that has
been dealt with by the Commission and rescind, alter or amend any decision
previously made or given by the Commission.”
Hilliger v Hilliger
Street CJ dealt with a provision, similarly worded to s 350(3) of the
1998 Act, in the
Landlord and Tenant Amendment Act 1948.
decision of
was applied by the Court of Appeal, to the exercise
of the reconsideration power (at the time s 36(2) of the
Compensation Act 1926
) by the then Workers Compensation Commission of New
South Wales, in
Hardaker v Wright & Bruce Pty
Their Honours Owen and
Walsh JJ referred to “the width of the power” and
“It is important, naturally, to keep well in mind the
distinction between the existence of the power and the occasion of its
and courts should not lose sight of the general rule that public interest
requires that litigation should not proceed interminably.
A party who seeks or
opposes an order must produce all the available evidence at the original
hearing, and courts must be on their
guard to refuse to allow the same matter to
be litigated again and again. But at the same time it is clear that the
legislature intended
to leave with the prescribed courts the power of reviewing
any decision to see that justice is done between the
v Herfords Pty Ltd
the reconsideration power, at a time when it was found in s 36(2) of the
Workers’ Compensation Act 1926
, and the provision for appeal to the
Supreme Court was found in s 37(4) of that Act. Samuels JA (Reynolds JA
agreeing) said:
“To my mind, there was much more involved here
than delay alone. First, the worker had not brought the appeal to this Court
which s 37(4) provides. It seems to me that the terms of s 37 as a whole clearly
intend that the primary mode of challenge to
errors of law is to be by appeal to
the Supreme Court. I say ‘primary’ because such errors may be dealt
with also under
s 36(2). But I do not think that these review provisions are to
be regarded as fully alternative to the right of appeal. They may
be capable of
doing the same work, but the extent to which they should be permitted to perform
the same function ought properly to
be controlled, and the means of control is
to be found in the
discretion.”
Maksoudian v J Robins & Sons Pty Ltd
“There is no doubt that the discretion of this Court to
reconsider is wide and far reaching. The task of the Court is to balance
policy requirement of finality of litigation with the obligation to rectify any
clear cut injustice. The cases do not comprehensively
indicate how the Court is
to approach this task, but it does seem that two broad requirements are laid
down. The first of these is
that the material leading to an application for
reconsideration must be what can broadly be described as ‘fresh
namely material that with reasonable diligence could not have
been put before the Court at the time of the original proceedings and
application for reconsideration has to move with appropriate speed and diligence
to bring that matter to the Court’s attention.
The second point is that
the fresh evidence must be of such a nature that if it had been before the Court
when the original proceedings
were heard it would more likely than not have
affected the outcome of the proceedings:
Hardaker v. Wright & Bruce
(1962) 62 SR (NSW) 244
Hilliger v Hilliger
(1952) 52 SR
(NSW) 105.”
Galea v Ralph Symonds Pty Ltd
, O’Meally J said “[t]here is a
distinction between fresh evidence and more
is helpful to quote the passage from the decision of Roche ADP in
that was referred to in the submissions of the
“Having regard to the above authorities and the
provisions and objectives of the 1998 Act I believe that the following
are applicable to reconsideration applications under section 350(3)
of the 1998 Act:
section gives the Commission a wide discretion to reconsider its previous
decisions (‘
the word ‘decision’ is not defined in section 350, it is defined for
the purposes of section 352 to include ‘an
award, order, determination,
ruling and direction’. In my view ‘decision’ in section 350(3)
includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, any award, order or determination
of the Commission;
the discretion is a wide one it must be exercised fairly with due regard to
relevant considerations including the reason for
and extent of any delay in
bringing the application for reconsideration (‘
of the factors to be weighed in deciding whether to exercise the discretion in
favour of the moving party is the public interest
that litigation should not
proceed indefinitely (‘
reconsideration
may be allowed if new evidence that could not with reasonable diligence have
been obtained at the first Arbitration
is later obtained and that new evidence,
if it had been put before an Arbitrator in the first hearing, would have been
lead to a different result (‘
the broad power of ‘review’ in section 352 (which was not
universally available in the Compensation Court of NSW)
the reconsideration
provision in section 350(3) will not usually be the preferred provision to be
used to correct errors of fact,
law or discretion made by Arbitrators;
on the facts of the particular case the principles enunciated by the High Court
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
’) may prevent a party from pursuing a claim
or defence in later reconsideration proceedings if it unreasonably refrained
pursuing that claim or defence in the original proceedings
mistake or oversight by a legal adviser will not give rise to a ground for
reconsideration (‘
Commission has a duty to do justice between the parties according to the
substantial merits of the case (‘
’ and section 354(3)
of the 1998
THE APPELLANT’S ‘FRESH EVIDENCE’
party has sought an oral hearing. It is appropriate in the circumstances to deal
with the application ‘on the papers’.
power to deal with the reconsideration is pursuant to s 375 of the 1998 Act. The
appellant seeks leave to admit ten items of fresh
evidence which are described
in the Schedule of New Evidence. The principles governing the admission of fresh
evidence pursuant to
s 352(6) of the 1998 Act apply. These were discussed in the
Presidential decision.
included discussion of the decision in
CHEP Australia
v Strickland
two alternative threshold questions in s 352(6) identified in that decision. The
second of those threshold questions is where
unavailability of the evidence
would cause ‘substantial injustice’, in the sense that the result
would be different if
the evidence were taken into account. In the context of a
reconsideration application, it is additionally necessary that the fresh
evidence, if it is to change the result, be evidence that satisfies the criteria
(see [16] above).
will not attempt to summarise the appellant’s submissions dealing with
fresh evidence on the reconsideration application in
their entirety. The
documents and a brief summary of the basis on which leave is sought appear
Annexure No. 1 – email from Mr Bartkowiak (re: 2016
performance appraisal) dated 21 February 2017
appellant states that the respondent’s insurer previously had a copy of
this document; it was included as an attachment
to the appellant’s
applications to the insurer for review of its decisions pursuant to either or
both of the s 74 and s 78
notices. The appellant submits he asked his previous
solicitors to include such attachments in his Application to Resolve a Dispute
(ARD) but was told this was not possible as it would make the ARD too large. He
submits his former solicitors included some but not
all of the attachments. He
submits the email provides “tangible evidence” of “a breach of
s 344 of the Fair Work
Act”, and “irrefutable evidence of pressure
and undue influence” on him to sign “the employment contract”.
He submits that the failure of his previous solicitors to include “all the
attachments to the Request for Reviews” was
his reason for changing
lawyers after the issue of the Certificate of
Determination.
document was clearly available for use at the arbitration hearing. It was not,
on the appellant’s submissions, included
in the ARD by his then
solicitors. The appellant’s current solicitors obtained his file on 20 May
after the arbitral
decision was issued. The reconsideration that is sought is of the Presidential
decision. The last date when an
appeal could have been lodged within time was 26
The appeal was
successfully lodged on 29 May 2020. The appeal included multiple items of
‘fresh evidence’ in respect
of which leave was sought pursuant to s
352(6) of the 1998 Act, including a letter and a different email from Mr
Bartkowiak.
principles governing reconsideration applications require that fresh evidence,
relied on in support of such applications,
be “material that with
reasonable diligence could not have been put before the Court at the time of the
original proceedings”
(see [14] and [16] above). Item no. 1 could, with
reasonable diligence, have been put before the Commission at the time of the
arbitration
proceedings. The Commission did not have an arbitrary limit on the
size of an ARD. Additionally, there is no apparent reason why
leave could not
have been sought to rely on Annexure no. 1 in the course of the appeal
proceedings. The application in respect of
Annexure no. 1 is refused.
Annexures nos. 2(a) – (e), Annexure no. 11: Coversheet
and case notes of Ms Rowe dated 23 February 2017, 31 May 2017, 21 June
and 5 July 2017, emails between the appellant and Mentor Services
appellant sought to admit the case notes as fresh evidence, pursuant to s 352(6)
of the 1998 Act, in his appeal proceedings. He
submits that, in the appeal, it
was mistakenly submitted that these notes were with his original solicitors. The
appellant submits
that an enquiry he made after the arbitration result indicated
this was not correct. He submits his email enquiry of Mentor Services
possession of the notes) dated 29 April 2020, and the email dated 6 May 2020
from that entity, state the material was
not previously with his lawyers. He
submits in respect of the notes that “their existence was not previously
the appellant argues the material would have changed the result
and this enlivens the discretion pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998
contains copy emails
between the appellant and Mentor Services dated 29 April 2020 and 6 May
2020. The first of these states the
appellant confirms his conversation of that
date, and requests advice regarding whether clinical notes from his
consultations with
Ms Rowe are available and the process to obtain them. The
second is a copy email from the administration manager of Mentor Services
attaches “a letter of attendance for the dates you accessed our
service”. Annexure no. 2(a) is a letter dated 6
May 2020 signed by Ms
Rowe, which confirms that the appellant accessed “our service through
Australian Steel Mill Service’s
Employee Assistance Program on four
occasions”, being 23 February 2017, 31 May 2017, 21 June 2017 and 5
The appellant relies
also on a document attached to his “Teleconference submissions”,
from Dr McNamara of Mentor
That document, which
is dated 2 November 2020, states that the first contact from the appellant or
his representative was when the
appellant requested the file on 29 April 2020.
It indicates the appellant’s previous solicitors contacted the practice on
May 2020 to obtain a copy of the clinical file, which was provided. The
appellant knew he had been treated there, his statement refers
to having four
sessions with a lady at Mentor Services in Wollongong, from 23 February 2017 to
in or about July 2017.
information appears to have been as simple as requesting it. There is no basis
to conclude that, with reasonable diligence,
the notes could not have been
available for use at the arbitration.
clinical notes of Ms Rowe for the above consultations were attached to the
appellant’s Appeal Against Decision of Arbitrator
lodged on 29 May 2020.
They were the subject of an application to rely on fresh
which was dealt with in
the appeal decision.
documents were put before the Commission on the Presidential appeal, which is
the decision the appellant seeks to reconsider.
These notes are not fresh
evidence on the reconsideration application. They are evidence that was
previously the subject of an unsuccessful
application for leave pursuant to s
352(6) of the 1998 Act. The application in respect of annexures nos. 2(b)
to (e) is refused.
Annexure no. 2(a) is the letter dated 6 May 2020, which could
with reasonable diligence have been available for use on the presidential
appeal, and which would not affect the result. The application in respect of the
case notes and other material from Mentor Services
is refused.
Annexures nos. 3 and 4 – text messages
no. 3 is constituted by two text messages between the appellant and Marc Smith
on 28 June 2017. Annexure no. 4 is a text
message to Peter McConchie (I infer
from the appellant) dated 5 July 2017. The text message from the appellant to
Marc Smith said
that emails sent to the appellant were being sent to “Joy
and Richard”, that the appellant was “stuck between a
hard place”, and that the appellant had been directed that he could not
“talk to colleagues about work and
I take that to mean my
situation”. The message from Marc Smith to the appellant essentially
acknowledged the appellant’s
message and said to let him know if the
appellant needed “anything sorted out here” or if the appellant
needed someone
with him when he spoke to Richard. The text message to Peter
McConchie (Annexure no. 4) said the appellant had another appointment
psychologist, and that “Richard B has directed me that I’m not
allowed to talk to colleagues about work and
I take that to mean my situation,
which has left me feeling very alone”.
appellant refers to a passage in the Presidential decision which is said to
state that the reason “why some actions were
not assessed for
reasonableness was that the Arbitrator said that the actions occurred after the
[a]ppellant ceased work”.
This is not referenced to specific passages in
either the arbitral or presidential
The appellant submits
it is in error, and if it can be established that actions “taken after
cessation of work are very relevant”
and that they were
“deliberate” and contributed to the injury, this new evidence would
have produced a different result.
cannot see that evidence of the text messages could not, with reasonable
diligence, have been obtained for use at either the arbitration
hearing or in
the presidential appeal. There is no submission that they were not available
previously. The appellant went off work
from 18 May
Annexures nos. 3 and 4 are
evidence of complaint by the appellant about anxiety and his situation at work,
to two work colleagues,
in June and July 2017. They also indicate the appellant
had been instructed not to talk to work colleagues about work. There was
evidence in the appellant’s statement that he was anxious around the time
he ceased work and that he was directed not to talk
colleagues.
The evidence in
annexures nos. 3 and 4 simply tends to corroborate this. The basis for this
fresh evidence to enliven the discretion
to reconsider the appeal decision is
not present. The application in respect of Annexures nos. 3 and 4 is
Annexure no. 5 – Mr Bartkowiak’s
correspondence – frequently asked questions
is a document dated 14 April 2015 headed “Frequently Asked Questions
Change to Terms and Conditions of Employment and Motor
Vehicles”. It is
addressed to “All ASMS & ECOCEM Staff”. The appellant submits
the document “validates
the evidence that the Arbitrator excluded from the
COD – namely that the option existed to retain the vehicle at the end of
the lease with a continuing frozen salary”. The appellant states that
“this correspondence was cited verbatim”
in the ARD. He submits
“the exclusion of this information and of its implications” led to
an incorrect finding in the
arbitral decision at [176]. It is also submitted
there was “error and incompleteness” in the appeal decision at [7].
nature of the choice offered to employees (including the appellant) in 2015,
regarding retention of a company car, was set out
in the appellant’s
statement in the ARD.
“Car Policy Change” described in Annexure no. 5 is generally
consistent with how that issue is described in the appellant’s
There is no suggestion that Annexure no. 5 was not available with reasonable
diligence to be relied on at the arbitration.
no. 5 was the subject of an application to be relied on as fresh evidence
pursuant to s 352(6), in the earlier appeal proceedings.
It was dealt with in
those reasons at [55]. I observed that the document was “generally
consistent with the evidence (from
other sources) that was before the Arbitrator
regarding the change in policy regarding the provision of cars”. I
it is “unclear how it would have changed the result”. The
appellant now seeks to reagitate the unsuccessful application.
document does not satisfy the requirements for the admission of fresh evidence
necessary to enliven the discretion to reconsider.
It was, with reasonable
diligence, available to be used at the arbitration. It is not apparent how it
would change the result. The
application in respect of Annexure no. 5 is
Annexures nos. 6 and 7– 2020 EBA and 2014 EBA
no. 6 is a page of the Australian Steel Mills Services Pty Ltd Enterprise
Agreement 2020. It includes provision at subparas
26.8(a) and (b) for
redundancies. Annexure no. 7 is a page of the Australian Steel Mills Services
Pty Ltd Enterprise Agreement 2014.
It includes provision at subparas 26.7(a) and
(b) for retrenchment and
redundancies.
appellant’s submission on what flows from the two documents, and the new
contract the respondent sought to introduce, is
not easily understood. The
changes to redundancy entitlements in the new contract, and the capping of such
entitlements for employees
such as the appellant, are described in the
appellant’s statement which was included in the
appellant submits that Annexure no. 6 (the 2020 EBA) provides “factual
evidence of the considerable ongoing loss of benefit
he would have experienced
under the new contract and that its use would change the result”. He
submits Annexure no. 6 was signed
on 4 August 2020, subsequent to both the
arbitration hearing and lodgment of his appeal. He submits they could not have
been included
previously.
Northern NSW Local Health Network v Heggie
Sackville AJA
“In my opinion, the better view is that the
reasonableness of an employer’s action for the purposes of s
11A(1) of the
[1987 Act] is to be determined by the facts that
were known to the employer at the time or that could have been ascertained by
inquiries.”
JA to similar effect, in the same case, said:
“In short, in
assessing the reasonableness of the action taken by the general manager, the
relevant material was that in existence
at or prior to the time when the
decision was made and communicated to the
respondent.”
appellant submits that he wishes to tender the 2014 Enterprise Agreement
“merely for confirmation purposes”, that
the new agreement had a
“maximum redundancy entitlement period of 49 weeks”. The 2014
agreement could have been available,
with reasonable diligence, in the
proceedings before the Arbitrator. It is described as evidence that is
“confirmatory”.
It is not established that it would be likely to
change the result. I cannot see that evidence of the 2020 Enterprise Agreement,
a document entered into well after the relevant actions of the employer in this
case, is relevant to the issue of ‘reasonableness’
that was before
the Arbitrator. Additionally, there was already evidence to the effect that
changes to the redundancy arrangements
contained in the new contract were
disadvantageous from the appellant’s point of view. There is a distinction
between fresh
evidence and more evidence (see [17] above). The application in
respect of Annexures nos. 6 and 7 is refused.
Annexure No. 8 – Dr Lal’s report dated 21 February
a report from a treating psychiatrist to the appellant’s general
practitioner. The appellant submits the respondent had
previously seen the
report as its insurer paid for consultations with Dr Lal and obtained a copy of
the report directly from Dr Lal.
He submits it was an oversight on the part of
the appellant’s original solicitors not to include Dr Lal’s report
in the ARD). It is submitted that Dr Lal’s report is
“paramount to the [a]ppellant’s submissions, particularly
of the challenge to Dr Whetton’s
appellant previously sought to rely on this report of Dr Lal, as fresh evidence
pursuant to s 352(6), in the appeal. That application
was dealt with in the
appeal decision at [53] and [56]. I observed that the report assisted the
appellant’s case on the s 11A(1)
issue. I observed that Dr
Lal’s history was recorded over eighteen months after the appellant ceased
work duties with the respondent,
and it was not apparent how it would change the
I observed there was no
explanation of the appellant’s failure to use the report at the
arbitration.
An explanation is
now proffered of oversight. The explanation of how the respondent was said to
have previously been in possession
of the report, set out in the preceding
paragraph, was not made on the application in the earlier proceedings. It was
there asserted
the report (with other documents) was provided by the respondent
to the appellant.
submitted this explanation was “an error on the [a]ppellant’s
lawyer[’s] behalf”.
the report could have been available, with reasonable diligence, to be used at
the arbitration. It is a report that the appellant
unsuccessfully sought to rely
on in the earlier appeal. The appellant now seeks to reagitate his earlier
unsuccessful application
to rely on it as fresh evidence. Whilst it may assist
the appellant’s case, the submissions do not explain how it would change
the result. The requirements for satisfaction of the test to rely on fresh
evidence in support of a reconsideration application are
not present. The
application in respect of Annexure no. 8 is refused.
Annexure no. 9 – text messages
Annexure no. 10
– email to Gavin Tory dated 13 January 2017
no. 9 contains four short text messages, dated 31 December 2016, between Peter
Reeves and (I infer) the appellant. The first
two involve an interchange of
wishes for a happy new year; the appellant (I infer) says in one
“here’s hoping for a better
2017 for us all”. There is a
message from Mr Reeves that says “Just drop the keys off on Monday mate
...”. There
is a message from (I infer) the appellant. “It’s
getting hard. I’m seeing firsthand some really unethical practices
Bourke/Cross”. The submission in support of the admission of these
messages says “Refer as per Annexure 10 reasoning
was an incident on the night of 4 January 2017 in which a pot carrier drove
through a boom gate without it being opened. There
was a series of emails dated
from 5 January 2017 to 12 January 2017, between the appellant, Mr Bartkowiak and
others, regarding the
incident and safety precautions to guard against such
incidents. These are included in the
Annexure no. 10, the email
the appellant now seeks to admit as fresh evidence, is one from himself to Gavin
Tory dated 13 January
2017. It states “As discussed. Need to read from the
original email below. That’s the end of the matter for me as the
ramifications are pretty clear if I pursue, but very disappointing that OH&S
issues are handled like this now at ASMS.”
The “original email
below” is one from the appellant to Mr Bartkowiak dated 11 January
It appears to include
interchanges between the appellant and Mr Bartkowiak.
appellant’s submissions on admission of this material refer to
Evidence Act 1995
, which he suggests the Arbitrator has failed to comply
with. It should be noted that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence: s 354(2) of the 1998 Act.
appellant submits Annexures nos. 9 and 10 are inconsistent with the following
finding of the Arbitrator at [158] of her reasons:
overwhelming tenor of the evidence is that the issues which led to the injury
and the cessation of work were those related
to the contract. Those were the
only issues about which Mr Ceccato told Dr Tut and, with one exception, the only
issues of which
he complained to ASMS in his correspondence.”
appellant submits Annexures nos. 9 and 10 capture his “contemporaneous
complaints to others about the role [of] interference
issues, but they also
record the psychological impact that these issues were having on the
[a]ppellant”.
the material is admissible on the basis of the second of the threshold questions
identified in
noted above, the relevant email chain dealing with the incident on 4 January
2017 is already included in the ARD. This includes
an email to Barnabas Mate
dated 17 January 2017, attaching the same email that is also forwarded to Mr
Tory on 13 January 2017. In
the email to Mr Mate the appellant says “if
you read this, you’ll see that I have to shut up or else I’m going
to [be] sacked”.
another email to Mr Mate on 17 January 2017, the appellant says “Must
admit the whole episode has left me feeling pretty
low. Attached are the docs
relating to the original
I cannot see
that Annexures nos. 9 and 10 add in any significant way to the material that is
already in the ARD dealing with that
incident. I do not accept that the material
in those annexures is of such a nature that it would change the result. It is
more evidence,
not fresh evidence (see [17] above). The material was available
to the appellant to be used at the arbitration, the submissions do
not suggest
otherwise. The application for leave to rely on Annexures nos. 9 and 10 is
appellant’s multiple applications for leave to rely on fresh evidence have
failed. With the exception of the “2020
EBA”, which for reasons
given above was not relevant, all of the other annexures were evidence that was
available, or with
reasonable diligence could have been available, to be used in
the arbitration. The appellant’s submissions essentially proceeded
basis that if the various pieces of evidence could be argued to be relevant,
they should be admitted pursuant to s 352(6)
of the 1998 Act. The test, in the
second of the threshold questions identified in
, is a more
demanding one than that. Additionally, for fresh evidence to represent a basis
for reconsideration pursuant to s 350(3)
of the 1998 Act, it is necessary that
the fresh evidence be material that with reasonable diligence could not have
been put before
the Court at the time of the original proceedings (see [14] and
[16] above). If the ‘fresh’ evidence does not satisfy
criterion, it cannot be evidence that would change the result, and hence cannot
satisfy the second of the threshold questions
one of the threshold questions in
is satisfied, admission of
the fresh evidence remains discretionary. The passage from
quoted at [14] above, makes it clear that a party should produce all of the
available evidence at the original hearing. A failure
to do so militates against
exercise of the discretion pursuant to s 352(6). This is consistent with the
following passage from the
decision of Roche DP in
Drca v KAB Seating Systems
to which I referred in the Presidential
“The legal profession is reminded,
that it will only be in the most exceptional case where a party will be
permitted to tender on appeal evidence that, with reasonable
diligence, was
readily available at the arbitration. Arbitrations are not a dress rehearsal
where the parties can await the outcome
and then attempt to tender, on appeal,
evidence that could and should have been tendered at the arbitration, as if the
arbitration
was merely a preliminary
(emphasis in
EXERCISE OF THE DISCRETION PURSUANT TO SECTION 350(3) OF THE
arbitral decision was issued on 28 April 2020. The Presidential appeal was
successfully lodged on 29 May 2020, out of time by
a matter of days. The
Presidential appeal was accompanied by an application to extend time pursuant to
r 16.2(5) of the Rules. After
a full consideration of the grounds, the
application to extend time was refused, on the basis that loss of the right to
appeal would
not work demonstrable and substantial injustice. This was because
the appellant had not demonstrated the presence of ‘exceptional
circumstances’ and the appeal did not have reasonable prospects of
success. The decision in the Presidential appeal was issued
on 14 September
2020. The appellant lodged the reconsideration application under cover of an
email to the Registry on 7 October 2020.
He was, at that point, within time to
lodge an appeal pursuant to s 353 of the 1998 Act, had he wished to do so.
workers compensation legislation and Rules do not make provision for when a
reconsideration application pursuant to s 350(3) may
be brought. It is necessary
that an applicant for reconsideration “move with appropriate speed and
diligence” to bring
the matter that is relied on to the Commission’s
attention (see [16] above). The reconsideration has proceeded on the basis
it seeks reconsideration of the Presidential decision. The application was
lodged within 28 days of that decision. The appellant’s
reconsideration
application includes submissions dealing with “the delay in the making of
the reconsideration
application”.
these submissions were made under the misapprehension that the appellant was
seeking a reconsideration of the arbitral
decision. I cannot see that there is
any delay requiring explanation in the application to reconsider the
Presidential decision.
appellant submits that he was diagnosed with a significant health problem in
July 2020, which required surgery in mid-2020, with
subsequent complications. He
submits that this condition, in combination with his psychological injury, made
it difficult to cope.
He says he developed palpitations which required cardiac
monitoring involving an ECG and Holter
monitoring.
Annexures are
attached to the reconsideration application which deal to an extent with these
appellant, in his submissions, describes at least one of the medical documents
as “highly personal”. In deference
to the appellant’s privacy
I will refer to the medical matters in a relatively general way. There is a
report from a surgeon
in March 2020 which refers to some longstanding symptoms,
a risk of a serious diagnosis, and the need for a
A document from St
Vincent’s Hospital indicates that investigations and scans were carried
out on 16 July 2020.
appellant’s submissions refer to an
“operation”
is unclear from the medical material whether surgery was performed or its
is a copy of a progress note from the appellant’s general practitioner in
It says “[f]eels
stressed related to a recent decision” and says the appellant is
appealing. It includes “Palpitation.
No chest pain.” The actions
include blood tests, an ECG and a 24 hour Holter monitor. These are diagnostic
tests. Dr Tut gave
the appellant a prescription for Valium. There is no medical
evidence that supports a causal link between discovering the result
arbitral decision and experiencing palpitations. It is understandable that a lay
person might perceive the existence of such
a connection. There is no evidence
that the cardiac investigations revealed anything untoward.
appellant submits he is concerned that an appeal to the Supreme Court would
“take an additional toll on his health”.
He submits he has not
worked for over three years and has a disabled son; he has had and will have
expenses associated with treatment
of his health condition. He submits he has
not received unemployment benefits and that court proceedings would add to his
burden”. He submits he does not believe he “can
face those rigours if he was to have a concurrent court case”.
the decision should be reconsidered rather than
respondent submits there are “cogent reasons which militate against the
Commission exercising its discretion to entertain
the reconsideration
application”. It submits there is a public interest in finality in
litigation. It submits the new or additional
evidence could have been obtained
for use at the arbitration hearing with reasonable diligence. It submits the
reconsideration power
should not be used for the correction of error. It submits
the appellant is seeking to cavil with the decisions of the Arbitrator
Presidential member.
is no medical evidence that deals, with any specificity, with the treatment
which the appellant has required and will require
for his medical condition, its
extent and duration, and why this would be inconsistent with the institution of
an appeal pursuant
to s 353 of the 1998 Act. The Presidential decision was
issued on 14 September 2020. On 7 October 2020, the appellant lodged the
reconsideration application, a document 76 pages in length, plus annexures.
According to the index the appellant was the author of
the whole of this
document except for the annexures. The evidence as a whole does not support the
proposition that the appellant
was not able to form a decision, give
instructions, and otherwise appropriately involve himself in an appeal pursuant
to s 353, if
that was the appropriate chosen course.
appellant’s submissions raise, obliquely, the cost of an appeal. The
appellant refers to his “financial burden”.
His submissions refer to
the treatment costs of his non-work-related condition. It is not apparent
whether the figure quoted is one
before or after any relevant Commonwealth or
medical fund entitlements. The submissions regarding the appellant’s
position do not indicate his assets or whether he has investment
income. There is no evidence regarding the comparative costs of
reconsideration application as opposed to an appeal pursuant to s 353. One would
anticipate the costs of pursuing an appeal
pursuant to s 353 would likely be
greater. The extent of this would depend on factors such as whether solicitors
and counsel were
engaged. This is unexplored.
it is assumed that the appellant’s state of health, and financial
position, are relevant matters to consider in deciding
whether the discretion
should be exercised, what is put forward in the submissions is of little
reconsideration application is not, in any real way, based on fresh evidence.
The fresh evidence the appellant seeks to rely on,
to the extent that it is
relevant, is evidence that was available, or could with reasonable diligence
have been available, for use
in the proceedings before the Arbitrator.
explains that a “party who seeks or opposes an order must
produce all the available evidence at the original hearing, and courts
on their guard to refuse to allow the same matter to be litigated again and
appellant relies on 18 “Grounds for
Reconsideration”.
grounds seek to identify error. They read as if they were grounds of appeal. The
lengthy accompanying submissions seek to identify
error in the arbitral decision
and include references to alleged error in the Presidential decision. What the
appellant seeks to
do in the reconsideration application is to reargue, at
length, multiple points which were decided in the arbitral decision, which
then confirmed in the Presidential decision. There is a public interest that
litigation should not proceed interminably (see
[14] above). The appellant seeks
to use the reconsideration power as a full alternative to the provision in s 353
for appeal to the
Court of Appeal.
1998 Act provides for an appeal from an arbitrator to a Presidential member
pursuant to s 352, and for an appeal from a Presidential
member to the Court of
Appeal pursuant to s 353. In
the Court of Appeal concluded
that failure by a party to use an available right of appeal, provided for in the
legislation, was a
matter that militated against the exercise of the
discretionary power to reconsider. Their Honours said that the terms of s 37 of
the 1926 Act (which at the time dealt with the right of appeal to the Supreme
Court) “clearly intend that the primary mode
of challenge to errors of law
is to be by appeal to the Supreme Court”. It was said that the extent to
which the reconsideration
power should be permitted to perform the same function
as the appeal provisions “ought properly to be controlled, and the means
of control is to be found in the discretion”.
353(1) provides for appeal by a party aggrieved by a decision in point of law.
Section 353(4) provides that various appeals,
including an appeal from an
interlocutory decision, may only be made with leave of the Court of Appeal. To
allow unrestricted challenge
against a decision of a Presidential member, by way
of reconsideration, has the potential to be inconsistent with how the
legislature
has provided for a Presidential decision to be challenged in the
Court of Appeal. This is consistent with the need, explained in
to properly control the exercise of the power in s 350(3) by exercise of the
discretion. The primary mode of challenge to alleged
error of law by a
Presidential member is by way of appeal pursuant to s 353 of the 1998 Act, which
specifically provides for appeal
from a Presidential member to the Court of
Appeal. I am not persuaded, in the circumstances of this case, that the
Commission’s
discretionary power to reconsider should be exercised.
the reasons given above, the appellant’s application for reconsideration
of the Presidential decision in this matter, pursuant
to s 350(3) of the 1998
Act, is refused.
appellant’s application pursuant to section 350(3) of the
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
to reconsider the
Commission’s decision dated 14 September 2020 is
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
29 January 2021
Ceccato v Australian Steel
Mill Services
[2020] NSWCC 131
Australian Steel Mill Services
[2020] NSWWCCPD 58
decision), [135]–[137].
Appeal decision, [1]–[5] and [6]–[24]
respectively.
Reconsideration
application, pp 1–2, p
Reconsideration
application, p 11.
Reconsideration application, p
Reconsideration
application, p 13.
Reconsideration application, p
Reconsideration
application, pp 14–76.
Reconsideration application, pp
NSWWCCPD 141
Respondent’s
submissions, [4], [6]–[8],
example Reconsideration application, [1.5.2] and
Email from Mr
Hampson to the appellant,
11/11/2020.
Email from the
appellant to Mr Hampson,
Email from Mr
Wright to the appellant,
Email from Mr
Hampson to Ms Hickie,
[1952] SR (NSW)
[1962] SR (NSW) 244
1 NSWLR 412
[1993] NSWCC 36
9 NSWCCR 642
5 NSWCCR 192.
Presidential decision,
12 DDCR 501
Reconsideration application, p
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision,
Appeal against
decision of Arbitrator, p 4.
Reconsideration application, p
Reconsideration
application, p 78.
Teleconference submissions, Annexure
Appellant’s
statement 15/1/20, [147], ARD, p
Notice of Appeal, p
Presidential decision,
Reconsideration application, p
Appellant’s
statement 15/1/20, [124], ARD, p
Appellant’s
statement 15/1/20, [122], [135], ARD, pp 27,
Appellant’s
statement 15/1/20, [20]–[21], [31]–[35], ARD, pp
Reconsideration
application, pp 88–89.
Appellant’s statement 15/1/20,
Reconsideration
application, p 8.
Presidential decision, [53].
Presidential decision, [56].
Presidential decision, [56].
Reconsideration application, p
See ARD, pp
Reconsideration application, p
[2015] NSWWCCPD 10
Reconsideration
application, p 13.
Reconsideration application, p
Annexure 13,
reconsideration application, p
Reconsideration
application, Annexure 12.
Reconsideration application, p
Reconsideration
application, p 100.
Reconsideration application, pp
Respondent’s submissions,
Reconsideration application, pp 11–13.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.78 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter