URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/1798.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yin v Ku-ring-gai Council [2025] NSWLEC 1798 (12 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
Yin v Ku-ring-gai Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 1798
Hearing Date(s):
Conciliation conference on 5-6 November 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
The Court orders that:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) Development
Application eDA0546/24, as amended, for alterations and additions to the
existing dwelling and detached garage and
studio, a modified driveway and
associated works on land legally described as Lot 1 in DP330347, being 56
Treatts Road, Lindfield,
is determined by the grant of consent subject to the
conditions set out in Annexure A.
Catchwords:
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION: alterations and additions to dwelling house
– impact on heritage significance of an item – heritage
conservation
area – conciliation conference – agreement between parties -
Legislation Cited:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environment Court Act 1979
Ku-ring-gai
Local Environmental Plan 2015, cll 4.3, 4.4, 5.10, 6.1, 6.2, 6.5
Environmental Planning Policy (Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and
Hazards) 2021, s 4.6
State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable
Buildings) 2022
Texts Cited:
Ku-ring-gai Community Participation Plan
Principal judgment
Xiaodong Yin (First Applicant)
Min Ye (Second Applicant)
Ku-ring-gai
Council (Respondent)
Representation:
D Robertson (Applicant)
K Geragthy (Solicitor)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
McKees Legal (Applicant)
HWL Ebsworth
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/215363
Publication Restriction:
COMMISSIONER
Development is proposed at a site at 56 Treatts Road, Lindfield known as
‘Brenchley’ that is listed on the State Heritage
Register for its
local heritage significance.
specifically, development application No. eDA0546/24 was lodged by the
Applicants in these proceedings, Mr Xiaodong Yin and Ms
Min Ye (together the
Applicants) with Ku-ring-gai Council on 18 December 2024, seeking consent for
alterations and additions to the
existing dwelling on the site, and to a
detached garage and first floor rooms, modification of the existing driveway and
works (the DA).
development application was subsequently notified by the Council between 21
January 2025 and 4 February 2025, in accordance with
the Ku-ring-gai Community
Participation Plan in response to which no public submissions were received.
development application was refused by the Ku-ring-gai Local Planning Panel on
behalf of the Council on 14 April 2025 and the
Applicants filed an appeal with
the Court on 5 June 2025 under
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) (EPA Act)
Court arranged a conciliation conference between the parties on 5 November 2025,
pursuant to
Land and Environment Court Act
(NSW) (LEC Act), at which I presided.
an onsite view, the conciliation conference re-convened at Court, during which
the parties reached in-principle agreement on
those issues in dispute, subject
to the preparation of amended plans.
signed agreement prepared in accordance with s 34(10) of the LEC Act was
submitted to the Court, dated 6 November 2025, and amended
plans and other
documents were filed on the same date.
parties ask me to approve their decision as set out in the agreement before the
Court. In general terms, the agreement approves
the development subject to
amended plans that were prepared on behalf of the Applicants, and noting that
the final detail of the
works and plans are specified in the agreed conditions
of development consent annexed to the s34 agreement.
s 34(3) of the LEC Act, I must dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the
parties’ decision if the parties’
decision is a decision that the
Court could have made in the proper exercise of its functions. The parties
prepared a jurisdictional
statement to assist the Court in understanding how the
requirements of the relevant environmental planning instruments have been
satisfied in order to allow the Court to make the agreed orders at [
site is located within an area designated by the Ku-ring-gai Local Environmental
Plan 2015 (KLEP) to be R2 Low Density Residential,
in which the proposed
development is permitted with consent, where consistent with the following
objectives of development in the
• To provide for the housing needs of the community within a
low density residential environment.
• To enable other land uses that provide facilities or services
to meet the day to day needs of residents.
• To provide for housing that is compatible with the existing
environmental and built character of Ku-ring-gai.
proposal complies with the development standards in respect of height and floor
space ratio at cll 4.3 and 4.4. In respect of
FSR that is expressed as a ratio
of 0.3:1 given the site area of 1,941m2.
is commonly held that Brenchley was built in 1914 and that the site is listed
for its heritage significance. The development application
is supported by a
Statement of Heritage Impact prepared by GBA Heritage and dated November 2024,
in which the Statement of Significance
for the site is described in the
following terms:
“The subject dwelling at 56 Treatts Road, Lindfield, demonstrates historic
and aesthetic significance and representative qualities
at a local level.
Constructed in c.1914, the dwelling is representative of the Federation Bungalow
style in which it was designed
and constructed, including the use of the large,
simple roof planes, a wraparound verandah, roughcast rendered chimneys, timber
and posts, and a prominent gable verge. The existing dwelling is
located within an extensive garden setting.”
site is also located within the Oliver Grant Heritage Conservation Area (Oliver
Grant HCA), and adjoins the Blenheim Road Conservation
Area to the south of the
site, and the Crown Blocks Conservation Area to the east of the site.
is also relevant that the site is within the vicinity of a number of other
heritage items, namely: No 42 Treatts Road, No 45 Treatts
Road, No 47 Treatts
Road, No 50 Treatts Road, No 43 Nelson Road
considered those matters at cl 5.10 of the KLEP, and on the basis of the amended
architectural plans prepared by Lindsay Little
& Associates, the experts
agree that the heritage significance of the item, the relevant Conservation
Areas and those items of
heritage significance nearby is not adversely affected
by the proposal, due primarily to lowering of the new roof over the alterations
to the north of the existing dwelling that are subservient in scale, and
distinct in form to that of the original roof form.
at cll 6.1 and 6.2 of the KLEP in respect of Acid Sulfate Soils and Earthworks
respectively are, in my view, not relevant
to the proposal that is primarily
alterations and additions to existing lower ground, ground and first floor
State Environmental Planning Policy (Biodiversity and
Conservation) 2021
the site is located within the Sydney Harbour Catchment as identified by the
Sydney Harbour Catchment Map, Part 6.2 of the State
Environmental Planning
Policy (Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021 (Biodiversity SEPP) applies.
6.6 of the Biodiversity SEPP precludes the grant of consent unless the
Respondent council, or the Court on appeal, is satisfied
that the proposed
development ensures that, firstly, the effect on the quality of water entering a
natural waterbody will be as close
as possible to neutral or beneficial, and
secondly, that the impact on water flow in a natural waterbody will be
the basis of Condition 12A, I am satisfied that there are no changes proposed to
the surfaces outside of the existing building
footprint, and that the area of
impervious roof is also proposed to be maintained as existing such that there
will be no change in
the rate, volume or velocity of discharge from the site. I
am also therefore satisfied that the water quality resulting from the
development is likely to be neutral within the catchment, and that water flow is
minimised by no virtue of there being no additional
similar reasons I have also considered those matters at s 6.7 of the
Biodiversity SEPP and am satisfied, there will be no direct,
indirect or
cumulative impact on terrestrial, aquatic or migratory animals or vegetation to
a minimum, and no adverse impact on aquatic
reserves, or in terms of erosion.
note that the site is not identified as flood liable land to which s 6.8 of the
SEPP is directed and so does not apply. Neither
will the proposed development
have an impact on recreational land uses or access to public land, in terms set
out in s 6.9 of the
Biodiversity SEPP.
the same basis, I am satisfied that water sensitive urban design principles are
incorporated in the development by the collection
of stormwater runoff via first
flush devices, its retention and reuse so that potential adverse environmental
impacts are likely
to be avoided in terms required by cl 6.5 of the KLEP.
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards)
have considered whether the site is contaminated pursuant to s 4.6(1) of
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021.
basis of the historical chronology of the site set out in the Statement of
Heritage Impact cited at [
I am satisfied that the site is suitable for
the development.
State Environmental Planning Policy
(Sustainable Buildings) 2022
application is accompanied by a BASIX certificate (Cert No. A1774794_03 dated 6
November 2025) prepared by Lindsay Little &
Associates Pty Ltd in accordance
with State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022
(Sustainable Buildings SEPP).
the basis of the Embodied Emissions of Proposed Works certificate, prepared by
Lindsay Little & Associates dated 6 November
2025, the Court can be
satisfied that the embodied emissions attributable to the proposed development
have been quantified as required
by s 2.1(5) of the Sustainable Buildings SEPP.
the parties’ decision is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its functions, I am required
under s 34(3) of the LEC Act to
dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the parties’ decision.
making the orders to give effect to the agreement between the parties, I was not
required to, and have not, made any merit assessment
of the issues that were
originally in dispute between the parties.
Court notes that Ku-ring-gai Council, as the relevant consent authority,
approves the amending of development application No.
eDA0546/24 by those amended
plans and other documents listed below, and that were filed with the Court on 6
29 Drawing Title
Prepared by
Architectural Plans
Site Analysis Plan
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Ground Floor Plan
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Attic Floor Plans
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Lower Floor Plan
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Section AA/East Elevation
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Long Section BB
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Document Title
Prepared By
BASIX Certificate No.
A1774794_03
Lindsay Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Stormwater Drainage Statement
Linday Little & Associates Pty Ltd
Court orders that:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) Development Application eDA0546/24, as amended, for alterations and
additions to the existing dwelling and detached garage and
studio, a modified
driveway and associated works on land legally described as Lot 1 in DP330347,
being 56 Treatts Road, Lindfield,
is determined by the grant of consent subject
to the conditions set out in Annexure A.
Commissioner of the Court
A (262 KB, pdf)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (274 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter