URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v DHALL [2012] NSWPHT 2 (20 November 2012)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
INQUIRY BY PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTIUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH
PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW), INTO COMPLAINTS
REFERRED TO THE
TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER SECTION 167, THEREOF.
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
Pursuant to Clause 7 of
Schedule 5D of the National Law, the Tribunal has made
non-publication order in respect of the name of the patient and of the
mother-in-law or any material that may identify either
HCCC v DHALL
[2012] NSWPHT 2
Health Care Complaints Commission of New South Wales
(Complainant);
Suresh Kumar Dhall
, (Respondent)
: Mr. Peter Dwyer, Chairperson
Russell Benda (Pharmacist Member)
Ms. Jane Ludington (Pharmacist
Ms. Margaret Knibb (Lay Member)
: 30 April; 1, 2 May; 2 August 2012.
: 20 November 2012
APPEARANCES:
Mr. B. O’Donnell of Counsel, instructed by Mr. T. Davis, Solicitor
(HCCC), for the Complainant;
Mr. M.A. Robinson, of Senior Counsel,
instructed by Mr. W. Redpath, Solicitor; and on 2 August 2012, Ms. A. Poljak, of
Counsel, instructed
likewise, for the Respondent.
Pharmacist—Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Professional Misconduct-- dispensing prescribed
medications—opioid
analgesics in combination with other prescribed
medications—potential for adverse additive effects—failure to
prescriber—history suggestive of excessive, prescribed medication
use—failure to correctly label dispensed medication
(methadone) as
instructed by prescriber—death of patient--Coroner’s finding as to
cause of death—respiratory depression
from “cocktail of drugs”
of which methadone a primary constituent.
The Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct and of Professional Misconduct.
Respondent is reprimanded with respect to his failures as found by the Tribunal
and reminded of his paramount, professional obligations
to the community he
serves as a pharmacist to whom the privilege of registration has been granted;
to ensure at all times, that dispensed
medication achieves its purpose, to
benefit the health and welfare of patients; and to be mindful always of a
pharmacist’s
professional obligation to contact a prescriber should there
be any concern with prescribed medication;
a period of six (6) months commencing at the expiration of thirty (30) days from
the date of the Tribunal’s decision, the
Respondent is to accept a Mentor
selected by him and approved by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
(“the Council”)
in relation to his practice as a pharmacist with
respect to assessment of prescriptions and dispensing of medications having
for the subject matter of the Complaints before the Tribunal and for its
Reasons for Decision; Mentoring sessions are to be conducted
monthly, following
each of which sessions, the Mentor is to report to the Council within such
period and in such manner and form,
as determined by the Council. A copy of the
Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision is to be provided by the Council to the
to be read and considered, prior to the commencement of the mentoring
Respondent is to complete within twelve (12) months from the date of the
Tribunal’s decision the ‘
Prescription Drug Misuse Module’
conducted ‘on-line’ by the
Royal Australasian College of
Australasian Chapter of Addiction Medicine
should such course become no longer available, then to complete such other
course with similar learning objectives, to be selected
by the Council having
regard for the Tribunal’s Findings and Reasons for Decision. The
Respondent is to provide the Council
with evidence of the completion of such
course within thirty (30) days of the Respondent’s receipt of such
the Period of five (5) years following the date of the Tribunal’s
decision, the Respondent is to maintain his membership
Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia
Respondent is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed; if agreement cannot
be reached, either Party may have the matter
of costs re-listed for assessment
by the Tribunal.
LEGISLATION
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86A Sections 139B(1) (a), 139E, 145D, 165A,
167; Schedule 5D, Clause 6 (2) and
Evidence Act, 1995
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Therapeutic Goods Act, (Commonwealth) 1989
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Kalil v Bray & Another
(NSWCA) ([1977]) NSWLR
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Complaints
(2) Complaints were referred to the Tribunal dated 21 October 2011 in respect of
the Respondent’s dispensing of medications
prescribed by Dr. G. Dillon
(“the Prescriber”) located in the Australian Capital Territory
[“A.C.T.”) on
three occasions—25, 26 and 29 September 2008 at
the Respondent’s pharmacy situated at Jerrabomberra, New South Wales,
town near to the A.C.T.
first Complaint was that the Respondent was guilty of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
as defined within the meaning of Section 139B (1) (a)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86a
(“the National Law”) in that the Respondent:
... has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by him in the practice of pharmacy was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
second Complaint was that the Respondent was guilty of
professional
within the meaning of Section 139E of the National Law in that
the Respondent:
(i)... has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
practitioner’s registration; or
(ii)...has engaged in more than
one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the instances
are considered together
amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
Complaints were later amended to reflect corrections made to a list of
medications, dosage and quantity of tablets, dispensed
between 8 August and 29
September 2008, within Schedule ‘B’ to the Complaints; specifically,
correction of the originally
particularised amounts of paracetamol and codeine
in tablets containing each of these two active ingredients.
‘A’ to the Complaints identified the patient for whom the
medications were prescribed and to whom the Respondent
dispensed them. A
Direction was made pursuant to Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law that
the patient’s name not be
published. The Tribunal made a further Direction
that the name of the patient’s mother-in-law not be published, such person
having provided written testimonial letters in support of the Respondent
tendered on his behalf and admitted into evidence in the
Particulars of Complaints
Complainant relied on the same particulars for each of the above Complaints, as
relevant times the practitioner practised pharmacy as the sole proprietor of the
Jerrabomberra Pharmacy;
On the dates
described in the schedule marked ‘B’ to this complaint, the
practitioner dispensed to Patient A the following
medications prescribed by Dr G
Dillon (‘the prescriber’) in tablet form;
On 1 October
2008 Patient A died as the result of respiratory depression caused by a cocktail
of drugs with Methadone being the primary
constituent.
25 September 2008
the practitioner;
to contact the prescriber to question the use of Methadone (Physeptone) as a
cough suppressant,
(b) Dispensed
Methadone inappropriately in light of the concurrent use of Paracetamol &
Codeine (500/30) and Zolpidem,
to counsel the patient regarding medication interactions,
counselling occurred, failed to record details of that counselling.
26 September 2008
the practitioner;
to contact the prescriber to question the continued use of Zolpidem and
Paracetamol & Codeine (500/30) in light of
the concurrent use of
(b) Dispensed
Zolpidem and Paracetamol & Codeine (500/30) inappropriately in light of the
concurrent use of Methadone,
29 September 2008
the practitioner;
to contact the prescriber to question the use of Methadone as a cough
suppressant,
(b) Dispensed
Methadone inappropriately in light of the concurrent use of Paracetamol
Codeine (500/30) and Zolpidem,
to counsel the patient regarding medication interactions,
counselling occurred, failed to record details of that counselling
Additional complaint
the course of the inquiry pursuant to Clause 6 (2), Schedule 5D of the National
Law, the Tribunal having regard for a matter
that arose concerning the
Respondent’s labelling of the Methadone dispensed by him on 25 and 29
September, 2008, it appeared
to the Tribunal that another complaint could have
been made against the Respondent. Accordingly, during the course of the inquiry,
on 2 May 2012, the Tribunal exercised its discretion and took that complaint as
having been referred to it and decided that it would
be dealt with in the
current inquiry (“the Additional Complaint”). Neither party required
any further and better particulars
of this additional complaint.
Additional Complaint was of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
defined by Section 139B (1) (a) of the National Law being conduct significantly
below the expected reasonable standard, the Particulars
of which were provided
during the inquiry on 2 May 2012 when the inquiry was adjourned to 2 August,
2012, as follows:
(The Respondent) failed to label the dispensed medication,
namely methadone (Physeptone) oral tablets in accordance with the prescriber's
directions on each of two prescriptions, the first dated and dispensed, on 25
September 2008 and the second dated and dispensed,
on 29 September 2008 in that
each of the dispensed medications omitted from the pharmacy directions label
the words "when necessary"
reflecting the prescriber's handwritten directions
on each of the above prescriptions by use of the abbreviation "PRN".
his evidence the Respondent conceded that he omitted the words “when
necessary” from the label he applied to each
dispensed supply of Methadone
on 25 and 29 September 2008; and conceded also, that he should have included
such words, being the
prescriber’s specific directions on each
prescription by use of the abbreviation “PRN”.
was no dispute as to the Respondent’s ownership as sole proprietor, of the
Jerrabomberra Pharmacy (“the Pharmacy”);
nor as to the List of
Medications and the dispensing of prescription particulars thereof set out in
Schedule ‘ ‘B’
referred to above including those medications
dispensed on 25, 26 and 29 September 2008. Nor was there any dispute that the
died as particularised above, on 1 October 2008; the cause of death
relied on by the Complainant by reference to the findings of
the Coroner (at
Queanbeyan Local Court) which without objection by the Respondent, was admitted
into evidence (as Exhibit C-8) together
with the Report to the Coroner by the
pathologist (at A.C.T. Pathology) who conducted a post-mortem examination of the
deceased patient;
and a report by A.C.T. Government Analytical Laboratory
(“the Laboratory”) detailing the screening of the deceased
urine and identification of certain drugs / classes of drugs
together with screening of her blood identifying certain drugs present;
qualitative analysis of those drugs identified in the screening process. The
Coroner dispensed with the need to conduct a formal
inquest into the
patient’s death. The Coroner also found that the patient took the
medications the subject of the post-mortem
analyses “...without any
intention of self-harm or to take her own life.” (Ibid.).
was no evidence beyond the post-mortem and Laboratory reports of qualitative /
quantitative drug analyses before the Tribunal,
indicating the amount of each of
the relevant medications detected during analysis following the patient’s
death, which might
have indicated how much of each such medication the patient
would need to be ingested prior to death, to result in those amounts
following death or indeed, whether any such evidence was scientifically,
achievable. In any event, it would be reasonably
expected that the Laboratory
undertaking such analyses within the Coroner’s investigation process, had
considered this aspect.
Tribunal notes that according to additional information in the Laboratory report
and commented upon in the Post-mortem examination
Report, the post-mortem
methadone level detected was significantly high. However, the pathologist who
performed the post-mortem examination
of the patient, noted that the toxic
effect of the amount of methadone detected in the patient would depend on
whether she had used
it “...for analgesia or is a habitual user...”.
Accordingly, the pathologist regarded information as to the history of
patient’s methadone use as important in establishing the cause of
death—if the patient was not an habitual user of
methadone then the cause
of death would be “...respiratory depression caused by a cocktail of drugs
with methadone being the
constituent” (emphasis
added), but if the patient was an habitual user of methadone, then the cause of
death would be difficult
to establish.
was no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that the patient was an habitual
user of methadone; the only evidence of methadone
prescribed for her being that
dispensed by the Respondent on 25 and 29 September 2008.
is noted by the Tribunal that the level of
7-aminoclonazepam
metabolite of the medication
(a benzodiazepine type,
anti-epileptic drug available only on prescription) identified post-mortem by
the Laboratory, according to
. approximately 0.1 milligrams
per litre, was close to the toxic level
. greater than 0.12 milligrams
per litre. There was no evidence before the Tribunal that the Respondent had
ever dispensed clonazepam
to the patient; nor any evidence that her GP Dr.
Dillon had prescribed this medication between 31 January and 29 September 2008,
the period covered by his medical records admitted into evidence before the
Tribunal; the absence of any such evidence raises the
possibility that the
patient has been consulting another medical practitioner or practitioners; this
is further discussed, below.
Additionally,
the medication
an anti-depressant, identified during the
Laboratory analysis, was not included in the list of medications identified in
‘B’ to the Complaint as having been dispensed by the
Respondent between 8 August and 29 September 2008. However, in the
Respondent’s
provided to assist the Tribunal,
brand of fluoxetine was last dispensed to the patient
by him, on 29 April 2008 prescribed by Dr. Dillon whose records in evidence
before the Tribunal, indicate that he last prescribed this medication for the
patient on 20 March 2008.
was evidence before the Tribunal that the patient was also having medications
dispensed upon prescriptions presented to other
pharmacies in the general area
of the Respondent’s pharmacy.
Tribunal accepts, there being no evidence to the contrary, that the cause of the
patient’s death was as stated in the Particulars
of complaints, above.
Respondent graduated in Pharmacy with Honours, in Scotland in 1977 and became
registered as a pharmacist following a pre-registration
year, in 1978. After
and conducted it between 1982
and 1989 when he sold it and practised as a
pharmacy manager in the UK until 1995 when he immigrated to Australia. Following
of the necessary qualification examinations conducted by the (then)
NSW Pharmacy Board he was registered as a pharmacist in 1995
followed by two
years practising as an employed pharmacist at the Amcal Pharmacy in Queanbeyan,
near to Jerrabomberra where in November
1997 with Mr. Ken Cox as a partner, he
opened his current pharmacy. This pharmacy adopted a Soul Pattinson franchise in
2005 the Respondent purchased Mr. Cox’s share in the partnership
and since then has conducted the pharmacy as sole proprietor.
was no evidence before the Tribunal of any relevant, adverse disciplinary
matters, conditions imposed, or findings of any kind,
concerning the
Respondent’s career as a registered pharmacist prior to the complaints the
subject of the Tribunal’s inquiry,
or since, to the time of the
Tribunal’s inquiry.
patient was known to the Respondent since about 2001 as recorded in a
statement—an
Expert Certificate
pursuant to Section 177, NSW
Evidence Act, 1995
No. 25—made during relevant investigation of her death,
in evidence before the Tribunal as Complainant’s Exhibit C-12.
to another statement in evidence before the Tribunal, the Respondent was aware
from his initial contact with her, that
the patient was a practice manager of a
Medical Centre at Tuggeranong in the A.C.T.; and later, that she had been
involved as a consultant
to help establish medical practices in rural New South
Wales. Such information led to the Respondent accepting the patient as
a sophisticated, knowledgeable client” (Statement, Ibid.). The
Respondent was also aware that Dr. Dillon was her general medical
practitioner,
whom the Respondent regarded as a “...reliable and cautious doctor.”
to the Respondent’s statement, he was away from his pharmacy in August
2008. When the patient presented to his pharmacy
at about 5.00 to 6.00 pm on 25
September 2008 with prescriptions for Physeptone (methadone) tablets and
Erythromycin tablets (an
antibiotic), she had a “...wracking, chronic
cough that appeared uncontrollable...at one stage lying on seats in the
area coughing sputum into a cloth...” whilst the Respondent was
preparing her medications. The medications were dispensed.
Relevantly, the
prescriber’s directions for the methadone were in both computer-generated
and hand-written form albeit differing
in some respects. The computer-generated
form directed “
1 q.i.d for cough suppression
“one tablet to be taken four (4) times a day for cough suppression”.
The handwritten form directed “...
10mg q.i.d PRN
“one tablet to be taken, four times a day, when necessary.” The
prescription contained a computer-generated
direction to the prescriber to the
effect that the prescription details must be in the prescriber’s own
handwriting; methadone
being within the class of a Schedule 8 Drug of Addiction
pursuant to the New South Wales
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
then current. It was noted that on each prescription
the prescriber omitted to handwrite as required relevantly, the figure
in addition to the handwritten “twenty”.
the following day 26 September 2008, the patient again attended the
Respondent’s pharmacy presenting a Repeat Authorisation
(prescription) for each of zolpidem tablets 10mg and compound tablets of
paracetamol (500mg) and codeine (30mg), such Authorisation
forms having been
issued by another pharmacy, the Amcal Chemist Queanbeyan where each of these
medications had been originally dispensed
on 20 September, 2008 as new
prescriptions. The Respondent dispensed these medications on 26 September
29 September 2008, the patient again presented at the Respondent’s
pharmacy with a further prescription for Physeptone (methadone)
10mg tablets;
and a Repeat Authorisation prescription for Erythromycin the original supply of
which was dispensed on 25 September
2008. The Respondent dispensed both
medications. The form of this further prescription for methadone was identical
to that written
by the prescriber on 25 September 2008 as described above
including identical dosage instructions.
patient died on 1 October 2008 and the death was reported to the Coroner at the
Queanbeyan Local Court, who dispensed with the
need for a formal inquest into
the death, having been satisfied “...that the drugs taken by the deceased
were mainly prescribed
and taken without any intention of self-harm or to take
her own life.” (Coroner’s letter to the A.C.T. Community &
Health Services Complaints Commission, 18 March 2009). The Coroner’s
letter referred the matter to the above Commission because
“...concerns as to the prescribing of Methadone...[to the patient]...for
the treatment of a chest complaint / infection.”
The Coroner sought the
Commission’s advice as to whether the prescriber’s practice
concerning the prescribing of methadone,
was acceptable and what if any, action
would be taken by the Commission (Letter, Ibid.).
Coroner’s concern as to the relevant prescribing above, was referred to
the A.C.T. Health Services Commissioner who conducted
a review and referred the
matter to the A.C.T. Medical Board. The Health Services Commissioner by letter
to the Registrar of the
(then) NSW Pharmacy Board dated 16 December 2009,
communicated the concern of the ‘peer reviewer’ retained in respect
of the prescriber, that although not asked to comment on the care provided by
other health professionals, expressed the view that
“...it would seem
reasonable to expect the pharmacist in this case to have communicated with...
[the prescriber]...about...the
prescribing of methadone and the dispensing of
other medications at or about this time...Were...(the prescriber)...made aware
this information, he may have acted differently.” (Letter, Exhibit
“C-7” admitted without objection). The Tribunal
notes and assumes,
that the 'peer reviewer” would have been aware of the nature and amounts
of medications he had been prescribing
for his patient over a considerable
period and of their effects and potential, adverse effects. This of course, does
not diminish
the need for a pharmacist to exercise independent professional
judgment and if indicated, to contact a prescriber with any concern,
fulfilling a pharmacist’s protective role.
Complainant tendered a report dated 23 October 2009 by the ‘peer
reviewer’ mentioned above, to the A.C.T. Commission
concerning the
prescriber; but upon objection by the Respondent it was not admitted into
evidence before the Tribunal save for pages
9 to 12 thereof inclusive, being a
copy of a National Prescribing Service (NPS) Position Statement, July 2008,
Zolpidem and sleep-related behaviours, Review and
implications for insomnia management
Accordingly,
the (then) Board’s investigation processes began, leading to the
involvement of the HCCC culminating in its Complaint
Complainant’s documentary evidence—a
Complainant’s documentary evidence was admitted without objection as
Exhibits C-1 to C-38; and included copies of the prescriber’s
records for the patient 31 January 2008 to 27 February 2009 (the last
consultation having taken place on 29 September 2008);
the Respondent’s
Patient History and her prescriptions for the period 22 February to 29 September
2008; various guidelines
and data including Product Information for methadone
and the PDL (Pharmaceutical Defence Limited [PDL])
Guide to Good
, April 2010; and various communications relevant to the
investigation and complaint processes;
obtained by the Complainant by way of ‘
the Respondent relevant to the complaints, by registered pharmacist Mr. Michael
O’Donnell were admitted into evidence including
a report with respect to
the Additional Complaint concerning Respondent’s omission of the words
“when necessary”
on each of the dispensed supplies of methadone on
25 and 29 September 2008. Mr. O’Donnell gave evidence before the
Respondent’s documentary evidence—a
Respondent’s documentary evidence was admitted without objection, as
Exhibits “R-1 to “R-13” and included
the Respondent’s
Statement dated 12 April 2012 referred to above and the original prescriptions
relevant to the patient’s
medication.
included in the Respondent’s admitted evidence were profile extracts about
methadone, from the 31
edition (1996) and
edition (2009) of
Martindale, the Extra
Pharmacopoeia
published by the
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great
statutory declaration
by Ms.Therese Szabo, employed as a senior Pharmacy
Assistant at the Respondent’s pharmacy since about 2006, having worked in
Pharmacy since about 1991, who was present at the Respondent’s pharmacy on
25 September 2008 although not then on duty, who
told the Tribunal of her
observations of the Respondent’s counselling of the patient at that time.
(Exhibit R-3).
Tribunal received into evidence, testimonial support of the Respondent including
letters from the patient’s mother-in-law
and from medical practitioners
and pharmacists including his former pharmacy partner, Mr. Ken Cox, each of whom
provided a supplementary
letter admitted into evidence on resumption of the
Inquiry on 2 August 2012, confirming that each of them had been shown and
considered,
the complaints before the Tribunal and maintained their opinions in
support of the Respondent.
reports by registered pharmacist Mr. Paul Mahoney by way of ‘
of the Respondent relevant to the complaints, were in
evidence before the Tribunal. Mr. Mahoney’s report dated 16 February,
included reference to his visit to the Respondent’s pharmacy on 16
February 2012 when he conducted an interview with him
and inspected his pharmacy
“...to form an opinion on his professional standards of practice.”
(Exhibit R-2). There was
no further report from Mr. Mahoney addressing the
Additional Complaint however, during his evidence before the Tribunal, he was
directions include the abbreviation “PRN” on a prescription.
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal.
Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal
methadone, the Respondent confirmed that at the relevant time he had available
to him, the editions of
described above; and also, in addition
to the so called ‘FRED’ Dispense System and separate from it, he had
“E-MIMS” a source of information about medications
approved pursuant to the Commonwealth
Therapeutic Goods
legislation,
for use in Australia.
Respondent also confirmed his awareness of the need to abide by professional
standards to achieve the best health outcomes for
patients, including in
appropriate circumstances, withholding supply until a prescriber was first
for a pharmacist to understand medications and
to apply independent judgment based on knowledge of their effects and potential
effects such as addiction; and where relevant with opioid analgesic
medication use including codeine and methadone, which when taken
together may
cause respiratory depression. He described such information as
“basic”. He confirmed his understanding in
2008, that by combining
opioid analgesics with benzodiazepines or hypnotic medications, respiratory
depression could follow as it
were, by “synergistic effect.”
NPS statement on zolpidem referred to above, was available to the Respondent at
the relevant time in 2008. He confirmed that prior
to 25 September 2008, he had
never dispensed methadone to the patient. When put to him during
cross-examination, he accepted that
in August 2008 the patient had received a
cumulative total of 120 zolpidem tablets [TS Page 220]. However, the Tribunal
seems from the dispensing evidence (Exhibit C-17), that in August
2008, the patient received a total of 108 zolpidem tablets from
Respondent’s pharmacy; 14 zolpidem tablets on 7 August 2008 from the
Pharmacy in Queanbeyan (Exhibit C-17, Page 45) and 14 zolpidem
tablets on 31 August 2008 from the
Pharmacy, also in Queanbeyan
(Ibid. Page 51)—thus making a total of 136 zolpidem tablets received by
the patient in August
2008. The dispensing history recording the zolpidem
tablets dispensed at the two pharmacies in Queanbeyan above, became available
the Respondent in the usual way, from the
Repeat Authorisation
prescription form each pharmacy issued to the patient who presented them to
the Respondent’s pharmacy. In any event, whether
a total of 120 or 136
tablets, the amount of zolpidem the patient received in August 2008, was
clearly, excessive.
Tribunal also notes that in September, prior to the first relevant dispensing on
25 September 2008, the patient had received a
cumulative total 54 zolpidem
tablets. The Tribunal also notes that when a
Repeat Authorisation
issue by the
Pharmacy (above) for 14 zolpidem tablets (Exhibit
C-17, Page 57) was presented to the Respondent on 26 September 2008, the
history thereon, confirmed that pharmacy’s dispensing of 14
zolpidem tablets on 20 September, 2008.The Respondent accepted
dispensed amounts were excessive given the dosage prescribed for the patient. He
agreed with the proposition that with
such dispensed amounts the patient would
be “...taking it, stockpiling it or selling it...”. He was aware by
25 September
2008, of the amount of “...sedative medication...” the
patient was acquiring; and he agreed such possibilities above,
were reasons for
his then, concern. Asked whether he considered the patient to becoming
“habituated” to zolpidem at the
relevant time, he considered be was
becoming concerned and considered it would have been appropriate then to again
counsel her “...and
even take it up...” with the prescriber.
Respondent described the patient’s very distressed presentation to his
pharmacy on 25 September 2008. He believed that at
that time her consumption of
paracetamol / Codeine compound tablets (“PC tablets”) was
“borderline” rather
than excessive as had been put to him in
cross-examination; but nonetheless a concern, as the patient was taking the
maximum dosage
of eight (8) tablets daily. He told the Tribunal he had
previously counselled the patient about zolpidem and PC tablets but in effect,
she was reluctant to discuss it as “...it was a very sensitive
issue...”. He conceded that as at 25 September 2008, there
was a serious
problem with the amount of zolpidem being taken by the patient together with the
maximum dosage of PC tablets.
he told the Tribunal, the Respondent had one patient taking methadone for
analgesia in the dosage of one tablet twice daily;
and that prior to 25
September 2008 he had dispensed methadone to patients but this was the first
occasion he had dispensed it for
cough suppression; and he agreed such use was
“...extremely unusual...”. He told the Tribunal that if a patient
methadone as an analgesic and was also currently taking other,
prescribed analgesics he would contact the prescriber; but as in this
patient’s case the prescriber ordered methadone as a cough suppressant, he
“...was comfortable...” with such use
and also relied on the
patient’s presentation with considerable coughing and expectoration. He
also calculated that having
had PC tablets dispensed last by him, on 14
September 2008 and using them at eight tablets daily, she would have
“...probably
run out...” of them on 20 September and thus, he
concluded, she was probably not taking PC tablets when she came to the pharmacy
on 25 September 2008. However, he conceded the patient may have been obtaining
these PC tablets elsewhere. The Tribunal notes that
the Respondent dispensed
these medications the next day 26 September 2008, upon presentation of Repeat
Authorization prescriptions
to the Respondent.
Respondent counselled the patient on the first date relevant to the complaints,
25 September 2008, that methadone caused drowsiness
and that she should not take
it with zolpidem; but he did not mention any other medications including PC
tablets as “...none
of these had been contraindicated on the computer
system.” He conceded that he should have contacted the prescriber on that
first dispensing occasion.
the medications dispensed to the patient on the following day, 26 September
2008—the second dispensing date relevant
to the complaints— the
Respondent could not recall what he told the patient; but he felt
“...sure...” he would
have told her about taking those medications
then dispensed, with methadone. He agreed that this situation justified an
strong warning which he did not give to the patient; and that he
should have contacted the prescriber before dispensing those medications;
conceding that the respiratory-depressive effects of concurrent ingestion of
methadone and codeine (the latter in PC tablets) justified
prescriber on 26 and 29 September 2008. He agreed that the CMI (Consumer
Medicines Information) document he gave
the patient did not include
cough-suppression as an approved-use indication for methadone; but that he told
her it had been prescribed
for the suppression of cough. He also told the
Tribunal that “...a terminal patient might be using...[methadone]...in the
and ...would...use a smaller dose.”
Respondent told the Tribunal that relevant recording systems at the pharmacy had
been improved. Also, that he had always regarded
the particular prescribing
doctor as “...reliable and cautious...”. When taken to the second
prescription, and the wording
imprinted on a sticker thereon, generated by the
pharmacy’s computer program: ”Immediate Supply Necessary” he
that he did not follow the practice of initialling the notation with an
indication of a consultation with the patient to ascertain
whether in fact such
supply was necessary; and that he should have been concerned whether it was
necessary. He told the Tribunal
he should not have dispensed the prescription
for methadone on 29 September 2008
his failure relevant to the Additional Complaint, to label each of the methadone
tablets dispensed on 25 and 29 September
2008 in accordance with the
prescriber’s directions (“PRN”), by including the words
“...when necessary...”
he agreed that the standard expected of a
pharmacist demanded that a prescriber’s directions be followed; and
further, that
with medications such as those prescribed for the suppression of
cough or for sedation, it is not unusual for the prescriber’s
to specify that they be taken when necessary or required, as in effect,
continuing frequency of dosage will be dependent
on whether for example, the
cough or pain, has been alleviated. He told the Tribunal when counselling the
patient concerning the
methadone, he told her it was to be taken four times a
day as labelled. He conceded that it was only when the “PRN” issue
was raised during the course of the Tribunal’s inquiry that he realised
the above instruction was on each of the relevant methadone
prescriptions.
Respondent told the Tribunal he was unable to check using his computer system,
the dosage for methadone for use in cough-suppression
but he was aware that the
recommended dose of the medication was one tablet every six to eight hours when
prescribed for analgesia.
He had no recollection of its dosage for
cough-suppression from his previous Pharmacy experience in the United Kingdom.
He accepted
that no publication or computer technology could ever be a
substitute for the individual, professional judgment of a pharmacist.
conceded in effect, that a pharmacist could not necessarily rely upon an
apparently knowledgeable, competent and skilled
patient to justify not
his continuing professional development obligations, the Respondent confirmed
his membership of the Pharmaceutical Society
of Australia (PSA) since his
registration in 1995 and that he reads its journal
The Australian
; and membership also, of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia (PGA and
he reads its journal)
The Australian Journal of Pharmacy
; and that for
the last 14 years, his pharmacy has maintained accreditation under the PGA
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
(QCPP); he attends when permitted by his
practice demands, continuing professional programs.
Evidence of Ms. Teresa Szabo
noted above, Ms. Szabo’s
Statutory Declaration
declared on 29 June
2011, was in evidence; and she gave evidence to the Tribunal by telephone,
during its inquiry. On 25 September
2008, she attended the pharmacy with her two
sons but was not on duty at that time. Whilst waiting to speak to the Respondent
observed the patient in a distressed state and “...coughing
chronically...” as she waited for her prescription to be
dispensed. She
next observed the Respondent counselling the patient about dispensed medication.
Ms. Szabo told the Tribunal she did
not hear the exact words spoken by the
Respondent during such counselling “...but I could see that he was
explaining and saying...don’t
take it with or they are not to be taken
together, to that effect...He was holding the medication and talking to her
he does with any customer that has something that has warnings
against using it with other things.” [TS Page 170]. After the
patient had
left the pharmacy, she told the Tribunal, she and the Respondent “...both
agreed that we felt she should have been
in hospital with the severity of her
coughing.” (TS 172] Ms. Szabo also described how the patient
“...looked quite stressed
and very ill and I thought she had tears in her
eyes, type of thing, from coughing so hard.” [TS 171]
Peer review evidence
Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence of the peer reviewer pharmacists
both documentary and orally before the Tribunal
and summarises their evidence by
reference to the three dates to which the Particulars of the complaints refer;
and as relevant to
the two dates on which the Respondent dispensed the
prescribed methadone as particularised in the Additional Complaint.
Dispensing: 25 September 2008
to the Particulars relevant to the dispensing on 25 September 2008, neither Mr.
O’Donnell retained by the Complainant nor
Mr. Mahoney retained by the
Respondent, each a registered pharmacist, was of the opinion that the
Respondent’s failure to contact
the prescriber was significantly below the
relevant standard expressed in the definition of unsatisfactory professional
conduct 139B
(1) (a) stated above. Nor was Mr. O’Donnell satisfied that
the Respondent’s counselling on that date, was significantly
standard. Although Mr. Mahoney suggested that the warnings on this occasion were
not sufficiently strong as the “...combination
of drugs being consumed was
a very potent one” he did not express a view as to whether such failure
fell below or significantly
below, the relevant standard. Although the
Respondent admitted that where counselling occurred he failed to record it,
neither peer
reviewer in effect, formed other than an opinion that it would have
to make such a record. As to the particular of
‘inappropriate dispensing’ the Complainant relied on the
Respondent’s
dispensing methadone without consulting the prescriber;
failure to counsel the patient concerning the additive (respiratory-depressive)
effects of codeine (in PC Tablets) and methadone.
Dispensing: 26 September 2008
Mr. O’Donnell (pharmacist, peer reviewer) was of opinion that the
Respondent’s failure to contact the prescriber at this
dispensing fell
significantly below the relevant standard; Mr. Mahoney expressed the view that
at this stage he would have contacted
the prescriber and that the majority of
prudent pharmacists of the Respondent’s level of experience would have
prescriber. As to the particularised inappropriate dispensing of
zolpidem and PC tablets in light of concurrent use of methadone,
O’Donnell questioned whether the zolpidem and PC tablets should have been
dispensed at all, on this dispensing date. Mr.
Mahoney’s opinion was to
the effect that he would have delivered the strongest warning to the
Dispensing: 29 September 2008
was Mr. O’Donnell’s opinion that Respondent’s admitted failure
to contact the prescriber fell significantly below
the relevant standard.
Although Mr. Mahoney expressed the opinion that it would have been prudent to
Respondent’s failure to do so was not
significantly below the standard; he did tell the Tribunal however, that
confronted as
was the Respondent, he would have withheld dispensing the
prescription for methadone until he had contacted the prescriber indicating
effect, that it was inappropriate for the respondent to dispense the methadone
without such contact. It was Mr. O’Donnell’s
opinion that in the
circumstances of no prescriber contact, Respondent’s dispensing of
methadone was inappropriate and fell
significantly below the relevant standard.
It was inherent within the peer reviewers’ opinions that no counselling
overcome the above failures.
Dispensing of methadone on 25 & 29 September
2008—Additional Complaint: the “PRN” issue
O’Donnell’s report addressing the Additional Particular was admitted
into evidence and he gave evidence before the
Tribunal on this issue. He told
the Tribunal he would have labelled each dispensed prescription for methadone to
include the words
“when necessary” as directed by the
prescriber’s use of the abbreviation “PRN”; and that such a
would not be unusual for a medication prescribed for cough-suppression
or pain relief as it contemplates relevantly to the Additional
Complaint, that a
patient uses only the minimal amount of methadone effective to relieve the
symptoms by its anti-tussive effect.
Mr. O’Donnell told the Tribunal that
looking at both prescriptions there was nothing to require the words “when
not being included on the dispensed label; and that counselling
of the patient receiving dispensed medication with instructions including
words “when necessary” on the label as in this case would include
reinforcing such directions; that the patient takes
it while they have the
cough. Finally, Mr. O’Donnell’s opinion was that the failure to
label on the two occasions, the
dispensed methadone to include the words
“when necessary” did not fall significantly, below the relevant
was no further report from Mr. Mahoney but during his evidence before the
Tribunal he agreed “...definitely...”
with the proposition put to
him by the Tribunal, that if a prescriber’s written instructions included
an instruction for the
dispensed label to include the words “when
necessary” then it was the pharmacist’s professional obligation to
Submissions—Complainant: a summary
for the Complainant emphasised that in addressing the particulars of the
complaints, the Tribunal should consider those found
proven, taken together, to
amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct; also emphasizing relevant to the
definition in section
139E of the National Law, that multiple instances of
proven unsatisfactory conduct can together, amount to professional
misconduct.
Complainant’s
Counsel addressed the Tribunal further to its written submissions and noted the
Respondent’s relevant admissions;
and emphasised the role played by
methadone as the “primary constituent” of the “cocktail of
drugs” causing
the patient’s death from respiratory depression as
described in the report by pathologist Dr. Sanjiv Jain consequent upon his
post-mortem examination of the patient and quantitative and qualitative analyses
of the patient’s post mortem urine and blood.
Counsel submitted that the
amount of clonazepam and its principal metabolite, could be inferred to have
been well below the toxic
level. However, the Tribunal notes to the contrary,
from what appears from the evidence as the near proximity of the amount of
detected, to such toxic range as expressed in the post-mortem reports
of analyses. The Tribunal further addresses clonazepam, below.
Dispensing: 25 September 2008
Complainant submitted that the Respondent’s failure to contact the
prescriber although below the relevant standard, did
not fall significantly
below it. Although submitting that the Respondent failed to sufficiently counsel
the patient, it was submitted
that this failure also, did not fall significantly
below the relevant standard. Although prudent to record any counselling where
occurs, it was submitted, the Respondent’s admitted failure to do so did
not fall below the expected, relevant standard.
Complainant also submitted that
it was inappropriate for the Respondent to dispense methadone given the
patient’s concurrent
use of PC tablets and zolpidem without first
consulting the prescriber; and without counselling the patient about the
additive (that
is, respiratory depressive) effects of the codeine (in the PC
tablets) and methadone; and further, without strongly counselling the
was submitted that the particulars relevant to this first of three dispensing
dates the subject of the complaints—but for
the Respondent’s failure
to record his counseling on that date—although falling below the relevant
standard, did not
fall significantly below such standard; accordingly, the
proven particulars it was submitted, did not amount to unsatisfactory
professional
conduct. Given Complainant’s peer reviewer Mr.
O’Donnell’s withdrawal of his comments relevant to the
Respondent’s
dispensing of methadone and erythromycin together, the
Tribunal excludes this from its consideration.
Dispensing: 26 September 2008
Complainant submitted that in dispensing PC tablets and zolpidem, these were the
medications the Respondent should have been most
concerned about in combination
with methadone. Based upon the evidence including the Respondent’s
admissions and peer review,
it was submitted that the particulars relevant to
this dispensing date, were proved; and that the Tribunal should be reasonably
that they amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Dispensing: 29 September 2008
Complainant’s
Counsel noted the Respondent’s admission during cross-examination, that he
should not have dispensed the
prescription for methadone written and presented
to him on this date, without first contacting the prescriber. Counsel also
that given the prior history, no level of counselling would have been
sufficient to address concerns to this further supply of methadone.
Complainant
submitted that each of the particulars of the complaints relevant to this date,
were proven according to the evidence
of the Respondent and peer reviewers; and
accordingly, the Tribunal should be reasonably satisfied that such proven
particulars amounted
to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
the Additional Complaint (the “PRN” issue) Complainant’s
Counsel submitted that by reliance on the Complainant’s
peer reviewer,
that although the facts of this complaint demonstrate a failure, it did not fall
significantly below the relevant
standard and that therefore as a complaint of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, it has not been made out. In making this
submission,
Counsel acknowledged that the Tribunal, whose membership includes
two pharmacists, can come to its own view on this issue. Counsel
acknowledged that although not so proven, it could be taken into account in
determining any protective orders.
emphasised that any failure of the prescriber towards his patient might be
relevant to any protective orders, but cannot excuse
a pharmacist’s
obligation to exercise independent, professional judgment; and that as a
pharmacist, the Respondent could not
claim to be ignorant of the additive
(respiratory-depressive) effects of opiate medications in combination nor of
their potential
danger when taken with zolpidem or other medications of
addressing the complaint of professional misconduct, Counsel submitted that the
five instances of proven unsatisfactory professional
conduct [Particulars 2 (a)
& (b); 3 (a), (b) & (c)] taken together, meet the definition of
professional misconduct in section
139E (b) of the National Law; and although
not deliberate breaches, portrayed in effect, an indifference to the
patient’s health
and well-being, as described by
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
to protective orders consequent upon a finding of professional misconduct,
Complainant submitted that given the absence of
any relevantly adverse conduct
prior to or since, the subject complaints, over a long career and in light of
his admissions and evidence
before the Tribunal including recognition of his
failures, suspension or cancellation of his registration was not necessary for
community’s protection. However it was submitted, some adequate
measures were needed to reflect the seriousness of the proven
including the fact of a patient’s death having likely occurred in part,
from taking prescribed medications dispensed
by the Respondent; and to maintain
public confidence in the Pharmacy profession.
was submitted that the Respondent be reprimanded and remain subject to a period
of mentoring (the nature and extent of which, were
included in
Complainant’s written submissions) by a registered pharmacist to be
selected by him and approved by the Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales
(“the Council”); and that the Council be the ‘appropriate
review body’ pursuant
to sections 163 and 163A of the National Law.
Complainant sought an Order for Costs.
Submissions—Respondent: a summary
Respondent’s
Counsel was critical of the role of the peer reviewer Mr. O’Donnell, whose
reports were before the Tribunal
and who gave evidence during the inquiry,
submitting that he had lost his independence and objectivity in presenting his
accordingly, the Tribunal should exercise caution in considering his
evidence submitting it was of no or little, weight.
Dispensing: 25 September 2008
referred to the 36
(and another, similar extract from the
edition thereof) relevant
methadone, tendered by the Respondent and admitted into evidence without
objection; and relied upon a statement therein, that methadone
“...useful for the suppression of cough...”. Counsel submitted that
it was not restricted to patients with terminal
illness, or non-ambulatory
patients; and hence given the above extract, there was no necessity to contact
the prescriber and the
relevant particular was not proven. Counsel did not
however, address the dosage range of methadone described in
comparison with that prescribed for the patient and dispensed accordingly, by
the Respondent.
this dispensing date, Counsel submitted, the Respondent was not requested to
dispense PC tablets and zolpidem; nor was he then
aware that the patient had
received these two medications on 29 August 2008 pursuant to an original
prescription, written by the
prescriber and dispensed by another pharmacy, in
Queanbeyan. Accordingly he submitted, there was no evidence before the Tribunal
to confidently establish that the patient was “...actually
ingesting...” these medications concurrently (as relevantly
particularised), as at 25 September 2008.
was the Respondent’s submission that on this date the Respondent did
counsel the patient as “...witnessed by a staff
(referring to the evidence of Ms. Teresa Szabo); and that at most, such
counselling was not adequate given that
shortly after, the patient died on 1
October, 2008 with subsequent post-mortem analyses identifying the medications
(dispensed by
the Respondent) in her blood together with “...an additional
medication...” (It is assumed by the Tribunal that Counsel
was referring
to clonazepam). However, it was submitted, the prescriber’s caution
administered to the patient by telephone
on the night of 25 September 2008
(noted in his records, in evidence before the Tribunal, on the following day) to
the effect that
she should not take other medications with the methadone, was
not heeded by the patient. Accordingly, Respondent submitted, any further
counselling by the Respondent on 25 September would have been to no avail. It
was finally submitted that none of the particulars
relevant to this first
dispensing date had been proven.
Dispensing: 26 September 2008
it might have been prudent to contact the prescriber on this date of dispensing
the Respondent submitted there was no formal
duty to do so; and the Respondent
made a professional judgment not to do so; any failure did not fall below the
relevant standard
to constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct. In respect
of particulars concerning the dispensing of PC Tablets and Zolpidem
submitted no “interaction” was shown on the FRED computer program;
and that although the Respondent had no clear
recollection of the warning he
gave the patient on this day, he was sure he would have warned her about taking
the above medications
concurrently with methadone.
Dispensing: 29 September 2008
respect to the Respondent’s failure to contact the prescribed as
particularised, Counsel repeated his submissions noted
above; repeating also,
those submissions as to the particulars of inappropriate dispensing of PC
tablets and zolpidem.
was submitted that the Respondent counselled the patient on this occasion
according to his Statement in evidence, reminding her
of dosage instructions;
and on 25 September he had provided her with a CMI (Consumer Medicines
Information brochure) for methadone.
Counsel submitted that despite experts
expressing opinions “...years after the events and with the benefit of
hindsight when
matters are viewed and examined with pellucid clarity...”
Respondent’s conduct did not fall below the relevant standard.
again submitted that as stated by the peer reviewers in evidence, although
prudent for a pharmacist to record counselling
of a patient, failure to do so
did not fall below the relevant standard.
summary, it was the Respondent’s submission that none of the particulars
of the complaints before the Tribunal were proved
such as to constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct as defined in
the National Law.
Respondent’s
Counsel was critical of the Complainant’s failure to call evidence from
the prescribing medical practitioner
by comparing such evidence with the
obligations of a prosecutor, given its relevance and because “...it may
well have been
exculpatory.” Accordingly it was submitted the complaint
should be dismissed or permanently stayed “...as an abuse of
process.”; Counsel also relied on the principle or rule, in
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 308, 312; and 320-321. It was also submitted
that the Complainant failed to extend its investigation to identify any other
by whom medications had been dispensed to the patient, including
clonazepam; likewise there was no evidence it was submitted, for
example, from
as to any other prescribers by whom medication might have been
prescribed for the patient; or in effect identifying medications dispensed
the PBS (Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme) to the patient.
submitted that the Tribunal should dismiss the complaints and the Complainant
ordered to pay the Respondent’s costs.
Alternatively, should the Tribunal
need to look to any protective orders if finding either complaints proved, it
should caution or
alternatively, reprimand the Respondent; adding that his
practice had been improved, as confirmed by the peer reviewer Mr. Mahoney
visited the pharmacy and made his assessment; and it was also submitted that the
Respondent had been deeply affected by these
events the subject of the
complaints; and had demonstrated insight into his conduct. Counsel also
emphasised the significant, testimonial
support for the Respondent in evidence
before the Tribunal including from pharmacists, medical practitioners and from
the patient’s
mother-in-law; and submitted that the Tribunal can be
confident in his current practice and that he needs no further training, or
suspension from practice.
referred to the confidence the Respondent had placed in the relevant prescriber
over a period of time as a careful, medical
practitioner. It was submitted in
effect in mitigation, that the Respondent was confronted with a patient who
rejected her doctor’s
advice especially given the prescriber’s
caution to her by telephone on the night of 25 September 2008, referred to
Also relevant was the Respondent’s reliance on the patient’s
general appearance and knowledge, especially in her occupational
association in
and with, medical practices.
his submissions Counsel noted that the Tribunal is established to include
pharmacists as Professional Members and is “...certainly
permitted to
bring its own expertise to bear...” having been created in this
Complainant bears the onus of proof in satisfying the Tribunal that all or some,
of the particulars of the complaints have been
proved and if so, whether such
amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct. In
considering the evidence
before it, the Tribunal applies the standard of
‘reasonable satisfaction’ according to the principles enunciated by
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362.363.
reasonable satisfaction
should not be
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences”
listed by division into the three relevant dates of dispensing
26 and 29 September 2008, the Particulars of the complaints are considered by
the Tribunal as in effect, a continuum of interdependent
and interrelated,
professional activities, commencing on 25 September 2008 when the first
prescription of methadone was dispensed
by the Respondent to a patient with as
the evidence disclosed, a relevantly significant history of medications
dispensed at the Respondent’s
reaching its findings, the Tribunal confines its consideration to the complaints
as particularised; considering the acts and omissions
of the Respondent in all
the circumstances relevant to his dispensing prescriptions on the three relevant
dates; together with an
assessment of his compliance or otherwise with his
professional obligations as a registered pharmacist; and including opinions
by the pharmacist-peer reviewers. The Tribunal considers the
Respondent’s conduct as it were, prospectively and not retrospectively
with the ‘benefit of hindsight’, having regard for its protective
information was available to the Respondent on 25 September 2008 to confirm that
methadone as a cough-suppressant, was not an
approved use, in Australia, for
example by accessing E-MIMS a computer program then available at his pharmacy.
Additionally, the
Respondent told the Tribunal that he had never encountered
such cough-suppressant use of methadone, certainly it seemed in Australia,
he commenced practice as a pharmacist, in 1995; although he had some
recollection of such use in the United Kingdom when in
practice there, in the
. Also available to the Respondent on 25 September 2008
was the publication an extract from which (at page 60 thereof) concerning
methadone, he relied on, admitted into evidence—
Martindale, the Extra
Pharmacopoeia
Edition (1996). Also admitted, as part of the
Respondent’s evidence, was a similar extract from the
Edition (2009) of Martindale although this may not
have been available at the relevant time, given its publishing date identified
by the Respondent. In any event, the following, relevant information was
essentially identical to that in the earlier edition. The
Edition included a description of methadone as
having “...
a depressant action on the cough centre and may also be used
as a cough suppressant in terminal illness, although some authorities
this use because of the risks of accumulation.
”; and addressing
dosage, the following: “...
for the control of intractable cough
associated with terminal lung cancer methadone is usually given in a dose of
1 to 2 mg every 4 to 6 hours
reduced to twice daily
prolonged use
.” (Emphasis added). At the relevant time,
was one of similar, alternative publications, required by the
NSW Pharmacy Board, to be held by a pharmacy.
the above context of extracted information from
, the Tribunal
notes that the prescriber’s computer-generated prescriptions for both
prescriptions for methadone (each prescribed
by a brand name
as 10mg tablets, included the directions “
[meaning one
tablet of 10mg to be taken four times a day]...for cough suppression”;
additionally on the prescription in the
prescriber’s hand-writing appeared
the directions “...
10mg q.i.d. PRN
.” It was not disputed that
the abbreviation “
” signified “when
necessary”. The prescriber ordered 20 tablets to be dispensed. Handwriting
on each of the prescriptions
was apparently necessary to comply with relevant
requirements for prescriptions for methadone as a ‘Schedule 8—Drug
Addiction” pursuant to the requirements of the
Therapeutic Goods Act
and then current,
Relevant in this context also, having regard for the risk of accumulation, is
the Respondent’s failure to include the words
necessary...” on the label for each dispensed methadone, as the prescriber
instructed; such failure being the
subject of the Additional Complaint. Also
relevant is the pharmacy’s automatic, computer-generated
‘sticker’ attached
to the prescription for methadone on 29 September
2008 as in effect a ‘prompt’ consisting of words “
supply necessary’
relevant usually, to prescriptions for PBS
(Pharmaceutical Benefits Schedule) medications dispensed prior to the time they
be, as some of the originally dispensed medication should remain to be
taken by a patient. The Respondent gave evidence to the Tribunal
calculating that the patient would be near to completing the first dispensed
amount. This ‘prompt’ could well
have served to direct his attention
to the potential harm from methadone and especially, to the prescriber’s
instructions that
it be taken only “when necessary”.
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal in a candid, forthright and sincere
manner; he acknowledged his relevant failures
and was clearly deeply affected by
the patient’s death and the circumstances of his dispensing to her.
the extent that the peer review evidence did not support some findings to have
fallen ‘significantly’ below the relevant
standard and hence did not
amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied and finds, otherwise.
Likewise, to the extent that peer review was not
of the opinion that failure to label each of the dispensed methadone to include
the words “when necessary” as instructed by the prescriber, fell
‘significantly’ below the above standard,
the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied and finds, otherwise; and notes the evidence of each of the peer
reviewers and of the Respondent,
that such instructions must be included on
dispensed medication, as the prescriber’s instructions.
its composition including two Pharmacist Members, the Tribunal is as also
acknowledged by Counsel appearing for the Complainant
and for the Respondent
during the inquiry, an expert professional tribunal, so described by the New
South Wales Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
reaching its findings, the Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence before
it and is mindful as submitted by Respondent’s
Counsel, that the patient
might have been consulting a medical practitioner or practitioners other than
the relevant prescriber,
although as Counsel submitted, the Complainant adduced
no such evidence; accordingly, any such consultation or consultations, remains
speculative. However, there was evidence before the Tribunal confirming the
patient’s obtaining prescribed medications dispensed
at other than the
Respondent’s pharmacy. The Tribunal has noted that the drug clonazepam
detected upon post-mortem analyses
of the patient’s blood, had never been
dispensed by the Respondent. The Tribunal also notes in this context, that
also detected in the above post-mortem analyses, was last dispensed
brand capsules 20mg) to the patient by the Respondent on 29
April 2008 according to the Respondent’s
Patient History
to the patient, tendered by the Complainant and admitted into evidence.
Tribunal has also, carefully considered the peer review evidence; and the
submissions of Counsel for the parties, to the effect
that those particulars of
complaint relevant to 25 September 2008 do not satisfy the definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
However, in considering all the evidence
before it and notwithstanding some peer review opinion to the contrary with
respect to those
particulars, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that with the
exception of the particular of Respondent’s failure to record
which it accepts as a matter of ‘prudence’, that the particulars are
proven and amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct as defined in section
139B (1) (a) of the National Law.
Tribunal does not accept Respondent’s Counsel’s criticism during his
submissions, of the Complainant’s peer
reviewer; and notes that the
reviewer withdrew his comments on the aspect of any interaction between
methadone and erythromycin,
when questioned about it. Nor does the Tribunal
accept Counsel’s submissions to the effect that the Complainant’s
can be compared with obligations relevant to the role of a prosecutor in
criminal proceedings.
also to this finding, being the date of the first, incorrect labeling of
methadone, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that the Additional Complaint is
proven and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct on each of 25 and 29
September 2008. The
Tribunal is also reasonably satisfied that the particulars
of complaint relevant to 26 September 2008 have been proven and constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Likewise, but for that particular
concerning a failure to record counselling as noted above,
the Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that the particulars relevant to 29 September 2008 have
also been proven and amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
considering whether the Respondent’s proven unsatisfactory professional
conduct amounts to
professional misconduct
, the Tribunal is reminded of
the words of
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
, at 200, which although concerning a medical practitioner, are
applicable to a pharmacist:
Departures from elementary and generally accepted
standards of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be heard to say that
or she was ignorant could amount to professional misconduct. But the
statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies
in the practice of the profession. Something more is required. It includes a
deliberate departure from accepted
or such serious negligence as
although not deliberate, to portray indifference
and an abuse of the
privileges which accompany registration as a medical practitioner.”
(Emphasis added)
observed by
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding that a
complaint has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
public at large, but more particularly patients or potential patients of the
practitioner concerned. However the public interests
include indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in
the high standards...of
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence
or, to put it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners to
the importance of complying with professional standards and the risks
of failing to do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two
members of the medical
profession should, at least in relation to professional standards be accorded a
degree of flexibility which
might not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal
differently constituted.
These words are also applicable to
pharmacists and to the profession of Pharmacy.
the Tribunal, the Respondent acknowledged his failures relevant to the
complaints; and he acknowledged a pharmacist’s
paramount, professional
obligation to those to whom medication is dispensed. Accordingly, pharmacists
dispensing potentially harmful
medications especially where it is known or even
suspected from prior dispensing, in combination with other medications where
combined or additive, effects as in this case, may result in potentially
serious consequences, must be ever vigilant and alert to
any possible, adverse
consequences and always, ‘err on the side of caution’. The
pharmacist usually, is the last health
care professional with whom a patient has
important opportunity and must be regarded as such, always, and not
Respondent’s failures were not deliberate, but adopting the words of
P. above, taken together over the relevant period of three
dispensing dates within a five day period; and having regard for the nature
effects of methadone and its combined effects with PC tablets and zolpidem taken
concurrently with them, these failures portray
in the Tribunal’s
assessment, indifference in all the circumstances, to his professional
obligations. Considered together,
the proven instances of unsatisfactory
professional conduct amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension
or cancellation of the Respondent’s registration.
Accordingly, as defined in section 139E (b) of the National Law, the Tribunal
finds the Respondent guilty of professional misconduct.
Protective orders
noted earlier, but for the complaints before the Tribunal, there is no evidence
before the Tribunal adverse to the Respondent as
a registered pharmacist, prior
to or since September 2008. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr. Mahoney
following his visit to
the Respondent’s pharmacy in February 2012 to the
effect that he was satisfied with the Respondent’s current professional
practices and was of the opinion that he is a fit and proper person to continue
practice as a pharmacist and thereby to serve the
community in which he
Complainant submitted that neither cancellation nor suspension of the
Respondent’s registration was necessary; but that
measures...” were needed and especially in the circumstances relevant to
the patient, to maintain public confidence
in the profession of Pharmacy.
Complainant also submitted that a reprimand was appropriate together with a
period of mentoring in
which the Respondent would meet with the mentor nominated
by him and approved by the Council on one day each fortnight over a period
not less than six months; such mentoring to address the Respondent’s
counselling of patients; communications with prescribers;
and dispensing of
“...combinations of opioids, hypnotics and benzodiazepines; and reasons
for dispensing opioids.” (Complainant’s
written submissions).
Complainant also submitted in effect, that the overall period of mentoring
should be extended if the Council
after considering the mentor’s reports
to it, deemed such extension “...necessary.” (Ibid.) The Complainant
that the appropriate review body should be the Council relevant to
sections 163 and 163A of the National Law.
Having considered the submissions, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied and
orders, that in all the circumstances, the respondent
be appropriately
reprimanded; and be subject to a period of six (6) months of mentoring by a
mentor to nominated by him and approved
by the Council, the further particulars
of which are included in the formal Orders set out above.
Respondent is to complete within twelve (12) months from the date of the
Tribunal’s decision the ‘
Prescription Drug Misuse Module’
conducted as an ‘on-line’ course, by the
Royal Australasian
College of Physicians
Australasian Chapter of Addiction
; or should such course become no longer available, then to complete
such other course with similar learning objectives, to be selected
Council having regard for the Tribunal’s Findings and Reasons for
Decision. The Respondent is to provide the Council
with evidence of the
completion of such course within thirty (30) days of the Respondent’s
receipt of such evidence; and for
the period of five (5) years following the
date of the Tribunal’s decision, the Respondent is to maintain his
membership of
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia
; and the Respondent
is ordered to pay the Complainant’s costs as agreed between the parties,
but if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may have the matter relisted
for assessment by the Tribunal.
For the Tribunal,
-----------------------------------------------
Peter Dwyer,
Chairperson.
20 November 2012.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (303 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter