URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/1797.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Trustee for Double Space Greta Unit Trust v Cessnock City Council [2025] NSWLEC 1797 (12 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
The Trustee for Double Space Greta Unit Trust v Cessnock City Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 1797
Hearing Date(s):
Conciliation conference on 31 October 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
The Court orders that:
(1) The Applicant is granted leave to rely upon
the amended plans and documents referred to in Annexure A.
(2) Pursuant to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Applicant is to pay the costs of the Respondent that have been thrown away as a
result of the amendment of the application
for development consent in accordance
with the plans in Annexure B, in the amount of $20,000 within 28 days of these
(3) The appeal is upheld.
(4) Development Application DA
8/2023/304/1 is approved subject to the conditions in Annexure B.
Catchwords:
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION: Tourist & Visitor Accommodation in RU2 Rural
Landscape zone - Restaurant and Function Centre –
conciliation conference
– agreement between parties - orders
Legislation Cited:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
Subsidence Compensation Act 2017
Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016
Rural Fires Act 1997
Water Management
Act (NSW) 2000, s 92
Biodiversity Conservation Regulation 2017
Cessnock Local Environmental Plan 2011, cll 1.8A, 5.21, 7.1, 7.6, 7.14,
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
State Environmental Planning Policy (Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazard)
Principal judgment
The Trustee for Double Space Greta unit Trust (Applicant)
Cessnock City
Council (Respondent)
Representation:
R Wilcher (Solicitor) (Applicant)
S Miller (Solicitor)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Keypoint Law (Applicant)
Sparke Helmore
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/186701
Publication Restriction:
COMMISSIONER
This Class 1 appeal is brought under
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) following the refusal by Cessnock City Council of
development application DA 8/2023/304/1 seeking development consent for Tourist
and Visitor Accommodation (22 units providing 26 beds; and 6 glamping tents
providing 6 beds), Restaurant and Function Centre (100
seat capacity), Wellness
Centre, ancillary amenities building, guest reception building, and associated
infrastructure on land known
as Lot 2 Deposited Plan 874323, 356 Tuckers Lane,
Greta (the DA).
DA was lodged by the Applicant in these proceedings, Trustee for Double Space
Greta Unit Trust (Double Space) and was publicly
notified by the Council for a
period of 28 days from 14 June 2023 to 12 July 2023.
DA was refused on 24 December 2024, in response to which Double Space filed an
appeal with the Court on 15 May 2025.
31 October 2025, the Court arranged a conciliation conference between the
parties in accordance with
Land and Environment
Court Act 1979
(NSW) (LEC Act), at which I presided.
the conciliation conference, the parties reached agreement
on the matters in contention, and a signed agreement was filed with
the Court on 28 October 2025, in accordance with s 34(10) of the LEC Act.
parties ask me to uphold the appeal and grant conditional development consent to
the development application according to terms
set out in the s 34 agreement
before the Court. In general terms, the agreement approves the development
subject to amended plans
that were prepared by Double Space, and noting that the
final detail of the works and plans are specified in the agreed conditions
development consent annexed to the s 34 agreement.
s 34(3) of the LEC Act, I must dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the
parties’ decision if the parties’
decision is a decision
that the Court could have made in the proper exercise of its functions. The
parties’ decision involves
the Court exercising the function under s
4.16 of the EPA Act to grant consent to the development application. There
are jurisdictional
prerequisites that must be satisfied before this function can
be exercised.
the reasons set out below, I am satisfied that the parties’ decision
is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its
development application is supported by the written consent of the owner.
proposed development is identified as integrated development under s 4.46
of the EPA Act by virtue of invoking the following:
Coal Mine Subsidence Compensation Act 2017
, for which a Subsidence
Advisory was received dated 28 June 2023.
Rural Fires Act 1997
(NSW), in respect of which a Bushfire Safety
Authority has been issued in accordance with
by virtue of the site being
designated Bushfire Prone by the relevant map at
of the EPA act
Water Management Act 2000
(NSW), for which a controlled activity
approval has been issued in accordance with
Terms of Approval in respect of those matters above are incorporated into the
agreed conditions of consent.
State Environmental Planning Policy
(Resilience and Hazards) 2021
have considered whether the land is contaminated in accordance with
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazard) 2021. On the basis
of the Contamination Report prepared by Douglas
Partners dated 26 April 2024,
and the agreed conditions of consent, I accept that the site is generally
suitable for the proposed
development, subject to the remediation of localised
areas within the existing and former chicken shed, identified in the
Contamination
Report, and in respect of which Condition 24 is imposed to ensure
remediation of the site occurs prior to its proposed use.
Environmental Planning Policy (Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021
the site is designated by the Cessnock Local Environmental Plan 2011 (CLEP) to
be zoned RU2 Rural Landscape, Ch 3 of State Environmental
Planning Policy
(Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021 (Biodiversity SEPP) applies to the site.
note Council has considered whether the site is potential or core koala habitat
in accordance with
of the Biodiversity SEPP, and resolved that
notwithstanding around 5% of the trees on the site are listed as koala feed
Biodiversity Development Assessment Report prepared by MJD
Environmental dated 18 March 2024 (the BDAR), in accordance with
Biodiversity Conservation Act
(NSW) (BC Act), records that
there are no sign of koalas on the site and neither are there historical records
of the same. The Habitat
Assessment at Annexure E of the BDAR states that the
closest record of a Koala is over 5km from the site.
this basis, and assisted as I am by the BDAR, I am satisfied that whether or not
the site is potential koala habitat, in terms
Biodiversity SEPP, such a designation does not of itself preclude the grant of
consent but requires satisfaction under
as to whether it is core koala
habitat. I am satisfied that the site is not core koala
Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016 (BC Act)
site is mapped on the NSW Biodiversity Values Map (BVM), with up to 0.59ha of
native vegetation proposed to be impacted by the
proposed development.
Accordingly, Double Space relies on the Biodiversity Offset Scheme. Given the
scope of potential impact is
less than 3ha of native vegetation, a streamlined
assessment Biodiversity Development Assessment method was adopted.
DA relies on the BDAR cited at [
] to record assessments of threatened species,
including the Endangered Ecological Community: Central Hunter Ironbark –
Gum Forest (PCT 3315).
Additionally,
the western extent of Tuckers Lane has multiple records of
pauciflora,
a threatened species at risk of “serious and irreversible
impact” that qualifies under cl 6.7(2) of the
Biodiversity Conservation
Regulation 2017
because of its small population size, and due to its limited
geographic range.
BDAR details how Double Space has mitigated to avoid and minimise impacts to
biodiversity values, including amendment of the proposal
to remove the need to
upgrade Tuckers Road and accordingly, avoidance of those potential impacts to
the critically endangered
Persoonia pauciflora
proposed development has been designed and sited to avoid impacts to areas of
higher biodiversity value within the Site by siting
the development within areas
of cleared and managed land.
accordance with s 7.13(2) of the BC Act, I am required to take into
consideration the likely impact of the proposed development
on biodiversity
values as assessed in the BDAR.
parties are satisfied, as am I, that the BDAR outlines the likely impact of the
proposed development in the Amended DA, and that
the proposed design includes
measures to avoid and minimise impacts on the relevant Endangered Ecological
Community. The BDAR also
identifies the retirement of 8 biodiversity offset
credits, and a requirements for the same is set out in the agreed conditions of
consent, at Condition 35.
Cessnock Local Environmental Plan 2011
stated at [
site is located within an area designated RU2 Rural Landscape, in which
development for the purposes proposed are permitted
with consent, where
consistent with the objectives for development in the zone are as
• To encourage sustainable primary industry production by
maintaining and enhancing the natural resource base.
• To maintain the rural landscape character of the land.
• To provide for a range of compatible land uses, including
extensive agriculture.
• To enable other compatible forms of development that are
associated with rural activity and require an isolated location
recreation.
• To ensure the type and intensity of development is
appropriate in relation to the rural capability and suitability of the
• To maintain and enhance the scenic character of the land.
• To ensure development does not create unreasonable or
uneconomic demands for the provision or extension of services or infrastructure
by public authorities.
• To minimise disturbance to the landscape from development
caused by vegetation clearing, earthworks, access roads and construction
• To ensure development does not intrude into the skyline when
viewed from a road or other public place.
is relevant to note at the time the DA was lodged, the uses nominated within the
Land Use table such as Tourist and Visitor Accommodation;
restaurant or
café; Function centre and camping ground were permissible with consent.
While a subsequent amendment to the
Cessnock Local Environment Plan 2011
prohibited certain uses proposed, cl 1.8A of the CLEP saves the development
application from
such a prohibition.
site is, in part, flood affected by the 1% Annual Exceedance Probability and
Probable Maximum Flood flood. A Concept Stormwater
Management Plan prepared
Northrop dated 10 March 2023 concludes the proposed development does not result
in significant redistribution
of flow around the site, or significant changes in
peak flood level either within or outside the site.
parties agree that the Civil Engineering plans prepared by Northrop demonstrate
sufficient onsite detention to avoid an increase
in peak flows; and that there
is not expected to be a risk to the proposed development from local flooding due
to the height of floor
levels of at least 1m above flood planning levels.
Accordingly, I am satisfied pursuant to cl 5.21(2) of the CLEP that the proposal
is compatible with the flood function and behaviour on the land, will not
adversely affect the flood affection of other development
or properties, and
will not result in any avoidable erosion, siltation or reduction in the
stability of the watercourse on the site.
In a flood event, safe access is
available from the site along Tuckers Lane towards Mansfield Street.
Contamination Report cited at [
] states that the site is not within an area known to
have any occurrence of acid sulfate soils: cl 7.1 of the CLEP.
proposal is for Tourist and Visitor accommodation on a lot with a total area of
40.14 ha which is in excess of the minimum of
10 ha stipulated by cl 7.6 of
am satisfied that essential services of a kind described at cl 7.14 of the CLEP
will be available to the site when required by reference
(1) The Hydraulics Services Report, prepared by Henry & Hymas dated 22 March
2023, and Memo by the same author dated 5 August
2025 in respect of the supply
of potable water.
(2) The Electrical Services DA Concept Design Brief report prepared by WEBB,
dated 21 March 2023, describes the proposed consolidation
of existing powerlines
by augmenting the Ausgrid overhead cabling network via a dedicated 400kVa
Ausgrid pole-mounted transformer.
(3) A supplementary Effluent Disposal Investigation by Douglas Partners dated 5
August 2025 concludes sewage will be appropriately
disposed of when agreed
conditions of consent are considered.
(4) The Civil Engineering plans prepared by Northrop demonstrate a stormwater
detention system.
(5) The parties agree that vehicular access is acceptable and preferable via
Tuckers Lane.
the basis of the following documents, the Court is satisfied that the
development is designed, sited and will be managed to minimise
impacts of a kind
set out at cl 7.15(3) of the CLEP, in respect of groundwater
vulnerability:
(1) Preliminary Geotechnical and Effluent Disposal Assessment by Douglas
Partners dated April 2023;
(2) Contamination Report prepared by Douglas Partners dated 26 April 2024;
(3) Effluent Disposal Investigation cited at [
(4) Civil Engineering plans cited at [
the parties’ decision is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its functions, I am required
under s 34(3) of the LEC Act to
dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the parties’ decision.
making the orders to give effect to the agreement between the parties, I was not
required to, and have not, made any merit assessment
of the issues that were
originally in dispute between the parties.
Court notes that the Council, as the relevant consent authority, approves under
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
amending of development application DA 8/2023/304/1 by those amended plans and
other documents listed in Annexure A.
Court orders that:
(1) The Applicant is granted leave to rely upon the amended plans and documents
referred to in Annexure A.
(2) Pursuant to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(NSW), the Applicant is to pay the costs of the Respondent that have
been thrown away as a result of the amendment of the application
for development
consent in accordance with the plans in Annexure B, in the amount of $20,000
within 28 days of these orders.
(3) The appeal is upheld.
(4) Development Application DA 8/2023/304/1 is approved subject to the
conditions in Annexure B.
Commissioner of the Court
A (110 KB, pdf)
B (310 KB, pdf)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (249 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter