URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
State Wage Case 2025 (No 2) [2025] NSWIRComm 33 (31 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
State Wage Case 2025 (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 33
Hearing Date(s):
24 September 2025
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Taylor J, President
Chin J, Vice President
Paingakulam J, Deputy
Senior Commissioner Constant
Commissioner McDonald
(1) Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act
(NSW), the paid rates adjustment for 2025–26 is
(2) By 4.00pm on 21 November 2025, the parties are to
file any submissions they may wish to make as to the terms of the draft Award
Making Principles annexed to this decision.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW ─ State decision ─ Award Making
Principles ─ Whether to retain the paid rates adjustment
mechanism ─
Effect of the paid rates adjustment on bargaining ─ Whether the paid rates
adjustment should redress changes
to the value of money in past years ─
Quantum of the paid rates adjustment for 2025-26 ─ Whether the Value of
Money Principle
is redundant ─ Whether restrictive language in the Award
Making Principles remains necessary ─ Whether to amend the Work
Changes Principle ─ Whether to permit minor changes that improve or
modernise an award without having to establish the
criteria for an Arbitrated
Case ─ Whether to further simplify the Award Making Principles in a future
state wage case
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Health System Nurses’ and Midwives’ (State) Award 2023
Cases Cited:
Annual Wage Review 2025 (2025) 341 IR 1;
[2025] FWCFB 3500
Employees (Australian Music Examinations Board (NSW) Examiners, Assessors and
Chief Examiners) Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1055
Crown Employees (New South
Wales Education Standards Authority – Education Officers) Salaries and
Conditions Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1056
Crown Employees (NSW Police Force
(Nurses’)) Award 2022
[2024] NSWIRComm 20
Crown Employees (NSW Police
Force Special Constables) (Security) Award 2024
[2024] NSWIRComm 10
Employees (Police Officers - 2024) Award
[2024] NSWIRComm 24
Employers First
v NSW/ACT Independent Education Union
(2002) 115 IR 8
; [2002] NSWIRComm
Fire Brigade Employees’ Union v Industrial Relations Secretary (on
behalf of Fire and Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1063
Health Employees
Pharmacists (State) Award
(2003) 132 IR 244
[2003] NSWIRComm 453
School Certificate Marking and Related Casual Employees Rates of Pay and
Conditions Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1054
Industrial Relations Secretary v
[2025] NSWIRComm 26
Industrial Secretary & Ors v Public
Service Association and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated
Union of New
South Wales & Ors (No 2)
[2024] NSWIRComm 21
Public Health
System Nurses’ and Midwives’ (State) Award 2023
[2025] NSWIRComm
Re Crown Employees (Administrative and Clerical Officers) (State) Award
and Other Awards (No 2)
(1993) 52 IR 243
[1993] NSWIRComm 104
Employees (Public Sector – Salaries 2024) Award – Consent variation
re Psychologist rates
[2025] NSWIRComm 1045
Re Crown Employees (Teachers in
Schools and TAFE and Related Employees) Salaries and Conditions Award
[2004] NSWIRComm 114
Re Metal, Engineering & Associated
Industries Award 1998 –
[2000] AIRC 722
Operational Ambulance Officers (State) Award
(2001) 113 IR 384
[2001] NSWIRComm
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award
(2002) 115 IR 183
NSWIRComm 100
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 4)
(2003) 131 IR
[2003] NSWIRComm 442
Re Social & Community Services Employees (State)
(2001) 113 IR 119
[2001] NSWIRComm 274
Re Staff Specialists (State)
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Teachers (Non Government
Early Childhood Service Centres other than Preschools) (State) Award 2006
[2009] NSWIRComm 198
Re Transport Industry (State) Award
State Wage Case 1983
(1983) 5 IR 1
State Wage Case 2000
[2000] NSWIRComm 83
State Wage Case 2024 – Review of Minimum
Rates Awards (No 2)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1059
State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
(2024) 337 IR
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
State Wage Case 2025
[2025] NSWIRComm 22
(Non-government Preschools) (State) Award
(2001) 120 IR 3
[2001] NSWIRComm
Texts Cited:
Australia Bureau of Statistics, Consumer Price Index, Australia June
Quarter 2025
Reserve Bank of Australia, Statement on Monetary Policy, (August
Principal judgment
Industrial Relations Secretary
Local Government NSW
Health Services Union NSW
Representation:
S Meehan SC / H Pararajasingham (Industrial Relations
O Fagir (Unions NSW)
L Saunders (Health Services Union
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor's Office (NSW) (Industrial Relations
T Duffy (Senior Industrial Officer, Local
Government NSW)
C Danu-Asmara (Industrial Officer, Australian Paramedics
Association)
File Number(s):
2025/220842
Publication Restriction:
is the second State Wage Case 2025 decision. In this decision we consider
whether there should be variations to the Award Making
(the Principles), whether the paid rates adjustment mechanism provided for
in principle 6 should be retained and if so,
the quantum of the paid rates
adjustment for 2025–26.
the reasons that follow, the Commission has decided:
(1) to retain the paid rates adjustment mechanism;
(2) to set the paid rates adjustment for 2025–26 for public sector awards
(3) as a consequential change, to remove the Value of Money Principle at
principle 14 which is now redundant;
(4) to alter unnecessarily restrictive language from the criteria required to
make out a work value change in principle 10;
(5) to amend principle 9 to permit minor changes that improve or modernise
an award without having to establish the Arbitrated Case
criteria in
subprinciple 9.2;
(6) to make some further minor changes to the Principles; and
(7) otherwise, for the Principles to remain in their previous form for now,
whilst foreshadowing the likelihood of simplification
in a future State Wage
form of the Principles that we are presently minded to make is annexed to this
decision. The parties now have the opportunity
to make submissions on our
proposed text before the Principles are
Introduction
Commission is empowered to make an award by reference to the simple criteria
that it set fair and reasonable conditions of
employment.
In light of that broad
discretion it has been considered appropriate for the Commission to set
principles that both guide individual
members of the Commission dealing with
award applications at first instance, and assist parties to understand how award
applications
will be determined.
From 1983 until 2024, these principles were titled the “Wage Fixing
Principles”.
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
the Commission—with a renewed purpose unrestricted by the “wages
cap” imposed by s 146C of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) (the Act)—determined to make these principles in new terms and
to rename them as the “Award Making Principles”.
remaking the Principles in
State Wage Case 2024 (No
the Commission considered
how it could efficiently adjust public sector awards in line with changes to the
value of money, if appropriate,
in a manner that would limit potential
inconsistencies arising from having multiple award applications separately
decided on that
same basis. The method proposed by the Commission was for it to
determine in each year’s State Wage Case a paid rates award
adjustment for
public sector awards having regard to, among other things, the Annual Wage
Review of the Fair Work Commission, changes
in the value of money since the last
State Wage Case, and each mandatory consideration in the
this method, following the Commission’s determination of a paid rates
adjustment, an expeditious application could be made
to vary public sector
awards outside their nominal term, if they have not had an increase in rates of
pay in the last 12 months and
on the provision of a no extra claims undertaking
by the union party.
mechanism to implement this proposal was included in subprinciples 6.3 to
6.6, but without effect until the issue was considered
during State Wage Case
This was because it had not
been the subject of careful consideration and submissions by the parties to
State Wage Case 2024.
Commission noted that the parties could make further submissions as to whether
the mechanism in subprinciples 6.3 to 6.6 should
in fact be implemented
during State Wage Case 2025, and propose any consequential amendments to the
Principles arising from that
implementation.
proposed mechanism came with limitations, including that such an increase would
only be granted if the union parties gave an undertaking
that would create
industrial certainty for the life of the award by committing not to pursue
further claims that would take effect
during the nominal term of the
Procedural background
3 June 2025, the Fair Work Commission published its decision to increase the
National Minimum Wage and all Federal modern award
minimum rates by 3.5%
effective from 1 July 2025 (the National Wage
being a National decision
for the purpose of
of the Act.
Consequently,
on 10 June 2025, the Commission acting on its own initiative issued a summons to
interested parties to show cause why
the Commission should not adopt the
National Wage Review for the purpose of minimum rates awards listed in the
summons and also to
address the following questions:
“(2) Whether the Commission should vary any of the Award Making Principles
made in the
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
(a) Whether the Commission should amend the Paid Rates Adjustment mechanism at
paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6 of the Award Making Principles;
(b) Whether clause 9, Arbitrated Case, should be amended to confirm that minor
changes that improve or modernise an award and which
do not give rise to an
increase in remuneration or involve a significant change to conditions of
employment can be made without that
change having to meet one of the criteria in
clause 9.2.
(3) Whether the Commission ought to determine a Paid Rates Adjustment for
2025-2026 and if so what it should be.”
the interested parties to whom the summons to show cause was issued, the
Industrial Relations Secretary (the Secretary), Unions
NSW, Local Government NSW
(LGNSW), the Health Services Union NSW (the HSU), and the Australian Paramedic
Association (the APA) filed
notices of appearance.
29 August 2025, in
State Wage Case
the Commission
determined the first issue identified in the summons, by adopting the National
Wage Review outcome in respect of the
minimum rates awards and varying each
award accordingly. Concurrently, the determination of the second and third
issues identified
in the summons was timetabled for the filing of evidence,
submissions, and a hearing.
Secretary, Unions NSW, LGNSW, and the HSU filed written submissions. The APA did
not file written submissions. The APA appeared
at the hearing of this matter but
did not seek to make oral submissions.
support of its submissions, the Secretary relied upon the following
(1) the affidavit of Elizabeth Anne Livingstone, Deputy Secretary for the Policy
and Budget Group of NSW Treasury, sworn on 26 August
2025, which exhibited a
fiscal report prepared by Ms Livingstone for this proceeding; and
(2) the statement of Jo Prados-Valerio, Director of Bargaining and Legal
Strategy in the Premier’s Department, signed on 26
August 2025.
matters arose from the evidence filed. First, no evidence was filed in respect
of changes to the value of money since the last
State Wage Case, notwithstanding
that the Principles state that this is a relevant consideration to setting a
paid rates adjustment.
Ms Livingstone, on instructions, provided evidence as to the budget consequences
of any paid rates adjustment to a list of
12 awards, stated to be the only
awards for which a paid rates adjustment could be obtained in 2025–26. By
the time of the
hearing, however, it was apparent that a paid rates adjustment
could not be obtained in respect of several of the 12 awards due to
their status
in proceedings before the Commission, including the Public Health System
Nurses’ and Midwives’ (State) Award
address these matters, prior to the hearing, the Commission provided to the
(1) extracts from the Reserve Bank of Australia’s August 2025 Statement on
Monetary Policy and the Australia Bureau of Statistics’
Consumer Price
Index (CPI) data from the June 2025 Quarter which, at the commencement of the
hearing, the parties confirmed the Commission
should have regard to in making
its decision, and which were made exhibits; and
(2) a table setting out the status of the 12 awards referred to in Ms
Livingstone’s fiscal report which, at the commencement
of the hearing, the
parties confirmed was accurate, subject to some qualifications which we set out
below when dealing with Ms Livingstone’s
Overview of the parties’ key submissions
The Secretary
Secretary advanced three positions.
first was that there should be no paid rates adjustment mechanism in the
Principles (in other words, the mechanism proposed in
2024 should be removed).
The Secretary contended that the mechanism would:
(1) detract from the Government’s policy preference for mutual gains
bargaining by allowing a union to deploy the paid rates
adjustment as a
“strategic floor” when bargaining for wage increases, undermining
the efficacy of bargaining generally;
(2) waste resources in the bargaining process by permitting a union to continue
to bargain following a State Wage Case, then at a
late stage apply to vary an
award to take up the paid rates adjustment;
(3) not operate harmoniously with other statutory mechanisms for the making and
variation of awards;
(4) if it becomes the orthodox means by which paid rates awards are varied,
result in awards with 12-month nominal term extensions,
contrary to the
Government’s preference for the industrial certainty provided by, and the
benefits to the Government’s
fiscal and budgetary position of, multi-year
nominal terms;
(5) undermine the perceived benefit of avoiding the inefficiency of the
Commission considering afresh all relevant evidence every
time an application is
made to increase wages due to cost of living changes because a union is free to
choose if and when it applies
for a paid rates adjustment to a specific award,
and may pursue claims based on changes to the value of money without recourse to
this mechanism; and
(6) not avoid the potential for inconsistencies because unions are at liberty to
decide whether to apply for a variation of a paid
rates award to give effect to
a paid rates adjustment.
second position was that if there is to be a paid rates adjustment mechanism it
should be amended:
(1) to make clear that the no extra claims undertaking required by
subprinciple 6.6(5) to be given by a union includes all claims
Principles except for claims under the Gender Based Undervaluation Principle
during the nominal term;
(2) to remove the Value of Money Principle to avoid the situation whereby a
union can elect to pursue either
the paid rates adjustment or,
it is not satisfied with the paid rates adjustment, an adjustment pursuant to
the Value of Money Principle in separate proceedings
involving substantially
similar evidentiary issues; and
(3) to include two further mandatory considerations, namely the “likely
effect of the award variation on the prospects of successful
bargaining”
and “the views of the bargaining parties”.
Secretary’s third position was that if there is to be a paid rates
adjustment, the paid rates adjustment should be no more
(1) the General Government Sector Budget forecasts for 2025–26 are based
upon a 3% pay increase (plus superannuation) for paid
rates awards outside their
nominal term;
(2) the 2025–26 NSW Budget projects ongoing annual cash deficits in the
General Government sector, such that an increase in
expenses will require
further borrowings, increasing the State’s debt and interest burdens;
(3) an adjustment which exceeds the position in the NSW Government’s Fair
Pay and Bargaining Policy 2024-25 could adversely
impact the NSW
Government’s ability to manage the State’s fiscal position and
outlook over the medium term;
(4) the State faces significant fiscal risks that could materialise over the
next four years, and any marked increase to planned
spending may hinder its
ability to duly respond to these risks;
(5) an unexpected adjustment to employee expenses for 2025–26, and
consequential increasing debt levels, will likely have adverse
implications on
the State’s credit rating which is precariously poised;
(6) an increase to allowances in any given year results in higher base salaries
in subsequent years, and therefore has an ongoing
annual financial impact, such
that an additional 1% increase in 2025–26 (over and above the 3% budgeted)
is estimated to cost
an additional $523.5 million in 2025–26, and an
additional $2.2 billion over the four years to 2028–29; and
(7) the change in the value of money since State Wage Case 2024 is considerably
noted above, the Secretary relied on an expert report prepared by Ms Livingstone
for this proceeding. Ms Livingstone’s report
can be summarised as
(1) The fiscal position of the NSW Government is challenging, with its operating
position under pressure. The Government projects
a net operating deficit of $3.4
billion in 2025–26, and $1.1 billion in 2026–27, returning to a
surplus of $1.1 billion
in 2027–28 and 2028–29. Ms Livingstone
opines that, notwithstanding the surpluses projected for 2027–28 and
the fiscal position remains subject to multiple risks and
pressures, and any additional expenses are likely to put pressure on the
Government’s return to surplus.
(2) The Government’s debt position is projected to worsen, with gross debt
projected to continue increasing over the four years
to 2028–29 as the
Government continues to borrow to fund a portion of its infrastructure
(3) A 3% increase for paid rates awards outside their nominal term has already
been budgeted. Accordingly, a 3% increase would not
Government’s fiscal outlook. However, an increase above 3%, applied to 12
awards Ms Livingstone was instructed could
be affected by the paid rates
adjustment, would have the following effect on the Government’s fiscal
outlook by increasing
gross debt over the four-year period until 2028-29:
(a) $277.6 million for a 3.5% increase (0.5% above budget);
(b) $561.1 million for a 4% increase (1% above budget); and
(c) $838.7 million for a 4.5% increase (1.5% above budget).
noted above, in reaching these conclusions, Ms Livingstone relies upon a list of
12 awards said to be eligible for a paid rates
adjustment. At the commencement
of the hearing, counsel appearing for the Secretary informed the Commission
(1) an in principle agreement had been reached in respect of the interim
increases for two of these awards applying to the industry
of nursing and
(2) nurses and midwives constitute a “very significant cohort” of
public sector workers; and
(3) accordingly, the Commission would have to be cautious in its evaluation of
the budget consequences reported by Ms Livingstone,
as these consequences would
be significantly less given this cohort of workers would not be eligible for a
paid rates adjustment.
for the Secretary also informed the Commission of further awards upon which Ms
Livingstone relies that would not be eligible
for a paid rates adjustment, but
was unable to quantify the impact of these matters on Ms Livingstone’s
conclusions. Ultimately,
it is not necessary to set these matters out in full
because we have determined to set a paid rates adjustment of 3%, noting Ms
Livingstone’s
opinion that such a rate would not impact the
Government’s fiscal outlook, even if all the awards that she was asked to
obtained a paid rates adjustment.
submitted that there is no reason to amend subprinciples 6.3 to 6.6 insofar
as local government is excluded from their application.
its submissions in chief, it submitted that there is no need to amend
principle 9 to permit a minor change to an award without
meeting the
criteria within subprinciple 9.2 because the Commission can already make a minor
change provided it is by consent, and
that the absence of consent signals that a
change is not genuinely minor. In reply, and at the hearing, LGNSW confirmed
that it did
not in principle oppose the amendment of principle 9, but wished to
be heard on the drafting of the amendment.
did not seek to make submissions in relation to whether the Commission ought to
determine a paid rates adjustment or its quantum
because any adjustment would
not affect the local government sector.
NSW submitted that subprinciples 6.3 to 6.6 should be retained in their
current form for the reasons set out in
State Wage Case 2024 (No
In doing so, Unions NSW
noted that there is a real question as to whether a no extra claims undertaking
should be given at all, or
in circumstances in which a wage increase does no
more than maintain the real value of wages. However, Unions NSW has decided to
take the pragmatic approach of not opposing the requirement to give a no extra
claims undertaking, with the intention of interrogating
the merits of such an
undertaking at a future State Wage Case.
contended that the paid rates adjustment for 2025-2026 should be set at 5%,
including a 1.5% increase “above the increase
that would otherwise have
been awarded”, as a first step to remedying the erosion of the real value
of award wages in recent
years, and to restore awards to a level that ensures
that their real value has been preserved over the medium to long term. This
figure was reached by Unions NSW by reference to the 2% increase awarded by the
Commission as a one-off resetting of rates in
Fire Brigade Employees’
Union v Industrial Relations Secretary (on behalf of Fire and Rescue NSW)
Firefighters’ Awards Case
that result was particular to that cohort of employees. Unions NSW contended
that this increase is justified because:
(1) the real value of wages has diminished and requires urgent correction;
(2) wage rates are significantly lower than the level at which they would have
been fixed but for the constraints of the “wages
cap” over the past
(3) the proposed increase is appropriately conservative;
(4) the state of the economy is sound; and
(5) fair and reasonable conditions of employment require that wages not decrease
in real terms.
Unions NSW submitted that principle 9 should be amended in the manner proposed
in the Commission’s summons.
HSU advanced four positions.
it contended that principles 9 to 14 ought to be abolished and replaced by a
simplified “Principle 9 – Other increases
to remuneration”
appended to its submissions. The HSU contended that the historically driven
hyper-prescriptiveness of these
principles tends, in the contemporary era, to
drive an artificial focus on pleading-like points rather than the genuine
articulation
of and engagement with the particular case being run by employees.
and alternatively, it was contended that the Principles should be amended so
(1) the no extra claims undertaking in subprinciple 6.6(5) allows parties to
pursue any claim, other than one based on changes to
the value of money. The HSU
contended that the current exception in the undertaking for claims based on
gender undervaluation is
too limited because gender is not the only basis upon
which wage rates can and have been undervalued; and
(2) principles 9 to 14 are replaced by streamlined versions reflecting
contemporary approaches to wage fixation.
the HSU put forward a further alternative amendment to the Principles, namely
(1) modernise the historic language in principle 10—the Work Value
Change Principle—to remove artificial barriers to
change, in particular to
amend subprinciple 10.5 to address the reality of reactive work that
nevertheless forms part of the core
skill of a classification; and
(2) delete subprinciples 11.2 and 11.3 to better reflect the complexity involved
in measuring public sector productivity and in particular
the inadequacy of an
input/output analysis.
the HSU contended that the Commission should determine a paid rates adjustment
for 2025–26 in line with the adjustment
proposed by Unions
Consideration
Whether the paid rates adjustment mechanism should be retained
submissions advanced by the Secretary do not dissuade us from the position we
State Wage Case (No
We confirm our view that
the real value of award rates of pay should be maintained over time, not by way
of an automatic increase,
but rather, an efficient mechanism to increase rates
in awards which are outside their nominal term and for which no increase has
taken effect in the previous 12 months that will act as a safety net to ensure
that award rates can be readily adjusted to broadly
maintain their value in real
terms. It is desirable that the Commission determine this increase once for all
eligible public sector
paid rates awards, rather than separately for each
eligible award, given different evidence premised on different cohort sizes may
lead to different outcomes for applications otherwise made on the same
are not persuaded by the concerns raised by the Secretary. The essence of the
Secretary’s concerns is that the paid rates
adjustment mechanism would
detract from bargaining. In our view, provided the quantum of any adjustment to
rates is no higher than
necessary to achieve its purpose, the mechanism provides
an efficient and fair method to ensure awards are able to be adjusted in
with changes in the value of money, without discouraging parties from bargaining
for multi-year awards.
is not the paid rates adjustment mechanism itself that would deter parties from
bargaining for multi-year awards, but rather the
quantum of the particular paid
rates adjustment in any year. The Secretary’s submissions concerning the
impact on bargaining
have force in relation to a paid rates adjustment which is
higher than union parties could reasonably expect to obtain through bargaining.
Properly applied, the proposed paid rates adjustment mechanism will avoid this
Secretary ultimately accepted that there are efficiencies that derive from
determining the increase to the rates of remuneration
for public sector workers
arising from the change in the value of money by a single global hearing rather
than a series of separate
are accordingly minded to implement a straightforward process whereby, in each
year, a Full Bench of the Commission receives evidence
of changes to the value
of money since the previous State Wage Case and the fiscal position and outlook
of Government, and then determines
a paid rates adjustment. The Commission can
then separately and expeditiously consider applications to apply the adjustment
to eligible
awards having regard to its effect on bargaining for each
acknowledge the potential, following the Full Bench setting a paid rates
adjustment amount for a particular year, for a union to
engage in negotiations
in respect of a particular award outside its nominal term, only to later decide
to apply to vary that award
to increase rates in accordance with the paid rates
adjustment, thereby wasting resources spent negotiating. Nevertheless, we do
see that as leading to a significant waste of resources as a union could do the
same without the mechanism, but less efficiently,
by engaging in bargaining and
then seeking a substantial and full arbitration to increase rates in line with a
change to the value
of money, rather than making the expeditious application
contemplated by subprinciple 6.7.
Secretary raised a concern about the potential for a union to apply for an
increase to rates in respect of a period for which
a paid rates adjustment
amount has been set, but seek a higher increase relying on subprinciple 9.2(5)
and perhaps updated inflation
data. We accept that could be done, but only by
means of a contested Arbitrated Case in which sufficient evidence is led to
the Commission to increase rates in the manner sought. The Commission
would need to be satisfied that there was something special
circumstances that justified departing from the paid rates adjustment amount.
Such an application, requiring a full contested
hearing, would take some time to
determine. That stands in contrast to the relatively straightforward application
to apply the predetermined
paid rates adjustment that would be determined
expeditiously.
have updated the text of subprinciple 6.6(5) to confirm that the effective
date of the increase determines whether an award is
eligible for a paid rates
adjustment and not, for example, the date on which the increase was determined
or published. A change to
similar effect should be made to subprinciple 9.3 to
clarify that in considering changes in the value of money, the relevant period
of change will ordinarily commence from the effective date of the last wage rate
adjustment. We use the word ‘ordinarily’
noting that in
extraordinary circumstances it may be appropriate to consider a change in the
value of money over a longer
do not agree with the Secretary that further mandatory considerations should be
inserted into subprinciple 6.6. Subprinciple 6.6
already requires the
Commission to have regard to “the status of bargaining between the parties
to the Award” and “the
likelihood of that bargaining concluding in a
timely fashion” when considering an application to apply a paid rates
to an award. The ability to obtain an increase in rates of pay in
line with changes to the value of money in many, if not most, instances
unlikely of itself to have a significant impact on the bargaining position of
the parties. However, the fact that it comes with
the necessary undertaking to
prevent further increases occurring until the end of the 12-month period means
that the Commission may
determine, in light of the matters being discussed in
the bargaining process, that the bargaining should proceed, rather than accede
to the application to vary the specific award to apply the paid rates adjustment
at that time. We reject the submission, if made,
that requiring a union to
bargain to obtain no more than an increase to reflect a change in the cost of
living inappropriately discourages
bargaining—employees should not have to
give up conditions of employment or increase their productivity and efficiency,
to maintain their existing rate of pay in real terms.
amount of the 2025-26 paid rates adjustment
a high level, the submission advanced by Unions NSW that public sector workers
have had a diminution of the real value of their
wages in recent years can be
accepted. The Commission has begun to redress this diminution. For example, in
Firefighters’ Awards Case 2025
the Commission awarded an
additional increase as a one-off reset to remedy the below-trend increases that
combined with significantly
above-trend inflation in previous years to reduce
the real value of wages.
Further, there have been consent increases obtained through bargaining in the
last 12 months that have been above 3%, which will
also address the diminution
in the real value of wages in the period between 2020 and
This issue will continue
to be addressed by parties in bargaining or by arbitration in the absence of
conciliated outcomes, as occurred
Firefighters’ Awards Case
NSW contended that the paid rates adjustment for 2025–26 should address
this issue. While acknowledging that there is
an issue to be addressed, in our
view the paid rates adjustment mechanism is not the means by which to do so. It
is intended to
be a largely uncontroversial mechanism to maintain rates going
forward. If there were to be a paid rates adjustment well above changes
such as 5%, it would serve as a significant disincentive to bargain. It would
also produce the incongruous result whereby
union parties that obtained a
bargained outcome for their awards may achieve a worse result than union parties
that did not achieve
(or even seek) a bargained outcome. It would also produce
the odd result this year that the paid rates adjustment is higher than
adjustment to minimum rates awards.
Notwithstanding
the above, Unions NSW is correct to say that the Commission’s
determination of the fair and reasonable paid
rates adjustment cannot be
determined by Government policy. That we have determined a paid rates adjustment
at 3% is not a simple
application of the amount budgeted by Government, but
rather an amount that addresses changes in the value of money over the last
a future Government policy were to seek increases to awards below the increase
in the value of money in the preceding 12-months,
it may well be necessary for
the Commission to determine a paid rates adjustment that is higher than the
Government’s bargaining
position. At that point, the Commission would have
to consider the negative impact on bargaining and the impact on the fiscal
of the Government. Notwithstanding those matters, it may be
appropriate for the Commission to determine a paid rates adjustment
higher than
Government policy to ensure that rates of pay remain fair and reasonable.
is not the position presently confronting us. The position which emerges from
the evidence before us is that in the period between
June 2024 and June
(1) the CPI for Sydney increased by
(2) the CPI for Australia increased by
(3) the Trimmed Mean Inflation for Australia measured at
are content to set the paid rates adjustment for 2025–26 at 3%, being a
figure above each of those indices. We consider that
3% is appropriate, even
though it is slightly higher than the change in the cost of living, given
(1) if a rate is to be set, the Secretary does not urge a lower rate;
(2) it should have no fiscal impact as the budget assumes such an increase for
all public sector workers;
(3) it is not at a level which might be expected to impede bargaining;
(4) it reflects consent positions reached by the parties for interim variations
to awards in recent times;
(5) the diminution in the real value of award rates in 2020–24 is such
that it is not inappropriate to have a slightly higher
than CPI increase.
coming to the appropriate figure for this paid rates adjustment, we are
concerned to ensure a clear and efficient method by which
the paid rates
adjustment may be determined in the future. By that, we mean that while proper
consideration must be given to all
of the mandatory criteria, including the
fiscal impact of any decision, the starting point for the Commission’s
decision should
be to identify changes in the value of money in the 12-month
period ending in June in the year of the State Wage Case.
the Value of Money Principle should be removed
agree, in principle, with the HSU’s submission that in any Arbitrated Case
that relies on a range of the criteria in subprinciple
9.2, a union should
also be permitted to rely on changes in the value of money. This position is
maintained by retaining in subprinciple
9.2(5) the capacity for an Arbitrated
Case to be established based on a change in the value of money. We note,
however, that we would
ordinarily expect that criterion to be relied upon in
conjunction with other criteria. For the reasons explained above at [47], an
applicant would need to point to some special circumstances to satisfy the
Commission to increase rates based on a change in the
value of money as the sole
criterion in an Arbitrated Case. That is not to say that the Commission could
not, in a case where multiple
criteria are relied upon, ultimately decide that
the only basis for an increase is a change in the value of money.
this end, we have determined to remove principle 14, and to clarify the
terms of principle 9 in respect of the value of money.
Whether the form of the undertaking required by subprinciple
6.5(5) should be amended
are not minded to amend the form of the no extra claims undertaking required by
subprinciple 6.5(5) which, as we explained in
State Wage Case 2024 (No
provides certainty and
removes any disincentive to bargain that might arise if a union could obtain the
paid rates adjustment and
continue to press for higher rates of pay.
is an exception to ensure that parties are not prevented from pursuing claims
under the Gender Based Undervaluation Principle
because of its prominence in the
objects of our Act. We do not consider that it would be appropriate to expand
the exception to include
a wider range of discrimination-based undervaluation,
as sought by the HSU.
agree with the Secretary that the undertaking ought to exclude all claims under
the Principles except for claims under the Gender
Based Undervaluation
Principle. Contrary to the submissions of the Secretary, we do not consider it
necessary to add language to
make that clearer, being satisfied that is the
current effect of subprinciple 6.6(5).
reconsidering the terms of the undertaking we did identify that arguably it
would prevent applications to update or set new allowances
to reimburse expenses
under subprinciples 7.1 and 7.3 and also applications to ensure that the award
does not contain rates below
the minimum rate set by the National Minimum Wage
Order made by the Fair Work Commission under subprinciple 8.1. There does not
to be a good reason to prevent such applications during the term of an
award, consistent with the fact that they do not give rise
to an Arbitrated
Case. We propose a minor change to the text of the undertaking to reflect that
conclusion, as set out in the draft
revised Principles published with this
Whether the Principles should be amended to provide a
broader discretion
noted above, the HSU’s primary position is that principles 9 to 14 ought
to be abolished and replaced by a simplified “Principle
increases to remuneration” which it appended to its submissions:
Principle 9 - Other increases to remuneration
9.1 Other than as allowed elsewhere in these Principles, an application for new
awards or variations to existing awards providing
for increases in remuneration,
alterations to classification structures or other improvements to conditions
will be arbitrated by
a Full Bench of the Commission unless otherwise allocated
by the President.
9.2 Such applications will be granted where an applicant demonstrates that:
(1) productivity or efficiency improvements have occurred which justify an
increase in remuneration or other changes to conditions;
(2) the current rates of pay and/or conditions undervalue the work on the basis
of gender in that they do not properly reflect the
value of the work, skill or
responsibility required;
(3) the current rates of pay and/or conditions undervalue the work on the basis
of other discriminatory grounds in that they do not
property reflect the value
of the work, skill or responsibility required;
(4) the current rates of pay and/or conditions do not provide equal remuneration
for work of equal or comparable value;
(5) there are work value reasons justifying the change, including but not
limited to identifiable changes in the nature of the work,
responsibility required or the conditions under which work is performed since
the award was last assessed on a work value
(6) changes in the value of money, which have not been addressed by the
application of the Paid Rates Adjustment, justify the change;
(7) some other special attribute or out-of-the-ordinary feature is present which
warrants approval by the Commission.
9.3 For the avoidance of doubt, while the above matters are not exhaustive, they
are intended to operate as restrictive considerations.
The Commission
ordinarily:
(1) will not entertain claims based wholly or substantially on comparative wage
justice, outside the rectification of discriminatory
undervaluation;
(2) will guard against contrived classifications and overclassification of
(3) will not address discriminatory undervaluation by reducing existing wage
rates and conditions for other employees;
(4) will have regard to existing internal and external wage relativities, at
least to the extent that the awards are directly related;
(5) will not countenance double-counting, although a cumulation of factors may
be relied on.
is much force in the HSU’s submissions that the restrictive tests in the
Principles, in particular concerning the Work
Value Principle, were developed
during a time of stagflation when it was considered necessary to impose a degree
of restriction on
subordinate tribunal members to prevent them from making
unprincipled increases to rates of pay for reasons other than indexation,
otherwise endanger the centralised system of wage fixing. That context no longer
features in the industrial relations landscape
of New South Wales. In addition,
the HSU contended that these tests imposed a high level of restriction on the
Commission’s
discretion in circumstances, which no longer pertain, where
wages were automatically indexed in a manner not contemplated by the
adjustment mechanism.
restrictive tests were designed to constrain the discretion of individual
members of the Commission in circumstances where claims
to vary an award,
including claims to increase wages on the basis of work value changes, were
arbitrated by a single member of the
Commission.
At that time, only
special cases were required to proceed before “a Full Bench of the
Commission, unless otherwise allocated
President”.
The Principles
now require all arbitrated cases, including claims to increase wages on the
basis of work value changes, to proceed
before a Full Bench of the Commission,
unless otherwise allocated by the
“strict” tests were not developed to restrict the discretion of a
Full Bench of the Commission. The Full Bench’s
discretion was effectively
set by the Special Case Principle which permitted it to allow a claim if it was
justified on the merits,
despite the claim not otherwise falling within a
Re Social & Community Services Employees (State) Award
Community Services
Bench referred to
Re Crown Employees (Administrative and Clerical Officers)
(State) Award and Other Awards (No
in which the Commission
“the special cases section of the principles provides a mechanism whereby
a claim for enhanced wages or conditions beyond those
normally allowed under the
principles may be brought before the Commission. The hearing of such a claim is
to be conducted by the
Full Commission (formerly the Commission in Court
Session) thus emphasising the special nature of the case. It will be a matter
the Full Commission, after hearing the evidence and submissions,
particularly relating to the matters relied on to take the case
the ordinary’ and thus to make it ‘special’, to decide whether
the claim, in part or in whole, should
succeed. ... That, of course, is not the
end of the matter. The Full Commission must decide whether, on the whole of the
before it, and bearing well in mind the respondents' opposition, the
claim should in whole or in part succeed, and, if so, what increase
awarded and what conditions, if any, should be prescribed. But we repeat our
view that, in accordance with the principles,
it is entirely appropriate
for this claim to be heard and for the Commission
to grant the claim in whole
or in part if considered justified on the merits
.” (Emphasis added.)
Community Services Employees
, the Full Bench noted what had been
observed by a Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission as to
what constituted
a special case in
Metal, Engineering &
Associated Industries Award 1998 – Part
“In our view, ‘special case’, as used in Principle 10, is not
a self-defining term. The identification of a special
case is reserved to a Full
Bench level of determination. It is not necessary or desirable to attempt to
paraphrase that requirement
to a set of principles, or a code of considerations
for general application. A case by case approach is necessary. The circumstances
of the Award and the industry in which it operates are of fundamental importance
in determining whether the requirement is satisfied.
In this matter, the special
case requirement entails that the AMWU has the task of satisfying the Commission
that there are sufficiently compelling reasons
for awarding, as minimum
rate conditions to apply across the industries covered by the Award, the
substantive changes that it seeks.”
(Emphasis added.)
Community Services Employees
, the Full Bench at [23] referred to
Transport Industry (State)
the Commission held that:
“[this] approach requires, in effect, that the Commission be satisfied
that the case is not an ordinary one, but has special
attributes which warrant
its approval despite the restrictive considerations imposed generally by the
principles of wage fixation.”
approach in
Community Services
was confirmed in
Re Public Hospital
Nurses (State) Award
the Commission emphasised the need to:
establish an adequate evidentiary foundation
for those factors
which are relied upon as showing the special attributes of the case.”
(Emphasis added.)
Full Bench in
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State)
went on to note that
other principles “may have relevance” to the exercise in which it
was engaged, but did not need
to be met in order for the case to succeed.
other words, properly understood, the previous Wage Fixing Principles, now
replicated in the Principles, imposed strict tests on
single members, but did
not restrict a Full Bench once satisfied there were “special
circumstances” and the claim was
otherwise “justified on the
merits”. That is consistent with the genesis of the Principles, which were
developed, and
indeed tightened, by full benches of the federal tribunal
concerned to restrict wage increases determined by single members that
properly justified.
is worth noting at this point that the broad discretion exercised under the
Special Case Principle has been recognised as able
to be exercised by a single
member of the Commission, if so allocated by the President of the Commission.
This was previously permitted
by the Special Case Principle (as it was then
drafted). For example, in
Employers First v NSW/ACT Independent Education
the Full Bench refused
leave to appeal a decision of Schmidt J sitting alone, holding that it was open
to Her Honour to make an award
under the Special Case Principle, and that there
was no requirement to make the award by reference to Wage Fixing Principles
than the Special Case Principle. The text permitting the allocation of
special cases to single members is now picked up in subprinciple
9.1, applying
to all arbitrated cases.
have been cases where the Commission in determining a special case has found
that the strict test of the Work Value Principle
established.
characteristic of those cases is consideration of wide-ranging changes that
established a “significant net addition”
to the work requirements
but without a careful examination as to whether the changes were sufficient to
warrant the creation of a
new classification. The Full Bench decisions
determining these special cases seemed to find it sufficient that there was a
significant
net addition to work requirements to warrant an increase.
to the Principles being amended in 2010 the Commission from time to time
increased rates of pay to reflect changes in the value
of the work, relying on
the Special Case Principle, rather than the Work Value
The prohibition on
considering work value change as a special case was removed last year. In the
Firefighters’ Awards Case 2025
the Commission considered that road
crash rescue work performed by firefighters had evolved and required new skills,
but that it
did not meet the strict test of the Work Value
Notwithstanding this,
by reference to the circumstances surrounding this evolution, the Commission
held that a special case had been
summary, noting the Principles require arbitrated cases to come before a Full
Bench unless otherwise allocated by the President,
most cases under the current
Principles will be determined by the exercise of a broad discretion, regardless
of the so-called restrictive
principles. Provided that increases in the workload
of the Commission are matched by increases in members of the Commission, it can
be expected that this approach will not change. Further, unlike the position
when the Wage Fixing Principles were being developed,
there is no real risk that
individual members sitting at first instance would increase rates without an
adequate basis, and in any
event such a decision could be the subject of an
those circumstances a real question arises as to whether the Principles ought to
be replaced with simpler principles that remove
the historical, highly
restrictive and somewhat antiquated language and instead provide guidance, in a
manner akin to the proposal
in Appendix A to the HSU’s submissions.
are not minded to do so this year. No party other than the HSU contended for the
change. While the Secretary was on notice of the
HSU’s case, no other
party gave it the level of consideration necessary to assist us to come to a
firm conclusion about whether
to make such a substantial change, nor if we were
to do so, what ought to be the content of such a revised approach. However, we
wish to indicate that this is a matter to which the Commission is likely to
return in a future State Wage Case.
we consider that it is sufficient to address the particularly restrictive
language of the Work Value Principle and to expand
its text. We consider it
would be appropriate to amend the Work Value Principle to broaden the
Commission’s discretion in a
manner that, in practical terms, reflects the
approach that the Commission has taken to determining work value cases, albeit
context of determining a special case. In doing so, we do not think the
change will have a practical effect on the Commission’s
determination of
work value cases.
particular, we embrace the HSU’s view that we ought to amend the
“strict test” concerning whether changes in
work value will be
recognised, and expand its text to address how changes in work value ought to be
recognised for work that is not
done by all employees in a classification or not
done all the time by all employees in a classification. Specifically, we propose
to replace the requirement to establish a change sufficient to warrant the
creation of a new classification or an upgrade to a higher
classification with a
requirement to provide a sufficiently compelling reason to increase remuneration
to reflect the changed value
of the work.
also propose to include a reworked version of one aspect of the HSU’s
proposal that assists to guide how change ought to
be recognised for work that
is not done by all employees in a classification or not done all the time by all
employees in a classification.
Our proposed changes are set out in the draft
Principles annexed, in the form of a new subprinciple 10.5. It commences by
that where the change in the nature of the work, skill and
responsibility is one that applies to all employees in a classification
to be reflected in the rate of pay for the classification, and goes on to
address three circumstances where the change is
to be reflected in a new or
increased allowance rather than a general wage increase, being where:
(1) the nature of the change is one that gives rise to only particular employees
within a classification holding and maintaining
different skills; or
(2) employees are requested to do the changed work only from time to time; or
(3) the addition or alteration to the work is related to particular conditions
under which the work is performed.
Subprinciple
10.5 does not prevent the award of an across-the-board increase that relies on a
large number of different changes that
have affected subsets of a classification
in a manner that might justify a re-evaluation of the work value of that
classification
as a whole, as in
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No
Nursing is a prime
example, being a profession where within the single classification of Registered
Nurse there are nurses who have
obtained a wide variety of different additional
training allowing them to work with an expanded scope of practice in an area of
specialisation.
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 4)
changes that included a variety of different specialised additional skills
were addressed by whole-of-classification increases, rather
than by the making
of allowances. We also note that where an across-the-board increase has been
granted in such circumstances, great
care has to be taken, as required by
subprinciple 10.7, to not double-count changes when considering any subsequent
case seeking
an allowance for a change that affects only a subset of a
classification.
wish to emphasise that the alterations to the Principles that we intend to make,
and to the Work Value Principle in particular,
do not remove the requirement to
provide evidence that satisfies the Commission that the changes are of real
significance in order
to establish a case for changes to rates of pay; in other
words, the case must be sufficiently compelling to justify an increase
remuneration to reflect the changed value of the work. Claimants for an increase
in work value should not labour under the misapprehension
that our intended
amendment of the Work Value Principle would permit an increase for any minor
change in work value. Something more
than a continuum of previously recognised
change or some minor change or updating of training or duties would be
necessary. In that
regard we are not overturning any long-standing
Whether Principle 9 should be amended to permit minor
any large arbitration there may be changes that parties seek to an award which
are of a minor nature, and which do not affect rates
of pay. The Commission may
consider there to be a proper basis to allow the change to ensure that award
conditions are fair and reasonable,
even though the change does not meet an
existing Arbitrated Case criterion (or even the Special Case Principle).
was most recently apparent in
the Firefighters’ Awards Case 2025
where the parties sought a variety of changes without reference to an Arbitrated
Case criterion, including changes to clauses requiring
a particular form of
consultation.
respect of this issue:
(1) Unions NSW and the HSU submitted that the amendment should be made;
(2) LGNSW initially opposed the amendment in its written submissions in chief,
but changed its position in its written submissions
in reply, to not opposing
the amendment but wishing to be heard on the specific drafting of the amendment;
(3) the Secretary made no submissions in chief on this issue. In his written
submissions in reply he embraced the position taken
by Local GNSW, which LGNSW
ultimately changed in reply. During the hearing, we asked counsel appearing for
the Secretary to confirm
this position given the Secretary himself had benefited
from minor changes for which he applied in
Fire and Rescue
. In response,
counsel indicated that he had no instructions beyond what was put in writing.
consider it appropriate that the Principles contain a clear statement that the
Commission, when otherwise considering an award
in arbitration, is not prevented
from making minor changes that it is satisfied are appropriate to ensure the
award remains fair
and reasonable without having to be satisfied that one of the
Arbitrated Case criteria has been met in respect of that minor change.
Accordingly,
we propose to amend principle 9 to confirm that minor changes that improve
or modernise an award and which do not give
rise to an increase in remuneration
or involve a significant change to conditions of employment can be made. We
provide a draft amendment
for submissions, with the balance of the proposed
amendments.
Amendments to the list of minimum rates awards in
Subprinciple 6.2
the summons to show cause in this proceeding was issued, the Commission handed
down its decision in
State Wage Case 2024 – Review of Minimum Rates
Awards (No 2)
to implement
various recommendations made by Commissioner McDonald, on report to the Full
Bench, to rescind obsolete minimum rates
awards, and to amend existing minimum
rates awards to ensure each set fair and reasonable remuneration and
conditions.
consequence of that decision is that the list of minimum rates awards in
subprinciple 6.2, to be dealt with in each State Wage
Case, has changed.
Accordingly, we have amended subprinciple 6.2 to reflect the current list
of minimum rates awards.
Minimum wage for employees not governed
by an industrial instrument
State Wage Case 2024, we decided to remove (then) principle 7 concerning the
minimum wage for employees within the Commission’s
employment was not governed by an industrial instrument, and instead publish at
the end of the Principles a separate
form of order to be made each time the
Principles are published.
accordance with that practice, the text of this order remains at the end of the
draft Principles annexed to this decision, with
the expectation that it will be
made each time the Principles are published.
Applications to
apply for a paid rates adjustment
conclude by identifying our expectation for the process by which applications to
apply for a paid rates adjustment are to be made.
The application for a 3%
uplift in rates of pay needs be accompanied by an affidavit which
(1) sets out the date the rates of pay in the award were last increased;
(2) provides the necessary undertaking; and
(3) provides the status of bargaining between the parties to the award.
respondent to the application would be given the opportunity to file evidence,
and to indicate a desire to be heard on the application.
In the absence of
contested facts or a request for a hearing such applications will ordinarily be
able to be determined on the papers.
make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
paid rates adjustment for 2025–26 is 3%.
(2) By 4.00pm on 21 November 2025, the parties are to file any submissions they
may wish to make as to the terms of the draft Award
Making Principles annexed to
this decision.
ANNEXURE – THE 2025-2026 AWARD MAKING PRINCIPLES
Draft provided for submissions, with emphasis added to indicate our
amendments. Text that was inserted is underlined, and text that
was removed is
struck through.
1. Preamble
1.1 These Principles guide the exercise of discretion when making or varying
awards under
of Chapter 2 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
2. Mandatory considerations
2.1 When determining an application to make a new award or to vary an
existing award, whether by consent or otherwise, the Commission
must have regard
(1) whether the terms of the award as made or varied will set fair and
reasonable conditions of employment for employees; and
(2) the public interest, and in that respect must have regard to:
(a) the objects of the Act, including the effect of the award as made or varied
(i) the promotion of productivity and efficiency;
(ii) the promotion of participation in industrial relations by employees and
employers at an enterprise or workplace level;
(iii) the prevention and elimination of discrimination in the workplace, in
particular ensuring equal remuneration for all persons
doing work of equal or
comparable value;
(iv) the encouragement of co-operative workplace reform and equitable,
innovative and productive workplace relations; and
(v) strategies to attract and retain skilled staff where there are skill
shortages so as to ensure effective and efficient delivery
of services;
(b) the state of the economy of New South Wales and the likely effect of the
decision on that economy; and
(c) in respect of an award that will apply to public sector employees, the
fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the
likely effect of the award
as made or varied on the position and outlook.
3. When an award may be varied or another award made without the claim
requiring consideration as an Arbitrated Case
3.1 Provided it otherwise complies with the requirements of the Act, an award
may be made or varied without the application needing
to be considered as an
Arbitrated Case under Principle 9:
(1) in accordance with an express provision in an award that provides for its
(2) to incorporate test case standards, in accordance with Principle 5;
(3) to adjust wages consistent with a State Wage Case decision, in accordance
with Principle 6;
(4) to adjust allowances and service increments, in accordance with Principle
(5) to adjust wages to ensure that they are not below the National Minimum
Wage Order as made by the Fair Work Commission, in accordance
with Principle 8;
(6) where the application is consented to by the parties.
4. No extra claims commitments
4.1 A consent application to make or vary an award may involve parties giving
a no extra claims commitment in agreed terms. Such a
commitment may take the
form of an undertaking to the Commission not to pursue claims for extra or
reduced terms and conditions that
would take effect during the nominal term of
the award, with or without identified exceptions.
4.2 Absent extraordinary circumstances, the Commission will not vary or make
an award that is inconsistent with a no extra claims
commitment unless otherwise
expressly permitted by the award or by consent of the parties.
4.3 The Commission will not include in an award a clause that prohibits a
party making an application under the Act or participating
in proceedings under
5. Test Case Standards
5.1 There is a presumption that test case standards established and/or
revised by a Full Bench of the Commission will be incorporated
into an award on
application.
6. State Wage Case Adjustments
6.1 Following the completion of an Annual Wage Review by the Fair Work
Commission, the Commission will issue a notice to show cause
why that National
decision should not be adopted wholly or partly and with or without modification
for certain minimum rates awards
and for paid rates awards that apply to the
public sector, which will be determined at a State Wage Case hearing.
6.2 In the State Wage Case hearing the Commission will determine a
rates adjustment
for the following awards:
(1) Security Industry (State) Award (“Security
Industry Award”);
(21) Miscellaneous Workers – Kindergartens and Child
Care Centres, &c. (State) Award;
(32) Health, Fitness and Indoor Sports Centres (State)
(43) Transport Industry (State) Award;
(5) Clerical and Administrative Employees (State) Award;
(64) Local Government (Electricians) (State) Award;
(75) Entertainment and Broadcasting Industry – Live
Theatre and Concert (State) Award;
(86) Local Government Aged Disability and Home Care (State)
(97) Nurses’ (Local Government) Residential Aged Care
Consolidated (State) Award 2021.
and vary them to give effect to that minimum rates adjustment, provided that
each award contains the following clause:
“The rates of pay in this award include the adjustments payable under the
State Wage Case for the relevant year. These adjustments
may be offset
(i) any equivalent over award payments, and/or
(ii) award wage increases other than State Wage Case adjustments.”
6.3 In the State Wage Case hearing the Commission may determine a
rates adjustment
for paid rates awards that apply to the public sector.
Note: As provided in Principle 17, Transitional Provisions, Paragraphs 6.3 to
6.6 have no application before the 2025 State Wage
Case, which will consider
whether to make a paid rates adjustment and will also determine whether there
should be any alteration
to those paragraphs.
6.4 A paid rates adjustment will be determined having due regard to all the
circumstances including:
(1) the National Decision;
(2) its application to paid rates awards;
(3) the terms of the no extra claims undertaking required;
(4) changes in the value of money since the last State Wage Case; and
(5) the mandatory considerations in Principle 2, including the need to ensure
that awards remain fair and reasonable, the likely effect
of the decisions on
the New South Wales economy, and the fiscal position and outlook of
government.
6.5 For the avoidance of doubt, the paid rates adjustment need not be the
same as the minimum rates adjustment and need not equate
to the rate of
inflation over the previous 12 months.
6.6 Following the making of a paid rates adjustment, a public sector award
may, on application, be varied to apply that adjustment
and extend its nominal
term for 12 months from the date the adjustment takes effect, having regard
(6) the status of bargaining between the parties to the Award; and
(7) the likelihood of that bargaining concluding in a timely fashion;
but only where:
(8) the nominal term of the award has expired;
(9) the award has not had anlast increase in rates for at leastof pay took
effect more than 12 months earlier; and
(10) each union which is a party to the award gives to the Commission a no
extra claims undertaking in the following terms or in such
other terms as the
parties agree:
[Name of union] undertakes not to pursue any further claims to amend the award
in proceedings before the Industrial Relations Commission
in respect of
employees covered by the award that would take effect during its nominal term.
Provided that thisThis undertaking does
not prevent:
(i) participation in collaborative discussions to amend the award by means of
mutual gains bargaining or otherwise;
(ii) making an application to vary the award by consent;
(iii) participation in a consent arbitration;
(iv) participation in a s 19 review or other proceedings initiated by the
Commission or another party that affects the award; or
(v) pursuing and giving effect to claims under the Gender Based
Undervaluation Principle during the nominal term; or
(vi) an application pursuant to 7.1, 7.3 or 8.1 below.
6.7 Applications to apply a paid rates adjustment will be dealt with
expeditiously.
7. Adjustment of Allowances
7.1 Existing allowances which constitute a reimbursement of expenses incurred
may be adjusted from time to time where appropriate
to reflect relevant changes
in the level of such expenses.
7.2 If an order is made pursuant to Principle 6 for an adjustment to be made
to the applicable award, that adjustment will also apply
to existing allowances
which relate to work or conditions which have not changed other than in line
with whole of award salary adjustments,
including shift allowances expressed as
monetary amounts and service increments.
7.3 New allowances may be awarded to compensate for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred where appropriate.
7.4 Otherwise, applications to increase existing allowances or create new
allowances in the absence of consent will be determined
in accordance with the
Arbitrated Case Principle.
8. Minimum rate of pay
8.1 The Commission will vary an award on application or on its own motion to
increase a rate of pay in an award which is below the
minimum rate set by the
National Minimum Wage Order as made by the Fair Work Commission from time to
9. Arbitrated Case
9.1 Other than as allowed elsewhere in these Principles, an application for
increases in remuneration (including for new service increments
superannuation contributions higher than those mandated by Commonwealth
legislation) or changes in conditions in awards, will
be determined as an
Arbitrated Case and, unless otherwise allocated by the President, will be heard
by a Full Bench of the Commission.
9.2 An Arbitrated Case may be granted if it meets one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) there has been a change in work value that meets the requirements of the
Work Value Changes Principle;
(2) there has been an increase in productivity or efficiency in respect of
public sector awards that meets the requirements in the
Productivity and
Efficiency Principle;
(3) the application addresses undervaluation on a gender basis in accordance
with the Gender Based Undervaluation Principle;
(4) a special case is established in accordance with the Special Case
Principle; and
(5) there has been a change in the value of money justifying a change in
rates of pay and conditions for public sector employees that
requirements of the Value of Money Principle.
9.3 When determining an Arbitrated Case, the Commission will have regard to
changes in the value of money since wage rates were last
adjustedwhich
ordinarily will be since the effective date of the last wage rate
adjustment.
9.3A When determining an Arbitrated Case the Commission may grant a minor
claim that does not meet any of the criteria in Subprinciple
9.2 where satisfied
it is appropriate to do so. A minor claim is a claim to modernise or improve an
award in a manner that neither
alters remuneration nor significantly alters
conditions of employment.
9.4 Following determination of an Arbitrated Case the Commission will not
include a no extra claims clause in the settled award, but
may identify in the
decision the extent to which it is open to parties to the award to make further
claims that would take effect
during the life of the resultant award.
9.5 Claims that are based substantially on comparative wage justice will not
be countenanced other than to the extent contemplated
by the Gender Based
Undervaluation Principle.
9.6 There will be no double counting, provided however, that an Arbitrated
Case may rely upon a cumulation of the factors referred
to in these
Principles.
9.7 In the following Principles the expression “the conditions under
which the work is performed” relates to the environment
in which the work
10. Work Value Changes Principle
10.1 Changes in work value may arise from changes in the nature of the work,
skill and responsibility required or the conditions under
which work is
performed. Changes in work by themselves may not lead to a change in wage rates.
The strict test for an alteration
in wage rates is that the change in the nature
of the work should constitute such a significant net addition to work
requirements
as to warrant the creation of a new classification or upgrading to
a higher classification an increase in remuneration to reflect
the changed value
of the work.
10.2 In addition to meeting the test in 10.1, a party making a work value
application will need to justify any change to wage relativities
result not only within the relevant internal award structure but also against
any external classification to which that
structure is related. There must be no
likelihood of wage leapfrogging arising out of changes in relative position.
10.3 The foregoing circumstances are the only ones in which rates may be
altered on the ground of work value under this Principle
and the altered rates
may be applied only to employees whose work has changed.
10.4 In applying the Work Value Changes principle, the Commission will have
regard to the need for any alterations to wage relativities
between awards to be
based on skill, responsibility and the conditions under which work is
10.5 Where new or changed work justifying a higher rate is performed only
from time to time by persons covered by a particular classification,
or where it
is performed only by some of the persons covered by the classification, such new
or changed work should be compensated
by a special allowance which is payable
only when the new or changed work is performed by a particular employee and not
by increasing
the rate for the classification as a whole.
10.5 Changes in the nature of the work, skill and responsibility required or
the conditions under which work is performed that are
not recognised by an
existing rate of pay or allowance that meet the test in 10.1 are to be
compensated as follows:
(1) where all employees in a classification are required to hold and maintain
the relevant skills and/or qualifications to perform
particular or similar work,
and are required to perform it from time to time, this is to be reflected in the
rate of pay for the
classification;
(2) where a particular employee or employees within a classification are
required to hold and maintain particular skills and/or qualifications
the work that are in addition to those otherwise required by those employed in
that classification, and can be required
at any time to perform that work, this
is appropriately compensated by an all-purpose allowance payable to that
employee or employees
instead of by increasing the rate for the classification
as a whole;
(3) where new or changed work is work that can be requested of any employee
in a classification from time to time, but only arises
occasionally and does not
form part of the core work for that classification, this is appropriately
compensated for by an incident
allowance; and
(4) where the addition or alteration to work is related to particular
conditions under which the work is performed, and the conditions
only arise from
time to time, this is appropriately compensated for by a disability
10.6 The time from which work value changes in an award should be measured is
the date of operation of any adjustment arising from
the last work value inquiry
or the date of a consent award where the parties agreed that the wage increases
in the consent award
reflect or include increases in work value, whichever is
10.7 Care should be exercised to ensure that changes that were taken into
account in any previous work value adjustments or in a structural
exercise are not included in any work evaluation under this Principle.
10.8 Where the tests specified in 10.1 are met, an assessment will have to be
made as to how that alteration should be measured in
monetary terms. Such
assessment will normally be based on the previous work requirements, the wage
previously fixed for the work
and the nature and extent of the change in work or
the date of a consent award in which the parties have agreed that the wage
reflect increases in work value.
10.9 The Commission will guard against contrived classifications and
over-classification of jobs.
11. Productivity and Efficiency Principle
11.1 Productivity or efficiency measures that have delivered substantial cost
savings and/or productivity or efficiency improvements
or which have made a
substantial contribution towards the attainment of the objectives of the
employer (including departments and
agencies of the Crown) to achieve an
improved quality of service, and/or become more competitive and/or efficient, to
which employees
have made a significant contribution, may constitute the basis
for increases to wages and salaries or improvements in employment
conditions,
provided that the time from which such measures, savings or improvements are
measured is the later of:
(1) the date of the last adjustment awarded on account of productivity and
efficiency; or
(2) the date of a consent award in which parties have agreed that the wage
increases incorporate an adjustment made under this Principle.
11.2 Productivity or efficiency improvements in the public sector could arise
(1) delivering the same service (quality or quantity) with fewer inputs;
(2) delivering a better service (quality or quantity) with the same
(3) achieving a large reduction of inputs, with a relatively slight reduction
in service quality/quantity; and/or
(4) achieving a large improvement in service quality/quantity, with a
relatively small increase of inputs.
11.3 The following are not productivity or efficiency improvements in the
public sector:
(1) gaining a small improvement in output with a proportionate or relatively
large increase in inputs;
(2) achieving a small reduction in inputs with a proportionate or relatively
larger reduction in service quality/quantity;
(3) gaining a small improvement in quality, with no extra inputs, but with a
relatively large reduction in output;
(4) slightly boosting output, with no extra inputs, but with a relatively
large reduction in quality.
11.4 For the avoidance of doubt, it is not necessary to identify cost savings
before an increase can be awarded under this Principle.
11.5 This Principle does not apply to Local Government awards.
12. Gender Based Undervaluation Principle
12.1 Claims may be made for an alteration in wage rates or other conditions
of employment on the basis that the work, skill and responsibility
required, or
the conditions under which work is performed, have historically been, or are
presently, undervalued on the basis of
12.2 Where such a claim is established, the Commission will seek to ensure
that wage rates and conditions of employment properly reflect
the value of the
work, skill and responsibility required and/or the conditions under which the
work is performed.
12.3 Where the undervaluation is sought to be demonstrated by reference to
any comparator awards or classifications, the assessment
is not to have regard
to factors incorporated in the rates of such other awards which do not reflect
the value of work, such as labour
market attraction or retention rates or
productivity factors.
12.4 The application of any formula, which is inconsistent with proper
consideration of the value of the work performed, including
where such formulas
may themselves have been the result or product of gendered conceptions of the
value of the work the subject of
the application, is inappropriate to the
implementation of this Principle.
12.5 The assessment of wage rates and other conditions of employment under
this Principle is to have regard to the history of the
award concerned,
including any historical gendered conceptions of the value of the work the
subject of the application.
12.6 Where the requirements of this Principle have been satisfied, an
assessment will be made as to how the undervaluation should
be addressed in
money terms or by other changes in conditions of employment, such as
reclassification of the work, establishment
of new career paths or changes in
incremental scales. Such assessments will have regard to the wages and
conditions of employment
previously fixed for the work and the nature and extent
of the undervaluation established.
12.7 In applying the previous paragraph, consideration is to be given to
measures to address so far as possible, consistent with achieving
the outcome in
12.2 above, a legitimate concern that changes in wage relativities, not only
within the award in question but also
against external classifications to which
the award structure is related, will give to rise to claims that would cause
wage leapfrogging.
12.8 Any changes made to the award as a result of this assessment may be
phased in and consideration is to be given, where relevant,
to whether any
increase in award rates can be absorbed in individual employees' over-award
12.9 The Commission will guard against contrived classifications and
over-classification of jobs.
12.10 Equal remuneration will not be achieved by reducing any current wage
rates or other conditions of employment.
13. Special Case Principle
13.1 A new award or a variation to an existing award can be granted otherwise
than under one or more of the preceding Arbitrated Case
principles where an
applicant can demonstrate that the matter has special attributes or is out of
the ordinary in a manner that warrants
approval by the Commission despite the
restrictive considerations imposed by these principles.
13.2 Care should be taken not to rely on factors already taken into account
in establishing a predecessor award.
14. Value of Money Principle
14.1 The Commission can make a new award or vary an award to address changes
in the real value of money having regard to all the circumstances,
(1) the mandatory considerations in Principle 2 including the need to ensure
that the award rates remain fair and reasonable, the
state of the economy of New
South Wales and the fiscal position and outlook of the Government;
(2) the status of bargaining between the parties to the Award;
(3) the likelihood of that bargaining concluding in a timely fashion; and
(4) the terms of any no extra claims undertaking that relevant unions provide
to the Commission in order to obtain the increase;
in circumstances where:
(5) the award applies to public sector employees;
(6) the nominal term of the existing award has expired;
(7) the employees covered by that award have not had an increase in rates for
at least 12 months;
(8) no paid rates adjustment has been set pursuant to Principle 6; and
(9) each union party to the award gives a no extra claims undertaking in the
following terms, or in such other terms as the parties
agree or the Commission
considers appropriate in the circumstances:
[Name of union] undertakes not to pursue any further claims to amend the award
in proceedings before the Industrial Relations Commission
in respect of
employees covered by the award that would take effect during its nominal term.
Provided that this undertaking does
not prevent:
(i) participation in collaborative discussions to amend the award by means of
mutual gains bargaining or otherwise;
(ii) making an application to vary the award by consent;
(iii) participation in a consent arbitration;
(iv) participation in a s 19 review or other proceedings initiated by the
Commission or another party that affects the award; or
(v) pursuing and giving effect to claims under the Gender Based Undervaluation
Principle during the nominal term.
14.2 This Principle does not apply to Local Government awards.
154. Negotiation Principle
154.1 When considering an application for a new award or the variation of an
award, including the timetabling of such an application,
the Commission will
have regard to whether the parties have complied with the following.
154.2 In respect of the commencement of negotiations for a new award:
(1) a party contemplating a major industrial case pursuant to Practice
Direction 8A must notify the Commission and the other relevant
parties at least
three months before the nominal expiry date of the award that it is their
intention to enter into negotiations for
a new award in respect of claims
justified under one or more of the Arbitrated Case criteria or otherwise;
(2) the parties to the award must begin negotiations as soon as is
practicable after the notification has been given. In this regard,
written claim has been made by one party on another party, then if negotiations
have not already commenced they must begin
within 28 days unless it is agreed by
the parties to commence negotiations at a later time;
(3) prior to or at the outset of negotiations, a party can make a reasonable
request to another party for relevant information to
be used for the purpose of
evaluating options or developing claims and that request will not be
unreasonably refused;
(4) disputes about these procedures will be dealt with in accordance with the
dispute resolution procedures in the relevant award
applying to the parties to
the dispute.
154.3 In respect of any claim to alter existing wages and conditions,
including to modernise or consolidate awards, each party is
to bargain in good
faith prior to any arbitration commencing. In particular, parties are to:
(1) consider whether to enter into mutual gains bargaining under Chapter 2A
of the Act;
(2) attend meetings they have agreed to attend and be represented at the
negotiations by persons capable of giving genuine consideration
and reasoned
responses to the proposals of other parties;
(3) comply with agreed or reasonable negotiating or meeting procedures;
(4) disclose relevant information for the purposes of negotiation;
(5) respond to each other's claims and/or counter claims in a reasonable and
timely manner; and
(6) to the extent that agreement is reached, apply by consent to the
Commission to make a new award or vary an award to give effect
154.4 The good faith bargaining requirements do not require a party to:
(1) make concessions during bargaining; or
(2) reach agreement on the terms that are to be included in the
165. Economic Incapacity Principle
165.1 Any employer or group of employers bound by an award may apply,
temporarily or otherwise, to reduce, postpone and/or phase in
the application of
any increase in labour costs determined under the Principles on the ground of
very serious or extreme economic
adversity. The merit of such an application
will be determined on a case by case basis and any relevant material shall be
tested. Significant unemployment or other serious consequences for
the employees and employers concerned are important factors to
be taken into
account in assessing the merit of any application.
165.2 Such an application will be processed according to the Special Case
165.3 Any decision to temporarily reduce or postpone an increase will be
subject to a further review, the date of which will be determined
Commission at the time it decides any application under this Principle.
176. Transitional provisions
176.1 Other than as provided at 17.2, tThese Principles apply to:
(1) any application to make or vary an award that is made on or after the
date of commencement of these Principles; and
(2) any such application filed prior to that time where the hearing of the
matter has not commenced as at the date of the commencement
of these Principles
(directions hearings will not count for this purpose).
17.2 Paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6 have no application prior to the 2025 State Wage
Case, which will consider whether to make a paid rates
adjustment and whether
there should be any alteration to those paragraphs.
187. Duration
187.1 These Principles will operate on and from 20 December 2024[insert] 2025
until further order of the Commission.
The Commission makes the following order pursuant to s 51:
A. Minimum Wage for Award/Agreement Free Employees
A.1 Employees within the jurisdiction of the Act whose employment is not
subject to the terms of an industrial instrument shall be
paid not less than the
rate prescribed by the National Minimum Wage Order as made by the Fair Work
Commission from time to time.
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Relations Act 1996
; State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 1983
(1983) 5 IR 1
; State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm 25.
See also State Wage Case (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
NSWIRComm 19
[2024] NSWIRComm 25.
See also State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 2024 (No
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 2024 (No
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Annual Wage Review 2025
(2025) 341 IR 1;
[2025] FWCFB 3500
[2025] NSWIRComm
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
NSWIRComm 1063.
[2024] NSWIRComm 19.
Fire Brigade Employees’ Union v Industrial Relations Secretary
NSWIRComm 1063
[2025] NSWIRComm
Industrial Relations Secretary v Unions NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm 26
Crown Employees (Public Sector – Salaries 2024) Award – Consent
variation re Psychologist rates
[2025] NSWIRComm 1045
; Crown Employees
(NSW Police Force Special Constables) (Security) Award 2024
[2024] NSWIRComm 10
; Crown Employees (New South Wales Education Standards Authority –
Education Officers) Salaries and Conditions Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1056
; Crown Employees (Australian Music Examinations Board (NSW) Examiners,
Assessors and Chief Examiners) Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1055
School Certificate Marking and Related Casual Employees Rates of Pay and
Conditions Award 2024
[2025] NSWIRComm 1054
; Crown Employees (Police
Officers – 2024) Award
[2024] NSWIRComm 24
Australia Bureau of
Statistics, Consumer Price Index, Australia June Quarter
Australia Bureau of
Statistics, Consumer Price Index, Australia June Quarter 2025; Reserve Bank of
Australia, Statement on Monetary
Policy, (August 2025) at
Reserve Bank of
Australia, Statement on Monetary Policy, (August 2025) at
See, eg, Crown Employees
(NSW Police Force (Nurses’)) Award 2022
[2024] NSWIRComm 20
Secretary’s position concerning interim increases in Industrial Secretary
& Ors v Public Service Association and Professional
Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales & Ors (No 2)
NSWIRComm 21
; the 2024 interim increases made to the Public Health System
Nurses’ and Midwives (State) Award 2024 and the Crown Employees’
Nurses (State) Award 2024 in Industrial Relations Commission Proceedings No.
2024/00242824 and No. 2024/00242813; and Public Health
System Nurses’ and
Midwives’ (State) Award 2023
[2025] NSWIRComm 30
State Wage Case 2024
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Wage Case 2000
(2000) 97 IR 93
[2000] NSWIRComm 83
at Annexure B, subprinciple
State Wage Case 2000
(2000) 97 IR 93
[2000] NSWIRComm 83
at Annexure B, principle
Award Making Principles,
subprinciple 9.1.
& Community Services Employees (State) Award
(2001) 113 IR 119
NSWIRComm 274
–[25], [312]–[313]; Re Operational Ambulance
Officers (State) Award
(2001) 113 IR 384
[2001] NSWIRComm 331
[2001] NSWIRComm 274
(1993) 52 IR 243
[1993] NSWIRComm
[2000] AIRC 722
(2000) 110 IR 247
[2000] AIRC
(1996) 95 IR 126
(2002) 115 IR
[2002] NSWIRComm 100
, quoting Re Operational Ambulances Officers
(State) Award
(2001) 113 IR 384
[2001] NSWIRComm 331
(2002) 115 IR 183
[2002] NSWIRComm 100
(2002) 115 IR 8
[2002] NSWIRComm 13 at 11.
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 4)
(2003) 131 IR 17
NSWIRComm 442
–[241]; Re Staff Specialists (State) Award
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
–[120]; Health Employees
Pharmacists (State) Award
(2003) 132 IR 244
[2003] NSWIRComm 453
[263], [338(d)]; Re Crown Employees (Teachers in Schools and TAFE and Related
Employees) Salaries and Conditions Award
(2004) 133 IR 254
[2004] NSWIRComm 114
; Re Teachers (Non Government Early Childhood Service Centres other than
Preschools) (State) Award 2006
(2009) 191 IR 14
[2009] NSWIRComm 198
Teachers (Non-government Preschools) (State) Award
(2001) 120 IR 3
NSWIRComm 335
Crown Employees (Police Officers – 2009) Award
(2012) 220 IR 1
NSWIRComm 23
; Re Crown Employees (Administrative and Clerical Officers)
(State) Award (No 2)
(1993) 52 IR 243
[1993] NSWIRComm 104
; Re Social
and Community Services Employees (State) Award (2006) 152 IR 149;
NSWIRComm 87
Brigade Employees’ Union v Industrial Relations Secretary (on behalf of
Fire and Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1063
Brigade Employees’ Union v Industrial Relations Secretary (on behalf of
Fire and Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1063
[2003] NSWIRComm
For example, in respect
of the consultation mechanism and the Country Relief model: Fire Brigade
Employees’ Union v Industrial
Relations Secretary (on behalf of Fire and
Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 13
[2025] NSWIRComm 1059
State Wage Case
2024 (No 4)
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
at Annexure A; State Wage
Case (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (459 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter