URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v REZK [2009] NSWPYT 1 (2 December 2009)
PHYSIOTHERAPISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
MATTER NUMBER: 1/2009
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 102
Physiotherapists Act
IN THE MATTER OF
GUIRGUIS SAAD HABIB REZK
(AKA George
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
____________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v
[2009] NSWPYT
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms E Brus of Counsel instructed by Ms P Hook.
Mr Guirguis Rezk
(Respondent)
represented by Mr Stephen
Barnes, instructed by Mr Goce Mitrevski, Solicitor, from Colin Biggers &
Paisley (with Mr Gavin Creight
being the relevant
REGISTRATION
NUMBER: PY 128450
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Trudy Rebbeck
(Physiotherapist Member)
Prof Darren Rivett (Physiotherapist
Ms Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: June 29 & 30 and July 1 2009
DATE OF DECISION: 2 December 2009
ORDERS(summary): The Respondent is reprimanded, is not entitled to reapply
for registration for a period of two years and Prohibition
Orders made.
CATCHWORDS: physiotherapy - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – inappropriate examination
and physical contact
with two female patients.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Physiotherapists Act 2001
, Schedule 5 – Clause 6;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Public Health Act 1991
CASES CITED: Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
; Wentworth
v New South
Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
176 CLR 239
Health Care Complaint
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
New South Wales Crime
Commission v Vuletic and ors
[2005] NSWSC 614
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Goodrich Aerospace Pty Limited v Arsic
[2006] NSWCA 187
Zaide v HCCC
[1998] NSWSC 335
(1998) 44 NSWLR 82
(Nurses and Midwives Tribunal of New South Wales, 22 May 2006,
20 July 2006
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Physiotherapists Tribunal (the Tribunal), convened in accordance with the
Physiotherapists Act 2001
(the Act) held an Inquiry into a Complaint made by Ms
Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC)
dated 27 January 2009.
Complaints relate to the Respondent’s treatment of two women in late 2005
and early 2006.
3. The Respondent being a physiotherapist registered under the Act
COMPLAINT ONE
has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
in that the practitioner has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the
physiotherapist in the practice of physiotherapy is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of
a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct
course of the practice of physiotherapy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the practitioner was employed
as a physiotherapist at the Precision Physiotherapy clinic (“the
at St Marys in New South Wales.
23 December 2005 Ms A attended the clinic after being referred by her family
doctor because of an injury to the lower left side
of her back and buttock
attending the clinic, Ms A discussed her injury and various treatment techniques
with the practitioner before being escorted by
him into a treatment room which
contained a padded treatment bed.
inside the treatment room, the practitioner directed Ms A to remove all of her
clothing, including her underwear, without proper
and sufficient clinical
indications for doing so.
no time during the treatment session on 23 December 2005 did the practitioner
offer Ms A clothing to wear and/or a towel to cover
herself with.
Ms A lay on her back naked on the treatment bed:
practitioner stood at the end of the bed facing her;
practitioner took hold of both of her legs near the ankles and lifted them,
causing her knees to bend and push up towards her
practitioner then spread Ms A’s legs apart.
Ms A lay naked on the treatment bed, with her legs bent and spread
practitioner took a tissue in one hand and lightly dragged it across Ms
A’s vagina, without proper and sufficient clinical
indications for doing
practitioner failed to seek and obtain Patient A’s prior verbal consent to
touch her genital area;
practitioner lightly dragged a tissue held in his other hand across Ms A’s
vagina a second time, without proper and sufficient
clinical indications for
practitioner lightly dragged a tissue across the area between Ms A’s
vagina and anus, without proper and sufficient clinical
indications for doing
Ms A lay naked on the treatment bed, with her legs bent towards her
practitioner pushed Ms A’s left leg down so that the outer region of her
left thigh was touching the bed;
practitioner, holding a tissue, then pushed on the upper section of Ms A’s
inner left thigh and prodded Ms A’s pubic
hair line, without proper and
sufficient clinical indications for doing so;
the practitioner failed to seek and obtain Patient A’s prior verbal
consent for this procedure;
practitioner then returned Ms A’s left leg to an upright position, bent at
the knee, and pushed Ms A’s right leg
down so that the outer region of her
right thigh was touching the bed;
practitioner then pushed on the upper section of Ms A’s inner right thigh
and again prodded her pubic hair line, without
proper and sufficient clinical
indications for doing so.
3 and 6 January 2006 Ms A attended the clinic for treatment and was seen on both
occasions by the practitioner.
both treatment sessions on 3 and 6 January 2006:
practitioner directed Ms A to remove all of her clothing, including her
underwear, without proper and sufficient clinical indications
for doing so;
practitioner provided Ms A with a terry towelling gown which she wore without
underwear, as directed;
practitioner requested Ms A to lie on her back on the treatment bed and
demonstrate various leg stretches which when performed,
caused the gown to
shift, exposing Ms A’s genital area and/or breasts.
17 February 2006 Ms B attended the clinic at St Marys because of an injury to
her lower back and having previously received physiotherapy
at the Precision
Physiotherapy clinic at Surry Hills. She was seen on that occasion by the
practitioner.
the treatment session on 17 February 2006, the practitioner directed Ms B to
remove the shorts he had earlier provided and
to lower her underpants, without
proper and sufficient clinical indications for doing so.
Ms B lay on her back on the treatment bed, having lowered her underpants as
practitioner stood at the end of the bed facing her;
practitioner took hold of both of her legs near the ankles and lifted them,
causing her knees to bend and push up towards her
practitioner then spread Ms A’s legs apart.
Ms B lay on the treatment bed, with her legs bent and spread apart and having
lowered her underpants as directed:
practitioner used a tissue to stroke downwards along Ms B’s inner left and
right thighs from the groin area, without proper
and sufficient clinical
indications for doing so;
practitioner failed to seek and obtain Patient B’s prior verbal consent
for this procedure.
COMPLAINT TWO
has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
sections 25
of the Act in that the practitioner has engaged in conduct that demonstrates
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the
physiotherapist in the practice of physiotherapy is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of
a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct
course of the practice of physiotherapy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
per Complaint One.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes throughout the Inquiry.
Suppression Orders
Tribunal made an Order in accordance with Schedule 5 of Clause 6 of the Act that
the names the two patients treated by the Respondent,
and a work colleague of
one of the patients not be published. A schedule containing the identities of
the patients is attached to
this original Reasons for Decision document (and
marked with the letter G) and the copies that are forwarded to the parties. This
schedule should not be reproduced if copies of this Reasons document are made
for any purpose other than to provide it to an appeals
court, and it should be
marked accordingly by the parties.
A, Ms B, Ms Jagger, Mr Magner (by telephone), Mr Coleiro were required by the
Respondent for cross-examination. The Respondent
also gave evidence.
Documentation
HCCC tendered documents that came into evidence as Exhibits 1 – 23
(details in Schedule A hereto). The Respondent tendered
documents as Exhibits R
1- 17 (14 and 15 omitted - details in Schedule A hereto).
Relevant Law
Unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct
of the Act relevantly defines ‘unsatisfactory professional
conduct’ as:
26 For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory professional conduct", in
relation to a registered physiotherapist, includes any
of the following:
(a) any conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the physiotherapist in the
practice of physiotherapy is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the physiotherapist of a provision of this Act or
the regulations or of a condition of the physiotherapist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the physiotherapist to comply
with a direction by the Board to provide information with
respect to a complaint
under this Part against the physiotherapist,
(d) a failure by the physiotherapist to comply with an order made or a
direction given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the physiotherapist of section 34A (4) (Power of
Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Care Complaints Act
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a physiotherapist in the
course of the practice or purported practice of physiotherapy.
“Professional
misconduct” is defined in the
of the Act as being:
25 For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in relation to a
registered physiotherapist, means unsatisfactory professional
conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
physiotherapist’s registration.
Standard of proof
standard of proof required to establish this Complaint is the civil standard,
however because of the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their
consequences, the Tribunal needs to be comfortably satisfied that the Complaints
have been established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) said at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Tribunal not only has to protect the public but it is in the community interest
that the profession of physiotherapy should retain
and be entitled to retain the
respect and high regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
looking at the issue of improper and unethical behaviour, one of the matters to
which the Tribunal will have regard is any relevant
Code of Conduct. There is no
Code currently published by the Physiotherapists Registration Board of New South
Wales (the Board).
The Board has however published a Policy on Physiotherapists
and Sexual Misconduct (issued 1994, reviewed 2006). A copy of both the
version and the 2006 version of this document formed exhibit 16.
trust placed in physiotherapists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client
to disclose highly
personal information to the physiotherapist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under
subsection (2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses
a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”) do any one or more of the following:
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal thinks appropriate
on the provision of health services or specified health services by the
for the period specified in the order or permanently.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
de-registered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
respect to the assessment of demeanour, the Tribunal relies upon principles as
outlined below. The observations of Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ in
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Further, in recent
years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt
on the ability of judges (or anyone
else) to tell truth from falsehood
accurately on the basis of such appearances. Considerations such as these have
encouraged judges,
both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the
appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as
on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the
apparent logic of events. This does not
eliminate the established principles
principles are seen
as critical.
Tribunal also has regard to the NSW Court of Appeal decision in
Aerospace Pty Limited v Arsic
[2006] NSWCA 187
where his Honour Justice Ipp
JA stated at paragraph 27:
27. These problems and doubts about demeanour findings explain
why trial judges are expected to weigh their impressions as to demeanour
carefully against the probabilities and to examine whether the disputed evidence
is consistent with the incontrovertible facts, facts
that are not in dispute and
other relevant evidence in the case. Of course, demeanour may trump the
probabilities, but it should
be apparent from the judge’s reasons that the
probabilities and consistency with other relevant evidence have properly been
taken into account.
Background material
The Respondent
Respondent (D.O.B. 20 July 1981) was first registered as a physiotherapist on 8
January 2003. On 13 May 2008 the Board imposed
the following conditions on his
registration (as recording in Annexure B hereto).
Respondent is currently undertaking a degree in biomedical engineering and had
requested, on 8 December 2009, that the Board suspend
the necessity for him to
comply with the conditions on his practice during the period December 2008 until
February 2009 as he had
to complete a compulsory full time industrial placement
as part of his degree course. This would prevent him from attending to matters
such as regular in-service trainings in the area of physiotherapy (exhibit R5).
Respondent made further submissions dated 5 January 2009 and 3 April 2009 to the
Board requesting alteration of the conditions
on his registration. The Board
responded by letter dated 17 April 2009 (exhibit R7). A copy of this letter
forms Annexure C hereto.
appears initially the Respondent indicated he would undertake not to work as a
physiotherapist because his financial position prevented
him from complying with
the conditions imposed by the Board.
Respondent is currently not registered, his name having been removed from the
Register at his request on 9 July 2009.
2002 the Respondent graduated with a Bachelor of Applied Science (Physiotherapy)
Degree from Sydney University. He commenced work
as a physiotherapist
thereafter. In his statement (exhibit R1) the Respondent claimed he had
‘four jobs between my graduation
and October 2004 when I commenced work
for Precision Physio at their St Mary’s premises’. In his oral
evidence the Respondent
provided the following work history:
After graduation
he commenced working as a physiotherapist at Nepean Hospital in the orthopaedic
ward. He left this employment after
three months because of a dispute about the
Respondent’s competence.
The Respondent
then worked as a ‘gymnasium physiotherapist’ which involved him
attending several gymnasiums and supervising
rehabilitation exercises. This work
was 3 days per week and lasted for approximately 9 months.
Between April
and December 2003, the Respondent worked 2 days per week at a physiotherapy
practice – Active Body Physiotherapy.
This work involved some
musculoskeletal physiotherapy work.
Between January
2004 and August 2004, the Respondent worked at the Toongabbie Physiotherapy
Centre. Once again the Respondent stated
that this involved ‘some’
musculoskeletal work.
Immediately
prior to working at Precision Physiotherapy (the Practice) the Respondent worked
for three months as ‘Rehabilitation
Counsellor’ for a company called
IRC Rehabilitation. This work mainly involved managing rehabilitation programs
for employees
who had WorkCover claims.
copy of the Respondent’s CV came into evidence from documents produced
under a summons to the Minchinbury Community Hospital
(Hospital). The Respondent
worked part-time at the Hospital being employed as a physiotherapist, one day
per week with orthopaedic
patients. The CV had been provided to the Hospital
when the Respondent applied for employment on 5 July 2007. The Tribunal notes
the CV does not refer to the Respondent’s work at Nepean Hospital, the
work as a ‘gymnasium physiotherapist’ or
his work with IRC. Further,
it does not mention that the work at Active Body and Toongabbie were on a part
time basis, In the Application
for Employment made by the Respondent to the
Hospital (which is signed by the Respondent indicating he verified the
information provided
to be correct in every detail) the Respondent gave the
reason for leaving his employment at the Practice as ‘pay’, and
leaving Active Physiotherapy as an overseas holiday.
CV (exhibit 20) records the Respondent leaving the Practice in February 2006 and
commencing at King Street Physiotherapy in March
2006. However in his oral
evidence the Respondent stated he had taken off ‘a couple of months’
after his employment was
terminated at the Practice for the purpose of
‘soul searching’. Further in his oral evidence the Respondent stated
had not informed King Street Physiotherapy of the reason why he left the
Practice. The Tribunal notes that paragraph 55 of the Respondent’s
statement (exhibit R1) indicates that the Practice and King Street Physiotherapy
were located close by each other (in fact they are
both located in the suburb of
St Mary’s). At paragraph 53 of the Respondent’s statement he records
that he work at King
Street Physiotherapy from June 2006 to October 2006,
however in the CV he provide to the Hospital he records the dates of his
as March 2006 to August 2006.
documentation from the Hospital indicates he was assessed as a
year physiotherapist; however the Tribunal did not
confirm this with the Respondent and relies upon the evidence of the Respondent
to assess his experience.
the time of the police investigation, the Respondent resided with his parents.
Respondent has not been a member of the Australian Physiotherapy Association
Background to the Complaint
Board was first notified of the subject matter raised in the Particulars of
Complaint by way of a letter dated 6 July 2006 from
Mr Peter Magner. Mr Magner
was the Director of the Practice in which the Respondent was employed at the
relevant times.
Magner was notified on 20 February 2006 of a concern regarding the
Respondent’s treatment of one patient on 17 February 2006.
Mr Magner met
with the Respondent on 21 February 2006 and discussed the allegations. Mr Magner
reports that the Respondent ‘...confirmed
that the incident had
occurred’ and Mr Magner suspended him.
Magner details conversations he had with senior colleagues regarding the
behaviour and states that the Respondent’s employment
was terminated on 23
February 2006.
in this letter from Mr Magner are details of a report made by another patient on
4 July 2006 about the conduct of the Respondent
consultations.
NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board –
Policy Statement 1 - Physiotherapists and Sexual Misconduct
16 contained a copy of the above document which was published by the Board in
1994. This Policy includes the following statements:
The community
expectation of the physiotherapy professional is one of utmost integrity. The
community must be confident that personal
boundaries will be maintained and that
clients are not at risk.
absolute rule that a physiotherapist who engages in sexual activity with a
current client is guilt of professional misconduct
point 5, the Policy Statement reads:
rationale for the Board’s position has been supported in many contexts by
physiotherapy disciplinary authorities. Reasons
for the rule include the
5.1 The physiotherapist/client
relationship depends upon the ability of the client to have absolute confidence
and trust in the physiotherapist.
5.2 The physiotherapist is in a unique position regarding physical and
emotional proximity. Clients are expected to disrobe and to
physiotherapists to examine and treat them often in an intimate way. It is
imperative that a detailed explanation about these
procedures be conveyed to the
client at every step, and the client’s consent be obtained.
5.3 The physiotherapist/client relationship is not one of equality. In
seeking treatment/practical experience, the client is vulnerable.
Exploitation
of the client is an abuse of power. Each case must be examined in relation to
the degree of dependency between client
and physiotherapist and the duration and
nature of the professional relationship.
5.4 The physiotherapist’s role is one of authority by virtue of the
client seeking assistance and guidance.
5.5 Breaches of the physiotherapist/client relationship have often caused
severe psychological damage to the client.
Evidence of Ms A
A provided a statement at St Mary’s Police Station on 4 July 2006 (exhibit
4). Ms A stated she was then 42 years of age.
statement details that Ms A suffered an injury to the muscle in the left cheek
of her bottom as a result of a fall on 30 November
2005. She sought
physiotherapy treatment from the Respondent on 23 December 2005.
A reported that at the first consultation with the Respondent after discussions
as to her symptoms and treatment the Respondent
said to her ‘You need to
take all of your clothes off because I need to examine you’ to which Ms A
replied ‘Including
my underwear?’. The Respondent then said
‘Yes’. After removing her clothes, Ms A said she lay down on the
bed and was not offered a sheet or a gown by the Respondent.
statement of Ms A then relates the following events (at paragraphs 6 and 7):
told me that because I had pains in my left upper thigh he was concerned that I
may be numb around my middle torso area. REZK
then physically lifted my legs
with his hands. My legs were bent at the knees and spread apart at this
could see REZK was holding a tissue in each hand. He then lightly dragged a
tissue across my vagina and said “Can you feel
I said “Yes”
I then saw REZK drag the tissue in his other hand across my vagina and
said “can you feel that?”
I said “Yes”
REZK then pushed my left leg down to the side so that my outer thigh was
touching the bed. Holding a tissue in his hand REZK prodded
my inner thigh and
pubic hair line area asking me “Can you feel that?”
I said “Yes”
REZK then returned that leg so it was upright but still bent at the knee.
REZK then pushed my right leg down to the side so that
my outer thigh was
touching the bed. Holding a tissue in his hand, REZK prodded my inner thigh and
bikini area and said “Can
you feel that?”
I said “Yes”
her oral evidence, under cross-examination, Ms A adhered to the description
above save she clarified that when the word ‘prodded’
was used in
the above statement that she did not mean to convey that the Respondent was
actually prodding her with his fingers rather
he was dragging the tissue down
each side of the vagina.
a follow up visit on 3 January 2005 Ms A states that the Respondent again asked
her to remove all her clothes, which she did
before laying on the treatment bed.
Ms A then provides the following description of how the consultation progressed
(at paragraphs
gave me a blue gown which I put on. The gown was made of terry towelling and it
had no sleeves. It was like a boob tube style
with elastic around the top. It
didn’t do up it slipped over my head and rested above my breasts. The
gown did not open at
the back and the length ended about six inches above my
knee. I had no underwear on at this time. REZK told me to lie on the bed
back. REZK asked how my stretch had been going with my leg. REZK asked me to
demonstrate how far I could stretch my leg towards
my chest area.
bent my legs at the knees and pulled my left leg towards my chest. The stretch
then involved me moving my bent leg out to the left.
When I did this, the gown
lifted upwards and my leg was outwards therefore exposing my genitals to REZK.
This made me feel extremely
uncomfortable because I was thinking ‘why is
my vagina hanging out like this when it is my backside? What has this got to
with my injury? I felt like I had no dignity.’ I kept thinking over and
over in my mind, ‘It’s OK, he’s
a physio, he’s a
professional, you’ve got to put your trust in these people’.
then demonstrated on me, another stretch that I could do. I was laying on my
back and he put my left leg over my right leg so
that it was hanging off the
bed. He told me then to turn onto my stomach and he started manipulating my
injury on my left bottom
cheek. REZK placed a heat pack on my injury and left
the room. Still had the gown on at this time. REZK never once offered me
sheet to cover myself with.
detailed account of the consultation with the Respondent is provided in
paragraphs 15 and 16 of exhibit 4.
At paragraph 21, 22 and 23 (part thereof) Ms A makes the following
time I was treated by REZK I felt embarrassed and degraded and I felt so
uncomfortable and I didn’t want to be there but
I had to because I was in
so much pain. I kept thinking over and over, “He’s a professional,
he’s a doctor, he
knows what he is doing”. The fact that I had no
clothes on made me feel very vulnerable and I’m not used to talking
man whilst I have no clothes on.
was exposed to all these different positions and I don’t know what he saw,
it was just embarrassing. I was being treated
for my injury on my backside and
nothing to do with my vagina. When REZK dragged the tissue over my vagina, I
felt so uncomfortable
and I didn’t know what he was dong. I kept
thinking, “What’s this got to do with anything”. At no time
during my visits did I give REZK permission to touch my genitals.
though about this a lot and I had a gut feeling that what REZK had done
wasn’t right. I didn’t come forward earlier
because I thought no
one would believe me.
police Fact Sheet records that Ms A informed them that she had not previously
received treatment from a physiotherapist. This
was confirmed in evidence before
the Tribunal by Ms A.
A was firm in the evidence she gave before the Tribunal. One matter that Ms
A’s evidence differed from other evidence before
the Tribunal was that Ms
A denied (not just that she could not recall) that she had a consultation with
another physiotherapist at
the Practice (Ms Jagger) on 28 December 2005, being
after the first consultation with the Respondent but before the second
consultation.
The clinical notes of the Practice clearly record a consultation
on 28 December 2005 and Ms Jagger confirms that the entry was in
her handwriting
but that she had no recollection of the consultation. Another area in which Ms
A’s evidence differed from other
evidence before the Tribunal was with
respect to a statement made by Ms A’s Work colleague (exhibit 10(v)). Ms A
recall telling her work colleague that she had telephoned the Practice
on the day after the first consultation to complain about
the conduct of the
Respondent nor could she recall telling her work colleague that the Respondent
had ‘rubbed his hands inside
[her] inner thighs up to [my] inner
Ms A gave evidence in a calm, considered fashion and presented to the Tribunal
as a credible witness.
her oral evidence Ms A stated that she had told the Respondent that the numbness
she experienced was in her left upper buttock
area only. The pain extended from
the left buttock area down her leg to the left posterior aspect of the knee. The
Respondent did
not clarify (either at the commencement of the consultation or at
any other time) with Ms A her ‘Yes’ answer to the question
medical history form (exhibit 11) that indicated she had experienced
‘Numbness or tingling in your buttock or genital
A also stated that during the first consultation with the Respondent he did not
use the term ‘cauda equina’ and could
not remember the Respondent
saying anything about a ‘pinched nerve’. Ms A stated that if the
Respondent had used that
term ‘pinched nerve’, she would have
remembered. Ms A did remember that the Respondent talked about the spinal column
during that first consultation. Further if the Respondent had used the word
‘serious’ she would have been alerted and
would recall him saying
that. Further she stated that before she took her clothes off the Respondent did
not inform her he would
be performing a sensation test, it was after she had her
clothes off that he indicated he had concerns regarding numbness in her
A maintained her evidence that the Respondent requested she remove her
underpants at each of the three consultations. Ms A also
gave evidence that the
Respondent stood at the end of the bed when he performed the sensation test and
that the testing occurred
over her genital region and not over the outer aspects
of her thighs.
A stated that there was no sensory testing of her buttock region – either
for light touch (e.g. using a tissue) or for thermal
sensation. The Tribunal
notes that it is not in dispute that the Respondent placed a heat pack on to the
left buttock of Ms A towards
the end of the consultation.
A confirmed that she had never spoken to Ms B at any time, although she had seen
her at the court when the criminal proceedings
against the Respondent were
A stated in her oral evidence that the Respondent did not give the option of
‘self testing’ for the sensory testing.
Evidence of Ms B
5 is a statement provided by Ms B to the HCCC. Ms B describes a session with the
Respondent (identified in her Police Statement
as occurring on 17 February 2006)
at paragraphs 9 – 13 in the following terms:
Respondent then said words to the effect of “I just want to test your
sensations so can you please take your pants off.
I want to do a tissue
test.” I understood from his request that he wanted me to remove the blue
shorts, which I did knowing
that I still had my underwear on. After I removed
the shorts, I laid flat on the bed and The Respondent then pushed my knees up
and spread them apart with his hands. I remember thinking that this was unusual
because I had never had the tissue test at any other
physio appointment.
Respondent then stroked a tissue across my inner thigh very near my groin. I
recall him doing this on both legs 3 or 4 times
and him asking me “Does
that feel any different on each side”. I remember saying to something
like “I don’t
know how to answer that – it feels like a
tissue”. The Respondent then said “Can you take your pants
I remember looking at him because I still had my underwear on. The
Respondent then said something like “Oh – I didn’t
like that.” I then said “No its OK, you’re not going to be
asking me if you don’t need to”
and I then pulled my underwear down
to my ankles. I was still lying down and after I lowered my underwear I was
again lying flat
on the bed.
Respondent was standing at the foot of the bed while I lowered my underwear.
He then pushed my knees back up and I remember
keeping my knees together. The
Respondent then placed his hands on the inside of my knees and pushed my knees
apart. I remember
thinking “Is he going to touch me?” and waiting
for him to do that. I was getting ready to kick him if he did that.
uncomfortable now.
Respondent then kneeled down in front of me and his head was between my legs.
The Respondent’s face was right at the foot
of the bed and my bottom was
quite close to the end of the bed. I remember thinking that his head was too
close to me. The Respondent
then rubbed a tissue across my inner thighs again
just as he done when I was wearing my underwear and asking me the same questions
answer his questions because I couldn’t put the
sensations into
think The Respondent rubbed the tissue over my thighs 3 or 4 times very close to
my groin but the tissue didn’t touch the
outside of my vagina. As soon as
The Respondent stood up I immediately pulled my underwear up and put my shorts
back on. I remember
The Respondent then said words to the effect of “You
don’t need any more physio, you need to go back to the doctor.”
the statement made to Police, Ms B provided the following account of her
treatment session with the Respondent at paragraphs 14
-21 (exhibit 10
the Respondent returned to the room after the last stretching interval, I saw
him grab two tissues. He said to me, “I
want to test your sensations.
Pull your shorts down.” I removed my shorts, pushing them down to my
ankles. I kept my underwear
then watched as the Respondent held the two tissues, one in each hand. The
Respondent then, stroked my right let with the tissue.
He started from my right
groin, and stroked downwards along my inner thigh. He then asked me,
“Does it feel any different?”
I said, “What do you mean, does
it feel different, it’s tissues, it feels a bit rough, a bit weird”.
He said, “Does
it feel softer or rougher on either side?” I said,
“It feels different, the texture of the tissue doesn’t feel
but it’s going to feel different, if you rub each side a different
way.” I couldn’t really answer his question,
I didn’t really
understand what he wanted me to say, or how he wanted me to feel.
Respondent continued to stroke my right and left upper thighs for about five
minutes. Starting each stroke from my groin or pubic
Respondent then said to me, “Can you take your pants off”. I
remember giving him a really dirty look, and thinking
my pants are already off.
The Respondent must have realised I looked at him a funny way. The Respondent
then said, “Oh look”
and I interrupted him and said, “Well you
would not have asked if you didn’t have to, I trust you, so I guess
then pulled my underwear to my knees. The Respondent said to me, “Pull
them down a bit further”. I then pushed my
undies down to my ankles. I
was laying flat on my back. The Respondent then took hold of both my legs from
my ankles, and pushed
my legs up, so my knees bent and pushed up towards my
chest. He was standing at the end of the table, facing me. He then put his
hands on top of my knees, and slowly spread my legs until they were wide apart.
What really sticks in my mind is the way he spread
my legs open. He did it
really slowly. When he did this I thought, he definitely did not have to do
that. I felt embarrassed and
shocked. I though to myself, he has just had a
really good look at my vagina which made me feel disgusted, although I was of
feeling that I should trust him, because he was the doctor.
Respondent then starting stroking my inner thighs again with the tissues, in the
same way he did previously. He would start at
my groin and stroke downwards
with the tissues. All of this time I was naked, with my knees bent, and my legs
widely spread. The
Respondent was seated at the end of the bed, with his face
very close to my vagina. I was in this position for about five minutes.
this was happening, I felt really bad. I thought to myself, you could have done
this while my undies were on.
he finished his tissue sensation test, The Respondent said to me, OK
that’s over” I immediately put my undies and
my own shorts on. I
didn’t wait for him to tell me what to do. After I put my pants on, The
Respondent said to me, “Just
lay on your stomach now.” I did this,
and The Respondent then put some suction type caps on that are hooked up to a
which then send an electronic pulse to the area being treated. I was
hooked up to the machine for about ten minutes. The Respondent
had left the
room whilst I was on the machine.
Respondent returned to the room and turned off the machine. We had a discussion
doesn’t appear the physio
is helping your injury, you should go back to the doctor.”
B gave evidence (in the statement to police – exhibit 10 (vii)) that the
reason why she had attended the St Mary’s
branch of the Practice was
because it was closer to her home. When Ms B described the commencement of the
consultation, she indicated
the Respondent handed her a pair of shorts, spoke to
her about her injury, commenced with some stretching and traction with some
resting time in between while he went in and out of the room attending to other
matters. When he returned on one occasion he told
her he would do a sensation
test, as set out in the evidence above.
B discussed the consultation with her mother later that day. On the following
Monday she informed the Human Resources Officer (HRO)
at her workplace. Ms B was
informed by the HRO some time later that the Respondent had been dismissed from
the physiotherapy practice.
Ms B reported the matter to the Police a few months
later. A statement made by Ms B to the police forms exhibit 6.
cross-examination Ms B was challenged about a number of matters including the
position the Respondent stood in with respect
to the examination bed whilst
performing the ‘tissue test’, that the testing was undertaken twice
over the same area
(being the inner thighs) and the areas that the Respondent
covered during this testing. Ms B maintained her evidence without wavering
any manner.
B gave evidence consistent with the statements. She gave evidence in a
forthright, direct, clear manner without hesitation. The
Tribunal finds Ms B to
be a credible witness.
B confirmed that she had told the Respondent that she had numbness in her left
buttock area (T48.5-25). Ms B did not recall the
Respondent mentioning the
reason for the sensation testing, any nerve pinching, that he suspected she had
a serious condition or
a cauda equina lesion.
her oral evidence Ms B denies that the Respondent asked her on multiple
occasions whether she was comfortable to remove her underpants.
Ms B also stated
that the Respondent had not asked for explicit informed consent for the
sensation testing. Ms B also gave evidence
that she was not offered the
alternative of self-testing.
B confirmed that she had no connection with Ms A. She had seen another woman
when she had attended the Local Court regarding the
police matter, however, she
did not talk to her, nor did she appear to recognise that Ms A was sitting in
the back of the Tribunal
Hearing Room while she gave her evidence.
B confirmed that the Respondent did not perform sensation testing over her
buttock or foot area (despite the fact that these are
the areas that are
recorded in the clinical notes as being areas in which she experienced
symptoms). Ms B also confirmed in her oral
evidence that she had not told the
Respondent that she had any symptoms in the area of the inner thighs.
B did not recall being asked by the Respondent whether or not she had any
bladder or bowel problems (again the Tribunal notes that
the Respondent has
ticked a box on the Medical History form indicating that Ms B did not have any
bladder or bowel problems).
B gave evidence that despite having had physiotherapy treatment on and off for a
period of two years prior to her consultation
with the Respondent she had never
had a ‘tissue test’ before.
Evidence of Mr Peter Magner
Magner is the owner of the physiotherapy practice in which the Respondent worked
at the time relevant to the Particulars of Complaint
herein (the Practice). He
is a physiotherapist, currently of some 15 years standing. Mr Magner holds a
B.App.Sc.(Physio) and a Master
of Health Science (Manipulative Physiotherapy).
17 September 2007, Mr Magner made a statement to the HCCC. Mr Magner is the
Director of Precision Physiotherapy (the Practice)
which operates physiotherapy
practices in four different locations.
statement records that the Respondent commenced employment with the Practice on
2 September 2004. Mr Magner states that the Respondent
was consulted by Ms A on
23 December 2005, 3 January 2006 and 6 January 2006 and by Ms B on 17 February
20 February 2006, the practice received a telephone call from the HRO at Ms
B’s workplace, detailing the complaint by Ms
B regarding the request by
the Respondent to remove her underwear.
Magner states that as soon as he was advised of this matter he telephoned the
Respondent and he gives the following description
of the conversation that
occurred between himself and the Respondent (paragraph 8, exhibit 7):
Immediately
after the telephone call from
[business partner of Mr Magner]
[the Respondent]
and said words to the effect of “I have
had a complaint that you asked
to remove her underwear during a
consultation on 17 February 2006.”
[The Respondent]
told me that
had been dressed in a gown and that he did ask her to remove or
lower her underwear to her thighs and that he palpated around her
abdominal region for what he described as a sensory examination.
Respondent]
also said that he told
to return to her GP as he
was concerned about the progressive nature of her condition. I informed
[the Respondent]
in this conversation that I did not believe that
being asked to remove or lower her underwear to her thighs was clinically
appropriate. I do not recall what his response to that
that same day, after consulting with other physiotherapists, Mr Magner advised
the HRO that Ms B should report the conduct of
the Respondent to the
Physiotherapists Registration Board (the Board).
cross-examination, Mr Magner agreed that his motivation in advising Ms B to
report the matter to the Board was in part concern
for the reputation of his
practice or his standing before the Board. However, he stated that it was only
one of the motivating factors
(T33.44-49, 30/6/09). Cross-examination questions
were also directed at establishing that the witness was not impartial with
to the matters before the Tribunal.
following day, 21 February 2006, Mr Magner advised the Respondent not to attend
work. On 22 February 2006, Mr Magner met with
the Respondent in the presence of
Ms Lorraine Jagger (a senior physiotherapist in the Practice). The
contemporaneous note of this
meeting is annexure A to Exhibit 7.
Magner made another statement to the HCCC on 28 July 2008 (exhibit 8). The
statement indicates it is providing further information
regarding the meeting
with the Respondent in February 2006. The account provided in the statement is
in accordance with the Respondent’s
report from the Incident Report
(exhibit 7). Mr Magner records in his statement that the Respondent said that it
was the report of
paraesthesia over the genitalia area that had prompted him to
ask Ms B to lower her underwear. Mr Magner also records in this statement
the Respondent told him on 21/22 February that she had asked for Ms B’s
consent prior to undertaking the testing, that
he had explained the reason why
the testing was necessary and had asked her several time if she felt comfortable
with it. Mr Magner
records (at paragraph 6) the Respondent as stating the
following during their meeting:
‘When I began to palpate superior to
pubic region, the sensation superior to her usual underwear line
was intact, and at that point I had sufficient information to cease
neurological examination as I believed there was not a problem.’
Magner records that he asked the Respondent whether he considered that the
method of examination he had adopted was an appropriate
cauda equina examination
and whether his technique was correct and records that the Respondent replied
‘Yes’ to both
of these questions.
Magner records that both he and Ms Jagger informed the Respondent that they
considered the examination to be inappropriate and
that they would not have
performed such an assessment on a patient. The Respondent indicated that he had
never needed to perform
such an examination before and he would not undertake it
at the Practice due to the reaction it had caused (meaning the reaction
Magner and Ms Jagger). Mr Magner was assured by the Respondent that this was an
isolated incident (paragraph 11, exhibit 10
also occurred with respect to the possibility of the Respondent seeking
assistance/guidance from Ms Jagger before undertaking
the examination (paragraph
Magner made a statement to the police on 14 July 2006 (exhibit 10 (ix))
regarding the contact he had with Ms A after she complained
to the person
supervising her workers’ compensation treatment about the treatment she
had received from the Respondent.
a further statement to the police on 20 July 2006, Mr Magner stated that he was
of the opinion that it was not ‘necessary
or appropriate’ for a
patient to remove their underwear for an examination. Further, he opined that a
sensory examination ‘does
not consist of sensory checking over [the]
vagina’ (exhibit 10 (x)).
his oral evidence, Mr Magner confirmed that it was a policy of the Practice to
use draping to maintain a patient’s dignity
at all times and he was sure
that this policy was adhered to 100% of the time at the Practice. He confirmed
that the Practice adhered
to the APA recommendations with respect to obtaining
and recording informed consent.
Magner confirmed that the Practice ran weekly 2 hour in-service trainings and a
one hour individual clinical reasoning session
every week.
Magner stated that he had presented an in-service session on neurological
examination to the employees at the Practice, including
the Respondent. At some
later stage, the Respondent presented an in-service to the employees of the
Practice on neurological examination.
He could not recall whether or not cauda
equina was specifically mentioned in either of these in-service courses; however
more likely than not as he could not imagine presenting such a topic
without making mention of cauda equina.
Magner confirmed that he had never required a patient to remove their underpants
for any reason including a neurological examination.
During the 15 years that he
had been practicing, he had only seen two cases of cauda equina and that the
diagnosis was arrived at
in each case by taking a medical history from the
patient while they were patients in a hospital. To establish if saddle
anaesthesia
was present Mr Magner stated that he would ask the patient to self
Magner indicated that it was common for physiotherapists working within the
Practice to consult with each other regarding all aspects
of clinical treatment
of patients.
Magner was of the view that he would expect a physiotherapist would be competent
within 6 to 12 months of graduation. When they
first graduated they would be
expected to be competent at ‘standard treatments’ and he had
employed new graduates within
the Practice.
Evidence of Lorraine Jagger
9 is a statement made by Ms Jagger to the HCCC. Ms Jagger, a physiotherapist of
over 30 years experience, confirms she was
employed at the Practice from 2003 to
2006 and that at the relevant time she was the ‘team leader’ of the
Respondent.
The position of team leader required her to perform all the tasks
necessary for the smooth running of the practice. These tasks included
the supplies, ensuring the hydrocollator was correctly operating etc. She denied
having a supervisory role with respect
to the Respondent. Rather, all the
physiotherapists acted as a team and would seek advice from one another.
Specifically she stated
she would seek advice from the more recent graduates
regarding the appropriate use of the gym equipment as she did not have the same
experience as they had.
Jagger confirmed there was a collegiate atmosphere within the practice and that
the Respondent had asked her questions at other
times regarding the treatment of
patients. Ms Jagger could not recall specifically if she was present at the
Practice on the relevant
days, however she confirmed that it would be very
unlikely for there to be only one physiotherapist working in the Practice on any
other day apart from a Saturday. It does not appear to the Tribunal that any of
the relevant dates were Saturdays.
the Practice, draping via gowns, shorts, towels and sheets were common practice
within the Practice (and within physiotherapy
generally).
Jagger described in-service training operated by the Practice. It consisted of a
weekly two hour session and she recalled that
the Respondent had attended these
sessions. In general Ms Jagger was of the opinion that the standard of practice
within was high.
Jagger gave evidence that a physiotherapist must always obtain informed consent
and that it was a policy of the Practice to record
that it had been obtained.
She could not recall if it was a written policy within the Practice and during
cross-examination it appeared
that the clinical notes did not reflect adherence
to the policy of recording informed consent on every occasion.
Jagger gave a description of the layout of the Practice. There were two rooms
with glass fronts that could be curtained off for
or 5 treatment cubicles that could be curtained off for privacy and a large open
gymnasium area. The
room treatment areas were only a few steps away from having
a view into the gymnasium area.
Jagger stated that she had never come across a patient with a cauda equina
lesion in her 30 years of practice nor had she ever
asked a patient to remove
their underpants to perform a neurological examination (including a sensory
test), nor had she heard of
that practice.
she cannot recall the date of the meeting, Ms Jagger confirms that she attended
a meeting with the Respondent and Mr Magner
in February 2006.
recalled that Mr Magner had asked the Respondent a question to the effect of
‘Did you ask the patient to remove all of her
clothing from the waist
down?’ and that the Respondent replied with words to the effect of
‘Yes I did’.
Jagger also reports that during this meeting the following exchange occurred
between herself and Mr Magner:
Mr Magner: Have you ever felt the necessity to have a patient
remove all their clothing from the waist down for a similar examination?
Ms Jagger: I have never had to remove clothing from the waist down. Even
when I did vaginal faradism we never had a patient remove
Jagger recounts that both she and Mr Magner indicated that they did not consider
that he had undertaken an appropriate examination
and that the Respondent
appeared to consider it a normal practice. They indicated to the Respondent that
if he considered the patient
may have a cauda equina lesion then he should have
sought immediate medical attention for the patient by calling an ambulance or
sending her straight to a doctor.
Jagger recalls that Mr Magner asked the Respondent why he did not seek
assistance from her at the time of the examination. The
Respondent indicated
that he could not find her. Ms Jagger recalls she was in the clinic at the
relevant time. The only time that
it was likely that a physiotherapist was
working in the practice by themselves would have been on Saturdays.
Jagger confirmed in her oral evidence that clinical notes made regarding a
consultation with Ms A for 28 December 2005 were in
her handwriting and that
indicated to her that she had treated Ms A on that day. She had no independent
recollection of that consultation.
Statement of Ms Keri Clarke
Clarke made a statement to the police on 14 July 2006 (exhibit 10 (viii)). In
this statement Ms Clarke records that she worked
as the practice manager for the
Practice. Ms Clarke recounts a conversation she had with Ms A on 4 July 2006
wherein Ms A provided
an outline of the treatment she had received from the
Respondent.
Statement of Ms K-S
K-S is a work colleague of Ms A. In a statement made to the police on 6 August
2005 she states at paragraph 8:
On the morning after
has her first visit with
physiotherapist, I saw her at work.
I said to her, “How did it go with the physio?”
said, “I went OK, but he got me to take all my clothes
I said, “All of your clothes, even your underwear?”
said, “Yes everything.”
I said, “Did he give you a sheet or a gown to cover yourself
said, “No, he told me I had to be naked, and to lie on the
bed. I felt strange, and questioned him, but he said I had to be
I said, “And what happened?”
said, “He got tissues, in his hands and rubbed his hands
inside my thighs, up to the top of my groin and then spread my legs
I said, “Why did he do that?”
[Ms A] said, “He said he had to see the extent of my injuries, by
testing different area’s.”
I said, “It was only your back that is hurting?”
said, “Yes.”
I said, “Well why is he doing the inside of your leg like
said, “I did question him, but he said he had to find the
extent of the injury.”
I said, “That doesn’t sound right, I’ve been to the
physio before for a bad back, and they have not done that to
said, “I only did what he told me to do.”
I said, “We’ll that doesn’t sound right, you should ring
the physio and speak to the management there?”
seemed a bit hesitant to complain, I don’t think she wanted
to make a fuss, but I persisted with her to speak to the manager
Clinical Notes – Ms A
clinical notes of Ms A are provided in exhibit 10 (xiii) and exhibit 11.
is inconsistency noted between the Physiotherapy Management Plan document which
indicates paraesthesia (sensation of pins and
needles) “down whole
leg” and the clinical notes dated 23 December 2005 in which the body chart
appears to indicate no
paraesthesia or anaesthesia as “P&Ns
Numb” is crossed out. Both documents were completed by the
Respondent.
the clinical notes dated 23 December 2005, no concerns are flagged in the
“Special Questions” section which is for
identifying red flags. Red
flags are possible precautions which may require further investigation or which
contraindicate some interventions.
clinical notes record that neurological testing for reflexes, sensation and
muscle strength were all normal. “C(CE)”
indicates that testing for
spinal cord and/or cauda equina compromise was checked and no abnormality was
detected. The actual tests
performed are not recorded, however in his oral
evidence the Respondent stated he had tested for Babinski and clonus.
leg raise testing for neural tissue mobility was very slightly limited on the
left compared to the right but well within
normal range. In his oral evidence,
the Respondent stated that the ‘+ve’ recorded next to this test
indicated that pain
was reproduced in the patient when this test was
notes contain the following notations “C
and “pt was comfortable throughout” which the
Respondent indicated in his oral evidence to mean consent was given by the
patient to both examination and treatment and that the patient had been warned
The warnings involved the
Respondent telling Ms A that she should let him know if she had any discomfort,
pain or concerns during
the treatment. With respect to the recording of
‘pt was comfortable throughout”, the Respondent gave evidence that
had made this notation because Ms A did not ‘voice any concerns’
is clear from the notes that the Respondent initially considered the patient
primarily suffered from a gluteal muscle dysfunction.
This was confirmed in his
oral evidence, and he also confirmed that he maintained that diagnosis
throughout his treatment. He also
gave evidence that his secondary hypothesis
was that Ms A may have been suffering from a cauda equina lesion which caused
undertake the sensory testing.
clinical records for the later two sessions administered by the Respondent
indicate he now considered the pain to have a spinal
articular component (2/1/06
and 6/1/06).
document headed “Medical History” and dated 23 December 2005,
indicates that the patient responded ‘yes’
to the question:
“Numbness or tingling in your buttock or genital region?” The
accompanying note in the margin was partially
read by the Respondent as
‘if sitting for too long...............’ indicating that these
symptoms were only experienced
if sitting for too long. The patient also
responded in the affirmative to the question: “Weakness in your
patient responded in the negative to the question:
“Bladder or bowel problems?” a question the Tribunal notes is
to check for a cauda equina lesion. The page is initialled by the
Respondent and agreed that he had made the notes in the margin.
Revised Oswestry questionnaire (being the last two pages of exhibit 11) dated 23
December 2005 indicates the pain could be severe
and was worsening, but was
having minimal impact on the patient’s activities of daily living.
his oral evidence the, the Respondent stated that the order of the physical
examinations that he performed was that he had initially
performed observation
of spinal alignment, then active movement testing of the lumbar spine, then
length and stretch testing of the
gluteal and the piriformis muscles and then
straight leg raise test for neural tension. The neurological testing occurred
thereafter.
Clinical Notes – Ms B
B initially sustained an injury at work in January 2004. Her initial visit to to
an associated practice in Surry Hills was on 30
January 2004. The area injured
according to marks on the body chart for this date indicates the lumbar spine.
clinical notes indicate that Ms B received physiotherapy for this injury during
January 2004, August and September 2004. She re-presented
for treatment with a
recurrent episode in July 2005.
appears from the clinical notes that Ms B re-presented for treatment some time
later. The clinical notes pertaining to this date
include the medical history
form and the body chart with the initial examination and treatment notated. This
entry is undated and
unsigned, but was confirmed during the oral evidence of Ms
B and the Respondent to have occurred on 17 February 2006, the date when
was examined by the Respondent.
noted above, the medical history form is undated and unsigned, however during
oral evidence given by the Respondent, he confirmed
that this form was completed
by him. The key points in the medical history form are that the question
regarding the presence of ‘numbness
or tingling in your buttock or genital
region’ is ticked ’yes’ indicating symptoms in one or both of
these areas
were present. The word ‘unsure’ is written next to this
question. During oral evidence given by Ms B, it was confirmed
numbness was experienced in the buttock or posterior buttock/ thigh region.
second relevant question on the medical history form is the question asking
whether bladder or bowel problems were present. This
is ticked ‘no’
indicating that these problems were not present.
body chart indicates the areas of symptoms experienced by Ms B were the
posterior buttock/ thigh area and the dorsum of the foot.
Aggravating factors
recorded include coughing, sneezing and bending, and it was noted that nothing
eased the symptoms. There is an
arrow pointing to the anterior thigh on the body
chart. During oral evidence, the Respondent indicated that this referred to the
presence of pins and needles and muscle spasms in this area. Other written notes
record that there has been a 2 year history of pain
with no break from the pain.
next page indicated a physical examination. There is nothing written next to the
‘observation’, ‘range of motion’
‘palpation’ headings. This may indicate that these examinations were
not performed.
is notation that the piriformis was tight. There is notation that the straight
leg raise on the left and right were 50 and 70
degrees respectively. There is
notation under the heading ‘neurological examination’ that the
sensation was reduced in
the L3/L4 dermatome and the strength was reduced in the
L3/4 myotome.
is notation next to the C (CE) heading ‘nil’. During oral evidence
given by the Respondent, it was confirmed that
this referred to the Babinski and
clonus tests which were negative.
is notation under the heading ‘Phases’ that there are increased
neurological signs (see last page of exhibit 12).
There is notation under the
heading ‘treatment’ that traction with a left leg bias was
performed. There is notation under
the heading ‘plan’ to check with
the Doctor.
clinical notes would overall indicate that the working or primary hypothesis was
a L3/4 nerve root compromise. This primary hypothesis
was confirmed by the
Respondent during oral evidence.
is no indication in the clinical notes (i.e. either in the body chart, the
physical examination or the medical history) that
a cauda equine lesion was
considered as part of the differential diagnosis.
is no documentation of consent being obtained, alternatives offered or warnings
being given.
his oral evidence the Respondent clarified that the body chart had the words
‘muscle spasm’ and ‘pins and needles’
with an arrow
pointing to the front of the left leg in the thigh area. In the neurological
examination he noted the L3/L4 dermatomes
and he clarified in his oral evidence
what area of the body he was referring to. L3 referred to the antero-lateral
thigh and L4 was
the area at the front of the knee.
the notes had recorded decreased strength in the L3/L4 myotome the Respondent
indicated he was referring to the quadriceps muscle
for the L3 region and foot
inversion (indicating tibialis anterior muscle) for the L4.
relation to the Medical History document the Respondent confirmed that he had
completed this form entirely (i.e. the ticks were
not done by Ms B). He also
confirmed that he clarified with Ms B that the pins and needles experienced by
Ms B were in the buttock.
He stated that she was a little vague and unsure about
whether or not this sensation extended anteriorly.
Peer Review Report – Mr Albert Coleiro
Coleiro provided a report dated 14 December 2007 to the HCCC (exhibit 14).
respect to Ms B, Mr Coleiro stated he was of the view that there was no reason
why the patient would need to fully disrobe and
expressed strong criticism of
the Respondent’s conduct in this regard. He considered this conduct to be
a breach of the NSW
Registration Board Policy on Professional Conduct (Policy
2.2 – Respect for People) that requires a physiotherapist ‘treat
clients in a way that promotes their personal dignity and is sensitive to their
individual needs’.
respect to Ms A, Mr Coleiro opined that the examination undertaken by the
Respondent was ‘totally inappropriate for her
symptoms and not in
accordance with proper clinical practice’ as the presenting condition did
not require an examination of
the genital region for reduced sensations. The
Respondent had afforded no dignity to the client by asking her to disrobe and
providing a gown or shorts. Mr Coleiro expressed very strong criticism of
the conduct, it falling ‘significantly below’
the standard expected
of a physiotherapist.
Tribunal notes that Mr Coleiro refers to the 2006 version of the Policy
Statement; however, it is the 1994 edition that will be
applied by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal further notes that the terms of ‘
section 1.2
2006 corresponds with
section 5.2
and ‘Policy 2.1’ corresponds with
of the 1994 edition. Elaborating on his criticism, Mr Coleiro
provides the following at page 2 of his report:
The NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board’s policy on
physiotherapists and Sexual Misconduct
section 1.2
states that “
physiotherapist is in a unique position regarding physical and emotional
proximity. Clients may be required to disrobe and to
physiotherapists to examine and treat them occasionally in an intimate way.
It is imperative that a detailed explanation about these
procedures be conveyed
to the client at every step, and the client’s prior consent be obtained
and documented”
(Ref. 2). The Respondent has not explained his purpose
for examination nor obtained [Ms B’s] prior consent or documented
The Respondent has also fallen below accepted clinical standards by
examining [Ms B] genitals. Policy 2.1 (Ref 2) states “
absolute rule that a physiotherapist who engages in sexual activity with a
client is guilty of professional misconduct or
unsatisfactory professional
conduct. This encompasses activity that is of a sexual nature that may not be
consensual such as inappropriate
touching/feeling/examination of the client or
lewd or sexually explicit behaviour exhibited by the physiotherapist towards the
Coleiro had seen one patient with a cauda equina lesion during his career, being
a patient in hospital with a post-op complication.
He was of the view that if a
patient presented with symptoms that he suspected was cauda equina lesion, he
may do a lower limb neurological
examination then seek immediate medical
Coleiro gave oral evidence that he had never required a patient to remove their
underpants. On one occasion Mr Coleiro had a situation
where a patient
inadvertently removed their underpants. He stated that it was just a matter of
informing the patient that it was
not necessary and ‘inform them to put
their underwear back on’ before leaving the room (T10.7, 1/7/09).
Coleiro indicated that his opinions were based upon the two references listed in
his report as well as his knowledge of common
practice within the
profession.
cross-examination a lengthy account of the examination of Ms B (as described in
the evidence of the Respondent) was put to
Mr Coleiro (see T 3.5 - 5.26,
1/7/09), to which he replied:
Well, nowhere in physiotherapy training or undergraduate
training, postgraduate courses would you ever be instructed to take underwear
off a patient unless it's a specific pelvic floor type problem, which this
Coleiro initially agreed that he would be less critical of such conduct if it
was explained on the basis of an error of judgment
rather than being sexually
motivated (T 5.41-44, 1/7/09). However, this evidence was followed by further
cross-examination (T 6.9-39,
Q. Yes. If the practitioner asked the patient, as he did with
Ms B, it is not in dispute, to lower her underwear to perform this
he was motivated or if he did that out of an error of judgment rather than a
desire for sexual gratification, would you
be less critical of his actions than
you are in your report currently?
A. Well, as a physiotherapist there's no need at all to remove underwear,
so I couldn't say that I'd be less judgmental because there's
no signs to carry
out that action.
Q. If he thought there were, if he had a bona fide view which he accepts
now that he was wrong--
A. Well, if he was suspecting those sort of symptoms you still - the
correct action would be to send to a medical practitioner straightaway.
Q. And he accepts that now but I am asking you to answer these questions
in a hypothetical sense and I suspect it is probably difficult
because relying
on your own experience you have not done anything like this yourself, have
Q. Nor have you ever experienced or been aware of anybody else having
A. That's correct.
Q. So you find it extremely unusual conduct, don't you?
Q. But what I am asking you to do, if you can, is to tell the tribunal in
your view, doing the best you can, whether or not you would
be less critical of
the physiotherapist, Mr Rezk, depending on what his motivation was?
A. It's a hard question to answer. I couldn't say I'd be less critical,
no, because there's no - just no signs for that to be carried
Coleiro was taken through the same exercise with respect to Ms A and he remained
of the same degree of criticism of the Respondent’s
conduct (T 8.31-32,
answer to questions from the Tribunal Mr Coleiro (T 8.40-9.26, 1/7/09)
Q. Mr Coleiro, can you tell me in your professional
opinion, is there any reason to test sensation around the ASIS that you have
ever come across?
A. Perhaps if there was a lesion referring from the back around to that
region but it's unlikely to give you any further information
dysfunction or neurological problems. Perhaps if you were looking for an
entrapped nerve higher up in the hip or
if their clinical history suggested
Q. Could you just specify what sort of nerve entrapment you'd be talking
A. A peripheral nerve, so the nerve coming around the iliac crest rather
than a spinal nerve.
Q. Can you think of a situation in which altered sensation around the
ASIS could be attributed to a spinal nerve problem?
Q. Have you had cause in your professional practise to test sensation in
that area for a spinal problem?
Q. With respect to cauda equina lesions have you ever encountered a cauda
equina lesion yourself?
A. Yes, on one occasion.
Q. How many years have you been in practise?
A. Twenty years.
Q. Did you undertake any sort of physical testing to help you determine
that it was a cauda equina lesion?
A. To clarify where I encountered it, it was a post surgical patient when
I was working in orthopaedics.
Q. In a hospital?
A. In a hospital, that's correct.
Q. Okay, so they had just had spinal surgery?
A. Yes, that's right. It was a complication of surgery.
Coleiro expressed the view that he would expect a new graduate to ask a patient
to replace their underwear if they inadvertently
removed same as this was an
issue that was the subject of training.
cross-examined, Mr Coleiro indicated he would still be of the same degree of
criticism even if there was no sexual motivation
to the conduct of the
Respondent i.e. it being a result of inexperience. Mr Coleiro was of the view
that any graduate would understand
the importance of providing a patient with
the appropriate draping to ensure their dignity is maintained, that this was not
where experience was material to the standard expected.
Coleiro gave evidence that sensory testing over the ASIS region is not indicated
for any spinal problem, rather it was only indicated
for a possible peripheral
nerve entrapment.
Police involvement
Ms A and Ms B made complaints to the police. The matters were initially set down
to be heard in the Penrith Local Court on 19
October 2006.
of the police Fact Sheet lists the Respondent’s occupation as
‘Masseur’, in another place he is recorded as
physiotherapist.
it appears that the charges did not proceed. The Tribunal has disregarded these
issues and had no regard to any views that
may have been formed by police during
this process.
Other documentary evidence
email from the Respondent’ legal representatives to the HCCC dated 13
April 2007 indicated that the criminal proceedings
against the Respondent were
withdrawn and dismissed on the basis that the complainant was not willing to
give evidence in this matter.
An earlier email indicates that the hearing had
been stood over from December 2006 on the basis of the unavailability of a
(exhibit 19).
13 May 2008, the Physiotherapists Registration Board placed conditions on the
Respondent’s registration in accordance with
section 55 (exhibit
R2). These conditions are reproduced in Annexure B hereto.
Ms A and Ms B shaded in diagrams of the human body and described the area of the
body they referred to in their evidence.
Evidence of the Respondent
the meeting between Mr Magner, Lorraine Jagger and the Respondent, on 22
February 2006, the Respondent provided a Personnel Notice
Incident Report he had
prepared. In this report the Respondent wrote
...so I advised her to remove or pull down her undies so I could
check whether there was pins/needles extended to the genitalia the
sensation was
normal at the line just medial to the ASIS so the examination of sensation
concluded at that part. Also prior to asking
her to pull down her undies (the
lower portion only) I had asked her 2-3 times whether she was comfortable with
this request. She
answered that it was fine & ‘you’re only
trying to help me’. After the examination was complete, that is of
sensation, I immediately asked her to lift her underwear, the examination took
at most 1.5 minutes. The examination was negative
for cauda equina/cord signs. I
continued to finish the neurological exam & started treatment with manual
traction. At the end
of the session I asked her to consult a medical
practitioner regarding the slowly worsening pain,& possibly seek referral to
a specialist.
Also during the course of the examination, I did not at any point touch
the genitalia. I did not make any lewd or inappropriate remarks,
suggest any other request beyond what was written above.
With the history she stated that the mechanism of injury was a fall.
Healing of clinically silent fractures may produce exuberant
growth of bone
which may lead to cauda equina impingement.
way of a letter from his legal representative dated 7 September 2006, the
Respondent indicated to the HCCC that he did not wish
to give any account of the
circumstances surrounding the complaint whilst criminal proceedings against him
were ongoing.
way of a letter from his legal representative dated 11 September 2007, the
Respondent indicated to the HCCC (in response to their
letter dated 18 or 28
July 2007) that he did not wish to make a response to the notification that the
investigation by the HCCC would
be re-activated given the withdrawal of the
criminal proceedings against the Respondent.
way of a letter from his legal representative dated 20 February 2008, the
Respondent indicated to the HCCC (in response to their
letter dated 25 January
2008) that he did not wish to make any response.
Respondent provided a statement dated 12 June 2009. The contents of the
statement are dealt with below. The Respondent also provided
monthly reports to
the Board pursuant to the conditions placed upon his registration (refer above
– Background of the Respondent).
Also pursuant to the conditions on the
Respondent’s Registration, reports from the Board approved Mentor, Mr
Gaetano Milazzo
(exhibit R3). The contents of these reports are also outlined
statement of the Respondent includes the following information regarding the
Respondents treatment of Ms A:
Respondent interpreted Ms A’s answer on the questionnaire that she had
numbness or tingling in the buttock or genital area
as a ‘Red Flag
alert’ (paragraph 8).
‘...because
of the possibility of cauda equina I thought it was necessary to test sensation
in that area’ (paragraph 8).
Respondent clarified ‘the component of saddle paraesthesia as referred to
in the questionnaire’ and then informed
Ms A that he ‘...suspected a
possible cauda equina lesion’ (paragraph 9).
Respondent then explained to Ms A the nature of a cauda equina lesion, commented
that it was ‘quite unlikely but posed a
serious danger’ (paragraph
Respondent continued at paragraph 9: I explained to her that I proposed to do a
sensation test to rule out the condition which
would involve using two tissues
and simultaneously running these tissues over the corresponding regions of both
sides of the body,
to test whether there was any difference between the two, to
to get a clear idea of the region of sensation loss. I asked her whether she
would be happy for me to do that and she agreed.
Respondent recalled that Ms A stated she had heard that it ‘could be nerve
damage’ and that ‘she was quite worried
11 – 18 of the statement read:
asked Ms A to remove her clothes and put on a gown. I left the room. When I
returned Ms A had removed all her clothes and put
on the gown. I did not ask her
to remove her underwear. I believe that there must have been a
misunderstanding.
the time I obviously noticed that she did not have underpants on. I should have
immediately told her to put her underpants back
on. My failure to do so
reflected poor judgment. I felt awkward at the time and I feel my inexperience
was a factor. I thought that
if I spoke to her about putting on underwear, it
would make her feel embarrassed. This was a major error on my part.
deny that Ms A was not wearing a gown.
order to test sensation I had Ms A lie on her back. I stood by the side of the
examination table. Simultaneously I lightly dragged
tissues progressively
across her inner thighs. To permit that it was necessary for her to spread her
legs slightly. No abnormal
sensation was reported. I then moved to her
anterior thighs and continued the test. Again no abnormal sensation was
reported. I
did not touch the genitals or the body of Ms A within several
centimetres of the genitals with any part of my body or the tissues.
then proceeded to carry out the treatment on Ms A. I am very sorry that Ms A was
so distressed about the way she felt exposed during
the treatment. I did not
intentionally cause her to expose her breast or vagina. As stated above I ought
to have told her to put
on her underpants to avoid any such distress and
embarrassment. If she had removed her bra I ought to have told her to replace
saw Ms A on two further occasions. There were no more examinations involving the
pelvic area. The second and third consultations
were similar. Ms A wore a gown.
Ms A did not wear underpants at the second or third consultation. Again, I ought
to have told her
to put them on. I apologise for any distress suffered by Ms A
at those further consultations.
deny any intentionally offensive behaviour on my part and that any part of my
behaviour was for sexual reasons.
the consultation I talked with Ms A about what I was doing.
19 – 25 of the statement deal directly with the statement made by Ms A
dated 4 July 2006 and makes specific denials
to several matters stated therein.
These include denials that he asked Ms A to remove her underwear or to take off
all her clothes.
Further he denies that she made complaints regarding her
‘middle torso area’, that he dragged the tissue across the
vagina or perineum, that he pushed Ms A’s thighs down to
the level of the examination table or prodded her inner thigh and
pubic hairline
and he denies leaving Ms A uncovered while the heat pack was applied.
his statement (exhibit R1) at paragraph 46 the Respondent admitted he lied to Mr
Magner and Ms Jagger when he told them he had
not treated other patients in the
manner in which he had treated Ms B. This was not discovered until July 2006
when Ms A attended
the Practice to report the conduct of the Respondent.
Gaetano Milazzo is a senior physiotherapist asked by the Respondent to provide
guidance regarding the clinical presentation of
a cauda equina lesion and
ethical and legal obligations surrounding consent.
Reports of Mr Milazzo (exhibit R4) were provided to the Board in accordance with
conditions on the Respondent’s Registration.
The reports indicate that
during their meetings, Mr Milazzo reviewed the research undertaken by the
Respondent. Other topics covered
were the Respondent’s current practises,
reports by the Respondent on the in-service trainings he had attended, and the
development
of his understanding of appropriate examination and assessment
processes for sensitive areas. The Respondent undertook readings and
set by Mr Milazzo and appears to have made very satisfactory progress with the
his oral evidence the Respondent admitted he had lied with respect to the
following matters:
That he left
the Practice because of ‘pay’ (on the Minchinbury Hospital
Employment Application Form).
That he did
not actually go and look for Ms Jagger when he was treating Ms A when he had
previously stated he had in fact looked for
her to seek assistance with the
situation (see record of 22 Feburary meeting with Magner and Jagger exhibit 7
annexure A). At T57.1-21
(30/6/09) the Respondent gave the following
Q. Did you say to Ms A that you would prefer that
she put her underwear back on at any stage?
Q. Why not?
A. I don't know. I should have.
Q. You must have been embarrassed?
A. I was very embarrassed, yes.
Q. Were there female employees at Precision at this time?
Q. Ms Jagger was there wasn't she?
A. I believe so.
Q. Did you talk to her about perhaps assisting you in this situation?
A. I couldn't find her.
Q. Did you look for her?
interviewed by Ms Jagger and Mr Magner about his conduct with Ms B, the
Respondent denied there had been any other instances
of similar conduct with
other patients.
his oral evidence the Respondent stated that he had tested the entirety of both
patients’ legs. After his attention was drawn
to the clinical records he
had made of Ms B’s report of pins and needles in her left foot, stated he
had in fact commenced
the sensory testing at the foot, rather than just the
respect to informed consent the Respondent indicated he understood the
components of informed consent (T92.35-39, 30/6/09) included
explaining the
problem, the risks and offering alternatives. He stated in answer to a question
from the Tribunal:
Q. No, within physiotherapy clinical practice, what do you
understand to be the components of informed consent - of obtaining informed
A. Okay, so it's why you're going to do, why you're going to do it, how
you're going to do it, the risks involved, if there are any
alternatives and
whether they're happy to do it.
Respondent admitted he did not offer alternatives to the sensory examination to
either Ms A or Ms B.
Respondent confirmed that he had not understood the seriousness of this
complaint until he had worked with Mr Milazzo. Initially
he claimed that he had
no recollection of having been taught ethics in his undergraduate degree. He was
surprised to be reminded
that he had received a high distinction pass in 2000 in
the subject entitled Ethical Physiotherapy Practice.
Respondent denied that there was any discussion of cauda equina in the
in-service sessions at the Practice.
Respondent provided a number of ‘references’ to the Tribunal. Two
came from senior members of the Respondent’s
church and another from a
recent employer.
Antonias Kaldas provided a letter dated 10 June 2009 addressed ‘To whom it
May Concern’. Father Kaldas acknowledged
receipt of a copy of the
Complaint in this matter. Prior to his ordination as a priest in 1991, Father
Kaldas had completed an MBBS
at Sydney University and qualified as a medical
doctor. He had worked in that profession for about three years. Since his
he has not practiced medicine and maintains ‘retired
registration’. Father Kaldas records that the Respondent’s
was part of the parish when he was appointed there in July 1991, therefore he
has known the Respondent for nearly 18 years.
The reference continues:
I have also been his Father Confessor for the same period of
time. Guirguis’ parents, brother and sister are all greatly respected
loved by everyone they know at Church. They are also all active in serving
their community on a regular basis.
I have always found Guirguis himself to be a gentleman of impeccable
character. From his childhood, Guirguis has served as a deacon
in the Coptic
Church, carrying out his liturgical duties each Sunday with diligence and
humility. He is one of the leading deacons
in our parish and serves as a
teacher and role model to our deacons. He gets along with everyone quite well
and is universally liked
and respected. His relations with the female members
of our parish have always been totally normal; he is well served by his happy
nature and easy friendliness.
Guirguis has also been a Sunday School teacher since finishing High
School. He has served a variety of age groups, mostly in the
High School
sector. His activities have included teaching classes on Sundays, leading
outings and supervising overnight camps, so
he is often in a position of grave
responsibility. As part of his duties, Guirguis works closely with a number of
other Sunday School
teachers, both male and female, and of all ages. In
addition, Guirguis has also often served our Friday Night Youth Groups, dealing
with young people from aged 16 to 25 years old. He regularly counsels younger
people in the issues and challenges they face in life
and has always done so
with sincerity and utmost probity.
Thus Guirguis frequently deals with female parishioners of all ages, and
often from a position of authority or responsibility. Without
exception, he has
always behaved and carried out his duties with decency and integrity. Our
Middle Eastern Coptic community is a
small and extensively interconnected one
where it is virtually impossible to hide any kind of misdemeanour. News of any
misbehaviour, or even the insinuation of misbehaviour travels quickly
around the community and is certain to reach the ears of the
parish priest. And
yet, in the eighteen years I have known Guirguis, which represent his teenage
life and young adulthood, there
has never been the slightest complaint,
allegation, or even rumour of any kind of inappropriate behaviour form him. In
fact, I could
say with confidence that it would be very hard indeed to find a
young man whose record and reputation is as lily white as is his.
If there is
any blot on his character, it would be that he has among his peers the
reputation of being slightly goofy – the
kind of simple character that
takes some time to realise that another has made a joke at his expense. Even
then, there is not the
faintest hint of malice or evil his character, but rather
modesty, forgiveness and equanimity.
My personal experience of his character is quite in keeping with his
reputation. As his Father Confessor of eighteen years, there
is little of
significance in his life of which I am not aware. Having so intimate a
knowledge of a person’s life for such
a period of time, including those
teenage years when the personality is still forming, one can generally form a
reasonably accurate
picture of the degree of sincerity and the nature of the
character of the person. I can thus state without reservation that Guirguis
the kind of person who would rather die than willingly do something seriously
wrong. He regularly examines and evaluates his
own behaviour and has a
sensitive conscience that leaves him no peace when he has in fact done something
he realises to have been
Having read the complaint raised against him, I am too meagre in my
knowledge of physiotherapeutic practice to be able to comment
appropriateness of his actions. What I can vouch for without hesitation is that
Guirguis Rezk is [a] young man of impeccable
character, sensitive conscience and
sincere morals to a degree that is rare today in our society.
R17 is a letter addressed ‘To Whom it May Concern’ by Father Bishoy
Botros. Father Botros is currently the Parish
Priest at Archangel Michael &
St Bishoy Coptic Orthodox Church at Mt Druitt. Father Botros indicates he is
also a qualified medical
practitioner. The reference, which is hand dated 11
June 2009, does not state that the author was aware of the Complaint before the
Tribunal; however, the letter of request attached a copy of the Complaint. The
reference states that the author had known the Respondent
for a period of 5
years and that he was ‘...a good, respectful decent servant at our
church’. It goes on to state:
During this period, I as well as the majority of the
congregation at our church found [the Respondent] to be a good model to all our
youth. In fact he is one of the leaders in most of the youth services especially
the spiritual camps and sports.
In brief, I can announce him to be admired by the majority of the youth at
Submissions
Submissions made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a comprehensive written submission in accordance with the
Directions made by the Tribunal at the conclusion of the
evidence in this
matter. The submissions are reproduced at Schedule D hereto.
Submissions made by the Respondent
was conceded on behalf of the Respondent that if he was motivated by
something akin to some sort of improper sexually prurient desire for
sexual gratification......in his examination of these two patients
contravenes a written policy of the board or not it is not all right’
then his conduct would amount to professional misconduct
Respondent also provided comprehensive written submissions in accordance with
the Directions made by the Tribunal at the conclusion
of the evidence in this
matter. The submissions are reproduced at Schedule E hereto.
HCCC Submissions in reply
HCCC made submissions in reply dated 23 September 2009. The HCCC submitted that
any criticism made of the report of Mr Coleiro’s
report having been
prepared without reference to the Respondent’s version of events should be
viewed in light of the fact that
the Respondent had not given a statement to the
police or the HCCC during the investigation phase of this matter.
Mr Coleiro gave evidence that he had not seen the statement of the Respondent,
the document that was dated 15 June 2009 had
in fact been provided to Mr Coleiro
under cover of a letter from the HCCC dated 17 June 2009. The HCCC submitted
that Mr Coleiro
must have been mistaken when he gave evidence that he had not
seen the statement of the Respondent and may have thought it was a
reference to
another, as yet, unserved statement. The HCCC submitted:
Any implied criticism of Mr Coleiro for not taking account of Mr
Rezk’s version of events is unwarranted and does not assist
the Tribunal
in determining the matter before it.
HCCC urged the Tribunal to reject the submission made by the Respondent that the
evidence of Mr Coleiro was not only contradictory
but was also flawed as he
maintained his level of criticism as severe regardless of whether or not the
conduct was sexually motivated.
The HCCC based this submission on the fact that
Mr Coleiro made it clear in evidence that he thought there was nothing,
a purported error of clinical judgment, to support an examination of
the nature that was undertaken by the Respondent.
Tribunal’s Findings of Fact – re the
Particulars
are some direct contests between the accounts of the Respondent and Ms A as to
precisely what occurred during the three consultations
in question. The
Respondent relies heavily upon the evidence of Ms A with respect to the issue of
whether she was treated by another
physiotherapist between the time of the first
consultation with the Respondent and the next two consultations. The clinical
held in the Practice record Ms A consulting Ms Jagger on one occasion
during this period. Ms A gave the following evidence with respect
matter, noting that she was asked to recall events that had occurred some three
and a half years later without the benefit
of the clinical notes (T14.25 –
Q. Isn't it the case that following your first attendance upon
Mr Rezk on 23 December you returned on 28 December and saw
A. You're saying that's the second visit?
A. Not to my recollection.
Q. How good is your recollection, do you recall that or not?
A. No, I don't recall that at all.
Q. So you would say that you did not see Lorraine Jagger until
10 February 2006?
A. I don't - I can't recall the dates but I did see Lorraine after I saw
Q. Let me probably put it a bit easier for you because again it's not a
memory test about those dates but you are certain today as
you sit there that
the sequence of events was three visits to Mr Rezk?
Q. Two attendances upon Mr Lovell?
Q. And three attendances upon Lorraine Jagger?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. And if I suggested to you that, as I did a moment ago, that you had
seen Lorraine Jagger on 28 December in between your first
and second visits
to Mr Rezk, what would you say?
A. I did not see Lorraine.
Q. You would deny that?
Q. Vehemently deny it?
A. I can't recall it. I recall seeing Rezk three times.
Q. You say that Mr Lovell was the first person you attended at
Precision Physio who offered you the option of shorts or a gown?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. If you had seen Lorraine Jagger on 28 December between your two
attendances, your first two attendances upon Mr Rezk, she would
have offered you the choice of shorts or a gown?
A. I can't speak for her but I presume so.
Q. But you have no recollection of that whatsoever?
A. No, I don't.
Tribunal accepts that the evidence supports the Respondent’s contention
that Ms A was treated by Ms Jagger after the first
consultation with the
Respondent and before the second and third consultations. While this issue may
well go to the experience of
Ms A with another physiotherapist, it is not a
factual matter that goes to the heart of the Particulars of Complaint. The
takes the evidence of Ms A to be that she has no recollection of the
consultation with Ms Jagger. The circumstances of this failure
of the memory of
Ms A is a factor that was weighed by the Tribunal when considering the evidence.
Tribunal found both Ms A and Ms B gave evidence in a forthright manner despite
the difficult subject matter.
HCCC submission with respect to the credibility of the evidence of Ms A and Ms B
is accepted by the Tribunal. Further, the HCCC
submissions regarding some of the
Respondent’s assertions being implausible are also accepted. The
Respondent’s conduct
was so far outside the bounds of propriety that it
would allow a view to be formed that the conduct was motivated by some form of
sexual interest. The Tribunal is of the view that it does not have to make a
finding with respect to the actual motivation of the
Respondent, the conduct as
found by the Tribunal is of a sufficiently serious nature to warrant the
suspension or removal of the
Respondent from the Register, and therefore a
finding of professional misconduct is made.
Respondent gave evidence in a less than convincing manner. His suggestion that
he assumed Ms A would leave her underpants on for
the second consultation does
not ring true.
Respondent gave evidence that he had been asked to see Ms B for an unbiased
opinion because of her failure to progress with treatment
at the other practice.
This is at odds with the evidence of Ms B that she attended the Practice due to
its convenient location.
Respondent was unable to tell the Tribunal where he had learnt of the
‘tissue test’ over the genital area for cauda
equina lesions. The
evidence of the other physiotherapists would suggest that there is no such
B’s evidence was that the testing was only undertaken in the thigh area
whereas the Respondent stated that he had started
at the foot and worked upwards
to the ASIS area.
Management Plan for Ms B does not correlate with the clinical notes, and the
Respondent did not provide a satisfactory explanation
of the discrepancy to the
Tribunal is particularly concerned that there was no offer made (to either Ms A
or Ms B) of alternatives to the Respondent performing
the tissue test. The
requirements of informed consent would have mandated this, even where the
patient’s underwear remained
Tribunal notes with respect to Ms A that the Respondent admitted that she
indicated that her symptoms were in her hip area and
she had not indicated any
bowel and bladder problems more typical of a cauda equina lesion.
Respondent also stated that Ms B had indicated her buttock area as the area with
symptoms but that she was unsure as to the exact
distribution of the symptoms.
Once again the Tribunal notes that there were no clear indications of any area
that may be involved
with a cauda equina lesion.
Respondent admits Particular 1. There is no factual dispute between the parties
with respect to this matter. The Tribunal finds
this Particular established.
Respondent admits Particular 2. There is no factual dispute between the parties
with respect to this matter. The Tribunal finds
this Particular established.
respect to Particular 3, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts that Ms
A received treatment while she did not have her
underwear on. Further, the
Respondent accepted under cross-examination that he had instructed Ms A to take
off her clothes, although
there was no need for Ms A to remove the top half of
her clothing. The Respondent accepted that it was a communication error on his
part that he now deeply regretted (T50.18-29, 30/6/09). The Respondent went on
during cross-examination to state that he would clarify
with patients what items
of clothing should be removed ‘if they asked’.
Respondent’s evidence was that while he was providing treatment to Ms A
her genital area was exposed. Ms A’s evidence
on this matter was not
successfully challenged under cross-examination; she maintained that the
Respondent had confirmed that she
should remove her underwear. There was no
clinical indication for the removal of the patient’s underwear, as
confirmed by all
three physiotherapists that gave evidence before the
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms A that the Respondent directed her to remove
her underwear without proper and sufficient clinical
indications for doing so.
In fact the Tribunal is of the view there were no clinical indications for so
respect to Particular 4, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms A that she was
not provided with any clothing or towel to cover
herself during the first
consultation. Once again Ms A’s evidence on this matter was not
successfully challenged during cross-examination
and the Tribunal makes general
comments regarding the Respondent’s demeanour and credibility of his
Respondent stated during cross-examination that he only became aware that Ms A
was naked when he lifted her gown to perform a
spinal alignment check (T52).
This was not mentioned in the statement of the Respondent.
respect to Particular 5(i), the Tribunal notes that at T26.40 (29/6/09) Ms A
confirmed her evidence, in an emphatic manner, that
the Respondent was standing
at the foot of the bed facing her when he lifted her legs. Such movement would
have exposed Ms A’s
genital area.
respect to Particular 5(ii), the Tribunal has regard to the evidence of Ms A at
paragraph 6 of her statement as well as her oral
evidence as to the position of
the Respondent at the time her legs were spread apart. While the Tribunal
accepts the submission of
the Respondent that Ms A did not give specific
evidence that the Respondent held her ankles at the time of the actions
in this Particular, given the fact that the Respondent was standing at
the foot of the bed it is improbable that the Respondent held
any other part of
Ms A’s body to perform this action. In any case, the Tribunal is of the
view that this sub-particular does
not add any weight to the consideration of
the characterisation of the actions of the Respondent.
respect to Particular 5(iii) the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms A that as a
result of the actions of the Respondent her
legs were spread apart. Given the
Respondent’s evidence that it was his intention to test the inner
thigh’s of Ms A,
it is probable that the legs of the patient would have
been spread apart.
respect to Particular 6, the Tribunal has indicated it prefers, on balance, the
evidence of Ms A to the Respondent on this issue.
The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the conduct as particularised occurred. On the Respondent’s
version, he is faced
with a patient who had inadvertently removed her underwear
in circumstances where he then intended to undertake a sensation test
inner thigh area. In these circumstances, where there is a high chance of a
patient misunderstanding his actions, it would
be essential for the informed and
express consent of the patient to be recorded in the notes and for a detailed
record of the examination
to be made. No such records are found in the notes.
The Respondent does acknowledge that the patient had no underwear on and that
was testing her inner thighs.
respect to Particular 7, the Tribunal notes that Ms A gave evidence that
‘prodding’ may not have been the most appropriate
word to use. The
statement made by Ms A to the police used the word prodding. During
cross-examination Ms A was asked questions as
to the exact nature of the actions
of the Respondent. It was evident to the Tribunal that Ms A was uncomfortable
talking of these
matters in such a public forum and was embarrassed by the fact
that she had allowed this conduct to occur. At T 28. 42 – 29.4
Ms A gave the following evidence:
Q. And as I understand what you are saying there, it is that he
did that with a tissue over his fingers, so he's prodding that area
fingers, is that what you are suggesting?
A. Okay, that word "prodded" is probably incorrect. It is incorrect. He
just sort of whisked it.
Q. Just so I am clear on that, prodding has got a fairly--
A. Yes, it wasn't a prod. It wasn't a prod.
Q. So whatever it was or I understand what you are saying but basically
he was dragging the tissues in the way I was suggesting to
you earlier that you
didn't accept but you say that he was basically just holding the tissues in his
fingers and allowing the ends
to sort of--
A. No, that's not correct.
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s submission that Ms A was
resiling from her evidence with respect to this conduct,
rather she was
attempting to be as accurate as possible in describing it. The Tribunal relies
upon the general comments below regarding
the acceptance of the evidence of Ms A
over that of the Respondent.
T64.12-26 (29/06/09) the Respondent was cross-examined regarding the the
evidence given by Ms A about the areas of Ms A in which
the tissue made contact
as follows:
Q. And her evidence also that you did the tissue test over her
vagina or on her vagina?
Q. And also that you did the sensation test on her perineum?
A. Yes, I heard her testimony.
Q. I'm sorry.
A. Yes, I heard her.
Q. And I take it, sir, that you say that didn't happen?
A. Yes, that didn't happen.
Q. I put it to you, sir, that in fact it did happen.
A. I deny that, yes.
respect to Particular 8, the Tribunal notes the admission of the Respondent and
that it is not a fact that was controversial.
respect to Particular 9, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent acknowledges he
had provided Ms A with a gown on these occasions
as reported by Ms A. The
Tribunal accepts Ms A’s evidence that the Respondent directed her to
remove all her clothing. The
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s denial of a
motive of sexual gratification for the conduct in 9 (iii).
respect to Particular 10, the Tribunal notes the admission of the Respondent and
that it is not a fact that was controversial
between the parties.
respect to Particular 11, the Tribunal notes the Respondent admitted he asked Ms
B to lower her underwear during the consultation.
As set out above the Tribunal
accepts the evidence that there is no clinical indication for so doing.
T74.24-45 (30/6/09), the Respondent gave the following evidence:
Q. The fact that you had treated a patient and required that
patient to take down their underwear for what you were told was an unnecessary
procedure, you didn't understand that was serious?
A. At the time I didn't understand, no, but it was - it became
Q. What part of it didn't you understand was serious, sir?
A. Well, the fact that I had performed it for a - to clarify a symptom
that was what was running in my mind. I didn't see the sexual,
well, purported
sexual nature of it, I didn't see that, and until later on, you know, several
months later on I didn't - I didn't
see how it could be sexual in nature at the
time. I just saw it as a test that I needed to do.
Q. Sir, are you saying to this tribunal that you were unable to identify
the sexual nature of the complaint, a complaint that involved
a female removing
her underwear on your direction, is that your evidence?
A. As I've said before, I did not direct her to remove her
Q. I'll put it this way: You did direct Ms B to lower her
Q. And you say that you cannot or did not at that stage identify any
sexual component of the complaint?
respect to Particular 12 (i), the Tribunal notes that at T103 (30/6/09) the
Respondent was asked questions about where he was
standing when performing the
‘tissue test’. The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s
submission that the relevance
of this Particular is only established if there
was a sexual gratification element. Consideration of the patient’s dignity
is an important consideration in any examination or treatment of a patient,
particularly one that may expose the genital area. Even
when examinations of
this nature are clinically indicated, they are performed in a manner that
respects the patient’ dignity
and after informed consent has been
respect to Particular 12(ii) the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms B that as a
result of the actions (verbal instructions or
actual movement) of the Respondent
her knees were bent and her legs were spread apart. Once again whether it was
the specific actions
of the Respondent holding the ankles of the patient and
manipulating her legs into the position, or whether the patient undertook
manoeuvre herself does not add any weight to the characterisation of the conduct
by the Tribunal on this occasion.
respect to Particular 12(iii), the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms B and
notes that during cross-examination she gave the
following evidence about the
conduct of the Respondent after her underwear was lowered (T 54.47-55.1,
Q. And then he continued running the tissues down the outside
of your thighs?
A. Well, no, that - so he basically - yeah, he did exactly the same again
but, yeah, lifted kind of my legs up, pulled my legs apart
and did exactly the
same as what he'd already done with the tissues.
respect to Particular 13 (i), the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms B with
respect to the conduct of the Respondent and is
of the view that nothing in the
evidence supports there being a clinical indication to perform this test in any
manner, in particular
there is no record of the loss of sensation being in the
ASIS area which may in someway have been a basis for testing (with the underwear
respect to Particular 13 (ii), the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms B that
the Respondent only asked her on one occasion,
prior to the removal of her
underwear. The Tribunal notes Ms B was in her underwear at the time the
Respondent says he asked for
her consent. The patient was obviously in a
vulnerable position at that stage. With respect to the request to have her
removed there was no real information provided by the Respondent as to
the reason why the test needed her underwear down. There was
not ‘informed
consent’. There was not verbal consent to the procedure as the procedure
was not explained. The earlier
verbal explanation does not extend to a procedure
with the underwear removed.
the Respondent was asking for consent to remove a patient’s underwear, an
unusual occurrence in physiotherapy, it is the
view of the Tribunal that such
consent would need to be express consent which would involve the offering of
alternatives.
way of a general approach to the evidence, the Tribunal has carefully considered
the inconsistencies between the evidence of the
patients and that of the
Respondent. Having regard to the principles in
Goodrich Aerosmith
respect to demeanour, the Tribunal has weighed the evidence carefully against
the probabilities and examined whether the disputed
evidence is consistent with
the admissions of the Respondent, the incontrovertible facts, facts that are not
in dispute and other
relevant evidence in the case. The Tribunal notes the
obvious failure of Ms A to recall matters such as having been treated by other
physiotherapists in the practice between the first consultation with the
Respondent and the next two. In the Tribunal’s view
understandable lapse of memory, but more importantly it is with respect to an
issue not central to the matter complained
of. On the issues relevant to the
determination of this Complaint, Ms A’s evidence was not successfully
challenged.
Tribunal finds further comfort in the similarities of the evidence of Ms A to
the evidence of Ms B (see
Zaide v HCCC
[1998] NSWSC 335
(1998) 44 NSWLR 82).
careful examination the Tribunal is satisfied that it prefers the evidence of Ms
A and Ms B to the Respondent where that
evidence differs. The Tribunal also
notes the Respondent made admissions of having been untruthful with respect to
several issues
seeking some advantage for himself.
Ms A and Ms B gave evidence that the Respondent:
asked them to
remove/lower their underpants
did not offer
draping of any kind at the time of the sensory testing
was standing at
the foot of the bed when he moved their bent legs apart
did not sensory
test the areas in which they reported symptoms, in particular the buttock and
outer thighs
did not obtain
explicit/express informed consent to perform the sensory testing
did not offer
them the alternative of self testing
did not explain
to either of them that he suspected cauda equina (or any lay variation
both were tested
over the inner thigh area and Ms A was also tested over her genetalia.
of the witnesses who gave evidence before the Tribunal who were registered
physiotherapists (apart from the Respondent) gave evidence
that it was their
experience that a cauda equina lesion was a rare occurrence, that it would
constitute a medical emergency, and
that the appropriate clinical response would
be to refer the patient for immediate medical attention or conveyance by
ambulance to
a hospital. Further, they were of the view that a provisional
diagnosis of a cauda equina lesion would be made on the basis of the
patient’s medical history rather than an actual physical examination.
of the witnesses who gave evidence before the Tribunal who were registered
physiotherapists (apart from the Respondent) gave evidence
that they had never
asked a patient to remove their underpants for the purpose of undertaking a
neurological examination (including
a sensory test).
is of concern to the Tribunal that the Respondent appears to have placed a heat
pack on to Ms A in a region in which she had reported
numbness without first
appropriately testing the area. Although this is not a matter particularised in
the Complaint, and therefore
not taken into account by the Tribunal in reaching
the findings in this matter, it is still of concern and requires commenting
from the possibility of numbness or tingling in the buttock or genital region
(indicated by a tick placed in the box for ‘
Numbness or tingling in
your buttock or genital region’
for Ms A), there is absolutely no
other possible indication of a cauda equina lesion in either patient’s
records. Ms A’s
notes indicate that this numbness and tingling was
clarified as occurring if sitting for
It is noted
that no numbness or tingling is recorded on the body chart suggesting that the
area of any such symptoms had not been
clarified satisfactorily.
the oral evidence of the Respondent had been accepted it would indicate a
significant deficit in the Respondent’s clinical
reasoning. His stated
primary and secondary hypotheses are inconsistent with the clinical actions
taken by the Respondent.
respect to Ms B he had already tested the inner thighs and then proceeded to
test again with the patient’s underwear down.
Even if the
Respondent’s evidence regarding the area he was testing was accepted,
there was no reason for the underwear to
be lowered.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to the
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the evidence supports a finding that the
Particulars of Complaint are established as indicated
above and that the
Respondent engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed, and care exercised,
by the physiotherapist in the practice
of physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist
of an equivalent level of training or experience; and has been
guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
physiotherapy.
conduct of the Respondent was far outside of acceptable physiotherapy practice.
The Tribunal has not only set out reasons for
preferring the evidence of Ms A
and Ms B to that of the Respondent in those areas where they differ, the
Tribunal is of the view
that the clinical explanation proffered by the
Respondent does not hold water. A cauda equina lesion is such a rare clinical
in the practice of physiotherapy, particularly in a non-surgical
setting and without recent trauma. The testing described by the
Respondent is
not appropriate or correct for the condition. Nothing in the contemporaneous
notes support a cauda equina lesion as
being contemplated by the Respondent at
the time of the consultation, nor support it as being a possible hypothesis for
considering at the time.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent is of a sufficiently serious
nature to warrant his suspension or removal from
the Register and therefore
makes a finding of professional misconduct. Complaint Two is therefore
established. The conduct of the
Respondent was an abuse of his position of
trust, it was ‘exploitative’ of his physical access to patients and
the profession into disrepute.
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s submission that the behaviour
must be characterised as sexually motivated for
it to amount to professional
misconduct. The conduct is so far outside the bounds of acceptable practice that
it amounts to professional
misconduct. The Tribunal is also of the view that the
nature of the conduct would allow it to be characterised as sexual by both
patients and objectively. A similar situation arose in the matter of
(Nurses and Midwives Tribunal of New South Wales, 22 May 2006, 20
July 2006). In that matter the Tribunal found that while under
the influence of
the drug pethidine, Ms Shelley, then a registered nurse, acted in a manner that
was so outside normal conduct that
it was open to the patient to interpret her
actions as sexual. In that matter the Tribunal specifically held that it was not
view that the conduct was sexually motivated. In this matter the question
may well be asked (in light of the Tribunal’s rejection
Respondent’s explanation for his conduct), ‘If it was not sexually
motivated what other motivation could such
behaviour have?’.
Tribunal is of the view that the question of whether the Respondent’s
conduct had a sexual motivation does not have to be
resolved for the purpose of
determining the Complaint or appropriate Orders.
Tribunal recommends that the Respondent undertake some personal counselling
before returning to any work that involves contact
with members of the public.
The conduct of the Respondent may be best addressed in a counselling setting
where he may gain insight
in to the factors that motivated his professional
misconduct and thereby avoid repeating such conduct. Exploration of ethical
may also be of benefit to the Respondent.
Tribunal is of the view that any application for registration (or
re-registration with respect to physiotherapy) made by the Respondent
considered by a tribunal (or the equivalent thereof).
Section 54 Protective Orders
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent would require a minimum period of
two years to address the defects identified by the
findings made by this
Tribunal. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent is capable of appropriate
conduct as reported by his referees.
that the conduct was not a ‘one off’ i.e. this is not an occurrence
with one patient on one occasion where the Tribunal
could be reassured that the
Respondent would be able to overcome his ‘embarrassment’ and act in
a professional manner
at all times in the future, the Tribunal must make Orders
that will ensure the safety of the public. This decision should serve as
reminder to all members of health professions that involve intimate touching to
ensure that it is undertaken in the appropriate
manner at all times. Further,
the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent poses a substantial risk to the
safety of the public
should he be allowed to continue providing any health
service that allows him to physically examine any patients. It is for this
reason that the Tribunal has proceeded to make a Prohibition Order.
Tribunal makes the following Orders in this matter:-
Respondent is hereby reprimanded in terms of annexure F hereto.
that the Respondent’s name is not currently on the Register, the Tribunal
orders that the Respondent is not entitled
to apply for re-registration for a
period two year from the date hereof.
the Respondent is prohibited from providing any health services that involve the
physical examination or physical treatment of
patients for a period of two years
from the date hereof.
the expiry of the period of two years in Order 2 above, the Respondent is
permitted to provide these health services on the
condition that he gains
registration as a physiotherapist or other health professional, at which time
the registration authority
should consider the further continuation of the
prohibition order and/or conditions on registration.
Respondent is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. If the parties
cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted for
an application to apply to have
the matter re-listed before the Tribunal to determine costs.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:-
1) The Respondent
and his legal advisers
2) The HCCC and its legal advisers
3) and others as
the Board sees fit.
Dated: 2 December 2009
_______________________
JOANNE MULLER
_______________________
TRUDY REBBECK
_______________________
DARREN RIVETT
_______________________
JACQUELINE MILNE
Annexure A – Schedule of Documents in Evidence
Annexure B –
Conditions placed on Respondent’s practice on 13 May 2008. Annexure C
– Letter to the Respondent from
the Board dated 17 April 2009 (Exhibit
Annexure D – HCCC Submissions
Annexure E –
Respondent’s Submissions
Annexure F – Reprimand
Annexure G -
Schedule of Suppressed Names (Only to be kept with the original Reasons for
Decision Document and not to be published
in any version of the document)
SCHEDULE OF EXHIBITS
HCCC V Rezk
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS OF HCCC
Formal Documents
Complaint dated 27 January 2009
Certificate of Registration
Initiating documents
Letter from Peter Magner, Director Precision Physio, to the NSW
Physiotherapy Registration Board dated 6 July 2006
Statement of Ms A dated 23 January 2008
Annexure A: Statement to Police
dated 4 July 2006
Statement of Ms B dated 27 September 2007
Statement of Ms B dated 23 January 2008
Annexure A: Statement to Police
dated 10 September 2006
Statement of Peter Magner dated 17 September 2007
Annexure A: Notes of
Meeting on 22 February 2006
Annexure B: Personnel Notice Incident Form dated
21 February 2006
Statement of Peter Magner dated 28 July 2008
Statement of Lorraine Jagger dated 10 October 2007
Police Brief
NSW Police Indictable Brief of Evidence:
(i) CAN sequence 1
(ii) CAN sequence 2
(iii) Facts Sheet
(iv) Statement of Ms A
(v) Statement of Ms A’s work colleague
(vi) Statement of Constable ROTHWELL
(vii) Statement of Ms B
(viii) Statement of Keri CLARKE
(ix) Statement of Peter MAGNER
(x) Expert Statement – Peter MAGNER
(xi) Expert Statement – Doctor Robert BOLAND
(xii) Statement of Constable WHEELER
(xiii) Examination/Treatment notes of MATHER from Precision Physiotherapy
(xiv) Notebook copy of REZK refusal to be interviewed
Precision Physiotherapy Records
Examination/Treatment notes for Ms A
Examination/Treatment notes for Ms B
Expert Review
Letter of Instruction from the Commission to Albert Coleiro dated 15
November 2007
Report of Albert Coleiro dated 14 December 2007
Curriculum Vitae
of Albert Coleiro
Codes of Conduct
NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board Policy No.1:
Physiotherapists and Sexual Misconduct
(Issued 1994)
Correspondence
Letter from Colin Biggers & Paisley Lawyers to the Commission dated 20
February 2008
(a) Letter from the Commission (section 40) to Colin Biggers
& Paisley Lawyers dated 25 January 2008
Letter from Colin Biggers & Paisley Lawyers to the Commission dated 11
September 2007
(a) Letter from the Commission to Colin Biggers & Paisley
Lawyers dated 18 July 2007
(b) Letter from the Commission to Colin Biggers
& Paisley Lawyers dated 28 July 2006
HCCC V REZK
Conditions placed on Respondent’s practice by Board on
13 May 2008.
Mr Rezk is practising physiotherapy Mr Rezk only work in a facility with other
physiotherapists who are practising at the same
time. Mr Rezk is not to be the
only physiotherapist on duty in such a facility.
Mr Rezk participates in fortnightly in-services wherein there is discussion of
clients and their conditions. If Mr Rezk returns
to full time employment he
should participate in these in-services weekly.
Mr Rezk undertake continuing education in the matter of privacy and ethical
responsibilities. This may be attained via a short
course with the St James
Ethics Centre, or with a mentor.
Mr Rezk undertake clinical mentoring with a mentor appointed by the Board. The
cost is to be met by the respondent. The purpose
of the mentoring is to assist
the registrant to develop clinical protocols, to review ethical responsibilities
to the patient, and
to review privacy issues related to physical examination.
The protocols are to be regarding: the initial assessment of a patient,
to do when a patient presents with signs of perineal numbness. While the
condition on registration is in place the respondent
should meet with the mentor
on a monthly basis. The mentor will be asked to provide the Board with regular
written reports on his
Mr Rezk should join a physiotherapy professional association, which can provide
ongoing education.
Mr Rezk reports to the Board his current place of employment, and any future
place of employment.
Mr Rezk provide monthly written reports to the Board, for the duration of these
conditions detailing:
content of the in-services stipulated in (2)
continuing education stipulated in (3)
matters discussed with the clinical mentor as at (4)
protocols developed with the clinical mentor
his practice has developed in the last month, and what he has learnt from his
physiotherapy professional development study plan for the following month.
mentor’s monthly report will address the activities undertaken by the
Respondent, the mentoring sessions, and the progress
the Respondent has made in
his understanding regarding ethical issues, privacy, and clinical protocols. The
mentor is to make comment
on the registrant’s development of insight into
the seriousness of the complaint, and how the clinical examination of the
area in females can be seen as sexual in nature. The cost of the report
preparation is to be borne by the registrant.
Physiotherapists Act
these conditions are to remain in place
until the Board is satisfied the Registrant has sufficient mental capacity and
skill to practice
physiotherapy without
HCCC V Rezk
Letter to Respondent from Board dated 17 April 2009
(exhibit R7)
17 April 2009
Mr Guirguis Rezk
Cedar Crescent
ST MARYS NSW 2760
Dear Mr Rezk
I refer again to your email of 6 January 2009 enclosing your
submission dated 5 January 2009 to the NSW Physiotherapists Registration
(the Board) to alter the conditions placed on your registration as a
physiotherapist in NSW under
Physiotherapists Act 2001
The Board has considered your submissions in support of your application to
alter your conditions under
of the Act having regard to the following
circumstances:
A complaint had
been made to the Board about you by Mr. Peter Magner relating to your practice
of physiotherapy.
convened a committee meeting under
Physiotherapists Act 2001
to assist the Board in determining what action it might take under
with respect to you.
The details of
this complaint were of a sufficiently serious nature to warrant the Board to
impose conditions under
of the Act.
that the Board may suspend or impose conditions on a registrant’s practice
for the purpose of protecting the life or
mental health of any person.
requested the committee reconvene to consider correspondence dated 6 January
2009 from you enclosing submissions to the
Board seeking a review of the
conditions placed on your registration as a physiotherapist in NSW. (Refer to
attached conditions).
of the Act the Board has the power to alter or remove conditions.
The documents before the Committee, in considering your
submissions, were:
Monthly reports
received from you dated 29/7/08, 8/8/08, 1/9/08,1/10/08, 5/12/08, 5/1/09 and
reports received from Mr Gaetano Milazzo,
mentor dated 17/7/08, 12/8/08, 3/9/08,
Copies of all
correspondence between the Board and you and the mentor and the Board following
the imposition of the conditions on
your practice.
The Board considered a report from the Committee at its meeting
held on 10 March 2009 and has determined that you have failed to comply
following conditions imposed on your practice under section 55 of the
Physiotherapist Act 2001 for the reasons italicized
under the relevant
Mr Rezk should join a physiotherapy professional association, which can provide
ongoing education.
There is no evidence this has occurred.
Mr Rezk provide monthly written reports to the Board, for the duration of these
content of the in-services stipulated in (2).
is no comment by you on the impact this has made on your practice.
There is no evidence of the discussion of clients and their conditions as
related to the in- services.
matters discussed with the clinical mentor as at (4)
has been no elaboration on what has been learned from these discussions
protocols developed with the clinical mentor.
No evidence has
been provided.
his practice has developed in the last month, and what he has learnt from his
colleagues.
You have not elaborated on this in your
physiotherapy professional development study plan for the following month.
This has not been realised in your monthly reports.
The Board has also considered your email dated 3 April 2009 concerning your
further application for a variation to condition No. 4
to defer the clinical
mentoring. The Board has agreed to consider a deferment of the condition for
clinical mentoring, whilst the
conditions imposed under section 55 remain on
your practice, subject to compliance with the following requirements:
are to submit to the Board within 7 days from receipt of this letter a written,
signed undertaking that you will not practise
as a physiotherapist. This
undertaking is to remain on foot during the period of deferment of clinical
mentoring under condition
4 for reasons of financial hardship and ceasing to
are also required to submit to the Board evidence verifying the financial
difficulty referred to in your email. This may include,
for example, a Statutory
Declaration providing a true and correct record of your financial hardship and
witnessed before a Justice
of the Peace
You may also
annex details of your enrolment in your university program and include the costs
for the program, and
are to submit to the Board a written, signed notification within 7 days of
resuming practice as a physiotherapist of such resumption
of practice, and
resumption of practice the mentoring conditions detailed in condition 4 will
A failure to comply with the above may lead to Board lodging a
complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct against you. In these
circumstances, a copy of any other pertinent documents may be provided to the
Health Care Complaints Commission to assist in their
investigations.
The Board confirms that it is the adjudicating body for the conditions on
your practice at this time. The Board is not dealing with
any of the matters
scheduled to be heard before the Tribunal.
Subject to the above matters and
Physiotherapists Act 2001
conditions are to remain in place until the Board is satisfied
you have sufficient mental capacity and skill to practice physiotherapy
them. Also enclosed is a copy of
Physiotherapists Act 2001
which provides mechanisms for Appeal. An Appeal must be made within 28 days from
receipt of this letter.
Should you have any queries about the matters raised in this letter, please
telephone the writer on TEL: 9219 0205.
Yours faithfully
[Enclosures omitted]
HCCC V Rezk
HCCC Submissions
COMPLAINANT’S SUBMISSIONS
INTRODUCTION
1. The Complainant asserts that the Respondent has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct. The
relevant statutory
definitions are found in
sections 25
Physiotherapists Act
. The accepted test for determining when unsatisfactory professional
conduct is also professional misconduct is as set out in
General Council of Medical Education and Registration
(1894) 1Q.B. 750
“ [conduct] which could be reasonably regarded as disgraceful
or dishonourable by his professional brethren of good repute
competency.”
2. In this matter the Complainant submits that the evidence clearly
demonstrates, to the requisite
Respondent has engaged in both unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct.
3. Where the evidence of the Respondent (Rezk) differs from that of other
witnesses (particularly Ms A and Ms B) the Complainant submits
that the Tribunal
should prefer the evidence of the Complainant’s witnesses.
MATTERS NOT IN CONTENTION
4. There are various matters in respect of the complaints which are not in
contention between the parties:
4.1 The Respondent qualified as a Physiotherapist in 2002.
4.2 The Respondent was first registered to practice in January 2003.
4.3 The Respondent worked in various positions as a physiotherapist between
2003 and 2004 before commencing his employment at Precision
Physio in September
4.4 On 23 December 2005, Ms A presented as a patient to Precision Physio and
was assessed and treated by the Respondent.
4.5 Ms A had 2 further treatment sessions with the Respondent in January
4.6 At all 3 sessions, Ms A did not wear underwear.
4.7 On 17 February 2006, Ms B presented as a patient at Precision Physio and
was assessed and treated by the Respondent.
4.8 During the course of a physical assessment, Ms B was asked to lower her
underwear by the Respondent.
4.9 Neither Ms A nor Ms B suffered from cauda equina at the time of their
MATTERS IN CONTENTION
regard to Ms A, a primary area of contention is whether Ms A removed her
underwear at the direction of the Respondent.
The Tribunal has before it the
statement of Ms A and has had the benefit of hearing her oral evidence in
respect of this issue. She
has, from the outset consistently, stated that she
sought clarification from the Respondent as to whether it was necessary for her
to remove her underwear as well as her other clothing on each and every visit.
Ms A states that the Respondent confirmed that she
was to remove all of her
6. The Respondent does not dispute that Ms A underwent treatment
without underwear. As to whether it is claimed that during the first
Respondent regarded it as clinically necessary for her to be without her
underwear remains unclear. The Tribunal will recall
that the Respondent
justified his direction to Ms B to remove her underwear as being part of his
sensation testing for cauda equina.
He also asserted that he suspected that Ms A
may also have been suffering from this condition and it was necessary to perform
testing to rule out this condition. If the Respondent genuinely
believed that the testing needed to be conducted without underwear
evidence to the Tribunal that Ms A misunderstood his direction to remove her
underwear on the first visit is clearly contradictory.
7. As to the second and third visits, the Respondent claims that when it
became apparent to him that Ms A was not wearing underwear,
embarrassed
to advise her that it was unnecessary. His assertion that Ms A
did not ask whether it was necessary to remove her underwear is simply
8. Ms A is an articulate and intelligent woman who quite rightly sought
clarification about how far she was required to disrobe.
However, and
importantly, she had not undergone any physiotherapy prior to 23 December 2005
and as such it is not surprising that
she did not question why it was necessary
for her to remove her underwear. She was in a position where she was about to be
by a health practitioner in whom she had an expectation of trust and
professionalism. The onus was clearly on the Respondent to clarify
misunderstanding that may have arisen, an onus which he clearly failed to
satisfy, not once but on all three occasions.
9. The evidence strongly
suggests however, that this was
simply a case of a communication
breakdown. Rather it is open on the evidence before the Tribunal to conclude
that the Respondent
intended that Ms A be without her underwear during the
course of all her treatments.
10. Ms A also complained that on the first
visit she was touched by the Respondent in her genital area. She clarified the
of this touching diagrammatically on Ex 21. At T. 29.14 -29.25. Ms A
gave evidence about the Respondent touching her perineum with
a tissue. The
Respondent simply denies that he touched Ms A anywhere other than her inner and
outer thighs. Ms A has absolutely no
reason to fabricate evidence in respect of
the Respondent. She gains nothing from doing so other then to relive an
embarrassing and
unpleasant experience. The Tribunal should accept the evidence
of Ms A in respect of particulars 6 and 7 of Complaint One and particulars
and 20 of Complaint 2.
11. A further aspect of the complaint arising from the Respondent’s
treatment of Ms A is that on the first visit, the Respondent
left Ms A naked
throughout the treatment phase without any gown and/or draping. This is denied
by the Respondent who asserts that
he provided Ms A with a gown on each and
every visit. Ms A agrees that she was provided with a gown on the second and
third visit
but because she was not wearing underwear (at the direction of the
Respondent), this garment provided minimal coverage of her breasts
and genital
area which were exposed to the Respondent at various times throughout the
treatment he was administering.
12. The Tribunal will recall that Ms A
was adamant that she was completely naked throughout the first treatment.
Despite the best
efforts of the Respondent’s counsel to suggest that she had embellished
her evidence before the Tribunal,
there is nothing to suggest that Ms A had or
has any reason to either embellish or be untruthful in respect of her evidence.
Tribunal has no reason to accept Ms A as anything other than a witness of
13. The Respondent agreed that on each visit he could have provided Ms A
with sport shorts rather a gown. Had he provided Ms A with
the shorts at least
part of the problem in relation to her lack of underwear could have been
overcome. Despite being “very
embarrassed” however, the Respondent
only ever offered Ms A a gown and could provide no explanation to the Tribunal
did not offer her
14. The Respondent has provided no reasonable explanation for his conduct in
respect of Ms A and as set out in particulars 1-9 of
Complaint One and
particulars 14 to 22 of Complaint Two. The issue of suspected cauda equina is
discussed further in these submissions
however that matter only relates to the
initial visit of Ms A and has no bearing upon the Respondent’s conduct at
and third visits.
15. With regard to Ms B, the Respondent does not deny that he
asked her to lower her underwear during the course of his
“examination”
of her on 17 February 2006. The Respondent has not
provided any valid clinical or other explanation for asking Ms B to lower her
underwear other than the cauda equina defence.
16. During the course of his oral evidence [at T.74] the Respondent asserted
that he did not regard his examination of either Ms A
or Ms B to be sexual in
nature. His claim that he now understands the seriousness and nature of the
complaints was however qualified
by his evidence at T.74.20 to 74.46.
The Cauda Equina (CE) Defence
17. The Respondent has attempted to explain his actions in respect of both Ms
A and Ms B by asserting that he suspected that both
presented with symptoms
suggesting they may have been suffering from cauda equina (CE) lesions. There
are a number of problems associated
with the Respondent’s explanation.
18. The Respondent asserts that he was excessively worried about CE at the
time her saw both Ms A and Ms
. It remains unclear
from the Respondent’s evidence why he was, at this point in time,
excessively concerned about a rare condition.
Similarly it remains unclear why
he proceeded to test for CE in the manner in which he did.
19. The evidence shows that neither Ms A nor Ms B nominated any of the
classic symptoms of CE, i.e. loss of control of bladder and/or
bowel function.
With regard to Ms A, at T.47.46 the Respondent was asked:
Q. Did you make any
further inquiry about her ticking “No” to bladder and bowel
problems? A. Well, you tend- I mean by
this point I was suspecting cauda equina
(emphasis added).
20. With regard to Ms B the Respondent indentified the reason he suspected CE
was because she had indicated numbness in her buttock
area and the fact that it
wasn’t getting any
21. The Respondent does not deny that he asked Ms B to remove her underwear
– it was apparently necessary for him to test for
CE – however at
T.73 the Respondent could not explain why it was necessary other than it being
“a deduction” on
his part. This so-called deduction is so far
removed from the standard practice of other
physiotherapists
suspect CE as to be unbelievable.
22. The Tribunal should note that at the time of the complaints the
Respondent was
a new graduate and had in fact treated a number of
patients presenting with lower back pain. He had an impressive academic record
and he worked in a collegiate environment where he could seek advice from his
more experienced colleagues should something unusual
arise. There simply was no
need for him to
an appropriate test for a rare and dangerous
condition which was apparently causing him excessive worry.
23. The Tribunal can infer from the evidence that CE provided the Respondent
with a convenient clinical explanation for his conduct
in respect of Ms B when
he became aware that Ms B had lodged a complaint about him. The condition
involved loss of sensation in the
genital area, the very area that the
Respondent had asked Ms B to expose. When Ms A made her complaint to the police
in July of 2006,
he maintained the same defence of his conduct in respect of her
treatment. This is not surprising given that it was the only defence
lacking in substance and clinical legitimacy) that may provide
clinical basis for having two female patients undergo treatment without their
24. The Tribunal will recall the evidence of Mr Magner and Ms Jagger who
interviewed the Respondent about Ms B’s complaint.
Both these witnesses
recall that the Respondent was insistent that his treatment of Ms B in testing
for CE was clinically appropriate.
That position sits in contrast to his
evidence to this Tribunal that he really didn’t know what he was doing at
25. The Tribunal will also recall that when interviewed by Mr Magner and Ms
Jagger, the Respondent denied any previous conduct of
this nature. This denial
sits uncomfortably with his then claim that he had done nothing wrong in testing
for CE in the manner he
had adopted with Ms B. If he was certain of the clinical
legitimacy of his actions, why deny that he had done this previously?
26. The Respondent admitted that he had lied to Mr Magner about Ms A. He
further admitted that he had lied to another employer –
Minchinbury
Hospital – when he misstated the reason for leaving his employment with
Precision Physio [T.75 and 76]. The Tribunal
should, given the willingness of
the Respondent to be untruthful in circumstances which do not suit his
interests, be very cautious
in accepting any of the Respondent’s evidence
if it differs from that of either Ms A or Ms B.
27. The Tribunal should reject the CE defence as an
explanation for the conduct of the Respondent in respect of Ms A and Ms B. In
proposing such a defence, it would seem that the Respondent would prefer a
finding that he was incompetent. The defence however is,
quite frankly
unbelievable and is not supported by the evidence of Ms A, Ms B or the
Respondent himself.
PEER EVIDENCE
28. The Tribunal had the benefit of
evidence from Albert Coleiro (EX 14) an experienced Physiotherapist. Mr
Coleiro’s Peer report
Respondent’s examination of Ms B was: “totally inappropriate and not
in accordance with proper clinical practice.”
As to Ms A, Mr Coleiro
stated: “the examination of Ms A was totally inappropriate for her
symptoms and not in accordance with
proper clinical practice.” In
conclusion, Mr Coleiro stated that the actions of Mr Rezk had clearly fallen
below professional
standards and violated the rights and dignity of Ms A and Ms
29. At T. 10 (1/7/09) Mr Coleiro was asked a number of questions by the
Tribunal. At T. 10.19 – T.10.27, he was asked to comment
upon the issue of
a physiotherapist treating a patient without underwear. He maintained that he
would be strongly critical of such
a practice in the absence of a genuine
clinical reason including those circumstances where the absence of underwear was
inadvertent.
30. In cross examination, [T. 8] Mr Coleiro was asked whether his criticism
of the Respondent would change if he were to accept that
there was no sexual
motivation for the conduct. Mr Coleiro stated that he maintained his criticism
of the Respondent regardless of
the motivation. He was similarly unmoved by the
fact that the Respondent had only 4 years experience as a practising therapist
the time of the incidents.
31. The evidence of Mr Coleiro in his capacity as a Peer Reviewer is
rightfully damning of the conduct of the Respondent. He clearly
regards the
conduct to be disgraceful or dishonourable
thus satisfying the test
prescribed in
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and
Registration
(1894) 1Q.B. 750 at 755.
32. If the Tribunal does reject the CE defence and accepts the evidence of
the Peer about acceptable standards of practice, the Complainant
submits that it
must conclude that the Respondent has engaged in both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct
as set out in the
Complaints.
33. Having so determined, the Tribunal must then consider what orders it will
make pursuant to the
Physiotherapists Act 2001
34. The Respondent has already voluntarily removed himself from the
given evidence that he is pursuing an alternative career. This voluntary removal
however seems to have been motivated by
a conflict between the restrictions
placed upon him by the Physiotherapists Board and his academic
obligations
than any admission or concession that he should not be permitted to practice as
a physiotherapist.
Protective Orders
35. One of the principal functions of the Tribunal is to promote and maintain
the highest standards of professional conduct and ethics
in the physiotherapy
profession. The paramount role of the Tribunal is to protect the public.
Protection of the public and maintenance
of high professional standards
necessitate the Tribunal ensuring that:
(i) the public will be protected from the risk of the physiotherapist repeating
the misconduct;
(ii) its decision will have a deterrent effect on others that may be tempted to
fall short of the high standards required of them;
(iii) its decision will have the effect of encouraging the maintenance of high
standards in the physiotherapy profession;
(iv) its decision will have the effect of maintaining the public confidence in
the profession.
36. The Commission submits that the nature of physiotherapy
treatment is intimate. This fact alone gives rise to the need for a patient
be able to repose a considerable degree of trust in practitioners and it
requires practitioners to maintain very high standards
to ensure that a
patient’s trust is not misplaced. The Commission refers the Tribunal to
the following comments from the judgment
of the Court of Appeal in
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, which, although concerning the
obligations of medical practitioners, are equally applicable to the practice of
physiotherapy:
Female patients entrust themselves to doctors, male and female, for
medical examinations and treatment which may require intimate
physical contact
which they would not otherwise accept from the doctor. The standards of the
profession oblige doctors to use the
opportunities afforded them for such
that the public
in general and female patients in particular expect from their
doctors, and which right thinking members of the profession observe,
their colleagues to observe. In this context we would adopt, with respect, the
following statement from the dissenting
judgment of Priestly JA in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported) at
“The degree of trust which patients
necessarily give to their doctors may vary according to the condition which
takes the patient
to the doctor. Even in regard to the most common place medical
matters the trust a patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases,
of which the present seems to me to be an example, the patient’s trust
cannot help but be almost absolute. The
doctor’s power in regard to the
patient in such cases is also very great. I do not mean power in an abstract way
but as a matter
of fact; the extent of the power will vary according to the
temperament of the patient, but the doctor with some patients and for
periods, because of the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in
a position to do whatever the doctor wants
with the body of the patient. This is
one of the reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations
and are expected
to maintain very high standards: all this being very much in
the public interest.”
37. The Commission submits that Mr Rezk has clearly abused the
trust reposed in him by Ms A and Ms B and has failed to maintain the
expected of him.
38. The Commission submits that the Respondent appears to have limited
insight into the seriousness of the conduct complained of.
His conduct was not
isolated. His continued attempts to explain and justify his conduct as instances
of poor clinical judgement from
a naive and inexperienced practitioner, strain
credibility. The Commission submits that the conduct was not innocently
In any event, the peer reviewer remains strongly critical of the
conduct regardless of any “innocent” justification or
propounded by Mr Rezk.
39. The Commission submits that the Tribunal could not be comfortably
satisfied that such conduct would not recur.
40. The Commission submits that his conduct is sufficiently serious to
warrant the removal of Mr Rezk’s name from the Register
Physiotherapists and that it is in the public interest that this be done.
41. As noted at paragraph 34 above Mr Rezk was administratively removed from
the Register of Physiotherapists at his own request on
9 June 2009.
42. The Commission notes that section 54 of the Act enables the Tribunal to
order, where the physiotherapist has ceased to be registered,
as here, that he
or she not be re-registered. The Commission submits that it would be appropriate
for the Tribunal to order that
Mr Rezk not be re-registered for a period of at
least 3 years.
43.The Commission submits that should the Tribunal order that Mr Rezk not be
re-registered for a specific period, it should also in
the public interest make
a "prohibition order" under section 54(3A) of the Act for the same duration.
44.The Commission submits that the gravity of the misconduct and the risk of
recurrence require that Mr Rezk be prohibited from providing
health services
involving any form of physical assessment and/or examination, or physical
treatment, until such time as his name
is restored to the Register of
Physiotherapists.
HCCC V Rezk
Respondent’s Submissions
GUIRGIS REZK ats HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
1. By Complaint dated 27 January 2009 the complainant alleges that the
respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
- Complaint One - or
professional misconduct-Complaint Two. There are 13 particulars of Complaint
One. Particulars 1 to 9 concern
Ms A whilst particulars 10 to 13 concern Ms B.
The same particulars are repeated in relation to Complaint Two.
2. The task for the Tribunal is to first determine which of the particulars
are made out to the comfortable satisfaction of the Tribunal.
Having done that
the Tribunal must then determine if what has been established amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct. Finally the
Tribunal must decide what, if any, orders it needs to make for the protection of
Ms A – particulars 1 to 9
3. Particulars 1 and 2 are admitted.
4. As to particular 3 the respondent denies that he ever directed the patient
to remove all her clothing including her underwear.
He was cross-examined at
some length on this matter. Having regard to his demeanour and to the
unreliability of Ms A as discussed
below, the Tribunal will not be satisfied to
the requisite standard that he gave this direction to the patient.
5. As to particular 4 the respondent denies that he did not offer the patient
any clothing to wear during the consultation on 23 December
2005. Again, having
regard to his demeanour and to the unreliability of Ms A, the Tribunal would not
be satisfied to the requisite
standard that this particular is made out.
6. There is of course no dispute as to the fact that on the 3 occasions upon
which the respondent treated Ms A she was not wearing
underwear. The respondent
has conceded that it was an error of judgement on his part not to have required
the patient to have replaced
her underwear once he became aware she had removed
it. He says in paragraph 12 of his Statement dated 12 June 2009 that he felt
awkward and inexperienced. He thought that he would embarrass the patient by
requesting her to put her underwear back on. Nevertheless
he concedes that it
was a major error on his part not to have done so.
7. The Tribunal has the benefit of having observed the respondent give
evidence, in particular when he was cross-examined as to whether
or not he in
fact required the patient to remove her underwear and as to why he did not
request her to replace it. The Tribunal
would accept what the respondent said.
Not requiring the patient to do so was a significant error on his part.
However, the Tribunal
would not be persuaded to the requisite standard that he
was motivated by any desire of obtaining sexual gratification.
8. Particulars 5 (i)-(iii) are identical to particulars 12 (i)-(iii). The
latter relate to the respondent’s consultation with
Ms B on 17 February
2006. Submissions are made below in response to those allegations. There is no
doubt that Ms B made allegations
of those matters. The fact is however that Ms
9. Relevantly Ms A only made one Statement, that dated 4 July 2006 which
appears behind Tab 4 of the complainant’s bundle of
documents. Particular
5 must be based upon what appears in paragraph 6 of the Statement which is as
REZK told me that because I had pains in my left upper
thigh he was concerned that I may be numb around my middle torso area. REZK
then physically lifted my legs with his hands. My legs were bent at the knees
and spread apart at this time
10. The patient is clearly not saying that the respondent lifted her legs in
the manner alleged in particular 5(ii). She does not
say that he spread her
legs apart – particular 5(iii). Particular 5(i) is therefore irrelevant.
11. Particular 6 is the essence of the complaint made by patient A. The
patient relevantly describes the performance of the sensation
test in paragraphs
6 and 7 of her Statement dated 4 July 2006. The respondent denies that the test
involved the patient's vagina
and perineum but contends it was limited to the
inner and anterior thighs.
12. The Tribunal would not be persuaded to the requisite standard that the
patient's version of events is correct and should be preferred
respondent's for the following reasons:
12.1 the records of Precision Physiotherapy and the evidence of Lorraine
Jagger make clear beyond any doubt that contrary to the patient's
recollection
she was not seen by the respondent on each of her first 3 visits to the
practice. Following the first consultation
with the respondent on 23 December
2005 she was next seen by Lorraine Jagger on 28 December 2005;
12.2 not only did the patient not recall that being the sequence of events
she was prepared to deny on oath that the consultation
with Ms Jagger on 28
December occurred at all (29/6/09 T33 L18);
12.3 the patient's evidence was that whenever she saw Lorraine Jagger she was
given a pair of shorts which she wore (29/6/09 T32 L44);
12.4 if the respondent had performed the sensation test in the manner
described by patient A and the balance of the treatment both
whilst she was
completely naked, it is inconceivable that having seen Ms Jagger at the very
consultation the patient would have allowed the respondent to have
treated her again;
12.5 notwithstanding her denial of it in evidence, the patient has indeed
embellished her version of the first consultation because
with the benefit of
hindsight she felt extremely embarrassed that she had been treated by the
respondent whilst she was not wearing
any underwear. She admitted as much in
her evidence and said that she held the respondent responsible for what had
occurred (29/6/09
T 36 L 33-42);
12.6 importantly Patient B never suggested that the sensation test performed
upon her by the respondent extended to the areas of her
vagina or perineum.
13. Particular 6 is therefore not made out because the events alleged therein
did not occur.
14. Particular 7 is also based upon allegations made in paragraph 7 of
Patient A’s Statement of 4 July 2006. In his Statement
of 12 June 2009
the respondent denied those allegations (paragraph 21). Not one question was
put to the respondent in cross examination
15. In cross examination Patient A voluntarily resiled from her allegation
that the respondent had ‘prodded’ her inner
thigh and pubic hair
line and said that it was not a prod but that he ‘...
just sort of
’, referring to the tissue (29/6/09 T 28 L 45).
16. She went on to say that the manner in which the respondent allegedly
pushed her leg down so that her thigh was flat against the
examination table
caused her excruciating pain (29/6/09 T 29 L 31-41). She made no complaint
17. The events described are fanciful. It is not likely that any
physiotherapist would intentionally cause excruciating pain to a
patient in the
course of performing what was only a test. This is a further instance of
Patient A’s embellishing her version
18. Having regard to the respondent’s denial that these events occurred
at all; that he was not cross examined at all in relation
to that denial; to the
inherent unlikelihood of the events occurring at all and the patient’s
general unreliability as a witness
(see paragraph 12 above) , the Tribunal will
not be comfortably satisfied that Particular 7 is made out.
19. Particular 8 is not controversial and is admitted.
20. Particulars 9 (i) and (ii) are denied insofar as it is alleged that the
respondent directed the patient to remove her underwear
on any occasion.
Particular 9 (iii) is admitted however the respondent says that there was no
motive on his part to obtain sexual
gratification.
Ms B – particulars 10 to 13
21. Particular 10 is admitted.
22. As to particulars 11 to 13 generally, the respondent conceded in
paragraph 35 of his Statement that in hindsight his concern about
cauda equina lesion was misplaced and arose from inexperience. As a result of
conditions placed upon his registration
by the Board he has read further on the
topic and now knows that it is never necessary to require a patient to remove
underwear in
order to perform the sensation test and that if such a condition is
suspected the best course is to refer the patient immediately
to a medical
practitioner or the emergency department of a hospital (paragraph 58).
23. As to particular 11 the Tribunal will not be satisfied that the
respondent was motivated to obtain sexual gratification from the
performance of
the test upon the patient. Indeed, it was never put to the respondent by
counsel for the complainant that this was
24. As to particular 12(i) the patient and the respondent are in dispute as
to the position occupied by the respondent when he performed
the sensation test.
The respondent was adamant that he stood by the patient's side and not at the
foot of the treatment bed. The
respondent's evidence on this issue was not
tested by counsel for the complainant. The Tribunal will not be satisfied to
the requisite
standard that the complaint is made out. Moreover the complaint
could only have real relevance if it was suggested that the respondent
positioned himself at the foot of the bed in order to obtain sexual
gratification. No such suggestion was put to him by counsel
complainant.
25. Particulars 12 (ii) and (iii) are derived from paragraph 18 of the
patient’s Statement to the police dated 10 September
2006. In his
Statement the respondent denied paragraph 18 (paragraph 40). Again, the
respondent was not cross-examined at all about
his denial of those matters. In
the circumstances the Tribunal would not be satisfied to the requisite standard
that these particulars
are made out.
26. As to particular 13 (i) the Respondent denied that the repeated the
sensation test on the patient's inner thighs after she had
lowered her
underwear. Again, the respondent's version was not challenged by counsel for
the complainant. Moreover there was no
need for him to repeat the test in the
same anatomical area having elicited nothing unusual at the first attempt. In
these circumstances
the Tribunal would not be satisfied to the requisite
standard that this particular is made out.
27. As to particular 13 (ii) the Tribunal will not be satisfied that it is
made out to the requisite standard for the following reasons:
27.1 in the first Statement dated 10 September 2006 the patient said that the
respondent indicated to her that he wanted to test her
sensations and then
requested her to pull her shorts down (paragraph 14);
27.2 in paragraph 17 of that Statement she volunteered there was at least
some discussion before she removed her underwear; and most
significantly
27.3 in evidence before the Tribunal the patient agreed in cross examination
that the respondent told her that he proposed to perform
a sensation test
involving simultaneously running tissues over the corresponding regions of both
sides of the thighs ,explained its
purpose and obtained her agreement to his
doing so (29/6/09 T52 L7-27).
28. It is evident that the respondent sought and obtained Ms B’s
consent to his performing the sensation test.
What has been established
In relation to Ms A the respondent contends that the only material
particular established on the evidence is particular 9 (iii).
In essence that
is that the respondent treated Ms A on 3 and 6 January 2006 whilst she was not
wearing underwear. He accepts that
he should have required her to replace her
underwear but is adamant that his failure to do so was not motivated by any
his part to obtain sexual gratification.
30. The same criticism could be made of his having treated Ms A on 23
December 2005 whilst she was not wearing underwear. There is
complaint to that effect made by the complainant. Had it been the respondent
would have made the same response as set
out immediately above.
31. The respondent submits that if he is accepted then the appropriate
characterisation of his conduct in relation to Ms A is to regard
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
32. In relation to Ms B the respondent contends that only particular 11 is
made out. Whilst at that time he believed it appropriate
to perform a sensation
test he now concedes that it was not. Again, he is adamant that he was not
motivated by any desire to obtain
sexual gratification. He submits to the
Tribunal that the appropriate characterization of his conduct is unsatisfactory
professional
Evidence of Mr Albert Coleiro, Peer Reviewer
33. In his report dated 14 December 2007 (Complainant's Documents Tab 14) Mr.
Coleiro was very critical of the respondent. However,
at the time he prepared
his report Mr. Coleiro had before him only the versions of the events given by
the 2 patients in their statements
to the police.
34. Unfortunately the respondent's version of events had not been put to Mr.
Coleiro at any time prior to his giving evidence in the
proceedings on 1 July
2009. It was therefore necessary to put to him the respondent's version of
events by way of assumptions.
35. In paragraph 30 of the Complainant's Submissions it is put that Mr.
Coleiro maintained the level of his criticism of the respondent
whether or not
the respondent's conduct was sexually motivated. It is then put that Mr.
Coleiro 's evidence '....
is rightfully damning of the conduct of the
.’(paragraph 31).
36. With respect that is not a fair summary of Mr. Coleiro 's evidence.
Moreover common sense would indicate that the motivation
of a practitioner who
performs an intimate examination of a patient is very relevant in determining
the seriousness of the conduct.
37. Contrary to the summary of Mr. C's evidence proffered by the complainant
is the following evidence given by him:
Q. Would you agree with me that if a practitioner does something
motivated by some, if I can call it, a desire for sexual gratification
meriting of serious criticism?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. If a practitioner does something which could be construed in that way,
but could also be explained on the basis of being an error
of judgement that
would be meriting less criticism?
(1/7/09 T 5 L
38. Later in his evidence he said:
Q. But what I am asking you to do, if you can, is to tell the tribunal
in your view, doing the best you can, whether or not you would
be less critical
of the physiotherapist, Mr. R, depending on what his motivation was?
A. It's a hard question to answer. I couldn't say I'd be less
critical, no, because there is no-just no signs of that to be carried
(1/7/09 T 6 L 35-39)
39. On balance Mr. Coleiro maintained his level of criticism of the
respondent however his evidence was contradictory. While intending
disrespect to him whatsoever it must be the case that the true position is that
a practitioner who performs an intimate examination
of the patient who is
motivated by a desire to obtain sexual gratification is meriting of much more
severe criticism than is a practitioner
who performs the same examination in
consequence of an error of judgement.
The respondent’s credibility
40. In paragraphs 25 and 26 of the Complainant's Submissions the complainant
asserts that the Tribunal should prefer the evidence
of the two patients over
that of the respondent where their accounts differ for 2 reasons. The first is
that when the respondent
was interviewed by Mr. Magner and Ms Jagger about Ms B
he made a general denial that there had been any other instance of similar
conduct. The second reason is that the respondent misstated his reason for
leaving the employment of Precision Physio in his application
for employment at
Minchinbury Hospital.
41. Whilst neither incident brings any credit to the respondent his behaviour
needs to be viewed in context. His statement to Mr.
Magner was made when he was
feeling very stressed (30/6/09 T 75 L 19). No doubt that was the case. The
respondent had been suspended
from his employment and was almost certainly going
to be dismissed.
42. As to the statement to MINchinbury Hospital, the respondent knew that his
application for employment was likely to have been adversely
affected had he
disclosed precisely why his employment at Precision Physio had been terminated.
43. More informed and insightful views as to the true character of the
respondent are to be found in the references provided by Father
Antonios Kaldas
dated 10 June 2009 and Father Bishoy Botros dated 11 June 2009
(Respondent’s documents Tabs 13 and 17 respectively).
Protective orders
44. The respondent submits that his conduct should be characterised as
unsatisfactory professional conduct and that the public interest
sufficiently protected by reprimanding him.
45. If the Tribunal is against the respondent and decides that such of the
particulars are made out and as would warrant de-registration,
the only order
the Tribunal should make is that the respondent not be re-registered. Given the
stated intention of the respondent
not to return to the practice of
physiotherapy there would be no need in the public interest to order a minimum
period within which
he not make any application to be re-registered.
46. In paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Complainant's submissions it is put that
the Tribunal should make a prohibition order under section
54 (3A) of the Act
and that the order apply until such time as the respondent's name is restored to
the Register of Physiotherapists.
47. The respondent submits that the Tribunal would only consider making a
prohibition order if it was satisfied that he had directed
Ms A to remove her
underwear on each of the 3 visits; that he had performed the sensation test as
described by her and that he had
performed the examination upon Ms B as
described in particular 12 of the Complaint.
48. Having regard however to there having been no other complaint against the
respondent in relation to his practice of physiotherapy,
it would be reasonable
to limit any such order to the performance of intimate examinations and to limit
the time during which the
order should apply to a period of no more than 2
HCCC V Rezk
Guirguis Rezk, the Physiotherapists Tribunal has found you guilty of
professional misconduct. You are hereby reprimanded for your
conduct. Your
actions constituted a serious breach of the standards expected of a registered
physiotherapist in that you exploited
your position of trust. Your actions
demonstrated a total disregard for the patients’ dignity and rights.
Your conduct has brought the profession of physiotherapy into disrepute and
your conduct would attract the severe criticism of your
peers. The profession of
physiotherapy has always maintained the highest of professional standards with
respect to the conduct of
its members. Conduct of this nature puts at risk the
high level of confidence that the public has in the profession of physiotherapy.
The Tribunal found that you acted improperly and unethically towards Ms A and
Ms B and thereby failed to uphold the professional standards
expected of a
registered physiotherapist. Further, you conduct demonstrated that you lack the
knowledge, skill, judgement and care
required to practice physiotherapy.
The Tribunal is of the view that you pose a substantial risk to public safety
working in health services and therefore will not allow
you to continue to have
physical access to patients for a period of two years. It is for this reason
that a Prohibition Order is
The Tribunal is of the view that you need a minimum period of two years to
reflect upon your conduct and address the deficits in your
character, clinical
competence and ethical practice identified by this Decision. It is for this
reason that the Tribunal has Ordered
that you not re-apply for re-registration
for a period of two years.
In reaching these Orders the Tribunal has been mindful of its role to be
protective and not punitive.
As per HCCC v
[2007] NSWNMT 3
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362; see also the
comments of Branson J at paragraphs 122 to 138 of Qantas Airways Limited v Gama
[2008] FCAFC 69
paragraph 35
See evidence
of Jagger; Magner and
EX R 5; R 6;
R7; R8; R9;R10; and R11
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (997 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter