URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Development Corporation Pty Ltd v Challita [2000] NSWFTT 9 (15 May 2000)
Fair Trading Tribunal
New South Wales
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION PTY LTD - V – CHALLITA
[2000] NSWFTT 9
Development Corporation Pty Ltd
Respondent:
File Number:
CT No 1088 of 1998
Catch Words:
Building claim – contractor and an owner/developer – unlicensed
contractor – cross claim – security for costs
– constitution
of the Tribunal – cost to rectify alleged defects – liquidated
damages claim – other damages
claims – quantum meruit claim –
Primary Legislation:
Builders Licensing Act 1971
Commercial Tribunal Act 1984
Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987
s12A, s12B, s30, s32
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998,
s13, s16, s18, s48 Sched 5, cl
3(2)(b), cl 5A
(3), s89A, s
Matter for Decision:
Building claim under s89A of
Cases Cited:
Australasian Concrete Services v Multiplex
[1999] NSWSC 1140
Gray (Constructions) Pty Ltd v Hogan
[2000] NSWCA 26
Holland v Wiltshire
[1954] HCA 42
(1954) 90 CLR 409
Lee Gleeson Pty Ltd v Sterling Estates Pty Ltd
(1991) 23 NSWLR
O’Connor v LEAW Pty Ltd
(1997) 42 NSWLR 285
Olsson v Dyson
(1969) 120 CLR 365
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v Paul
[1987] HCA 5
(1986) 162 CLR 221
Poort v Development Underwriting (Victoria) Pty Ltd
[1977] VicRp 52
Renard Constructions (ME) Pty Ltd v Minister for Public Works
26 NSWLR 234
Ruxley Electronics Ltd v Forsyth
(1995) 3 WLR 118
Steele v Tardiani
[1946] HCA 21
(1946) 72 CLR 386
Sumpter v Hedges
[1898] 1 QB 673
Vickery v Woods
[1952] HCA 7
(1952) 85 CLR 336
Also Cited:
Repudiation’
Aust Bar Review
Goff & Jones,
The Law of Restitution
(4th ed 1993)
Hudson’s Building and Engineering Contracts
(ed Duncan Wallace
QC, 1995, 11th ed)
Principles of Remedies
Judge KP O’Connor, Chairperson assisted by Messrs Wargon and Wiffen
Hearing dates:
26, 27, 28 October 1998; 28 April; 17, 18, 19, 21 May; 20, 21, 23, 26, 27
July; 16, 17 August; 9 December 1999
Submissions closed:
9 December 1999
Date of Decision:
15 May 2000
REPRESENTATION
Mr A Howen, Counsel
Respondent:
Ms E Olsson, Counsel
1. In respect of the applicant’s application, that the respondent pay
the applicant $14,245.
2. In respect of the respondent’s cross-claim, that the applicant pay
the respondent $9,000.
3. Interest be payable in respect of Orders 1 and 2 at the rate prescribed
by cl 35 of the Fair Trading Tribunal Regulation 1999.
4. Leave to apply in respect of further orders as to:
the question of the release of monies paid to the Registrar by the applicant
by way of security for the respondent’s costs
costs in relation to proceedings unable to be continued on 3 December 1998
due to delay in reappointment of two Members of the Tribunal
costs in relation to the application made by the applicant for the Tribunal
to disqualify itself made on 27 July 1999.
Exhibits be returned after 28 days.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1) This dispute is between a contractor and an owner/developer
over the construction of timber framework for a residential building
involving the construction of four villa units on a block of land at Condell
2) The applicant in these proceedings is the contractor for the
timber frame, Development Corporation Pty Ltd (DevCorp). The respondent
owner/developer, Mr Challita (Challita).
3) DevCorp commenced proceedings in the Commercial Tribunal on 12
May 1998 pursuant to s 89A of the
(the Act). At that time
the Commercial Tribunal had jurisdiction to deal with building claims, as
defined by s 12A of the Consumer
Claims Tribunal Act 1987 which by virtue of s
32 of that Act exceeded the prescribed claim limit of $25,000. The orders that
Commercial Tribunal could make in respect of claims over $25,000 were set
out in s 30 of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1997. Building
claims can be
made in respect of residential building work by any person regardless of whether
the person is a consumer within the
meaning of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act:
see s 12B. DevCorp applied for an order for the payment of monies due under its
with Challita in respect of work performed.
4) At the commencement of the proceedings, the Tribunal granted
leave to DevCorp to file an additional claim in quantum meruit. It
sum of $30,119.60 subsequently amended, by leave of the Tribunal, to $36,119.60.
In closing submissions, counsel for DevCorp
advised that his client confined its
application to the quantum meruit claim.
5) This is a consequence of DevCorp having entered, as it
admitted, into a contract to do residential building work without a licence.
Under the Act, s 4 it is an offence for a person to contract to do residential
building work (which includes any work involved in
the construction of a
dwelling, see s 3) without a licence authorising its holder to contract to do
that work. Under s 10(3):
A person who contracts to do work in contravention of this Division or who
contracts do work under a contract that does
not comply with this
(a) is not entitled to damages or to enforce any other remedy in
respect of a breach of the contract committed by any other party
contract, but
(b) is liable for damages and subject to any other remedy in respect
of a breach of the contract committed by the person.”
6) Consequently DevCorp can not sue on the contract but Challita
7) The present s 10(3) has a history dating back to the Builders
Licensing Act 1971. The impact of the then relevant provision, s
13I (expressed
in substantially identical terms to s 10(3)) on a quantum meruit claim was
considered by the High Court in Pavey &
Matthews Pty Ltd v Paul
[1987] HCA 5
The High Court, reversing the New South Wales Court of Appeal, held
that the statute did not prevent such a claim, as it does not
rest on an implied
contract but on general restitutionary principles. Deane J said at 262-3
“There is no apparent
reason in justice why a builder who is precluded from enforcing an agreement
should also be deprived of
the ordinary common law right to bring proceedings on
a common law indebitatus count to recover fair and reasonable remuneration
work which he has actually done which has been accepted by the building owner
8) Pavey concerned a licensed builder who had contravened the Act
by not having a written contract. In the present case the situation
involves an
unlicensed builder. In Lee Gleeson Pty Ltd v Sterling Estates Pty Ltd
that situation was addressed. Brownie J held that the principles
expounded in Pavey applied equally. The question of whether a builder
unenforceable contract is entitled to sue on a quantum meruit basis was most
recently authoritatively dealt with by the
Supreme Court in O’Connor v
LEAW Pty Ltd
(1997) 42 NSWLR 285 (Rolfe
J) where the reasoning in Lee Gleeson
was adopted.
9) The Act makes one direct reference to quantum meruit, in
s94(1)(a). That provision states that a person who enters into a contract
building work without having in place prescribed insurance to protect home
purchasers is ‘not entitled to recover money
in respect of work done under
the contract under any other right of action (including a quantum meruit
action).’ Neither counsel
raised any issue as to the relevance of this
provision to these proceedings. Recently the Supreme Court has ruled that where
head contractor has insurance covering a residential building project, a
sub-contractor is not to be deprived of a remedy because
the sub-contractor does
not also have insurance: Australasian Concrete Services v Multiplex
[1999] NSWSC 1140 (Hunter
J). (Though there was no direct evidence on this issue, counsel for
Challita did indicate in closing submissions that Challita’s
builder did have insurance covering the project.)
10) Challita filed a cross-claim on 12 June 1998, later amended on
16 October 1998. On 16 October 1998 he also filed an answer to
claim, as it then stood, pleading the unenforceability of the contract on its
11) Under the cross-claim Challita alleged default by DevCorp in
its failure to complete its work in a competent manner pursuant to
the contract
of 20 November 1997. He alleged that DevCorp ceased work on 1 December 1997 and
subsequently refused to complete. He
alleged that DevCorp wholly suspended works
before completion, failed to complete the works with reasonable diligence and in
a competent
manner, and failed to comply with a notice dated 9 December 1997 to
remove and replace defective work and improper materials. He
stated that on 16
January 1998 Challita gave written notice that the contract was determined.
12) In the amended cross-claim Challita sought damages of $73,050.
The particulars of the amount claimed by way of damages under the
cross-claim comprised: rectification of carpentry work by another subcontractor,
$12,600 (this is a reference to demolition
costs); additional costs of $14,050
for another subcontractor to complete the carpentry work (being the difference
between the price
agreed with DevCorp and the amount paid to LMA Constructions
under the new contract); additional plumbing costs of $3500 incurred
in order to
complete plumbing work; additional costs of $2200 for an electrician; additional
costs of $5000 in respect of bricklayer’s
costs; liquidated damages of
$35,700 (approximately 26 weeks at the rate of $1400 per week).
13) In closing written submissions, counsel for Challita revised
the claim in liquidated damages downward to cover a period of 11
weeks from 10
December 1997 to early March 1998. This was computed by using the date of which
the replacement contractor (LMA Constructions)
took to build the new frames
after the work done by DevCorp had been demolished. The new work took about six
weeks from date of commencement
of the work which was about 21 or 22 January
1998. The period of delay was calculated as being from 10 December 1997 to early
being a total of 11 weeks, giving rise to a revised claim under this head
of $15,400.
14) The claims in respect of plumbing costs and bricklayer’s
costs were not pursued at hearing.
15) Consequently the original amount claimed of $73,050 was
revised downward to an amount of $44,250.
16) The hearing of evidence consumed 15 days spread over 10 months
between October 1998 and August 1999, with closing submissions
in December 1999.
There were other days of attendance relating to ancillary matters. The legal
costs incurred by the parties in pursuing
their dispute now greatly exceed the
amounts in issue.
17) In the course of the proceedings Challita (as the respondent
to the principal application) made a number of applications for security
costs, all of which were granted by the Tribunal, using a formula which sought
to take account of the proportion of Challita’s
case which could be said
to be in the nature of a defence, as distinct from that part of his case that
constituted a cross-claim.
For the rulings the running Transcript (ts) at 56-61
(26 October 1997), 716-7 (21 May 1998), 1295-7 (16 August 1998) and daily
for 13 November 1997, 36-42. DevCorp complied with each of the
rulings, with the result that $45,066 has been lodged in trust with
Registrar of the Tribunal.
18) The first day of hearing was 26 October 1998 and the last day
for the hearing of evidence was 17 August 1999. Directions were
given for the
filing of written submissions. The respondent’s submissions were filed
late, on 24 November 1999. Oral submissions
were presented to the Tribunal on 9
December 1999.
19) A Note on Constitution of the Tribunal: The hearing and
determination of this matter has concluded after the Commercial Tribunal
abolished. That Tribunal was abolished on 1 November 1999: Fair Trading Tribunal
Act 1998, Sched 5, cl 3(2)(b). Clause 5A of
Sched 5 governs proceedings pending
as at the date of abolition. It provides:
Pending proceedings after 1 November 1999
(1) If proceedings were instituted before 1 March 1999 but had not
commenced to be heard by a former body before 1 November 1999,
the proceedings
are taken to have been duly instituted in the Tribunal (as constituted, or
reconstituted, in accordance with section
13 of this Act).
(2) If a former body had commenced to hear (but had not finally
determined) a matter before 1 November 1999, the Tribunal (as constituted,
reconstituted, in accordance with section 13 of this Act) is to continue to hear
and determine the matter.
(3) For the purposes of subclauses (1) and (2):
(a) the Tribunal has and may exercise all the functions that the
former body had immediately before its abolition, and
(b) the provisions of any Act, statutory rule or other law that would have
applied to or in respect of the proceedings had this Act
not been enacted
continue to apply.
(4) For the purposes of proceedings heard under subclause (2), the Tribunal may
have regard to any record of the proceedings before
the relevant former body,
including a record of any evidence taken in the proceedings.”
20) These provisions do not deal clearly with the question of
whether members of the old Tribunal, the Commercial Tribunal, can continue
hear and determine a pending proceeding which has commenced to hear, but not
finally determined, a matter before 1 November 1999.
As the two non-legal
members (Mr Alexander Wargon, a structural engineer and an experienced industry
member of the Commercial Tribunal
and Mr Wiffen, an experienced consumer member
of the Commercial Tribunal) who sat with the presiding member in this matter
was before the Commercial Tribunal did not hold appointments as members
to the Fair Trading Tribunal, a question arose as to whether
they continued to
be entitled to sit in the matter. Clause 5A(2) speaks of the Fair Trading
Tribunal continuing to hear and determine
‘as constituted, or
reconstituted, in accordance with section 13’. Section 13
13 Constitution of Tribunal for particular
proceedings
(1) For the purposes of any proceedings, the Tribunal may be
constituted by one, two or three of its members.
(2) The Chairperson may give directions as to which members are to
constitute the Tribunal for the purposes of any particular proceedings
of proceedings.
(3) In giving a direction as to the members who are to constitute
the Tribunal for the purposes of any particular proceedings, the
Chairperson is
to have due regard to the degree of public importance or complexity of the
matters to which the proceedings relate.
(4) A direction under this section in respect of particular
proceedings may be revoked, and another given in its
(a) at any time after the giving of the direction and
before the commencement of the hearing of the proceedings, or
(b) if the member constituting the Tribunal (or, in the case of proceedings
before the Tribunal where it is constituted by two or
more members, one of those
members) during the hearing of the proceedings, or after the completion of the
hearing but before the
matter to which the proceedings relate is determined:
(i) ceases to be a member, or
(ii) ceases to be available for the purposes of the proceedings, at any time
after the member ceases to be a member or to be available.
(5) The Tribunal, if reconstituted in accordance with subsection (4) (b), may,
for the purposes of the proceedings, have regard to
any record of the
proceedings before the Tribunal as previously constituted, including a record of
any evidence taken in the proceedings.”
21) As a result the Tribunal after 1 November 1999 only had one
member, the presiding member, who could continue to sit. After consulting
counsel for the parties as to the desirability of the two Commercial Tribunal
non-legal members continuing to sit in the proceedings
if at all possible, and
with the agreement of counsel, in November 1999 the Chairperson did not
reconstitute the Tribunal to add
any new members pursuant to s 13 but instead
appointed the two Commercial Tribunal members mentioned as Assessors pursuant to
of the Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998 and invited them to continue to sit
in that capacity, as permitted by s18. Section 18 provides:
18 Assessors sitting with
(1) If proceedings are pending in the Tribunal, the Tribunal may, in
determining the proceedings or any part of the proceedings, be
assisted by one
or more assessors.
(2) An assessor assisting the Tribunal under this section may assist
and advise the Tribunal, but is not to adjudicate on any matter
(3) The Tribunal may dispense with the services of an assessor at
any stage of the proceedings.”
An Overview
22) The original contract was made on 30 October 1997. A second
contract was made on 20 November 1997. DevCorp had not completed the
job when it
ceased work for what it saw as good cause on 4 December 1997.
23) The documents that form the basis of both contracts are
DevCorp’s quote and the set of plans given to DevCorp by Challita.
contract price for the job (under both contracts) was $51,500. The quote
included a progress payment schedule, repeated in the
second contract, with the
first payment due at “35 per cent”.
24) DevCorp originally subcontracted the job to Sapina
Constructions Pty Ltd (Sapina Constructions), holder of a carpenter’s
licence (principal - Mr Sapina (Sapina)). It was a labour only subcontract, with
DevCorp taking responsibility for ordering and delivery
of materials. Work
commenced at the site on 4 November 1997, and one or more carpenters from Sapina
Constructions attended the site
and undertook work for varying periods of times
on 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14 and 18 November.
25) Disputes occurred. They centred on progress of works,
entitlement to progress payment, general quality of works and three specific
issues: the misalignment in places of the frame and the slab affecting all four
units, the size and lay-out of upper floor flooring
joists in all four units,
and the question of whether if constructed to approved plans adequate head room
had been allowed for the
rooms in the attics of units 2, 3 and 4.
26) DevCorp agreed on or about 19 November 1997 with work in
progress to remove and replace Sapina Constructions.
27) At the request of DevCorp Challita signed a standard form
contract issued by the Master Builders Association (MBA). It referred
original quote and the plans, but also incorporated into the contract some
additional matters. These included a specific date
for completion being 10
December 1997 and a liquidated damages clause.
28) The three building issues already mentioned (alignment of
frame and slab, joist lay-out and size and upper floor head-room) were
addressed by this contract. Nor was the issue of the circumstances in which the
first progress payment would be payable. That
contract was signed on 20 November
1997. A new team of carpenters, from Portland Structures Pty Ltd (Portland
Structures) worked
for varying periods of time at the site on 27, 28 and 29
November 1997 and on 1, 2, 3 and 4 December 1997.
29) On 13 November 1997 DevCorp had made a claim for its first
progress payment for $17,123.75 pursuant to a schedule included in
the quote of
30 October 1997. This claim was declined by Challita. The claim was renewed and
on or about 1 December 1997 Challita
tendered a cheque for $10,000, but that was
rejected by DevCorp the same day as not sufficient. On 3 December 1997 DevCorp
payment in writing and requested an extension of time. There were
several exchanges of correspondence between the parties of the
next few days,
and site visits by experts called in by Challita.
30) Negotiations in December 1997 and January 1998 to resolve the
dispute were conducted. These were unsuccessful. Early in January
1998 carpentry
on a day labour basis was undertaken at the site for Challita by Tom Lukac
(Lukac) and Ivan Rados.
31) Challita issued a written notice of termination through his
solicitors dated 16 January 1998. Challita had the work demolished,
new contractors (LMA Constructions) and proceeded to erect new framework. The
entire project was completed around September
32) Challita has not subsequently made any payment for the work
33) A site inspection was not sought by the Tribunal as the work
in issue could no longer be inspected.
34) The Key People: Before turning to the many factual disputes,
it may be helpful to give a brief outline of the various people and
that figure in the case.
35) DevCorp is a private company of which Mr Cvitan (Cvitan) is
the sole director. Cvitan describes himself as its managing director
executive officer. Cvitan has no building qualifications and has never been
licensed in respect of residential work. But
he claimed to have extensive
experience in supervisory roles in major commercial and residential building
work. In cross-examination
Cvitan listed a range of commercial and residential
building projects where he had had supervisory responsibilities. Subsequently
had been engaged as a partner in a joint venture and as a director of a private
company for projects involving the building of
blocks of residential units and
in major building projects relating to hotels (including fit-outs using
carpenters). He also referred
to a job another company of his had undertaken,
involving major refurbishment of a heritage listed residence at Mosman.
36) Cvitan was introduced to this job by a friend Mr Jurcevic
(Jurcevic), an architectural draftsman. Jurcevic knew of the possibility
at Condell Park through Ms Alagha (Alagha). Alagha was of Lebanese background
and an acquaintance of Challita through their
attendance at the same Church.
Alagha was qualified as a structural engineer, and had recently left a position
as a development
engineer at the local council, the Bankstown Council (covering
Condell Park). Jurcevic regularly did drawing work for Alagha, whose
business is
AMPA Design and Construction Pty Ltd (AMPA). AMPA had prepared plans on behalf
of Challita for the Condell Park project.
Alagha and Jurcevic introduced Cvitan
to Challita.
37) Once the job was obtained, Cvitan engaged Jurcevic to
supervise work at the site and Sapina Constructions were engaged to do the
Sapina, the principal of Sapina Constructions, was related to Jurcevic.
38) In many of the projects in which Cvitan had been involved, he
had regularly retained Mr Newman (Newman), a licensed builder, to
Newman said in giving evidence in chief in October 1998 that he had been in the
building industry for 25 years and held
a builder’s licence for about 11
years. His experience had including working in the building and health sections
of Marrickville
and North Sydney Councils. His final Council position was Senior
Health and Building Inspector, North Sydney Council. He holds certificates
qualification as a building inspector and health inspector, both dated 1978 when
he was working in Councils. Newman said he had
worked with Cvitan over the
previous 10 or 12 years on numerous building projects. Newman said his own
experience extended over 100
to 150 residential building projects. Newman was
cross-examined as to these claims.
39) Under cross-examination (in April 1999) Newman acknowledged
the correct position as to his licence is that he has held it since
1990, consequently at the time he gave evidence in chief (October 1998) he had
held it for 8 years, not 10 or 11 years
as he had then suggested.
40) Cvitan had known Jurcevic for 22 years. But he said that he
had not retained Jurcevic’s services previously. Jurcevic is
architectural draftsman but holds no licence or certificate under the Act. He
said that he had extensive experience supervising
41) This was the first job for which the company DevCorp had
contracted. While Cvitan had worked with Newman in the past, he had not
previously worked with Jurcevic or Sapina. He had not known
42) Challita migrated to Australia from Lebanon and has been
involved in the building industry for 29 years, for most of that time
concreter with the State Department of Housing. He had never held a building
licence. But he had spent all his working life
in Australia on building sites.
In his own right as an owner-builder, he had built around 1977 his then family
his current family home which is located at Greenacre. He
said he had done all the work on these projects including carpentry. He
later brick veneered the current family home. He also said that in 1991 he built
a ‘dual occupancy’ in Batemans
Bay. In 1994 he said he undertook a
small medium density development, consisting of one townhouse and two villas in
Greenacre. The
Greenacre development was frequently referred to in the
proceedings.
43) He said in cross-examination that he had retained as
investment properties the property at Batemans Bay (which he described as
printing business), and the developments at Greenacre and Condell Park. He said
he was looking at another development at Condell
44) Challita took ultimate responsibility for managing the site,
but left day-to-day co-ordination and oversight to his son, then
20 years old.
He had also engaged a licensed builder, Mr Zeaiter (Zeaiter).
45) Challita’s son was then a fourth year apprentice
carpenter indentured to Zeaiter, but near the end of his first year of
on-site experience having spent three years doing the carpentry course which
involves a mix of study days and days on sites.
He said he had been on site
working with his father since he was a child. Zeaiter left site co-ordination
and management to the Challitas.
Challita’s son said Zeaiter did a lot of
work for the Department of Housing. Challita said in evidence that Zeaiter came
the site two or three times a week. But Zeaiter’s evidence was that he
had no significant involvement in the running of the
site or in dealing with
specific issues that arose whatever his level of attendance.
46) Experts Called: Apart from the persons already mentioned,
several persons were called to give expert evidence:
47) DevCorp called -
a) Mr Mayoh, of PD Mayoh Architects Pty Ltd in support of his
written report dated 24 September 1998. He gave evidence as to the quality
the original plans and as to the structural issues (in particular as to
structural issues in dispute between the parties connected
with the lay-out of
beams and joists and in connexion with the degree of headroom provided in the
plans as drawn in the upper level
of the villa units.
b) Mr McKinley, a senior engineer with Costin Structural Pty
Limited in support of his report dated 17 September 1998. He gave evidence
relation to an engineering detail (bearing the name of Mr Alagha and AMPA, but
not accepted by Mr Alagha as his document) relating
to the floor joist and
timber beam layout for units 2, 3 and 4. His evidence related in particular to
whether the layout proposed
complied with the relevant Australian Standard and
whether it was adequate to meet design load standards.
c) Mr van der Zypen, of Coopers and Richards, a registered
surveyor in support of his report dated 17 September 1998. The report related
the height of the ridge of the four units and the level of the pitching point
heights and the pitch of the roof together with
dimensions.
d) Mr Perks, a quantity surveyor and licensed builder. Mr Perks
provided opinions as to the quality of Challita’s site management
practices Challita based on DevCorp’s version of those practices. Mr Perks
said he had done some work for DevCorp in the past.
He gave evidence as to a
meeting on site with Challita and Newman on 14 January 1998.
48) Cvitan and DevCorp had a prior association with Mr Perks.
49) DevCorp also called Mr Norman, an accountant who provides
accounting and bookkeeping services to DevCorp, as to expenditure incurred
respect of the Condell Park job.
50) Challita called -
a) Mr Cowper, formerly a senior building and development officer
with the Bankstown Council who attended the site in that capacity
on 3 and 23
December 1997, on the latter occasion with another surveyor, Mr Kemp. He gave
evidence as to the circumstances that might
require amended plans to be
submitted and a further approval to be obtained. Mr Cowper had known Challita
over the years because
of the number of concreting projects he had done in the
local area, and because of his project at Greenacre.
b) Mr Cornish, a building consultant and qualified builder who
originally trained as a carpenter. He gave evidence in relation to
attendance at the site on 19 January 1998 and subsequent attendances. His report
included numerous photographs of the state of
works, as well as a video. He gave
detailed evidence as to the quality of the work as he found it on that
c) Mr Hibbins, a quantity surveyor. He attended the site on 28
November and 10 December 1997. He made reports as to the framing work
at each time. He priced each of the elements identified, concluding that 29 per
cent of the work had been done as at 28
November 1997. In a second report dated
10 December he estimated the work completed at 34 per cent.
d) Mr Eid, a civil and structural engineer who prepared a report
dated 7 December 1997 following a visit to the site. His evidence
particular to the structural adequacy of the use of a composite beam as depicted
in the engineering detail in the name
of Mr Alagha and AMPA Design. Mr Eid was
an acquaintance of Challita, like Alagha, through their Church.
51) Challita also called witnesses in relation to the quantum of
his claim. They were Mr Saliba, a licensed electrician, in relation
to increases
in the price of his work due to delay in completing framing; and Mr Rashida, a
licensed carpenter and principal of LMA
Constructions, in relation to his quote
for demolition and rectification works, and work subsequently
undertaken.
52) Use of Interpreter: Challita was provided with the assistance
of an interpreter of the Lebanese language. When giving evidence
for the most
part he answered directly in English. But because of his difficulty reading
English, documents that were shown to him
were read to him in Lebanese.
53) The Concept Stage: Challita acknowledged in cross-examination
that he had given instructions in relation to a range of matters
to do with the
lay-out and style of the proposed units to Alagha. The Tribunal does not regard
that as surprising or unusual. He
said that this was the first time he had used
Alagha, and that Alagha had not been in involved in Challita’s similar
development,
a few years before, at Greenacre. Alagha acknowledged that he had
been given the Greenacre plans to look at, when preparing the plans.
had been a similar attic style development.
54) As to a matter which became significant Alagha said in
evidence that he regarded a 300mm vertical dimension shown on the cross-section,
between a ground floor ceiling level of 2400 (revised to 2600) and the upper
level as referring to a 300mm deep joist.
55) Challita said that when he gave instructions to Alagha, he
advised him that he wanted provision for bedrooms in the loft without
that there might be a problem in relation to headroom. But Alagha said that
Challita asked for the roof pitch to be 30
degrees, but Alagha recommended 35
degrees because of the need for adequate head room, and that was accepted (ts
1259). Alagha said
he had only done one previous attic style villa units plan.
In cross-examination Challita said that Jurcevic had seen the plans as
being drafted, as he was working (as a draftsman) in Alagha’s office at
56) The plans are dated 10 April 1997. They are marked as approved
by the Bankstown Council with a stamp dated 21 August 1997. As
submitted and
approved, the floor to ceiling height was 2400 mm for the ground floor rooms
(but later amended to 2600 mm) then there
was the 300 mm dimension, followed (in
the case of Units 2, 3 and 4) by a dimension of 3600mm to the underside of the
roof ridge.
The upper level rooms were attic rooms contained entirely within the
roof for which a pitch of 35 degrees was specified.
57) Unit 1 stood at the front of the property on the western side
of Edgar Street and consequently faced east. Unit 1 was larger and
different overall layout to the other three Units. It was built as a two-storey
dwelling. In relation to the disputes which
later arose, there was no difficulty
in respect of upper floor head-room as it affected Unit 1. In this instance a
dimension of 6000mm
to the underside of the roof ridge was permitted, and the
evidence was that it was finally built to 5500mm. The evidence was that
were more tolerant of a higher roof line for the villa unit at the front facing
the street, than for villa units at the
rear, because of overshadowing and
neighbour privacy concerns.
58) Unit 2 was immediately behind Unit 1 and faced south, and then
Units 3 and 4 were alongside each other behind Unit 2. Unit 3 was
northern side of the block and faced south towards Unit 4. Unit 4 was on the
southern side and faced north towards Unit 3.
Each villa unit had a garage, and
the overall lay-out had the benefit of facilitating access to the garages.
59) In the case of each Unit a lounge room, a family room, a
bedroom with en-suite, a bathroom and a kitchen and laundry, and garage
provided for on the ground levels. An internal staircase ran off the entry hall
inside the front door which was centrally situated.
That staircase went to an
upper level built entirely within the roof line. At the top of the staircase to
the left there was a bathroom.
Facing the top of the staircase were two doors,
one accessing a bedroom to the left, the other a bedroom to the right.
60) In the case of units 2, 3 and 4 the footprint of the upper
level is substantially smaller than that of the ground floor, since
the pitch of
the roof springs approximately from the level of the upper floor and since the
upper floor accommodations are confined
within the attic space. The roof is
depicted so as to be constructed in a Cape Cod style with the provision of
daylight and ventilation
being achieved by the construction of several niche
dormer windows which protrude through (and outside) the general profile of the
61) As to variations from the stamped plans, Challita said in
evidence that he had spoken to Mr Cowper, the inspector at Bankstown
Council. Mr
Cowper had told him that it was permissible to vary the ground level ceiling
height from 2400 to 2600. He had also said
it was permissible to build the wall
and the garage in Unit 1 in timber rather than brick.
62) A Note on Compass Points: The above description of compass
points in relation to the lay-out of the units on the site broadly
their actual position. For convenience when viewing the plans (in particular the
key documents, Ex
, Ex 8A and Ex 9) the convention was adopted of
treating the top of the plan as ‘north’ and the bottom as
and so on. This point is particularly relevant to the
discussion of how the flooring joists for the upper level of units 2, 3 and
might be laid out.
63) 25-27 September 1997: Jurcevic had worked as a draftsman for
Alagha. Cvitan and Jurcevic arranged to meet the Challitas at their
Greenacre to discuss the prospective job. In cross-examination Challita
corrected his affidavit and his evidence in chief,
and said that Alagha was not
at the meeting. This is consistent with Cvitan and Jurcevic’s accounts.
64) At the meeting Cvitan and Jurcevic discussed with Challita and
his son the possibility of undertaking the framing work for the
Condell Park
project. Challita frequently referred in his affidavit and in evidence, and was
supported by his son, to the fact that
they were impressed by DevCorp’s
business address, Level 67 of the MLC Tower in the centre of Sydney. Challita
thought that
a business with such an address must be very successful. Cvitan
referred in cross-examination to the meeting. He said: ‘It
consider as normal discussions of Mr Challita, or any prospective client,
wanting to find something about the company
and the person who intends dealing
business with. He wanted some background on what types of work we had done
previously.’
(ts 127). Cvitan agreed that he did not tell him that DevCorp
hadn’t done any work of this kind previously: ‘He didn’t
ask’ (ts 127).
65) Jurcevic later provided Cvitan with a set of plans. There were
three original documents (Ex 7, 8 and 9) containing plans, two
of which were
copies of each other, one of them bearing the stamp of the Bankstown Council
signifying its approval (Ex 8). Ex 7 and
Ex 8 had been used as the working
drawings, and had a number of additional markings on them. In the course of
examining the witnesses
a fourth plan, being a clean version of the stamped plan
was often consulted (Ex 8A). The third original document was a plan showing
set of elevations of the proposed development (Ex 9).
66) Cvitan did obtain at least one other quote (Ex 55) dated 15
October 1997 from AJ Nakad Carpentry for $54,000.
67) Cvitan and Jurcevic took the plans away. Jurcevic consulted
Newman, and they prepared a price for the job. In the meantime Jurcevic
telephoned Challita on 27 September to find out if he had any other prices.
Challita said he had a quote for $54,000. Jurcevic said
DevCorp would do it for
$51,500. Challita said he would accept that price. Jurcevic informed Cvitan.
Challita’s recollection
is that Jurcevic said “We’ll do a
contract that says that after 35% of the work is done, 35% will be paid and that
days after I give you the bill you will give me the money”.
Challita’s recollection is that he said “Yes,
68) In his affidavit Challita said that in that conversation he
discussed the pitch of the roof with Jurcevic. Challita gives the
version of the conversation with Jurcevic:
“If we cannot pitch the roof at 35 degrees because there would not be
enough headroom on the second floor we will
have to go to 45
Jurcevic: “That’s no problem”.
69) Under cross-examination he repeated this version of the
conversation in similar terms. He acknowledged that he had given thought
possible problem of headroom. He also acknowledged that if the contractor was
required to build to 45 degrees more timber
would have been
70) Challita was questioned about his earlier Greenacre
development. He acknowledged that there a similar roof pitch problem had been
resolved by varying the pitch to 45 degrees. He had used an architect other than
Alagha on that project, but had used Zeaiter as
the builder. He said that on
that occasion he had gone to the Council and got an amended set of plans to
allow for the 45 degree
pitch. He said that the framing contractor on that
occasion Patts and Son of Padstow had made the variation without extra charge.
He said that in the present case if it had been necessary to go to 45 degrees he
would have paid the extra.
71) Challita’s affidavit was to similar effect, where he
said that it was always his intention, if the lack of headroom required
of roof pitch from 35 degrees to 45 degrees to apply to Bankstown Council for
approval of any such change. He deposed no
such change became necessary at any
stage in the construction of the development, and they were completed with a 35
degree pitch.
72) Preparation of the Quote: Cvitan said that Jurcevic and Newman
estimated quantities by reference to the plans. Newman agreed that
Jurcevic did the estimate.
73) Newman, when giving evidence in chief, was asked to look at
the plans. He described them as poor and having insufficient detail,
but that it
was possible to quote on them. Newman also said that in preparing the quote he
had consulted an issue of Cordell’s
Estimator’s Guide, which may not
have been current. Newman said he and Jurcevic advised Cvitan as to a price, and
Newman believed
that they included a 20 per cent profit margin.
74) Newman altered his evidence under cross-examination. He agreed
that he simply inspected the plans with Jurcevic and did some ‘rough
take-offs’. He agreed that his previous evidence was wrong, and that he
had not used Cordell’s or other guides.
75) On the important question of the choice of joist sizes for the
first floor, Newman said in evidence in chief that he made a decision
joist 250 x 50 was appropriate. He said he reached that decision having regard
to the Australian Standard SAA 1684 (the light
timber framing code) and assuming
he was dealing with Oregon F8 timber. He said that the plan dimension of 300
could not be assumed
to depict the depth of the joist as the dimension may
include other items such as the depth of the ceiling material and the depth
the flooring material. He also referred to Australian Standard SAA 1100 in this
76) These answers were given in response to a series of questions
from DevCorp’s counsel that started with the question ‘Based
drawings as presented to you at the time, what sized joist did you decide was
appropriate in that space [the space showing
a vertical dimension of 300 and
situated between a vertical dimension of 2400 and a vertical dimension of
77) He was also asked ‘Did you make a decision that a joist
of 250 x 50 was adequate in that space?’ to which he replied
economic decision, yes.’ (ts 220)
78) This course of questions and answers left the Tribunal (and
counsel for Challita) with the understanding that he made these decisions
timber types at the quote preparation stage. However under cross-examination,
Newman acknowledged that he had not considered
the question of how to interpret
the 300 dimension, or the appropriate joist size at the time of advising on the
79) He said that he had examined these issues after dispute had
arisen over the use of 250 x 50 joists, at which point he examined
the plans and
consulted the Standards (ts 260-261). As to when precisely he formed the view
that the use of 250 x 50 was an ‘economic
decision’, he said it was
‘over that period’ but he could not remember whether it was before
or after the quote
stage (ts 264).
80) Jurcevic also commented on the question of the cost of timber.
He said he was aware that the whole job had to be done in Oregon.
He noted that
with hardwood spans 40 per cent longer could be covered at the same cost, and
observed ‘We can minimise our timber
sizes by putting beams, steel beams
through the areas. You know, it all complies. It’s just knowledge.’
81) He agreed that in the quoting process he selected a timber
that would fit into the span required. He noted that had some material
than Oregon been required, one could save 20 per cent materials. (ts
82) In his fourth affidavit filed 23 September 1997 Cvitan gave a
similar version to that of Newman’s evidence in chief, also
saying that
the quote was prepared based on the plans, in conjunction with Cordell’s.
He annexed the pages of Cordell’s
guide that he said he used. He was
extensively cross-examined on this point. Asked whether he had a copy of
Cordell’s in his
office at the time he was cross-examined (ts 137), he
said he was not sure. Cvitan when pressed was unable to give any account beyond
that as to the way in which he went about arriving at the quote. Cvitan said
that he relied on the advice of Newman and Jurcevic,
combined with his general
knowledge of the prices of timber materials..
83) These exchanges point towards Cvitan having little real
concern for the information contained in Cordell’s and relying instead
simply on what he was told by Newman and Jurcevic
84) The Tribunal is satisfied that Cvitan simply took the
quantities estimates provided by Jurcevic and Newman as to the overall amount
timber needed for the job, and then multiplied the gross number of lineal metres
by what he calculated to be an average cost of
for material and labour of
$24.12 per lineal metre. The Tribunal is satisfied that Cvitan did not break up
the job into components
in the process of estimating.
85) Jurcevic’s evidence is accepted (ts 322) that he went to
Newman, sat down with him and said ‘Paul, this is a job to
quote. I have
an idea what the job is worth. Can the job be done?’ He said they sat
down, did their figures and got a quote
on timber. He said then that ‘we
got our quote on the carpentry work and mathematically everything was OK’.
86) The Tribunal accepts the thrust of the cross-examination that
Cvitan’s statement in the affidavit was designed to bolster
or give some
tacit support to the quote. Most relevant to their pricing decision was the
conversation that Jurcevic had with Challita
as to the other quotes that
Challita had received.
87) The evidence of Cvitan and Newman was unsatisfactory on the
question of how they went about formulating the quote. As Newman acknowledged,
timber framing job is a relatively basic building task. Cvitan, Jurcevic and
Newman had no difficulty coming up with a quote that
was within the usual range
(as discerned from the other quotes obtained by Challita and from the quantity
estimates produced by Mr
Hibbins, and the check done by Mr Cornish) for jobs of
88) Cvitan and Newman sought by their evidence to give an air of
sophistication, deliberation and care to the rudimentary process
followed. Jurcevic’s account was, the Tribunal, considers accurate as to
what occurred. Cvitan and Newman did not,
the Tribunal considers, have any
significant reservations about the plan and the possibility of offering a
realistic quote based
89) Newman was also cross-examined on another aspect of his
observations as to the quality of the plans. He said that the plans were
deficient in failing to show all relative levels. He said, essentially, that it
was preferable when working on a job, to have all
levels available, rather than
having to deduce them. He said, for example, that the ceiling levels for unit 4
were not shown, and
the floor levels to unit 2 are not shown. He acknowledged
that typical details were shown. He said that north and east elevations
shown. He acknowledged that a typical detail was given showing a south
elevation, in this instance for unit 2. It was put
to him that as relevant
dimensions were shown on the plan, they could be used in conjunction with the
elevations shown to derive
the relative levels for the other elevations. He
agreed with this point but said that in these plans some dimensions against
relative levels could be determined were missing. (ts 269-70)
90) The Tribunal considers that the levels shown on cross sections
may not have been typical of all units, because they were not identical.
development of this kind it would have been appropriate to prepare a set of
construction drawings. There is force in Newman’s
criticisms in this
91) 30 October 1997: After Cvitan prepared the quote and had it
Cvitan denied in cross-examination Challita’s allegation that he was
present at the meeting where Challita signed the quote.
The Tribunal is
satisfied from the account given by Jurcevic that Cvitan was not at the meeting;
and that the meeting took place
between Jurcevic and Challita..
92) After discussion with Challita on 30 October 1997 Jurcevic
added a hand-written notation to the typed quote relating to the ground
heights noting they were to be 2600mm rather than 2400mm as shown on the plans.
Challita signed the quote.
93) The quote was on the letterhead of DevCorp showing its MLC
address and was typed apart from item 6 which was added in handwriting
meeting with Challita and read:
and fix frames 100 x 50 (oregon) Douglas Fir 450
2 Supply and fix joist and flooring (Yellow Tung [sic]) to living
a) wet areas 18mm FC sheeting
3 Roof framing 100 x 50 oregon 450
4 Timber Fasia [sic]
5 Eaves lining and weatherboard cladding 6mm
6 All Ceilings to be 2600 high”.
94) The Tribunal notes that the quote mentions ceilings associated
with 2600 minimum dimension which would ordinarily be interpreted
as a floor to
underside of ceiling dimension, rather than the underside of the
95) The quote referred to progress payments as
“Reference: Terms of
First progress payment 35% $18025
Second progress payment 35% $18000
Last payment on completion 30% $15475
Terms as discussed 5% retention for 28 days.”
96) It went on to say:
“This quotation is limited by the plans as
prepared by your architect, dated and numbered 1 of 4 date 10/4/97.
Drawing No 20/97 sheet No 2 of 4.”
97) Jurcevic and Newman both stated in evidence that they
understood Challita to have insisted that highest quality Oregon be used
98) Challita was cross-examined about the lack of paperwork in
relation to the project. The essence of Challita’s replies was
normally dealt with people on the basis of trust. He said later in
cross-examination (in the context of questions as to the
keeping of a site
diary) that he could not read English.
99) The Alleged Time Promise: In Challita’s first affidavit
(23 July 1998) there is no reference to a time period for the work
having been
agreed. But in giving evidence Challita said that when he met Jurcevic and
Cvitan to sign the agreement he had asked
how long the work was going to take.
Challita said he asked Cvitan who long it would take to do the job, and Cvitan
had said three
weeks. Challita says he then said, “How many men you
got?” and Challita’s version of Cvitan’s reply was,
much men we want we can get. Three weeks I finish with you.” Challita gave
similar evidence in cross-examination.
100) As to the degree of importance that he attached to the time
promise, Challita acknowledged the original quote had not specified
a completion
date in contrast to some other matters, such as the height variation. He
acknowledged that in his experience such a
job would take 12 weeks. He said that
his other quote was for the job to take 12 weeks.
101) Challita said he did not raise any concerns as to the
practicality of the promise, as Cvitan said “We got the power, we
the men we want.” He said he thought if Cvitan put four men on ‘each
one’ (which the Tribunal interprets
to mean each unit) for the whole three
weeks, he would have been able to get the job done.
102) DevCorp’s Address: Challita referred frequently to the
prestigious address on DevCorp’s letterhead, Level 67, MLC
Centre. He was
cross-examined on this. It was suggested to him that he was a shrewd developer,
with an eye to the costings of a project
and that the address was immaterial to
his decision to engage DevCorp.
103) DevCorp was incorporated in May 1997. Its registered office
was 44 Burwood Road, Burwood. Cvitan agreed under cross-examination
that it was
from Burwood Road that he operated day-to-day. Level 67 of the MLC Centre is a
suite of serviced offices, providing
telephone reception services and office-use
as required. Cvitan said that DevCorp had a number of different business
interests, which
included building itself, buying and selling building materials
and exporting wine. Cvitan said his main business interest during
1997 had been
selling wine.
104) As to the ability to communicate with DevCorp by fax between
October 1997 and January 1998 Cvitan acknowledged that the number
shown on his
letterhead was that of the MLC centre’s serviced offices, and doubted that
anyone would have gone there during
that period to collect faxes. (At the height
of the dispute some of Challita’s solicitors’ communications had
to this fax number.) He acknowledged that the letterhead phone number
was also that of the MLC Centre but he said that calls to
that number were
automatically diverted to his mobile phone.
105) DevCorp’s Supervision Arrangements: Cvitan said that
his arrangement with Newman, the licensed builder, was that Newman
would oversee
any problems on site, issue letters if they needed to be issued, and deal with
any correspondence from Challita and
to liaise with Jurcevic (ts 122). He denied
that the real purpose of the arrangement with Newman was to have the benefit of
his licence
when quoting for jobs. Cvitan said that he did ask him to conduct
inspections at the site, but that he could only recollect one or
two inspections
by Newman. This is consistent with Challita’s and Newman’s evidence.
Newman said his tasks were estimation
and then supervision.
106) Cvitan said he did not have a diary covering his movements in
the October to January period, but that he had gone to the site
seven or eight
times. Newman said in cross-examination that he attended the site two or three
times in the course of the project,
and according to his affidavit towards the
end of the evening to run his eye over the work. He said in his affidavit
Jurcevic was
‘our hands on supervisor’ and that he reported to
Newman on a daily basis. Newman said he saw Jurcevic’s architectural
drafting qualification as equivalent to building qualifications.
107) Challita’s site management: Challita said that he
intended always to manage the development at Condell Park. He said he
engaged the builder, Zeaiter, because he (Challita) could not do it without a
builder’s licence. He said Zeaiter came every
two or three days to the
site. This is in contrast to his principal affidavit where he said the Zeaiter
came every afternoon.
108) Challita was cross-examined as to the extent of his role in
managing the project. Challita depicted his son as having the main
responsibility. According to Challita it was his son’s role to ensure that
work proceeded in accordance with plans and was
done properly. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the project was under his effective control and that
Zeaiter’s involvement was
relatively minor leaving practical supervision
to Challita and his son (Zeaiter’s fourth year apprentice).
109) The net situation is that Challita and his son were the site
supervisors, and neither held the licence required for a qualified
supervisor.
110) As to the extent of Newman’s involvement on behalf of
DevCorp, Challita said in his principal affidavit that Newman attended
only on three occasions, 3 December 1997, 10 December 1997 and on one other
occasion. This is consistent with Newman’s
111) Sapina referred at several points in his evidence to the
abusive behaviour and swearing that he was subjected to by Challita
and his son.
Sapina criticised the general arrangements at the site. He said all there was by
way of facilities for the workers was
a tin shed, with chopped timbers (for them
to use for barbecues) in it. He said there was no wet weather shelter. There was
on site, which he described as one fixed to the sewerage at the front
of the property enclosed by a slap-on tin roof and timber plywood
Challita denied Sapina’s version of his behaviour as recounted generally
here and more specifically later in these reasons.
He said that he had worked
with the State Department of Housing for 21 years and was well aware of the need
to maintain a good attitude
112) Zeaiter’s role: Zeaiter was cross-examined as to his
role. He said he had a current builder’s and qualified supervisor’s
licence at all times, and was aware of the insurance implications of being the
nominated builder in relation to Condell Park. After
some questioning he agreed
that Challita’s son had never supervised a complete building project
before, and was not a qualified
supervisor (ts 1042). Zeaiter said he may had a
dozen jobs proceeding in November 1997. He indicated that he relied on the
of the carpenter to do the work properly, that normally he would deal
with defects by an oral instruction and that he did not keep
a diary. He said he
went to the site every second or third day, and referred to having a beer with
the workers in the afternoon at
the end of the day. He said he met Cvitan once
and the carpenter Sapina on the first day Sapina arrived. He said he did not
sure his son kept a site diary. He said the plans were satisfactory and
there was no problem with head heights for the roof as drawn.
113) He stated he had no knowledge of any complaints by DevCorp
over the slab, about lack of engineering detail and poor
114) Challita’s son’s role: His son was cross-examined
as to the extent of training he had had in his course in relation
management and the keeping of a comprehensive diary of events and why his diary
did not cover the whole period of works at
the site, as he was the site
supervisor, starting with the earthworks in September 1997 and the bricklayers,
plumbers, electricians
and deliverers of materials involved in the early stages.
He did not have any adequate explanation. He was asked what role Zeaiter
supervising the works. He agreed he was working full time for Zeaiter at Condell
Park from September. He also acknowledged
that various statements as to events
contained in his affidavits were not recorded in the diary including the absence
of any record
of any complaints by his father between the 11th and the 12th
November. He said he did draw apparent defects to attention but agreed
was no record in the diary.
115) DevCorp’s Engagement of Sapina Constructions:
116) Mr Sapina (Sapina) of Sapina Constructions was given the
plans by Jurcevic and asked for a quote. He was also asked for a cutting
Oregon was the timber mentioned, which Sapina said in evidence that was standard
for cut on-site work. Cvitan said in cross-examination
that he, Jurcevic and
Newman had met Sapina to discuss the job.
117) He agreed to do the job on a labour only basis (plus fixings)
for $10,500. He gave a cutting list to Cvitan. Sapina’s typed
1997, Ex 11)
was clearly divided into a single list for (the larger and
somewhat differently laid out) Unit 1 and a single list for Units 2, 3
said that Cvitan said to him that he would compare the list with his own cutting
list and quantities. In his evidence Cvitan
said (ts 84) in answer to a question
relating to Sapina’s cutting list, ‘So from this document your
company was able
to arrange materials?’ said ‘Yes’. This
statement was misleading. The material delivered to site did not conform
Sapina’s cutting list. DevCorp devised its own cutting
118) 31 October 1997: Initial Purchase of Materials: Cvitan agreed
that DevCorp was responsible for the purchase of timber and other
materials for
the job. Cvitan said (ts 201) that Jurcevic did the ordering of materials, and
that he Cvitan was not able to read
the materials off the plan. In
re-examination he said that he allocated the task of ordering the materials to
Jurcevic and Newman.
119) DevCorp’s accountant’s records (Ex 22) show two
cheques dated 31 October 1997 to SBO Building Products for a total
$9579.75. This amount is matched by a receipt for the same amount dated the same
day but in the name of MLM Timber Products,
not SBO. The purchase order dated 31
October 1997 lists the following items: 100 x 50 Oregon 3 packs 5.4 @ 2.38 lm,
100 x 50 Oregon
3 Packs 3.0 @ 2.33 lm, 200 x 50 Oregon “20/6m FJ @
120) The Preparation of the Slabs: Challita said in
cross-examination that before laying the slabs he got a surveyor (Mr Mansell of
W Buxton Pty Ltd) in to put the pegs in for the strip footing and to mark out
the site. Challita then poured the slabs. He said DevCorp
started work about two
to four weeks later after the slab was laid.
121) The evidence that strip footings were used in lieu of slab on
ground as shown in cross sections provides an example of a discrepancy
the drawings and the as-built construction in the early stages of the project, a
change which may have complicated the perception
of the carpenter as to what was
required in relation to frame lay-out.
122) In re-examination Challita agreed with his counsel that one
side of the slab was longer than the other, by 40mm. Challita emphasised
throughout the case that he regarded the slabs as satisfactory subject only to a
40mm discrepancy along one side of each of them.
He regarded this as a minor
discrepancy. He agreed that one side of the slab was longer than the other by
123) Other Works in Progress at time Framing Commenced: Challita
said that the other work occurring on the site at the time the framing
involved bricklaying and plumbing. He said that the bricklayers were doing the
124) Site Diaries: Two diaries were referred to frequently in the
evidence, a diary for the period 4 November to 18 December maintained
Challita’s son (annexed to Ex 59) and one kept by Sapina (Ex 37).
125) Sapina’s diary was maintained in a conventional
day-a-page bound diary of a standard type published by the Housing Industry
Association called Builders Handbook.
126) Challita and his son both gave evidence that his diary was
over the first few days completed by his mother, Mrs Challita based
notes kept by her son. These pages cover the period to 18 November. They are on
loose paper in his mother’s handwriting.
After that the diary is mainly
contained in a spiral bound small notebook, and the writing is Challita’s
son. The notes are
more extensive for the period from 20th November onwards when
the new contract was made. They provide the only regular diary record
at the site for the later period.
127) Cvitan did not keep a diary. Newman did not keep a site
diary. Jurcevic had a diary with very limited entries.
128) Tuesday 4 November 1997: Only Sapina attended the site.
Sapina’s diary notes that bundles of 4 x 2 [i.e 100 x 50] oregon
delivered, being pallets of 100 x 50 oregon RS timber. Sapina said that he
proceeded to mark out plates and cut the studs.
He said that there were four
separate slabs, and that brickwork was in place to slab height. There are two
numbers in the vicinity
of this notation, 60 and 8. It is not clear which one
describes the quantity. The material delivered was of the kind needed for
studs and noggins.
129) Sapina, relying on his diary, said that he worked on site
from 7.30am to 2.30pm on 4 November (Melbourne Cup day). Challita’s
said that Sapina told him he would be leaving the site at noon as it was
Melbourne Cup day, and he did leave then. But in cross-examination
Challita’s son said he was absent from the site himself that morning,
attending a TAFE course. Sapina’s is the more reliable
130) Wednesday 5 November 1997: Sapina did not attend the site on
5 November. He was challenged as to one aspect of his explanation
non-attendance. He said there was rain. His diary refers to rain in morning and
drizzle all day. Challita’s son’s
evidence is that it was not wet.
Challita said there was no rain on the day, only dew in the
131) An official meteorological report obtained for Challita
showed 1mm of rain fell that day, as recorded at the Bankstown Airport
located about 1km away from the building site. The site is only a few blocks
from the eastern side of Bankstown airport.
132) The Tribunal is satisfied that there was no significant rain
in the area on that day. Later evidence pointed to other factors
Sapina’s availability. He had another job in progress at the same time at
Hurstville.
133) Sapina was not pressed on the second reason he gave for not
attending the site, as recorded in notes attached to his affidavit,
there were no facilities for workers, i.e. lunch sheds, on site. He amplified
this evidence referring to the primitive
nature of the site shed and the site
134) Thursday 6 November 1997: On this day Sapina, according to
his diary, cut studs and finished the ground floor frames to Unit
1 and 50 per
cent of Unit 2. His evidence is that he, personally, was on-site from 11am to
5pm and that three co-workers were on
site from 2pm to 5pm. Challita’s
son’s evidence is that for 6th, 7th and 8th Sapina attended the site with
worker. The Tribunal accepts Sapina’s evidence as to attendance
on this day and Challita’s son’s as to the other
days, which is
consistent with Sapina.
135) The Frame and Slab Problem: Sapina’s evidence was not
clear as to whether he discovered the problem with the dimensions
concrete slabs on 4 November or on 6 November. In cross-examination he said it
was on the first day, 4 November but his letter
to DevCorp on 21 January 1998
gave the date as the Thursday. He said that it became apparent to him that the
dimensions on the plans
did not correspond to the site slabs. Cvitan said that
he was advised on 6 November by Jurcevic of the problem re the slab.
136) Cvitan referred to visiting the site soon after (day not
specified), and saw ‘stud walls which in some cases the bottom
protruded into the cavity, and in some cases went inside the edge of the
concrete floor, more than what was normally required’
(ts 86). This is
consistent with Challita’s evidence. Cvitan said the walls were, in his
opinion, correctly in place. He said
that he instructed that there be a site
meeting which was held on 11 November 1997.
137) Under cross-examination Sapina said that he marked out the
slabs with a chalk line but did so after he had cut the frames. It
was then that
he realised there were problems with the slabs. He said the cause of his frames
being out of square was that he had
taken his measurements and settings from the
line of the original brickwork, brickwork which had followed the slab. He agreed
had he set the bottom plates out with string lines and set squares, he
would have found at the setout stage that it was the slab
138) Sapina said that the method he had followed was to build the
frames on the ground and then to lift them up into place. He said
were square as against his chalk line. He said that the framing was done to a 90
degree angle, but the problem was that
the brickwork was out by 40mm, which made
a difference to the cavity and for the windows. He said the discrepancy exceeded
the tolerance
of 50 mm allowed for in the masonry code, because it was necessary
to add the 40mm discrepancy to the 40mm cavity for a total of
139) The Tribunal concludes that Sapina cut the timber to
dimensions derived from the plan without checking the slab dimensions as
constructed.
140) Challita’s son considered that the slab was straight
edged, and that the lay-out should have been aligned with the edge.
He regarded
the dimensional error as minor. (ts 981)
141) Challita in cross-examination referred to what he saw Sapina
do. He said that Thursday was the first day after Sapina started
(Challita) attended the site. He said he saw Sapina ‘cut the bottom top
plate all the way round, no choke (chalk?)
line, no nothing and he started to
put the frame up, no choke (chalk?) line. Challita said he said to Sapina
“Tom we have
not got enough cavity what are you doing”.
142) This is consistent with Sapina’s version of what he did
who agreed that he spoke to Challita about the problem.
143) Challita said that Sapina replied that he was working with
the plan. Challita says that he said to Sapina, “Tom, you have
measure 250 from outside the wall and put your chalk line and work with
it”, and he said “I am doing the job not
144) On other issues, Sapina said that he suggested to Challita
that he call the bricklayer to brick up the garage walls and to supply
the steel beams to Unit 1 so that it would be possible to proceed to the next
stage, upper floor framing. He notes that he
also contracted Jurcevic in
relation to supplying more timber material and bracing for walls to complete the
ground floor frames.
145) It is apparent at this early stage that problems were
emerging on both sides. Sapina was not happy receiving instructions directly
from Challita. Jurcevic appears to have had no involvement in the issue. Sapina
was anxious about delays in delivery of materials.
On Challita’s side,
Zeaiter was not seen as relevant to the problem that had arisen. Challita said
in cross-examination that
he did not consider it necessary to draw this problem
to the attention of Zeaiter.
146) The Tribunal considers that a competent site manager would
have recognised the necessity of calling the attention of the licensee
project to such a problem.
147) Though the matter is not referred to in any of his
affidavits, Challita said in cross-examination that Jurcevic had asked Challita
for money on the first day, which the Tribunal takes to be a reference to the 6
November. He said Jurcevic said he needed a deposit,
and Challita replied that
there was no clause to that effect in the agreement. The Tribunal accepts this
evidence, which points towards
abrasive conduct over money at this early stage
of the relationship on DevCorp’s side.
148) Friday 7 November 1997: On 7th Sapina started at Condell Park
at 8am with his brother. This is consistent with a phone call
that Challita
says he received from his son, in which Challita he was told that only Sapina
and one other were on site.
149) In his letter to DevCorp Sapina said that Challita was
visibly upset that the cavity between the external brick wall was 40mm
Sapina said that he was criticised by Challita over the appearance of the work
as not being in line with the slabs. Sapina said
in evidence that a the point of
the garage in unit 2 it was out by 200mm, where the laundry was it was out by
the master bedroom at the back it was out by about 40mm.
150) Challita said that when he checked the slab after the
complaint from Sapina that he found only one corner error in the plan of
He said that the corners were square. He said that if a slab was not square to a
small degree the solution was not to cut
the slab but to adjust the frame. He
agreed that if the slab was not square then the size of the cavity might vary.
151) In Challita’s opinion a carpenter would normally
measure from the outside wall to the inside wall allowing for 250mm and
would put his mark (chalk line) all the way around to check that the slab is
square. In that way any problem with the slab would
be picked up. The survey
was the subject of a report dated 14 November 1997 to Challita: see Ex A to
Challita’s principal
affidavit filed 23 July 1998.
152) On this day, 7 November, Challita requested a survey of the
slabs from W Buxton Pty Ltd, his surveyors. Challita explained in
cross-examination that the purpose of the survey was to check the dimensions and
levels of the slabs. It was necessary, he said,
to have this done so as to
submit a certificate to the council as to floor levels.
153) The survey report stated that the survey sketch noted
distances from the walls of the buildings to the boundaries of the land.
said: “These distances are in general agreement with the distances shown
on the approved building plans.” The report
also said: “We have
checked the level of the finished ground floor concrete slab and their reduced
values are noted on the
154) The report indicates that the survey conducted was done to
confirm the required set backs from the from and side boundaries to
the reduced levels of the ground floor slabs but, contrary to Challita’s
understanding, it did not deal with compliance
with plan dimensions and
confirmation of right angles.
155) Sapina’s diary for the day contains a serious
allegation against Challita. It reads:
got the shits when one wall in bedroom had a bigger cavity because the house was
a bit out of square. He offered me
a box of beer to move it & not to tell
Steve or Barry.”
156) In his affidavit and his letter to DevCorp Sapina referred to
a conversation with Challita on 12 November in which Challita offered
him work if he terminated the contract with DevCorp. Having regard to his diary
entry, the Tribunal concludes that the date
of the conversation was 7 not 12
November. This assessment fits in with references to the conversation found in
157) In evidence Sapina said that on that day he was working on
unit 4. He said he had pointed out to Challita some of the problems
that he had
at unit 2 with the ground floor slabs.
158) Sapina’s evidence was that he advised Challita that he
needed to cut the slabs back so that he could fit the frames on
Sapina said that he raised with Challita the possibility of moving the frames,
but Challita said not to, because it would
make the garages smaller and it would
push the room out of square. He said that Challita then asked him to rectify the
problem and
fix it up without the consent of Cvitan because Cvitan would end up
charging him extra and his percentage on top for any variations.
According to
Sapina, Challita asked Sapina to fix it up without telling Cvitan. Sapina
refusing saying he would have to consult with
159) He said that Challita also offered him a box of beer. This
evidence was hotly disputed. Challita said this was not true. Challita
usually on his job he gets a carton of beer for the workers in the afternoon. He
denied speaking to Sapina about getting
variations done.
160) Challita said that it was normal for the workers on his sites
to share a carton of beer at the end of the work day. He rejected
the allegation
that he had a conversation in which he tried to get Sapina to come and work for
him. Challita said he would not approach
a sub-contractor engaged by another
contractor to work directly for him. Sapina said that Challita did ask him to
terminate the contract
with DevCorp and would he consider taking on the rest of
the work for Challita directly.
161) Sapina explained that this conversation had occurred after
Challita had approached him aggressively complaining about the absence
to complete the work, and because the work was falling behind schedule. Sapina
said that he had no control over delivery
of the timber to site. He said that
Challita started complaining over the framing being out, that he was not
following the plans
and said that the concrete was fine.
162) Sapina was cross-examined closely.
163) The Tribunal considered Sapina to be a candid witness who
gave consistent and credible evidence. Sapina’s evidence in these
stands in contrast to the quality of much of the evidence given by the other
principal witnesses on both sides in this case.
164) The Tribunal is satisfied that Challita did have a
conversation with Sapina in which he sought to influence him to break his
contract with DevCorp. Sapina’s evidence is accepted.
165) Sapina’s diary for 7 November refers to materials
delivery problems. It says: ‘Keep calling Barry & Steve to
joist, bracing, plybrace etc’. He explained in cross-examination that he
was anxious to get the materials on site so
that he would have a good idea as to
what number of workers he should bring.
166) 8 November 1997: Sapina was on-site with his brother. Sapina
said in his letter to DevCorp that he had completed the Unit 3 frames
day. He found that the problem that applied to the Unit 2 frame in relation to
the slab also applied to Units 3 and 4. He
records that Challita yelled at him
saying that the problem was with the frames not the slabs. Sapina said that he
took out a string
line, a level and a carpenter’s square to illustrate his
conclusion. He said that after an hour of explanation Challita was
convinced, and that he had enough of his abusive behaviour and packed up and
167) Sapina’s diary for the day includes the following:
“Finish Unit 3 Frames same bed wall was out of square so Albert
didn’t need to be abused like that on my birthday.
I didn’t have to
be here. So then I asked him to talk & settle down & so did his sons
but he told them to shut up.
I took out a string line & level & showed
him that the brick foundation walls & his concrete slab were out of
168) As to his level of attendance on behalf of DevCorp (ts 342),
Jurcevic said he was there almost every day, usually for a time
minutes and an hour. He said he did not record this in his diary. His diary was
annexed to his affidavit filed 23 September
1998. The 8th appears to be the
first day that Jurcevic came to the site. In cross-examination he thought that
this was only the
second day on which work had occurred. The diary simply noted
that Sapina had commenced on 4 November. It had the entry ‘rain’
for the 5th. The pages for 6 and 7 November were blank. There was a brief entry
for the 8th referring to a problem with the dimensions
for the frame to be
169) In evidence Jurcevic said that when he inspected the site he
was satisfied that the carpenters had set out the frame properly
and that it was
square. He said the bottom plate started out correctly but would end up
overhanging the cavity because the slabs
were not straight. He said it was not
possible to place the bottom plates entirely on the slab because you would end
with too great
a gap between the brickwork and the window frames, which in brick
veneer construction could not be rectified by using storm moulds
(which were
satisfactory in full brick construction). He said he used a chalk line to check
the alignments.
170) Jurcevic said he had substantial on-site supervision
experience, and that he agreed that it was not uncommon for slabs to have
variations but he said they were not as bad as this one. It was put to him that
carpenters accommodate these possibilities by making
adjustments. Jurcevic said,
‘No, we don’t because the other things don’t meet up, like
your wall ties, your veneer
ties and your flashings and various bits and
pieces’ (ts 349). Jurcevic’s agreed that despite these problems he
nevertheless
suggested to Challita that he get his bricklayers in to continue
their work rather than redo the existing work. His explanation was
that Challita
had agreed to fix the problem. He said that Challita did fix one part of the
problem to do with the slab between the
laundry and the porch (ts
171) Jurcevic agreed that the lay-out was done rigidly to the
(cavity) dimension of 250mm. He rejected the suggestion of counsel for
that a margin, or tolerance, could have been allowed a little either way.
Jurcevic said if had built it that way, he would
not have been paid (ts 351).
172) 9 and 10 November 1997: Sapina did not attend the site. His
letter to DevCorp states that he ‘did not go to work until
the problems
were resolved with Barry (Jurcevic) and Steve (Cvitan).’ Sapina reiterated
this comment in evidence. He said issues
with the frames were being resolved. He
said also that he did not have floor joists and flooring or the plybrace. He
felt that he
could not proceed until the squaring problems with the outer walls
were fixed. He said that as far as he knew Challita had settled
with Cvitan
during meetings on the 10th and the 11th the question of how to deal with the
misalignment between the frame and the
173) Challita said in cross-examination that it was about this
time he raised concerns with Cvitan about there not being enough men
174) Sapina said in response to questions from the Tribunal (ts
454) that he decided later to erect the frames to a different line
to the chalk
line that he had drawn. Instead he sought to follow the line of the existing
brickwork. He said he did that under instructions,
which he received from
Jurcevic and Cvitan, after he said they had resolved the matter with
175) Jurcevic agreed with Sapina’s assessment of the
problems with the slab, saying if the frame were to have followed the side
the slab, in for example the case of unit 2, it would have commenced square at
90 degrees and ended up being on an 80 degree angle
in order to ensure a
consistent cavity with the brickwork around the slab (ts 317).
176) Jurcevic’s diary for Monday 10th says that he checked
all brick walls and slab dimensions and found they did not correspond
The note indicated that he would advise Challita to get bricklayers in.
177) Tuesday 11 November 1997: There was extensive reference to
the site meeting that occurred on this day. There was dispute as
Cvitan and Alagha were at the meeting.
178) Cvitan in his principal affidavit (filed 25 June 1998) says
that he was present at the meeting, along with Alagha, Challita and
In their principal affidavits Challita and his son say that Cvitan was not
present and that the meeting involved them
together with Jurcevic, Sapina,
Alagha and Challita’s son. He said that Cvitan was not present.
Challita’s son was cross-examined.
He could not refer to any diary record,
and he deduced that Cvitan was not there because he never came to the site in
179) On the other hand Alagha says that he was not at this
meeting, and that the first contact he had with the site was when he did
inspection on 6 December 1997. He made this statement in cross-examination.
180) Alagha had available to him their affidavits when he prepared
his affidavit, and had not said this. He then recalled that he
had been at a
site meeting with Challita at which the problem of a deficit in the slab was
discussed. He said the slab was 50mm out,
and that some labourers were used to
‘square off’ the frame to overcome the problem. When pressed he
conceded that may
be the others were there at that time (ts 1273). As to the
quality of the works, Alagha said in effect that he regarded them as
progress and felt he could not say what was wrong or right till the job was
finished. (ts 1293)
181) Cvitan’s account of the meeting is different to
Challita’s. Cvitan said in evidence that the purpose of the meeting
rectify problems and to reach decisions how ongoing works were to be performed
which would not have great detrimental effect
on the structure and physical
appearance of the building in question (ts 87). Cvitan says that he pointed out
to Challita that he
did not appreciate him harassing DevCorp’s
contractors. Cvitan says that he said he did not like Challita going behind his
discussed with Challita ‘design faults’ in the
drawings and the
inadequacies of the drawings. He recalls discussing the concrete slab not being
square to which he says Challita
said words to the effect, “Don’t
worry about that, that is my problem”.
182) In cross-examination Cvitan referred to the site meeting as
‘cordial’ (ts 141). Cvitan said he called the meeting
because he had
been told that there were some problems with the concrete. He said the frame
protruded in some instances from the
concrete. In cross-examination he referred
to the plan and said that the stud wall was 200mm inside the slab detail in the
area. He said that this problem occurred in relation to one of the rear
units, units 2, 3 or 4. It was put to him that the slab in
the area of the
master bedroom for unit 2 was 50mm larger than shown on the plan.
183) He said Sapina told him that he had followed the measurements
on the drawings. He agreed that Jurcevic said that DevCorp would
not fix the
frame because the slab was wrong and Challita said that there was nothing wrong
with the concrete, only the frame was
wrong. He agreed that Challita probably
said that he, Challita, would not pay any extra money.
184) Challita’s account of the meeting is as follows. He
said that Jurcevic said that DevCorp “won’t fix the frame
the concrete is wrong.” Challita said he replied by saying, “There
is nothing wrong with the concrete, only the
frame is wrong.” He said
Jurcevic said, “If you want to move the frame, I will charge you.”
He said he replied
“I won’t pay any extra money. I am sorry.”
Challita’s son’s version is identical.
185) The Tribunal is satisfied from Cvitan’s account that he
was present at the site meeting, and from his account and that
of others that
Alagha was present.
186) As to how the problem of the frames not sitting properly on
the slab was resolved, Challita explained that he did not see it
as appropriate
to cut the slab but instead arranged for Sapina to shift the two end corners of
the frame. At one end they were moved
so as to cantilever 20mm and at the other
end they were fully supported, but with the result that the size of the cavity
was reduced
by 20mm. He said that he took ‘20mm from this side and 20mm
from this side and make it middle’ (ts 757, also see ts 765).
that this adjustment had the effect that the other rooms would not be square,
but only to a minor degree.
187) Jurcevic’s diary note for the 11th refers to
Challita’s alleged conversation with Sapina offering him beer if he
amendments sought. He notes that the frames are now square but the cavity of
250mm is not all the way around.
188) Cvitan was cross-examined about a conversation with Challita
said to be on or about 14 November. Cvitan thought the conversation
was a day or
two earlier. Cvitan said in re-examination that this conversation occurred at
the site meeting on 11 November, which
the Tribunal accepts.
189) Cvitan agreed that he met Challita at the site and Challita
raised with him the problem of the first floor joists in the units
had stopped
short of the brick wall. He agreed that he and Challita inspected the work, and
noted that the joists did not go all
the way from one brick wall to the other.
He agreed that they were supported by a beam but they joists did not cover the
entire span.
190) Cvitan said the joists were never intended to be extended all
the way. He said there was a conversation about this at the site
meeting, with
Mr Alagha present, in which the possibility of solving the problem through
cantilever joists was raised.
191) Though some of Challita’s answers were very confused in
cross-examination on this matter (issues as to Challita’s
understanding
arose on several occasions on that day of hearing, 21 July 1999 for which an
explanation was offered relating to a
death of a relative), he acknowledged that
Alagha did not say to him at this time that the joists were wrong (ts 870). But
emphasised that he had complained to Cvitan and Jurcevic at the time of
the meeting about the size of the joists, which he believed
should be 300 x 50.
192) He was asked why he did not stop the job if he thought it was
dangerous to proceed on this basis. Challita said he relied on
the reply he
received from Cvitan which was “I’ll put a beam there. I will fix
it.” Challita said he said “It’s
up to you whatever you
do”. (ts 871) He said that Jurcevic said to him that he would get an
engineer’s certificate for
the proposed beam.
193) In cross-examination Challita responded yes to a question
that there was a discussion on that occasion between he, Cvitan and
Alagha about
defects in the drawings (though he has said elsewhere that Cvitan was not at the
meeting. He said he raised the problem
of the drawings with Alagha, and Alagha
said “It’s happened” and Challita said “All
194) Challita did recall Jurcevic suggesting that Challita had
gone behind his back and referring to ‘back stabs’.
195) As to the progress of works, Cvitan said that he walked
around the site that morning and his recollection was that some of the
walls in units 2 and 3 had been put up, some of the stud work in the bottom
plates and the top plates were cut for units 3 and
4. He could not recall any
work having commenced in respect of unit 1.
196) Cvitan referred in cross-examination to having walked around
to unit 3, to the laundry area. He said at that point there was
only 20-odd mm
between the edge of the concrete, the stud work and the brickwork, and in some
places the timber wall was touching
the brickwork. He said the group discussed
how to obtain sufficient cavity. He said in cross-examination that he said to
that”. Cvitan said that his view was the situation that
had arisen ‘was ridiculous’ (ts 146). He said Challita
there was another way, and Cvitan says he said he could put a damp course into
the area. These events were not referred
to by Cvitan in any of his four
affidavits.
197) Progress of Works as at 11th: In answer to cross-examination
Challita’s son said the position as at the 11th was that the
base plates
were down, some of the frame walls were up, there was no bracing, the frame was
not put up temporarily, there were some
studs in, no first floor joists were in
and some parts of the ground floor frame were up (ts 980). He said that by the
8th roughly
four or five walls for unit 4 were up with aluminium. He said Sapina
had spent most of the first few days cutting. (ts 984-5)
198) Challita’s son disputed Jurcevic’s affidavit
where Jurcevic said that there were window frames put up on 11 November,
said that no workers came to the site. The Tribunal accepts Challita’s
son’s account. Cvitan agreed no work was
done at the site that
199) Wednesday 12 November 1997: Sapina returned to the site and
worked on his own. His evidence was that he could not do much after
he was still waiting for more 4x2 (100 x 50 in metric measurements) timber to
arrive. His note is indicative of a situation
where he had almost run out of
200) His diary entry is as follows: “Worked on my own today.
Couldn’t do much for only had 4 x 2 lengths of timber and
nothing else,
all frames Unit 1, 2, 3 and start 4. Were done. Albert call about 10-11am and
had the shits with Barry & asked
me if he pissed Barry & Steve of (sic)
would I continue the job. I said I have to finish the job but only through Steve
didn’t quote the job with Albert. He asked me if I could change a
few windows & walls for him & then he would pay me
for any extras but
not to tell Barry or Steve.” Below a personal note he then says: “So
I called Barry to come down &
finalise this problem with Albert.”
201) Sapina said in cross-examination that he did not have the
floor joists until late that day. The joists, he said, had been promised
earlier. He then got in another team of workers to start framing the first
202) At about this time Challita says in his principal affidavit
he advised Jurcevic that in his opinion the joists were not in accordance
the drawings approved by the Council. He said that he said to Jurcevic that he
wanted the joists ‘to go from wall to wall
in accordance with the Council
203) Jurcevic’s diary note for the 12th refers to seeking
advice on the steel beam [re Unit 1]. It notes that he was told to
prop the beam
and work around it pending bricklayers coming.
204) Zeaiter said in his affidavit that he attended the site at
on the second floor framing when the first floor framing had not been correctly
completed. He observed that the bracing
was not installed. He said he told
Challita that before the carpenters go to the second floor, they should get the
first floor right
and plumbed. He said Challita told him they are going to go
advanced. He said he also noticed that the joists for the second floor over the
garage in units 2, 3 and 4 did not reach across to
the rest of the span. He said
he told Challita that the carpenters should finish each section of work
completely before they go to
the next section.
205) Joist Sizes and Joist Lay-Out: As Sapina proceeded to the
stage of completing the frame between the ground and first floor he
the joist timber supplied was in fact 250 x 50. In his cutting list prepared for
Cvitan he had asked for joists and beams
of 300mm thickness. Because of the
lesser thickness of the material delivered to him he considered that he did not
have timber of
sufficient strength to span the width of the ground floor
including the area over the garage, as had been his original intention.
206) Sapina’s cutting list provided for quantities of 300 x
50. There was no evidence as to what the contents of Cvitan’s
cutting list
were, though it is clear that Cvitan chose to use 250 x 50 rather than 300 x 50.
DevCorp’s cutting list has to
be derived from scrutiny of the timber
purchase invoices.
207) Newman was questioned as to his role in determining and
ordering materials. In evidence in chief he said he had no role in ordering
timber, and under cross-examination revised it to say that he might have made
some recommendation to Cvitan in passing (ts 264).
Jurcevic was cross-examined
in detail on this area. He said that he consulted span tables in forming a view
as to what timber was
required. He was satisfied that appropriate structural
support could be given to the upper levels in units 2, 3 and 4 by using joists
with a dimension of 250 x 50 Douglas Fir (which he explained was American
Oregon). The area not under the footprint of the first
floor could be covered by
100 x 50 ceiling joists. He said that he did not interpret the 300 vertical
dimension to represent the
specification for 300mm joists.
208) At hearing Sapina was shown the plans and gave evidence as to
his interpretation of them. He said that the plans gave no information
desired joist lay-out. He said that it was his practice to work out the joist
lay-out having regard to the light timber
framing code, and calculate materials
required on that basis. He also expressed concern as to the adequacy of the
information on
the plans in relation to relative levels for the west and north
elevations of units 1, 2 and 4.
209) Sapina was cross-examined as to how conceived the joist and
beams would be laid out. He agreed (ts 435) that the way he originally
the lay-out was not how he was ultimately asked to do it. He had conceived the
lay-out as involving a consistent run of
joists across the entire span of the
first floor ceiling covering the lounge and the garage.
210) In his cutting list Sapina had, as noted, proposed that 300 x
50 joists be obtained. He said that Cvitan and Jurcevic informed
him that when
they quoted the job for 250 x 50 joists. The Tribunal notes that there is no
reference to joist size in the quote.
Jurcevic said (ts 321) that he checked
his span tables and proceeded on the assumption that 300 referred to a finished
He said he ordered 250 x 50 Douglas fir (American Oregon). He said
with the yellow tongue flooring on top, dimension 19mm and then
with carpet
finish or ceramic, the dimension to 300 mm would be satisfied.
211) Sapina agreed that he was asked to run 250 x 50 joists
between composite beams at 450 centres running east-west commencing at
points where structural support was required for the upper level. These points
fell about 2750mm north of the southern wall of
the lounge room in the lay-out
for units 2, 3 and 4, and about 1500 mm south of the northern wall of the
garage. The span was approximately
3300 mm. From each of those beams, he was
asked to lap the joists with 100 x 50 ceiling joists extending to the outside
212) The question of the meaning to be attached to the vertical
dimension of 300 was closely examined. Sapina noted that the typical
for units 2, 3 and 4 showed a dimension between the ground floor and the first
floor of 300mm. He said its meaning was not
spelt out. He considered that the
bottom point might mean finished ceiling level and the top point finished floor
level. Therefore
the flooring joists would be a dimension less than 300 mm which
could be 250mm allowing for the thickness of the ceiling and the
Jurcevic’s view was similar.
213) Jurcevic was cross-examined closely on this point. He was the
source of the instruction to Sapina, which was described by Sapina.
to Jurcevic that the common building practice would have been to run 300 x 50
joists from south to north from the main
wall of the lounge room to the wall of
the garage, a distance of approximately 8 metres. It was put to him that
normally the 300
x 50 joists would be laid out in such a way that they lapped
the east-west wall frame dividing the lounge and garage. (The span shown
lounge room was 4950mm and for the garage 3802 mm.)
214) As to the question of what the common practice was, Jurcevic
initially sought to deflect the question to the fact that he had
gone to Alagha
to get an engineering detail as to how to make composite beams running east-west
which would provide adequate support.
Pressed to address the question of whether
it was common practice to run the joists across the entire span, he answered
necessarily’ and when asked later if this was the common
treatment he said again ‘not necessarily’ and said there
ways the matter could have been dealt with (ts 367).
215) He was pressed as to whether he would have had to have
purchased 300 x 50 timber if he had intended to cover the entire span.
referred to other jobs where the method preferred had been used. (ts 362-3). He
did not answer the question directly. He was non-responsive
as to whether it was
cheaper to use 250 x 50 (ts 364). He agreed that the remaining spans were
covered by 100 x 50 (also often referred
to as 4 x 2), explaining that as there
was no floor on top, they were just needed to hold up the plasterboard (ts
216) It was put to Jurcevic that had 300 x 50 floor joists been
run north-south lapping over the wall, the plans as drawn could have
followed, without having to seek the engineering detail that showed how to use
composite beams to provide support for the 250
x 50 joists. It was put to him
that had he run joist North-South for the entire span, the Code would have
required him to use at
least for the span of the lounge room 300 x 50, to which
he answered ‘not necessarily’ (ts 367). (Issues related to the
engineering detail are considered under the heading 12 November 1997,
217) Newman’s views were sought in cross-examination as to
joist lay-out. He acknowledged that ordinarily joists generally span
shortest distance.
218) As to the plans Sapina agreed that he followed instructions
not to build the ground floor frames for a 2400mm room height but
for a 2600mm
room height.
219) The Engineering Detail: After the discussion of the problem
of how to provide adequate structural support for a span reliant
on 250 x 50
joists, Cvitan instructed Jurcevic to get an engineering detail to solve it. On
the evening of 12 November, according
to Jurcevic he went to Alagha’s home
(and office) with a request for an engineering detail to deal with the need to
adequate structural support for the span.
220) An engineering diagram resulted which showed how to use two
250 x 50 beams in a composite beam formation to provide adequate
Jurcevic said that he did the drawing, and that Alagha approved it.
Alagha’s signature was attached to the diagram
produced, but Alagha
disputed the authenticity of the document, and queried how his signature came to
be on it. Alagha said the document
did not carry other features, which without
fail, were incorporated into any engineering detail he issued. These accorded
standards as to certification of drawings by an engineer required by
the Institute of Engineers.
221) The inescapable inference of Alagha’s evidence was that
Jurcevic had manufactured a document showing Alagha’s signature,
Alagha’s consent. The question of authenticity was fiercely contested. He
says in his affidavit that he had a conversation
with Jurcevic on 6 September
1998 (after the parties had exchanged affidavits going to this issue) in which
Jurcevic said in effect
that he had prepared the document without Alagha’s
authority following advice from an engineer from Turramurra.
222) In preparation for these proceedings Challita’s
solicitors had issued a notice addressed to DevCorp to produce the engineering
detail. Cvitan failed to produce the detail but did so later and filed an
affidavit on 14 September 1998 explaining his late production.
223) He said that he had asked Jurcevic on 1 and 2 September 1998
whether he knew anything about the detail. Jurcevic told him he
drew the detail
at Alagha’s office on 12 November 1997, after Alagha gave him the
dimensions of the bolt and the shoes. He
said Alagha checked it and then signed
it. On the morning of 2 September 1998 Jurcevic said he had seen the detail at
place the previous night (1 September 1998).
224) Cvitan said he was extremely concerned when he received a
letter from Challita’s solicitors suggesting that the detail
prepared by Alagha. He said the next evening he went with Jurcevic to
Alagha’s home. Cvitan said he asked Alagha if
he had the original drawing.
According to Cvitan Alagha said he did not remember. He said he then asked
Jurcevic on that occasion
to draw the sketch to remind him of the detail, and he
asked Alagha did he give the detail to Jurcevic and Alagha again said he did
225) Alagha said that Jurcevic had said to him on this visit:
‘Boss, please say that you certified.” Jurcevic denied this.
226) It was put to Cvitan in cross-examination that he did not
give a full account of the conversation. It was put that the conversation
along these lines, ‘Gabriel, we are in a position’. He agreed he
could have said that. It was put that Jurcevic
said to Alagha, ‘Boss, at
Mr Challita’s job I drew the section for units 3 and 4’. Cvitan
agreed that he could
have said that. It was then put that Jurcevic drew the
timber plane and the ceiling of the unit. Cvitan said that this did not occur.
Alagha produced a sketch which he said was Jurcevic’s (not contested) of
that kind. Cvitan said he asked Jurcevic to do a
drawing to help refresh
Alagha’s memory. Cvitan also agreed that Jurcevic may have said to Alagha
‘Boss, please say that
you certified this’ and that ‘We have a
copy on your letterhead’. Jurcevic agreed with this account of events
227) Cvitan agreed in cross-examination that at this conversation
(which took place about six weeks before he gave evidence) that
Alagha did say
words to the effect that ‘Barry used to come to my office if not every
day, then every other day, and letterheads
were on my desk and anyone who comes
to my office, not only Barry, could have picked up the letterhead.’
Jurcevic said that
this was never said in front of him by Alagha (ts
228) Cvitan agreed, as did Jurcevic, that Alagha also stated that
he did not sign anything on 12 November 1997 and did not certify
a drawing. He
agreed that Alagha made it clear that he knew nothing about the
229) In a further affidavit filed 19 October 1998, Alagha said
that he conducted a search of his office for the alleged drawing, and
unsigned and undated photocopy of it with the AMPA letterhead on it. He also
found the drawing without letterhead. He sought
to demonstrate by reference to
spacings that the unletterheaded drawing matched exactly the dimensions of the
drawing shown on letterhead.
He sought to raise the inference that a letterhead
and the unletterheaded document had been matched so as to produce a composite
document containing the two elements and then his signature added without his
230) Jurcevic said that he went to Alagha’s home on the
night of 12 November 1997 to ask for advice. Jurcevic’s account
cross-examination (ts 369) was that he, Jurcevic, sketched in the detail and
Alagha said to him: ‘ “Barry, do this
and this” and “put
these bolts in” and “it’s correct”. And it was signed
his signature, his letterhead.
After I finished the drawing, he had a look at
it, he put the thing in the computer, he came up with the letterhead out of the
and then he signed it and he gave it to me. I went to the photocopying
machine in his office and I ran off a few copies and I placed
a few copies on
the drawer ... I put some copies for himself up there, of the original beside
his copying machine.’
231) Later Jurcevic said that he did not know how to use a
computer (ts 383). Alagha agreed with this. Jurcevic said he did not draw
computer, and described how he went about the task, using a T square and two
drawing tables in Alagha’s office. He denied
the possibility that he may
have attended the office on his own that night.
232) Alagha was pressed as to his degree of association with
Jurcevic. He claimed that he only saw Jurcevic once in November, whereas
Jurcevic said that he regularly worked for Alagha at that time. When pressed
again he said he saw him frequently. (ts 1279) Later
he said he treated like one
of his family. Alagha was pressed as to his work association with Jurcevic and
acknowledged that he used
site supervisor on projects of his, and was aggrieved
that he had lost money on a project because of what he regarded as inadequate
supervision by Jurcevic. He referred later to having considered legal action
against Jurcevic over what he saw as a forgery (ts 1377).
He was challenged as
to why he had not produced the documents (the one with letterhead and the one
without letterhead) he referred
to in his final affidavit in response to a
notice to produce from DevCorp’s solicitors received after he had found
said he had given them to his solicitor.
233) Alagha denied any involvement in preparing the engineering
detail. He said his practice was to do the original drawing on tracing
puts a sticker of his title on it, and then he copies it on the ammonia machine,
with the client getting an ammonia paper
copy. He said he had only used A4 paper
of the kind used for the engineering detail once. He said that had occurred when
a detail for his cousin relating to a piering system. His attention was
drawn to several instances which Alagha acknowledged where
Jurcevic had drawn
details and he had signed off on them in respect of projects that Jurcevic was
managing for Alagha.
234) He denied that it was his signature that appeared on the foot
of the detail in issue. He agreed that he had been asked by his
solicitor to
provide sample signatures for a forensic document analyst.
235) Jurcevic was, the Tribunal considers, generally reliable as a
witness in these proceedings. Jurcevic’s account of the
events on 12
November 1997 and reflected the close working relationship he had with Alagha at
that time. By the time he gave evidence
Alagha bore great animosity towards
Jurcevic over a range of matters. While the Tribunal accepts that Alagha has no
specific recollection
of whether he signed the detail on the night of 12
November 1997, the Tribunal finds that he did sign and issue the
236) Thursday 13 November 1997: Cvitan said that he received the
engineering detail under the letter of AMPA Design bearing date
‘12-11-97’.
He said it was handed to him by Jurcevic. Sapina’s
diary contains the following entry: ‘1. Group worked on Frames &
double up wall plates. 2. Group started on floor joists on back unit. I asked
Albert to get engineering details so I can continue
job but I never received
any, I will make my own judgement on my knowledge accord to the framing code.
Ben went to get some details
for beams. Extra Adjust Unit 3 Wall out bedroom. 2
men x ½ hours = 1 hr plus.’
237) According to Sapina’s letter to DevCorp on this day he
worked on the ground floor frames to unit 4. By this stage the steel
bracing had
arrived and he braced all the walls to the four units, contacted Jurcevic and
asked when would the rest of the timber
238) DevCorp’s accounting records (Ex 22) show a cheque
dated 13 November 1997 to MLM Timber Products for $4000 but MLM’s
for this payment is dated 3 December 1997, and forms part of a combined receipt
in the amount of $7227.10 covering the cheque
mentioned and two cheques dated 17
November 1997.
239) Challita says in his principal affidavit that about this time
he said to Cvitan at the property, “All the joists are wrong.
supposed to go all the way right through from wall to wall”. He says
Cvitan responded, “Leave it to me, I will
fix it up.”
240) Progress Payment Claim: On 13 November 1997 a progress
payment claim was issued by DevCorp. Newman said in his affidavit
‘approximately
two to two and half weeks into the work, stage one of the
contract had been completed’ and ‘he advised Mr Cvitan ...
instructed him to make a claim for first payment as per the contract.’
241) He conceded under cross-examination that this was not an
accurate depiction of events. He acknowledged that he had no direct
knowledge of
actual days worked, and that he got the information probably from Jurcevic as
supervisor (ts 267). He said in this regard
that he had been advised there had
been delays and requests for extension of time. There is no corroboration of
this suggestion elsewhere
in the evidence, as at this point of time.
Newman’s evidence again on this matter was unsatisfactory.
242) The progress payment claim is dated 13 November 1997 and was
issued by DevCorp issued on its letterhead. Its material parts were
a) First Progress Payment 35% $18025.00
LESS 5% retention $901.25
TOTAL THIS CLAIM $17123.75
BALANCE $34376.25”
243) Cvitan said that at this stage the stud work to units 1, 2, 3
and 4 had been done. He referred to the external stud work and
cross-bracing. He also referred to materials on site in two different locations
and ‘works in progress’.
244) According to Challita, Jurcevic handed him this claim. He
said that he said to Jurcevic, “There is supposed to be 35% of
done before the first payment is made. There is not even 5% of the work
done”. Jurcevic, he says, replied, “No,
245) Cvitan was cross-examined on his understanding of when the
first progress payment was due. He said again that he regarded it
as being able
to be claimed in relation to material brought to site together with a component
for labour done. He said he formed
the opinion that the first claim was due from
his observation of the site. He then gave the instruction to Newman to make the
He said at this stage around $10,000 had been expended on timber and he
added that in his mind to the labour that had been performed.
246) He agreed that Sapina did not give him a progress claim for
his work, but billed only after he left the job.
247) Zeaiter said in his affidavit that following an inspection
after the progress claim he told Challita that $10,000 was the correct
‘for the work performed ... to date.’ He said ‘You’ve
got to be the boss of these people to the site,
Albert. Nothing about the
framing is right. It needs to be fixed.’
248) Timber Order: Jurcevic’s diary note for the 13th refers
to 2 packs of 250 x 50, 5.4 long and 2 packs of Yellow Tongue.
explained in evidence that this was his assessment of what was necessary to be
ordered. A price is noted (including cost
of delivery) delivery of $7137.88.
When these items were delivered is not clear. The receipt for payment is dated 3
December 1997.
This may be the timber that Sapina says was delivered late in the
day of 14 November.
249) Friday 14 November 1997: Sapina’s diary notes:
“Extra. Push stud wall out Master Bedroom window frame. ½ hrs
room before ½ x 2 men. Total 2 hrs plus nails & charges, Unit 2”.
This note reflects a limited amount of work
was done on this day, pointing to
continued difficulties in relation to availability of materials. Sapina’s
letter to DevCorp
is to similar effect and records that he worked on units 2, 3
and 4 ‘to fix the variation work which was given the OK’.
evidence was that he pushed out stud wall of the master bedroom adjusted a
window frame, and that it took half an hour to make
these adjustments. He said
that this occurred in relation to master bedroom on the walls that were out of
square in units 2, 3 and
250) The Roof Pitch Problem: Sapina raised concerns about whether
the plans allowed for enough headroom in the attic rooms in particular
bathroom and the second bedroom. As the holder of a licence, he considered that
he was obliged not to undertake work that might
contravene the Code. He sought a
solution to this problem.
251) The problem, as he saw it, would have to be resolved by
increasing the height of the roof or altering the pitch of the roof.
specified for the pitch of the roof was 35 degrees. There was dispute as to
whether Challita demanded that the problem
be solved by altering the roof pitch
to 45 degrees. The question of whether Challita wanted the roof pitch to be
altered to 45 degrees
was a recurring theme of the case.
252) Jurcevic said that in the discussions leading up to the
contract, Challita had mentioned the possibility of a 45 degree roof
Jurcevic had said that such a change would require a variation to be agreed and
a price for the variation to be set.
253) Sapina gave evidence that about the time ‘I was
building the frames and when I was asking for the details for the engineering
[the detail re the beams and joist]’ Challita had told him he wanted it
built to 45 degrees.’ He said Challita has referred
to the project he had
done in Greenacre, that he had tried to do a 35 degree pitch, it had not worked
and he had changed it to 45
degrees. Sapina said that he if he changed the pitch
it would affect the height restriction and that Challita would need to put in
amended plans, and that he would not undertake such a change unless he had a
proper signed authority.
254) Sapina said he had said that such a change would require more
work on his part and that he would have to negotiate a new price
with Jurcevic.
In a solicitor’s letter written on behalf of Challita on 4 December, there
is a reference to a 45 degree roof
pitch which Challita says was a mistake on
the part of the solicitor. There were references to the Greenacre project where
put to Challita that he had had a similar problem to the one encountered
by Sapina and had resolved it by altering the roof pitch
to 45 degrees. Cvitan
said in his affidavit and in cross-examination that he asked Challita for
amended drawings. He reiterated
that Challita had asked for the roof pitch to be
altered. He acknowledged that ultimately the roof had been built between 34 and
35 degrees.
255) He reiterated that he asked Newman to contact the Council to
see if it had any amended drawings. He agreed that DevCorp was not
prepared to
take responsibility for what it regarded as an illegal structure; and that he
instructed the carpenters to work on something
else (ts 175).
256) Challita agreed in evidence that it was about this time that
the roof pitch issue first emerged. He said it became an issue after
carpenters put in the floor for Unit 4. It arose at the time the first floor
work commenced to be done. He recalls saying, though
he was not sure as to the
date, to Sapina that if there is not enough headroom at 35 degrees then it could
be changed to 45 degrees.
He said he had no recollection of DevCorp asking for
an amended set of plans. Challita’s son said that he heard his father
to Jurcevic that he had done a similar job before and it had been constructed,
and why couldn’t he do the same.
257) Challita considered that the problem raised by Sapina was not
a serious one, and directed him to continue with the work. Sapina
saying that he would have to get instructions from Jurcevic. Challita said in
cross-examination that when the problem arose
he had called to the site a man
with the first name Steve to explain to Jurcevic how the roof could be
re-pitched to overcome the
headroom problem. Steve, he said, had worked on the
Greenacre project where a similar problem had arisen.
258) Sapina’s letter records that he added extra wall top
plates to all walls and began on the first floor joists and flooring.
that he asked Challita for an engineer’s drawing. He says that Challita
said he did not have one, and that Challita
pointed out the roof details on the
pitch will change to 45 degrees and not what was on the plan. Sapina records
that he said that
this was a major change in the project and that he would have
to contract Cvitan and get any new amended drawings.
259) Jurcevic agreed with the suggestion of Mr Wargon of the
Tribunal that the only offending area with respect to interference with
in fact the stair and the bathroom. Mr Wargon suggested that it might have been
possible to construct an almost flat section
above the stairs and above the
bathroom, to provide for full head room. Jurcevic agreed but said that he had
asked for a set of amended
plans because our costs would have been different.
260) Jurcevic was questioned as to the progress of the job at this
stage. He agreed that the frames for the ground levels were not
fully completed,
and that he had been asked to start putting on floor joists and flooring on one
or two of the units. He said he
recalled that the steel beam has been put up at
the front of unit 1, and he was asked to hurry up with the framing work on unit
so that the bricklayers could continue as it was a two storey dwelling and so
that they could put up scaffolding (ts 371).
261) Jurcevic said that is why he arranged for delivery of floor
joists on that day.
262) Progress of Works: Jurcevic agreed that the carpenters
commenced to work on the upper level though the ground floor frame had
fully completed. He said non-completion was due to the fact that they had been
waiting for the beam to go in, which Challita
had now done. Challita’s son
said that as at this date the external walls for units 3 and 4 were up but not
the internals.
He did not agree that the all ground floor framing was up.
263) As to delivery of materials, the Tribunal’s conclusion
is that floor joist timber arrived on site on the 14th, but little
work was done
to install them. Jurcevic’s note for the 14th refers to handing an invoice
to Challita [the progress claim],
and that there were 4 men on site. There are
no relevant notes for the 15th and 16th. Sapina did not return until the
264) Weekend 15 and 16 November 1997: Cvitan deposed in his
principal affidavit that he was advised over this weekend by Sapina that
Challita wanted to change the pitch of the roof. Cvitan said that at this stage
he requested amended drawings with respect to the
pitch of the roof or any
framing to do with the roof. Cvitan explained that so far as he was aware every
council in the area had
a guideline as to ridge heights. He said that he was
also advised that the head heights at critical points did not comply. He says
that Challita said to him that drawings were not required.
265) Cvitan says he said: “We are not to do the roof because
its a variation and we’d have to give you a quote on the
scope of the
works. You need to give us amended drawings so we can quote”. Cvitan said
that at this stage DevCorp made enquiries
through Newman with Bankstown Council
to see if amended drawings had been filed. Challita denied that ever indicated
to Cvitan that
he wished to change the pitch of the roof over that weekend or at
any other time or received any request for amended plans.
266) Challita considered that the problem raised by Sapina was not
a serious one, and directed him to continue with the work. Sapina
saying that he would have to get instructions from Jurcevic. Challita said in
cross-examination that when the problem arose
he had called to the site a man
with the first name Steve to explain to Jurcevic how the roof could be
re-pitched to overcome the
headroom problem. Steve, he said, had worked on the
Greenacre project where a similar problem had arisen.
267) Jurcevic said in his second affidavit and in evidence that he
spoke to Challita on 15 November and asked Challita for the Greenacre
to assist in resolving the headroom issue, where a similar problem had arisen.
Challita said he did not recollect this
conversation, but agreed that he had
said to Jurcevic that he had done a similar job at Greenacre where this
difficulty had arisen.
268) Jurcevic said that Challita did raise the possibility of
going to a 45 degree pitch. Jurcevic said he told him that he could
it without an amendment to plans and that once it commences the materials will
be greater. He said Challita said he would
pay the materials but not the labour
269) Jurcevic said that he visited Alagha’s office to query
how Alagha came to design the loft area the way he had. He said
Alagha replied:
“Oh, my client, he gave me set of plans and something was built near his
property in Greenacre” and Alagha
said “I traced it”. This
allegation was not put directly to Alagha, who did say that generally did
initial drawings
on tracing paper. No finding is made on this
270) He said on this occasion they sat down, and they were unable
to come up with the correct roof to meet the ridge requirements
and the soffit
lining requirements. Jurcevic said that the way to resolve the matter so as to
maintain the same pitch was to insert
a ring or steel beam which sits on the
frame, thereby raising the roof, and that required Council approval. He said
there was later
that day a meeting on site, where Alagha attended, and Challita
said it could be done, but at no extra cost (ts 314-6). He said that
on the 16th
or 17th someone he did not know, a friend of Challita, came on to the site and
gave similar advice as to how to solve
the problem. He said he was Lebanese and
a builder, but he could not recall whether it was Zeaiter. This was consistent
with Challita’s
evidence, and is a reference to the person Challita called
271) As to whether this issue was resolved, Challita said they had
not finished the first floor. Challita said in cross-examination
that he said to
Jurcevic and the others, “First finish the first floor, then we talk about
it.” (ts 780) Asked if he
spoke to Alagha about the roof pitch problem,
Challita said he said to him “All right, we get the wood, we’ll talk
272) Challita said he said to Jurcevic that he would not pay any
extra money because he had been warned about it (ts 781).
273) Cvitan recalled a site visit where he discussed the
installation of window frames with Challita, but could not put a date on
remembered a conversation about 16 or 17 November that windows had to go in.
274) Challita says that on 15 November 1997 (this was probably
Friday 14th) he received a promise from Sapina that he would “come
Saturday to put the windows in for the bricklayer to commence on Monday.”
275) Sapina did not attend the site over the weekend. Sapina said
that it was over this weekend that Challita had cut the slab to
deal with the
problems that he had encountered and backfilled them up with concrete. He said
that Challita continued complaining
slab were made and after the framing was in place.
276) Challita’s Son’s Recollection: Under
cross-examination Challita’s son had no knowledge or recollection of the
discussions over the various problems referred to so far in this account. His
answers were unsatisfactory.
277) Monday 17 November 1997: No work done at site by Sapina. His
diary records this day as a ‘rostered day off’ for his
team. On that
day, according to both Challitas, four bricklayers and a plumber arrived at the
property but could perform no work
because the carpentry that was to have been
completed by Sapina on the weekend had not been done. He said that as a result
the plumber
who attended could not return to the property for another two weeks.
Challita stated that the steel universal beam (for unit 1) was
installed on that
278) Jurcevic’s diary for the 17th contains various
calculations to do with upper level floor areas.
279) DevCorp’s accounting records (Ex 22) show two cheques
dated this day to MLM Timber Products for $3127.10. The receipt from
these payments is dated 3 December 1997, and is a combined receipt for these
cheques and the one referred to earlier under
the heading related to 13
November. It is not clear when delivery of the timber covered by the payment of
$3127.10 took place.
280) Tuesday 18 November 1997: Sapina’s diary and
Sapina’s letter to DevCorp refers to a meeting at the site at 730 am
1030am. He records that Cvitan, Challita and he attended. Challita insisted, he
says, on terminating the contract. Challita, he
says, had said that he
(Challita) had seen a solicitor, had received a letter of termination and that
he was to stop working and
get off the site. He said Cvitan asked to see these
documents but they were not shown. He says that Cvitan sought a time extension
of four to six weeks. Sapina’s diary notes “Settled but on some
terms, time extended to 4-6 weeks”.
281) Challita’s stated that on this occasion Sapina said in
response to criticism from his father about the framework not being
‘OK. It was my fault. I shouldn’t have cut the plates and placed
them until I had my chalk line and squared it
first.’ Sapina in his
evidence acknowledged that it would have been preferable had he followed this
282) Jurcevic’s note for the 18th refers to work on two
kitchen windows and two doors at units 2 and 4. There is a note that
there is to be a change using brickwork. There are also references to further
amounts of building materials having arrived.
283) Sapina said in evidence that he ultimately did about five
hour’s work on the 18th. He began working and installed all windows
four units and touched up any changes to walls, windows and
284) Sapina’s evidence was that at about 5 or 6pm later that
day Challita called him to complain about the progress of the works.
Challita said that he, Sapina, was not to come back to the job. He agreed that
he said he had an appointment early the next
day and that he would be there
after 9am. He agreed that the next morning Challita rang him about 7.30pm. He
disagreed with Challita’s
version to the effect that he would be there at
9. He said he said that he would be there after 9.
285) Sapina said that he told Cvitan that he (Sapina) had an
appointment the next morning and would be at the job after 9am. Sapina
evidence that by this point he and Challita were not communicating. He said
that the same evening before he had rung Cvitan
and asked him to join him for a
meeting at the site. Cvitan asked Sapina to ring Challita. Sapina informed
Challita that they would
be coming to the site after 9am on Wednesday. His late
arrival the next morning contributed to the angry encounter which
286) Wednesday 19 November 1997: Jurcevic’s diary for the
19th refers to carpenters being on site at 10.30 but Challita did
not want them
to commence. Sapina’s diary entry is more dramatic. It notes: “Walk
off job. Went to Condell Park &
Albert block the driveway with truck &
said not to come on the property he has a letter from solicitor not to enter
and that we are not to finish the job. Called Barry & Zdenko to
sought (sic) out problem because I have had enough. More verbal
threats were said and I have to leave went to next job,
Hurstville.”
287) Challita gives 18 November as the date of these events, but
the Tribunal is satisfied that the correct date is 19 November. According
Challita in his principal affidavit, Sapina rang him about 7am and said
‘Albert please give me a chance. I will be there
at 9am. He said that
Sapina did not attend the property until 10.30 that morning. Challita says he
said when Sapina arrived “I
don’t want you on the job anymore”
and Sapina said, “No, I want to finish the work.”
288) Challita said that after the first couple of days Sapina was
always arguing. He said Sapina was complaining that things were
not right and
there was no material on the job, and that he can’t get going on the job.
He said that Sapina did not use bad
language to him, only on the occasion of the
incident that occurred on the 19th. Challita also said he did not want Sapina
was not doing work to the Australian Standard. Challita said he knew
‘everything’ about the Australian Standard from
his extensive
experience on building sites.
289) When Sapina arrived about 10am he said that there was a large
tipper truck belonging to Challita parked across the path giving
access to the
site from the street. He said he asked Challita to move the truck and Challita
said “No. Get off my fucking property”.
It was put to Sapina that he
initiated the heated exchange by saying, referring to the truck, ‘Get this
shit out of here’.
Sapina denied that he used these words, and said that
he asked him to move the truck so that he could get in.
290) Sapina said things ‘heated up’. He said that they
were all on the footpath outside the property. His evidence was
Challita’s son ‘said that if we fucking enter the property at all
that he will beat us up’. Sapina alleged
that Challita’s son
threatened to go to his home and hurt him. Sapina said he replied “Look if
you’re going to
do something, do it now, out here on the footpath so we
can both be responsible for our actions”. Sapina said a plumber working
the site then joined the discussion, and identified him as a relative of the
Challitas, mentioned that they were Lebanese and
that they would stick together.
291) Challita denied Sapina’s version of what Challita said.
He denied swearing at him, or telling him to get off the property
or referring
to a solicitor’s letter. He denied that Challita’s son threatened
Sapina with being beaten up if he entered
the property. He says that
Challita’s son did not scream but raised his voice and said, “We
don’t want you here,
get out.” He agreed that he and
Challita’s son were very angry. Challita’s son denied making any
threats on this
day, or blocking the site.
292) Sapina rejected the suggestion that no words threatening
physical violence were used to him by the Challitas.
293) Sapina said Challita said that he (Challita) had received a
letter from his solicitor stating that ‘we’ were trespassing
property and that we will be prosecuted. According to Sapina he said that he
asked if he could go and get his ladders which
were stored in a container on the
property which he was allowed to do. He said Challita said that he just did not
want Sapina there
any more though his ‘boys’ could continue to
294) Challita agreed in cross-examination that he lost his temper
with Sapina. His version is that he, Challita, was unloading the
bobcat off the
truck, and Sapina arrived about 10.30 or quarter to 11. He said that Sapina
said, “Move that shit from here”.
I said, “What are you
talking about? Piss off, I don’t want you on my site.” Challita said
he had expected him
to be there and he had not turned up till “10, quarter
to 11 or 10.30” (ts 783).
295) Challita denied that he had the site blocked off. He said he
was just about to move the truck when Sapina came at him swearing.
Challita said
in explanation that he could not have people speaking to him the way Sapina did,
and that in any case in his opinion
he had not been performing well.
296) Sapina said he rang Cvitan and Jurcevic came to the site
which they did. Sapina said that Cvitan said to Challita as to his complaint,
‘Give it to me in writing, all right”. Challita’s version is
that Cvitan said “Keep Tom Sapina out no problem,
and I’ll get
somebody else to continue in the job”. Challita said that he said
“That’s fine.”
297) Sapina said Barry Jurcevic arrived, and things continue to
heat up. Sapina said that he said to Barry “Look I’m not
handle this. I’m not going to get involved. I don’t want anything
happening to me or my family or anything on
the weekends. Look, I’m going
that’s it”.
298) Challita in his principal affidavit denied that he screamed
or swore at Jurcevic or said that he would take him to court. On
the other hand,
Cvitan’s oral evidence was the Challita was very irate, and shouting and
screaming. Cvitan said he had asked
Sapina to the meeting to dissuade Challita
from removing Sapina. Cvitan said Challita was angry because Sapina had said he
be there by 9.30 and had arrived late at 10.30.
299) Challita said that after Jurcevic arrived, there was a lot of
swearing between Jurcevic and Sapina. Jurcevic said that when he
Challita, his two sons and the plumber was there. Three of the carpenters were
there. Jurcevic said when he got there about
10 am Challita’s truck with a
bobcat was there, unloading, and that it was parked in the driveway blocking the
road. He said
the carpenters could not get on to the site. He said that Challita
did not move it, and that Challita said “You can’t
get in. You step
on this property and you’ll see what will happen to you.” (ts 381)
He said Challita’s son said
“If you step in here I’ll shoot
you. I’ll kill you.” (ts 332) He said Challita’s son also said
of youse get in here there’ll be fights and blood.” (332)
Under cross-examination Challita’s son said he said “Get
off the job, we don’t want you back.” (ts 1010).
300) Challita denied making the threatening comments attributed to
him by Sapina. He agreed that one of the two plumbers there got
involved in the
altercation, and he regarded them as ‘just helping out’ (ts 1011).
He denied they were there to provide
muscle to get rid of
301) A further request for the first progress payment claim of
$17,123.75 was made on 19 November. Sapina said he had at an earlier
conversation on site with Challita where Challita said that it was his practice
not to make progress payments but simply
to pay for a job when the whole project
was completed. Jurcevic said that Challita said to him that he wanted more work
before there would be any progress payment.
302) Jurcevic said Challita said he would not pay more, and said
Challita said: ‘I will just give you a bank guarantee that
I will you one
lump sum payment’. He said he then said he ‘wanted out’. He
said Challita said “Give me a
figure, I’ll pay youse out”.
Jurcevic said that he replied: “Mr Challita, I don’t want to end
this job in
this way. I will do my best. If you’re saying that you are not
happy with these people, I will try to find somebody else. You
difficult for some other people to come on site”.
303) He said Challita replied “Okay, Barry, I will give you
a week, 10 days, please find good carpenters to finish the job.”
304) Sapina’s letter to DevCorp records that after
Jurcevic’s arrival and after the altercation, he and Barry walked away,
and Barry said to Sapina ‘Tom we are stopping the job until this matter is
resolved and that I send them an invoice and payment
to me will be made within
seven days’.
305) Sapina said he packed up, tied the ladder to the roof of the
car and went to another job.
306) In re-examination Challita gave his reasons for wishing to
dismiss Sapina from the site that he was not happy with him, because
rudeness and because, in his opinion, his work did not comply with Australian
307) Challita’s son was unresponsive in cross-examination as
to many of the details of this event. What he did say was that
shouting that he wanted to get on with the job, but that his father had said
‘No you can’t come on the job.’
He agreed that his father
stopped Sapina working on the site. He said the reason for removing Sapina was
that he turned up whenever
he felt like it, and he was getting rude to his
father. (ts 1005)
308) Materials on Site as at 19 November 1997: Jurcevic said he
had about $18,000 to $20,000 worth of materials on site at this point.
309) State of Works as at 19 November 1997: In cross-examination
Sapina said that by the time he had left the job he had only done
floor joists and flooring for one unit, Unit 4. The stage of works reached with
the other units was that he had built the
downstairs frames. He had put steel
bracing on only, not the ply brace on the walls. The walls, he said, were
temporarily braced
with the timber. He said that no roof framing had commenced
when he left the site. As to the progress of the first floor framing
of Unit 4 it was incomplete.
310) As to the state of the ground floor framing he agreed that
plybracing still had to be done, and some of the points where the
still out of square had to be fixed. He said he still had to support the actual
walls with studs. He said he had been waiting
for delivery of the plybracing.
311) Nature of Challita’s Complaints: Cvitan denied that
Challita ever made any complaints to him regarding the quality of the
to this time (ts 188). Jurcevic’s evidence was the same. Jurcevic said
that Challita did complain in the first week
and a half about the progress of
the works, specifically about workers not turning up (ts 372). Elsewhere in
cross-examination (ts
346) Jurcevic corrected any impression that this statement
may have created that that much work had been done at the site. His estimate
that it was about four days into the job. He said that the first time
workmanship was raised was during the discussion on the
19th which he saw as an
excuse to justify blocking them from the site.
312) Jurcevic agreed that he had on 18 November instructed
carpenters to replace two kitchen windows, and to replace two door openings
units 2 and 4. He rejected the allegation that this was necessary because the
carpenters had put the windows and the openings
in the wrong place. He said
Challita had wanted to make the amendments. (ts 373)
313) Challita’s evidence also was that he had expressed
concern to Cvitan over the progress of the works.
314) Cvitan was pressed as to what matters Challita was concerned
that Challita
was very upset and made many phone calls to him, and that he was upset about the
materials being no good, and that
Challita ‘might have said’ that
Sapina and his workmen were not getting on with the job (ts 181). He later
acknowledged
that Challita had been complaining about this (ts 182). As to
Sapina’s frequency of attendance, Cvitan observed: ‘No,
not his responsibility to get them on site. It’s mine’ (ts 182).
Cvitan reported Challita as screaming ‘Please
finish, please finish,
please finish’. Cvitan reports himself as saying ‘Give me some
details, give me some drawings’.
315) Discussions leading to New Contract: In cross-examination
Challita agreed that by this time he and Cvitan had started to argue,
Challita, had suggested that they draw up a written contract. He said the Cvitan
agreed to get the contract. Challita says
after he received it he took it to his
solicitor who said it was fine. Challita says that he asked Cvitan how long more
the job would
take. Cvitan had said ten days, and Challita had replied
“Steve, I will give you twenty days”. Challita said that he
said that he wanted Sapina removed, and that Cvitan agreed. Cvitan denied that
this conversation occurred.
316) Later in cross-examination Challita said that he expressed
doubt to Cvitan as to whether he could complete by the new date. He
said he said
to Cvitan, “You won’t finish it.” He said Cvitan replied,
“No, I’ll finish it. We’ll
sign a contract, we agree for
317) Cvitan was cross-examined on this issue. He was asked whether
the nominated completion date (10 December) was a realistic assessment
he was concerned. He said: ‘Yes, I think it was’ (ts 177). Later in
cross-examination Cvitan referred to time
for the works, saying ‘our
schedule shows it’s a six-week program to do the work’ (ts 183). No
document was provided
to the Tribunal confirming the existence of such a
318) 20 November 1997:New Contract: Cvitan says in his principal
affidavit that he again spoke with Challita. Challita requested that
continue work with different tradesmen. About 1 or 2 pm on that day Cvitan
visited the office of the Master Builder’s
Association (MBA), and obtained
some advice and collected a standard form contract issued by the MBA.
319) Cvitan was cross-examined as to his experience in contract
negotiation. He acknowledged that he had been involved in this process
major projects that he had been associated with in the past. He acknowledged
that he had done the work on an earlier project
involving the heritage listed
residence on the basis of a contract which he signed.
320) The Contract form used was marked “SC2 - July 1966
(revised October 1993)” issued by the MBA. It was completed by
names Challita as the ‘builder’ and names DevCorp as the
‘subcontractor’. It describes DevCorp
by reference to its ACN number
and then refers to its “Licence No 666” and gives its address as
“Level 67 MLC Centre
Sydney NSW.” The Licence number is that of
Newman. The Lump Sum contract price given in the Contract is
321) Under Description of Works, it states: “Supply and Fix
Timber Stud Work to the above Development. Fram’s (sic), Joist
and Roof Timber and all associated works as per
Quotation.”
322) The contract provides for dates to be inserted specifying
stages of work. Three stages are provided for, with a beginning and
end date for
each stage. All that was completed was the date for the beginning of the first
stage, shown as “4/11/97”
and the date for the completion of the
third stage, shown as “10/12/97.” The contract then provides for
payment of liquidated
damages. Against that heading is written
“$1400.00”. See further cl 2A below. The next heading is
“Progress Payments”.
Against that is written “Claims by 3
instalments as per Quotation” and “Payment within 7
323) Material conditions of contract included the
“Conditions
of Contract
1(a) The Sub-Contractor will complete the Works described above
(‘the Works’) in a workmanlike manner in accordance with
Plans and Specifications and in the time specified. If so indicated the
Sub-Contractor will complete the Works in stages
by the dates respectively
stated for each stage in the Schedule. All Work will be comply at least with
‘Acceptable Standards
of Construction’ issued by Lending
Authorities.
2(a) IF the Sub-Contractor fails to complete the Works or any stage
by the date specified in the Schedule or within any extended time
approved in
writing by the Builder the Sub-Contractor shall pay or allow by way of
liquidated damages the sum stated in the Schedule
for each week or part of a
week during which the Works or the relevant stage shall remain
incomplete.
(b) The Builder shall make a fair extension of time in respect of
any delay not caused or contributed to by act or default of the
Sub-Contractor.
3(a) Progress Payments shall be made as provided in the Schedule and
if nothing is so provided then from time to time within seven
days after the
Builder shall have received payment from the Proprietor of an amount claimed by
the Builder on behalf of the Sub-Contractor.
(b) [deals with retention] ...
(c) Before becoming entitled to any payment the Sub-Contractor shall
deliver to the Builder a statement signed by him that no wages
are due and owing
by him in respect of the Works at the date of payment.”
4(a) The Sub-Contractor shall vary the Works as required by the
Builder but shall not be entitled to claim payment for any variation
authorised in writing.
(b) [mechanism for establishing price for variation]
8 If the Sub-Contractor shall become bankrupt or go into
liquidation or if he shall make default in any of the following respects
(a) if he wholly suspends the work before completion, or b) if he fails to
proceed with the Works with reasonable diligence
or in a competent manner, or c)
if he fails to comply with a notice from the Builder requiring him to remove and
replace defective
work or improper materials, or (d) if he commits any breach
hereof THEN the Builder may by notice in writing determine the Contract.
determination shall not prejudice any right of the Builder to recover from the
Sub-Contractor damages for any breach by arbitration
hereunder or
otherwise.”
324) There are 23 standard terms. Standard term 20 relates to the
provision of provision of current licence details from the Building
Corporation (the Department of Fair Trading is now the issuing authority. The
sub-contractor’s warranty that it holds
a current valid licence, and
providing for its number and expiry date to be given was not
325) Cvitan says that at this stage, in his opinion, the ground
floor stud work and bracing had been completed. He said that one unit,
unit 4 had floor joists and some flooring; and unit 2 and 3 had some very
significant floor joists.
326) He said that on that day there was also agreement to a
variation allowing for a stud wall to be built rather than a brick wall
garage. That day DevCorp issued a quotation for additional work requested by
Challita in relation to supply and fixing of
100 x 50 stud wall to the garage
area, covering 11 metres. The price shown on the quote is $600, which is crossed
out and $520 is
written in, in handwriting dated 3/12/97 counter-signed by
Cvitan. Cvitan said this work was done straight away before quote was
327) Jurcevic’s diary for 20th refers to a ‘Tiku
Radas’ (this is probably Ivan Rados) arriving on site at 5.00pm
he could not commence.
328) Unresolved Issues: Challita was cross-examined as to why he
had entered into the contract with the roof pitch problem still not
sorted out.
His answer was that “Well, we haven’t got to it yet.” (ts 791)
It is clear that Challita took the view
that this problem would be addressed
once the first floor frames were completed.
329) He was challenged as to why he signed a contract with this
issue outstanding. Challita indicated that his view was that the contract
one to build a roof at a 35 degree pitch but he reiterated his view that he
would expect DevCorp to build it the way that he
expected even if the pitch had
to be 45 degrees.. He repeatedly rejected the suggestion of counsel for DevCorp
that he needed to
submit amended plans if the pitch had to be altered to 45
degrees. He said he would ask the Council first if it needed plans, and
it did they would be submitted.
330) 20-26 November 1997: Cvitan said that he did not agree with
Challita to change the contractors on the site - he said he was ‘forced
to’ (ts 95) and that it took him 5, 6 or 7 days to find new carpenters.
Cvitan said ultimately he engaged Portland Structures
to take over the work. He
agreed under cross-examination that their letterhead did not refer to a
contractor’s licence and
that he had not sighted a contractor’s
licence from them though he was ‘sure’ they had one (ts 132).
331) Newman was cross-examined as to his involvement with the new
team of carpenters. In his principal affidavit he said that he was
instructed by
Cvitan to continue works and ‘to instruct’ a new team of carpenters
to finish the job. He acknowledged
under cross-examination that he did not
arrange for or ‘instruct’ the new team. He said he did not know who
Again Newman contradicted his original evidence. He said Jurcevic
rang him to say that he had new carpenters.
332) There is a note in Jurcevic’s diary for the 22nd that
he ‘rang Albert [Challita] He said he will be getting a price
carpenter. For the 24th the diary records
“1. Complete
bottom frames Unit 1, 2, 3, 4.
2. Complete floor joists and flooring, Unit 1.
3. Start Unit 1. Top Frames & Roof.
4. Deliver balance of floor joists/ flooring/ 150 x 50 roof
333) His note for 25th says, ‘Albert rang. Said he is
willing to pay out so he could complete himself’.
334) Jurcevic’s oral evidence was that he tried for new
carpenters and eventually after two or three days there was a meeting
with Mr Ivan Rados. He said he met on site with Rados and the Challita family.
Rados was acceptable to Challita, but he declined
the job. This is probably the
meeting referred to in Jurcevic’s diary as occurring on the 20th.
335) Portland Structures was recommended to Jurcevic, Jurcevic
said, by people from Canberra. He said its workers commenced about
later. He said that during this period Challita was good to them, and he had
more materials delivered to site but then
Challita’s ‘nagging’
started again (ts 376). He gave no details as to the extent of any difficulties
the Challitas
might have caused him during this period. Jurcevic said he could
not remember whether the contract said work was to be completed
by 10 December
336) As at the time work was due to recommence, Jurcevic agreed
that the floor joists for unit 1 had to be completed, and that his
team had to
start the unit 1 top frames. He agreed that his diary entry for 24 November
referred to the need to deliver the balance
of the floor joists and flooring,
and that the notation relating to 150 x 50 related to roof frames.
337) Thursday 27 November 1997: Challita’s son’s diary
refers to Cvitan and Jurcevic attending the site with 3 carpenters
to start work’. The note says that it started to rain about 3 in the
afternoon. Challita and Cvitan also agree
that on that day Jurcevic, Cvitan and
three carpenters attended the site. They were supplied by Portland Structures
Pty Ltd. An invoice
for $4500 was tendered to DevCorp by Portland Structures on
29 November (dealt with under the heading for 5 December, below).
338) Jurcevic’s only diary note for this day refers to
Harrison [the timber supplier] and listing a price with delivery of $958.35.
339) Challita and Cvitan agree that on that occasion Cvitan again
sought payment for stage one. They both agree that Challita said
that DevCorp
would ‘have to wait’. Challita then says that he said that he gave
the reason as it being necessary for
35 per cent of the works being done.
Challita says, denied by Cvitan, that Cvitan said to him that he would have a
schedule prepared
for the carpentry work until completion. Cvitan deposed that
‘At no stage was the quality of works or quality of materials
issue’. Cvitan, agreed after some hesitation, under cross-examination that
he had said on that day that he would have
a schedule prepared (ts 185). This
accorded with the affidavit evidence of Challita’s son.
340) Cvitan said that it was about this time that Jurcevic handed
him a cheque for $10,000. According to Challita the precise date
was 1 December
1997 which the Tribunal accepts. He said he told Jurcevic to hand it back as he
was not going to accept part payment.
341) There was further dispute as to the roof pitch issue, and
according to Cvitan the new carpenters were instructed to proceed with
342) The accounting records for the job show a cheque dated this
day to Harrison’s Timber and Hardware for $958.35. This is
matched by an
invoice dated 28 November from Harrison’s. The main item of material
listed is plywood bracing. Other major
items include angle braces. The
accounting records also contain a ‘reminder notice’ from Sapina
Constructions to DevCorp
seeking payment of $4500.
343) Friday 28 November 1997: At Challita’s request an
experienced and qualified quantity surveyor, Mr Hibbins, attended the
at the end of the day. Challita’s principal affidavit is confused as to
whether the attendance occurred on this day
or seven days later on Friday 5
December 1997. The Tribunal’s conclusion is based on the text of Mr
Hibbins’ letter reporting
on his attendance is the attendance occurred on
28 November. Mr Hibbins’ letter dated 5 December is as
regard to the assessment of carpentry works at the above site I confirm that
when I saw the work completed on Friday last
the value did not match that as
claimed by the carpenters.
My assessment is that at that time only 29% of the work was done and
that the standard of workmanship of that was not acceptable.
It was clear from
the date of the claim that the Subcontractor has claimed far too early as his
claim was dated 13th November 1997.
As I understand it his agreement with you was that upon completion
of 35% of the work he was entitled to claim to be paid within 7
days. Once he
reaches that value of work carried out to acceptable work practices then he will
be entitled to payment within 7 days.”
344) Attached to this report is the following
Wall framing ground floor, 50% of $2,944.00 1,472.00
Wall framing ground floor, 85% of $3,975.00 3,225.75
First floor joists, 90% of $936.00 842.40
Floor boarding, 66% of $720.00 475.20
Units 3 and 4
As for Unit 2, 2 x $4,543.35 9,086.70
TOTAL 15,102.05
345) Mr Hibbins’ report then appends documents headed Full
Estimate Summary (giving a proportionate allocation of the contract
price across
the four units, allowing a little more than 25 per cent for unit 1 and a little
under 25% for each of the other three
units). That is followed by the Trade
Breakup figures upon which he based his calculations.
346) Mr Hibbins gave evidence and explained his method of
computation. He visited the site, inspected the state of progress of works,
a subjective estimate of that based on experience and then ran the estimate
through the computer where the relevant tables are
347) He was cross-examined on his methodology. He was unable to
refer to any detailed notes taken at the time as to the progress of
He said he used a tape measure to assist him in forming a view, and he said that
the trade figures he used in his calculations
were ones that he had developed
based on his knowledge of current industry costs (ts 1139-40). He said it was
his own view that the
standard of workmanship was not acceptable. Subsequently
for the purpose of a further report of 10 December 1997 (dealt with under
heading, 10 December, below) he accepted the views of the AMPA Design report
(referred to later) in that regard.
348) In Jurcevic’s diary for the 28th it is noted that
Challita told him he did not want to pay the $17,123.75 because 33 per
the work was not completed. The note then indicates that he was advised by
Cvitan to get a costs estimator, and that any
cost incurred by DevCorp would be
349) State of Works: Jurcevic said in cross-examination (ts 379)
that all ground floor frames were completed at this time. He said
sheeting and the ply bracing had arrived and they were fixed. He said the ply
sheeting were fixed on the Tuesday (25th) or
the Wednesday (26th). He rejected
the suggestion that it was not all installed on the morning of 28th when he met
350) 29 November 1997: Challita’s son diary notes that
carpenters arrived on the job, and that Jurcevic came to the site about
spoke to the carpenters and then left. There is no statement as to what work was
done on that day. There is no entry in Jurcevic’s
351) Monday 1 December 1997: Challita’s son’s diary
notes records that carpenters arrived at the job and this day. There
reference to how long they stayed or what they did. There is nothing recorded in
Jurcevic’s diary.
352) Challita says that on this day he arranged for his son to
give Cvitan a cheque for $10,000, as an expression of good faith even
considered that 35% of the work had not been done (oral amendment made at
hearing in relation to his affidavit evidence
that the date of the tender was 14
November 1997 which was the day after the original claim). Though the matter of
the date of this
event was the subject of inconsistent evidence,
Jurcevic’s diary for 1 December does contain the words, alongside 8.00am
me $10,000’ and alongside 6.00pm ‘I gave 10,000
back’. On the other hand in his affidavit Jurcevic placed the event
the week of 17 to 21 November as did his evidence in cross-examination (ts
374).Challita also appeared to think it occurred
earlier. Nonetheless most
likely date, based on the consistent diary records, would seem to be 1 December
353) Challita’s son gave the cheque to Jurcevic. Jurcevic
said that Challita’s son said to him “The $10,000 cheque
to me by my father and this is all he’s willing to pay at the
moment.” (ts 372) Challita’s son’s
diary also records this as
the day that he tendered the cheque to Jurcevic. Jurcevic agreed that
Challita’s son did say that
he did not think the work had reached a stage
of completion appropriate for the first progress payment. Jurcevic denied that
were any complaints about workmanship made by Challita’s son.
354) Challita said in cross-examination (ts 817-8) that at this
stage he still wanted DevCorp to do the job. He said he told Cvitan
could have the cheque today, with the balance the following Friday, the 5th. But
as at Monday he was not satisfied that 35
per cent of the work was
355) Challita says in his principal affidavit that on this date
he contacted the Bankstown Council and spoke to Mr Cowper, a building
He said that he said to Mr Cowper, “I’ve got carpenters on the job
and I am not happy with the work. Can you
come and have a look”. Mr Cowper
attended the property on 3 December.
356) Newman’s Discussion with Challita: Challita’s son
said Newman came to the job for the first time on 1 December, when
Jurcevic came
to return the cheque. He says he saw all the defects and said “Albert,
I’ll fix everything no problem”.
Challita’s son placed the
only attendance that he could recall on the part of Newman at about this time.
357) He said the defects were pointed out to Newman and he said
‘not a problem’ and sent some workers down to the site
the next day,
‘and they put a few pieces of timber in and then they left.’ (ts
1007) He described the defects as ‘the
plates, the bottom plate; the
frames weren’t sitting on the concrete properly; bracing wasn’t
sufficient; the studs in
the corner they weren’t placed; the lentils; the
lentils over the windows were knocked into the studs and no support under
lentils; there wasn’t double stud under load-bearing walls.’ He
added ‘structure of the floor joists were wrong’
and there were not
enough noggins. (ts 1007) His estimate was that the problems would take two
carpenters more than a week to fix.
358) In evidence Newman said he had a conversation with Challita
in relation to the drawings before work commenced about the pitching
ridge heights. In his initial answer in cross-examination he placed this
discussion in early November, and then went on
to refer to a site meeting with
Challita in early December.
359) The Tribunal’s conclusion is that Newman was in fact
referring to the site meeting at the end of the day on 1 December.
Newman says
he asked Challita (for what Newman referred to as) a ‘section 102
modification’ dealing with the need to
increase the pitching points and
the ridge heights.
360) Challita agreed in cross-examination that he never made an
offer for any extra work that might be involved in altering the roof
pitch as he
believed that they had agreed to that within the original
361) Tuesday 2 December 1997: Following the conversation with
Newman the previous day, Challita says a couple of workers came to the
they worked for a couple of hours. He said after that there were no further
attendances at the site.
362) Challita’s son noted in his diary (which for the period
after 20 November was far more detailed and the Tribunal considers
reliable) that bricklayers and carpenters came to the site. He noted that the
carpenters were having trouble with the roof
for the three back units. He gave
as the reason ‘because ... the architect didn’t put any diamentions
(sic) on the plans.’
The diary records that Jurcevic came to the job to
asking for more money. The note refers to his father offering a put money
in trust for DevCorp in the form of a bank guarantee with
the money to be
payable on completion of the job after the job has been passed.
363) Jurcevic’s diary note contains drawings, one of which
is of the ceiling joist layout. The diary note contains two pieces
text, ‘Spent 3 hours working out roof’ and ‘Albert said he
will provide bank guaranty’. On the
other hand, Challita denied in
cross-examination that the new carpenters ever complained about any roof height
problem. As to how
the issue was eventually addressed, he said the soldier wall
was always on the plan.
364) Challita said that at this time he tried to call Newman at
the office but Cvitan answered the phone. He said he explained that
he wanted to
discuss whether DevCorp wished to complete the job. (ts 832)
365) Both Challitas recalled a conversation on this day with
Jurcevic about payment about DevCorp wanted extra in relation to the
the roof, with Challita insisting that it built according to the plan.
366) Wednesday 3 December 1997: Challita’s son’s diary
records that ‘carpenters turn up to the job and the bricklayers
well.’ He notes - ‘The materials for the carpenters haven’t
arrived so that is delaying the carpenters.’
He referred to Jurcevic
coming at about 2.00 pm, and Newman later in the day doing an inspection. His
notes say: ‘Barry (Jurcevic)
sent the carpenters away for three days so
that means there will be no carpenters until next week ...’.
367) Mr Norman Cowper, the building inspector from Bankstown
Council, also attended the site. Mr Cowper made a hand-written note of
observations, as follows:
“1. Provide
double joists under all load bearing walls where running parallel to
2. Double brace walls braces (sic) to be recessed into
3. Reposition bottom plates to bear fully on concrete peers
4. Provide 3 full studs and 3 blocks to all external, internal
corners and wall intersections.
5. Sheet bracing shall be in one continuous length and nailed
368) Mr Cowper gave evidence. He was unable to recollect whether
he did any checks of cavities between brickwork and frame. In cross-examination
Mr Cowper agreed that he had known Challita for many years through
Challita’s work in the area as a concreter, but rejected
the suggestion
that his visit was done as a favour for a friend rather than as official Council
business. He was questioned as to
why his note was not on the official
letterhead of the Council. He said he regarded the visit as consistent with his
official duties,
which included making random inspections of sites. He said he
went to see what rectification work might be necessary.
369) He agreed that there was about a day’s work involved in
the matters he identified. He agreed that there was a difference
unfinished item and defective work. He agreed that council practice at a final
inspection is to issue a rectification
notice in relation to any defects
identified. Mr Cowper said he had no independent recollection of the visit,
other than what is
contained in his note (ts 924).
370) DevCorp’s Attitude as at 3 December 1997: Cvitan denied
in cross-examination that he ever asked Jurcevic to suspend work
at the site (ts
194). But he then said: ‘I gave him (Jurcevic) instructions no further
monies are to be expended until we get
details, because we needed to place an
order for timber. Whatever the course of events, in regards to construction, you
have to buy
your timber according to what you are, and there wasn’t
sufficient materials there to carry on work and we didn’t know
pitch of the roof was going to be in order to buy the timber’ (ts 194). He
agreed that on or about 25 November he
had told Jurcevic not to continue until
‘we get details’ (ts 195). Challita’s son’s said in his
that DevCorp was unable to perform work on that day because of lack of
materials, and that Jurcevic told him they would not arrive
until DevCorp get
the first progress payment. The receipt for payment given to DevCorp from the
timber company for the second and
third orders of timber is dated 3 December
371) Newman referred in his principal affidavit to having
‘arranged, through Mr Jurcevic’ for the new team of carpenters
complete the portion of outstanding works as a matter of priority so other
trades were not delayed. In time he places this event
in early December. He said
that he particularly recalls ‘pointing out to them’ that additional
studs to the corners were
required to comply with Australian Standards and that
under-window studs to a particular block needed to be reset immediately so
allow other trades people to continue their work.
372) He acknowledged in cross-examination that he had not any
to Jurcevic.
373) Similarly his reference later in the affidavit to the
carpenters advising him on 6 December that this work was done was inaccurate,
and that he received that information from Jurcevic. This, the Tribunal
considers, is another example of Newman trying in his original
evidence to
present a role of himself in relation to the project that was more significantly
more involved than was actually the
374) Newman was questioned as to why he did not go to check this
work immediately. He said it was work of kind that could readily
be checked on
the next regular inspection. He was asked what other projects DevCorp had on at
the time, and he referred to a garage
at Rockdale and a job at Newtown (ts 275).
He said that he was not employed full-time as a builder and that time and that
capable of full-time employment at that particular
time’ (ts 275).`
375) DevCorp’s Request for Extension of Time: On the same
day DevCorp delivered the following notice to Challita. In cross-examination
Cvitan acknowledged that this letter was prompted by a letter from
Challita’s solicitors dated 26 November 1997. Newman said
cross-examination that he wrote this letter.
I refer to the abovenamed [Condell Park] along with our subcontract
dated 20th October 1997 (sic) and wish to notify yourself of
Contractual
Breaches causing our Company to claim extensions of time to completion dates so
damages cannot be claimed against our
You are hereby further advised that these extensions of time are
duly notarised -
i) inability to gain access to site by blocking driveway on 19th
November, by your personnel
ii) Non payment of claim 1, dated 13th November and not payed (sic)
by 3 December 1997 also breaching sub-contract
iii) Offer of part payment of our initial claim which is
unacceptable to our Company
As such our Company has not alternative but to, in the first
instance claim extensions of time for the abovementioned delays.
Since you are apparently the Head Contractor, you should also be
advised that your overseeing employees should not have direct communication
our tradespeople, but if there is any problem regarding workmanship or defectual
works, then contact should be made in the first
instance with Mr Barry Jurecvic
(sic) or other personnel.
In our Corporation, the normal practice is to issue site
instructions to suitable personal (sic), not tradespeople.
Hopefully this letter will extinguish all animosity and ensure that
there will be no further delays either in time schedule or payment
Also please be advised that brickwork has not been completed which
stops the progress of the job and will only delay your own
I also draw attention, to difficulties in the Architectural
Drawings, in that the Roof Plan as drawn cannot be constructed, as such,
will be regarded as a variation to the contract.
We will be more than happy to discuss this matter so that no further
delays are incurred.
It has also been brought to our attention that the Architectural
Detail was copied from a prior set of drawings applicable to another
require a workable set of Drawings so that this problem can be alleviated and an
amended quotation or variation to existing
contract, can be
discussed.”
376) Cvitan said his concern as to head room arose from advice
that he had received from Jurcevic and Newman. He said he understand
relevant building codes dealing with distances, egress and the like could not be
met. He then referred to the Building Code
of Australia (BCA) which is national
and Ordinance 70 which he said covered New South Wales. The Tribunal understands
that Ordinance
70 is no longer in vogue. He said that he understood that the
BCA prescribed minimum ceiling heights which were two-thirds, one-third.
377) Newman was cross-examined as to the lack of specifics in this
letter. It was suggested that it might have been helpful to provide
with more detail in relation to the conclusion expressed in relation to the head
height problem. He was asked as to why
he had given no details of the number of
days required to complete the job. He said ‘There would have been a record
somewhere in our file’ (ts 283). No file information of this kind
was tendered.
378) Thursday 4 December 1997: Challita’s son’s diary
records that his father went to the job and the carpenters were
‘putting the studs in each corner of the buildings as specified by the
inspector then they felt because there wasn’t
any materials on the job for
them to work.’ This was the last occasion that work was recorded as being
done on the site by
379) As to the quantity of materials on site, there is no evidence
that there were any further deliveries to site on or after 3 December
is difficult to discern what quantity of timber remained on site when
DevCorp’s carpenters left the job. Challita’s
son’s diary
refers to the carpenters waiting for material on 3 December which would suggest
that there was little timber there.
Jurcevic had indicated that no more material
would be brought to site while the payment issue was unresolved. In
cross-examination,
Challita said (ts 884) that there were approximately 10 or 15
lengths of 100 x 50 and three or four 250 x 50.
380) Olliffe & Co, Solicitors, for Challita replied to the
last letter.
“Regrettably
time does not permit a full review of your Company’s lack of performance
and breaches of its obligations.
We have been instructed to reply to the matters
raised in your facsimile as follows.
Although there were dealings between the Challitas and your Company
prior to the 20th November, a contract was entered into upon that
provided for completion by the 10th December 1997. Accordingly, any claim for
delay for any dispute on the 19th November
cannot be accepted.
As to the claim for progress payments, we are instructed you have
not performed 35% of more of the work. The payment offered was a
vain attempt to
encourage you to attempt to comply with the contract.
As to the Challitas discussing the quality of the work with the
persons on site, they are clearly at liberty to raise issues of defective
with those persons. We are informed that the Council has required a number of
matters of defective work to be rectified. We
also understand there is a
question of defective materials which is yet to be resolved. We are instructed
that the drawings could
not cause you any delay. We are instructed that you were
informed prior to the quotation stage that the pitch was to be 45% (sic)
We are also instructed that it is your lack of progress which is
delaying other trades and not the reverse as claimed by you.
No extensions are due; none will be granted.
Due to the breaches by you, the Challitas are entitled to determine
the contract. Your attention is also drawn to the provisions in
the contract
regarding damages.”
381) As to this letter, the Tribunal accepted that the reference
to 45% and 35% should be read as references to degrees. Challita
explained this
part of the letter in cross-examination. He said that DevCorp knew that it
‘we can’t get enough headroom,
we have to go to 45’ (ts 673).
Challita said that is what he instructed his solicitor to write, and that he
expected them to
do the job for the same price as a 35 degree pitch. The
Tribunal’s understanding of Challita’s evidence is that the
solicitor’s
letter should have read ‘35 degrees not 45
degrees’ and that the reference to degrees had been inverted. No evidence
was furnished from his then solicitors as to this matter.
382) As to the position at this stage, Cvitan said that he had
never agreed at the quote stage to build to 45 degrees. He said that
the job had
been significantly delayed by factors attributable to Challita. He said they had
been refused access to the site. He
said the first problem had been the slab
requiring DevCorp (through Sapina) to try to rectify, and to doorways to the
laundry and
some other stud work to fall in line with the concrete (ts 101). He
also said that there had been delays due to bricklayers not being
provide support structure to go off of, for the flooring.
383) Cvitan said in cross-examination that he thought there was
some work on the site on 4 December. He believed Newman had discussions
Challita, and that ends had to be placed in order for the bricklayers to
proceed. (ts 194).
384) Cvitan said he made a decision this day to have the dispute
arbitrated. He said no work was done during the three or four weeks
arbitration which followed.
385) Zeaiter’s evidence as to the state of the works at this
stage was that there had to be certain work done by this stage
problems. He considered that the first floor and part of the framework had to be
rectified. (ts 1054)
386) Extent of Attendance at Site by New Team of Carpenters: The
Tribunal is satisfied that there was no attendance at the site by
any workers on
behalf of DevCorp from 20-24 November. The position as to the 25th and the 26th
is less clear. In the above chronology
the Tribunal has noted the diary entries
bearing on this matter.
387) Jurcevic said in evidence that the workmen were there for
‘four days’ straight from 24th to 28th. (This is a five
day period.)
Challita said that one day’s work was done by 25th November (the Tuesday).
The evidence on this matter is confused,
with Cvitan and Newman and Challita (in
other evidence) placing the date that workmen recommenced at the site at the
27th, as does
Challita’s son’s diary note. In regard to resumption
of works, Cvitan said that he did not recall receiving a letter
November 1997 from Challita’s solicitor alleging that DevCorp had refused
to return to site.
388) Jurcevic says he thought that the progress payment was again
sought on the Thursday (27th) but Challita declined to pay, and
workers had the Friday 28th off because they were on another job.
Challita’s son’s diary records that the carpenters
attended from
6.35am to 8.30am on the 28th when Jurcevic came and told them the rest of the
materials would be coming today. He
records a delivery. The Tribunal’s
conclusion is that they attended for a brief period on 28th and did little
389) Though the matter is not free from doubt, the Tribunal has
concluded that the first attendance after 20 November at the site
reasonable amount of work was done was on the 27th. Work was discontinued early
on Friday 28th because of unavailability
of materials and resumed on Saturday
29th. As noted below, further progress was achieved on Monday 1st but little new
work was done
on Tuesday 2nd because of delays in delivery, as was also the case
on Wednesday 3rd and Thursday 4th, both days involving short periods
rectifying defects.
390) Friday 5 December 1997: As noted in Challita’s
son’s diary, Jurcevic came to the site about 12:55 and was taking
photographs (the photographs comprise Ex18). The diary records that
Challita’s son asked when the carpenters were coming back,
and Jurcevic
said when they finish another job, and Challita’s son said that they had
til next Wednesday (10 December) to
finish. His diary records no further
attendance at the site.
391) DevCorp replied by letter dated 5 December to
Challita’s solicitors’ letter of 4 December. Newman said in
re-examination
that he wrote this letter, as follows:
to your apparent inability to have the matter settled relating to the Progress
Claim and to show our corporations (sic)
“Good will and bonafide
attitude” in relation to settling the matters in dispute namely, payment
of our corporation claim,
we hereby offer to have the remainder of the
outstanding works in relation to ground floor timber framing complete subject to
cheque being lodged with our corporation solicitors in our Company or an
independent solicitor with appropriate release documentation
and duly signed and
held by another independent body whose release would be subject to inspection
relating to the remaining list
of outstanding work listed below.
As previously stated, in our opinion there has been a number of
Contractual Breaches to date by yourself causing undue delays to our
Corporation
necessity (sic) to seek extensions of time as per our letter of the 3rd to which
no response has been received.
It would appear by your own inactivity, relating to the
abovementioned, that you either wish to terminate the contract or have financial
difficulties.
List of Outstanding Work -
1) Metal Bracing rear wall, has not been correctly attached to stud
2) Door width is incorrect and requires amendment
3) linte (sic) has been end nailed only to require the stud to be
checked out and correctly positioned in accordance with SAA 1684
4) A number of under window studs require placement
5) Placement of triple grip timber connections to intersecting floor
joists over garage area.
With the abovementioned information in hand, we wish to advise that
our Corporation had no alternative but to put the matter in the
hands of an
Arbitrator to get a further independent ruling in relationship to the matter in
dispute. I previously stated we wish
to prove our ‘bona fides’ and
goodwill in this matter and hope that this letter will be sufficient atmosphere
the matter out of dispute and confirm our business relationship in an
amicable and friendly manner, without further time delays which
magnified due to the time of year’s availability of personal (sic) and
materials that this time of the year normally
brings to the
We request a written reply to this correspondence.
We also require the Department of Fair Trading Licence or Owner
Builder Permit Number, so that there can be no further dispute in
relation to
who actually is the head contractor, secondly also be advised that your recent
correspondence is noted and will be disputed
accordingly.”
392) Cvitan agreed that by this stage he had a list relating to
defects from Alagha. Alagha’s report filed in these proceedings
December and refers to him doing the inspection on that date. It may be that he
did the inspection a day or two earlier.
393) Cvitan said his position was that the job was in the
situation of works in progress and that DevCorp had to deal with any problems
that were drawn to its attention. He acknowledged that DevCorp had to do the
work required by the agreement and that it had to be
inspected. He agreed that
when it is completed Challita would need to the call council and ask for a
certificate. He agreed that
if the works are not adequately performed a notice
is given by the council (ts 198).
394) Challita was cross-examined in relation to the suggestion in
DevCorp’s letter that Challita might have had financial difficulties
funding the project. Challita gave an account of his overall liquidity at the
time and his project budget. Based on that account,
his liquidity was
satisfactory.
395) Challita was cross-examined as to why he did not take up the
DevCorp offer to put an amount in deposit in trust while the dispute
progress was sorted out. He said he could not now recall receiving the letter,
but acknowledged that his solicitors did write
a letter a few days later
responding to it. He said he made an offer, which was to give them a bank
guarantee, payable upon completion.
396) Also on 5 December Cvitan sent by certified mail to Challita,
from DevCorp and on DevCorp letterhead, a document headed Notice
of Dispute, in
which he advised that he had invoked condition 22 of the contract which,
provided for the submission of disputes to
the MBA’s arbitration
397) DevCorp’s accounting records for the job show a cheque
dated 5 December for $4500 to Portland Structures Pty Ltd. This
matched by an invoice from Portland Structures Pty Ltd, in handwriting dated 29
November 1997, referring to the job at
Condell Park and containing the following
items: Floor framing to Units 1, 2, 3 and 4: $2000; Wall framing to Units 1, 2,
$2500; total of this invoice $4500. It then contains a further item
‘Contract value’ in the amount of $13,500 and states
‘Balance’ of $9000. The same records show amounts of $4500 alongside
the name of Sapina Constructions without any payment
recorded, and similarly in
relation to ‘Wages Barry [Jurcevic] Supervisor” in the sum of
$3124.40 and “Wages Paul
[Newman] Supervisor” with no amount
398) State of Works: Cvitan said that at this time the framing was
90 per cent complete to the bottom floor, event though it was temporarily
propped. The floor joists had been completed to units 1, 2,3 and 4, the
flooring to 1, 2, 3 and 4 and some first floor framing to
unit 1, and some
attempts in that regard to unit 4 (ts 102). Cvitan was cross-examined as to
extent of works at this time. Cvitan
said he was ‘not sure’ whether
the first floor on the units was complete or the framing on the ground floor was
399) Saturday 6 December 1997: Mr Eid, a civil and structural
engineer and a licensed builder, of Eid Consulting Engineers at the
Challita took photographs of the state of works at the property. He provided a
report dated 7 December. He noted that
the inspection was limited to those areas
of concern to Challita.
400) His general conclusion was that ‘the workmanship is
substandard and in many locations does not comply with acceptable methods
construction and in instances do not comply with Australian Standards AS 1684
(Timber Framing Code) and AS1720 (Timber Structures
Code). He went on to
“Subsequent
to these, the structural integrity and reliability of floor and wall members is
impaired. In one instance the floor
joists have not been installed in accordance
with the Architectural Plan, as wished by the Client.
Inadequacies and deficiencies observed were generally similar in
Units 2,3 and 4. Those parts of the construction found to be unacceptable
would compromise structural integrity and reliability of members are as
1. load bearing beams (2/200x50 F7 Douglas Fir) carrying roof, wall
and floor loads are not acting compositely, incoming floor joists
inadequately fixed to beams mentioned in 1 above
2. generally insufficient number of fixings provided for floor
3. single or no wall studs below load bearing floor
4. inadequate fixing of trimmers between floor joist
5. poor fixing of flooring to floor joists
6. poor installation of metal angle braces (Unit 1)
7. improper installation and fixing of timber lintel (Unit
401) The Tribunal observes in respect of item 1 that in all other
evidence the references were to 2/250 joists, and regards the measurement
in item 1 as a mistake.
402) Mr Eid reiterated in giving evidence that he did not consider
that the double beam was properly fixed so as to act effectively
as a composite
beam operating as one unit. He referred to photographs that he had taken on the
day to demonstrate his concerns. He
also noted a number of instances of poor
fixing of nails through the floor boards to hold the joists. He also criticised
the absence
of double studs below the load bearing beams as it was common
practice to support them in this way. He then demonstrated each of
his remaining
points by reference to photographs.
403) In cross-examination he agreed that the items he observed
could be rectified by a competent carpenter (ts 1178). He was pressed
whether what he saw in relation to the beam construction represented works in
progress. He rejected the suggestion that because
it may have been supported by
an acroprop that affected his criticism in relation to the adequacy of the
bolting that he saw.
404) He said ‘being composite has to do with being joined
together at the time of installation’ (ts 1204). The Tribunal
understands
that “being composite” has nothing to do with the time of
installation. The time of installation should
not reflect on the strength or
performance of a composite beam. He said that in his opinion the joists were
undersized (ts 1207).
He referred in particular to the joists over the garage.
He was pressed as to why he had not made this comment in his report. He
had made such a comment to Challita on site.
405) Alagha did an inspection, possibly a couple of days earlier,
an provided a report dated 6 December. Alagha found the following
‘outstanding works to be finalized’.
- All cantilevered joists must be extended to be supported on walls as shown on
drawing in units 2, 3 and 4
b - Bracing where shown as two pieces joined together must be
changed by one single bracing
c - Missing bracing in all units 1,2,3 and 4 must be placed
d - All hinged connecting joists must be U-shape and nailed
e - All deflected walls from horizontal line and vertical line in
all units must be fixed within an acceptable range
f - Additional noggins must braced (sic) for wall between laundry
and kitchen for unit 4
g - Joists must be fastened properly where the nails are puled (sic)
h - Where applicable, floor joists supported over door openings must
be fastened properly
i - Double joists of southern wall of unit 3 must be fastened to
other joists
j - Joists must be leveled to provide enough space for the proposed
plaster board
k - Twisted external joints on eastern side must be
l - Joists supported by steel beam in unit 1 must be fastened by
m - Bracing for southern wall of unit 1 must be
n - Joists of western wall of unit 1 must be
406) In cross-examination Alagha said he could not recall whether
there were still temporary structures in place indicating that the
ongoing, such as jacks holding up the first floor. His main recollection was
that the joists did not run to the outside
407) 9 December 1997: The three reports (from Mr Cowper, Alagha
and Mr Eid) obtained by Challita going to the adequacy of the works
forwarded under cover of a solicitor’s letter.
408) The letter went on to say:
are informed that as at the time of writing no one on behalf of your
organization has arrived to work on the site. We have
been instructed that
notwithstanding the rain, there is sufficient undercover work.
Accordingly it is presumed that you have wholly suspended work
before completion.
Please take this letter and its enclosures as notice to attend to
the rectification of the defective work outlined in the enclosed
409) 10 December 1997: Challita’s solicitors sent a further
letter by registered mail to DevCorp. It said:
“We note that no work has been performed on the
site by your company this week.
We confirm that we are in receipt of the reports of:
1. J & H Quantity Surveying Service dated 5/12/97
2. AMPA Design & Construction dated 6/12/97
3. Handwritten report of N. Cowper of Bankstown City
We are informed that as of today’s date less than 35% of the
work has been performed and that the work performed is defective
at least to the
extent set out in the reports provided to your Company.
We note your Company has been repeatedly called upon to perform its
part of the bargain and that it has failed to do so.
Mr Challita is at liberty to determine the Contract. Mr Challita is
prepared to attend an arbitration. We anticipate being instructed
to serve the
Company tomorrow with a Notice Determining the Contract.
As to your handwritten fax received this afternoon, considering the
work is supposed to be finished today these issues are somewhat
irrelevant.
We enclose further copies of the reports already provided to you
together with copies of our letters to you of 26th November, 4th
December, 8th
December and 9th December 1997.”
410) Not included in that material (possibly because it was not at
hand) is a letter dated 10 December 1997 from Mr Hibbins, the quantity
engaged by Challita. He says ‘[h]aving visited the site this morning the
quantity of work carried out it is my opinion
that the percentage completed
would hardly be 35%.’ He went on to say: ‘In hard terms probably
34%, however even this
quantum of works has not been carried out to a
satisfactory standard as stated by Ampa Design & Construction and EID
Constructing
Engineers.’ As to this report, in cross-examination, Mr
Hibbins said what had changed his views as against his earlier report
visit that occurred on 28 November 1997, was that there had been a little
further progress with the works. (ts 1137) He
reiterated his evidence as it
applied to the earlier report, that he no other detailed records of his
observations beyond the information
given in the report.
411) Mr Hibbins was cross-examined as to whether he had been given
any information about the degree of, and issues involved in, the
dispute between
Challita and DevCorp by Challita and he said he had not. He said his advice was
based entirely on the assumption
that DevCorp did not do the job on time. He had
been shown the standard form contract and the time schedule in it. He said he
told of other disputes apart from money, but did not enquire as to
412) He then added: ‘The progress claim of $17,000 would be
justified now if the work was satisfactory. However, having regard
comments contained in the letter from Ampa Design dated 6th December 1997, this
is not the case. It is estimated that the
cost of rectifying and completing
items b-n of Ampa’s letter would be in the order of $2500 subject to
confirmation quotation
from another carpenter.’ As was put to Mr Hibbins
under cross-examination it was not appropriate for him to offer this
assessment.
413) He estimated that if the floor joists were completely removed
in units 2 to 4 this work would cost in the order of $5,500 to
concluded that the progress claim should be subject to an ‘immediate
deduction’ of $8,500.
414) He said also that he had been ‘informed that the
carpenters have not been on site since last Wednesday 3rd December
415) Later on 10 December DevCorp sent a handwritten fax message
to Challita’s solicitors expressed to be from Newman and Challita.
said he wrote it, and initialled when it was sent, at 1.45pm. The note
is Head Contractor & Builder’s Licence No. As well as or Owner
Builders Permit No.
2. Who is the Lending Authority & which of the Independent
Reports was made by the Lending Authority.
3. Also Require a Copy of Stamped Approved Plans Along with
Structural Engineering Drawings relating to the Project along with Copy
Councils Conditions of Approval & Sec 102 Amendment to Development Consent
Relating to the Alteration of the Envelope of the
Building. Re Change in Roof
Pitch or Pitching Points.” (sic)
416) Challita’s son’s diary says that late on 10
December Newman rang his father at 5.00pm and said he would be there
hour. It says that Jurcevic, Cvitan, Newman and an engineer came to the site and
only stayed for 20 minutes.
417) Challita’s View of DevCorp’s Attitude: Challita
considered that by this stage DevCorp had ‘walked off’
the job. They
had not in his opinion achieved 35 per cent progress and the three reports had
identified a number of items of defective
work (ts 827-8). He agreed that he
would not pay them anything unless it was ‘35 per cent right’, but
he referred under
questioning frequently to his tender of $10,000 that had been
418) Challita rejected the suggestion of counsel for DevCorp that
by early December (in particular after the conversation with Jurcevic
December) he had decided he wanted to get rid of DevCorp because he would have
to pay extra for changes to the roof. He denied
the suggestion that by not
giving them any instructions to continue with the roof, it was like forcing them
to leave (ts 834). Challita
said he had tried to get someone to show them how to
do it, but they were not interested.
419) Challita consistently responded that he did not consider the
roof problem needed to be addressed finally as ‘we haven’t
yet’ (ts 836). He rejected the suggestion that the defects identified
where minor ones of a kind that can arise in
relation to work in progress, to be
rectified at the expense of DevCorp. He acknowledged that DevCorp were agreeable
to fixing the
defects (ts 837). But he regarded the problems as requiring major
alterations, and said that they would have to take most of the
floor out and
take most of the frame down.
420) DevCorp’s Action after Work Ceased: Newman refers in
his affidavit and evidence at hearing to being advised on 6 December
work requested by him had been done by the new team of carpenters, advising
Cvitan to that effect and being instructed
to suspend work because the progress
payment claim had not been met.
421) Newman said that after work had ceased he examined the plans
in relation to the head room and roof pitch issue, and satisfied
himself that
they were in contravention of the Code. He referred in cross-examination to part
3.8.2 of the BCA. In his second affidavit
he said this assessment took place
around 10-12 December 1997. He said there would be insufficient head height over
the stairs and
bathroom. He did not have any notes of his calculations. He said
the head height was 2100 for two thirds of the room in the case
of the bathroom.
422) Newman acknowledged that there was a qualification to the
requirement in the BCA allowing for a reduction in the height is it
‘unduly interfere with the functioning of the room or space’. He
said his recollection that the stair height
clearance was as low as 1500. He
said in the case of the bathroom he had done the calculation of head height in
the shower and came
up with less than 1700.
423) He said he told Jurcevic not to attend to ridge heights in
the roof because it could not comply with Council approval. He agreed
did not have any conversation with Challita about changing the heights or the
424) Newman was questioned as to whether he had in his mind when
looking at this matter the stricter provision of Ordinance 70 which
had preceded
the BCA which had been introduced since he had left Council inspection work. He
acknowledged that he did not have regard
to the more flexible approach allowed
by the qualification to the BCA when giving the advice to
425) As to the time when Newman asked Cvitan and Jurcevic to get
new drawings in relation to this problem, it was put to him that
this was after
the due date for completion. He said he regarded the due date as not having been
been decided as requests for extension
had not been granted (ts
426) 12 December 1997: Jurcevic’s diary contained no notes
between 2nd and 11th clearly relating to the project. On 12th there
‘Take timber from Condell Park.’
427) On 12 December DevCorp sent a letter direct to Challita, and
a second identical letter to Challita’s solicitors, requesting
their timber left on site.
428) It referred to its ‘numerous requests for information
regarding the project as was the case for the 1st progress payment’.
said it would take no responsibility for defects arising due to exposure of
timber. It referred to Challita’s ‘non
concilliatory approach’
(sic) and requested permission to remove unused lengths of F8 Oregon and sheets
of particle board flooring.
429) As can be seen DevCorp was pressing to recover its unused
timber from the site.
430) 15 December 1997: On 15th there is a note in Jurcevic’s
diary stating that he rang Challita asking whether he had been
in contact with
his solicitor. The note set ‘we are asking permission to have
[indecipherable] if anything happens’.
It then appears to record a
statement from Challita that he will sue.
431) Challita’s son’s diary says that Jurcevic rang
his father and asked if he could pick up the timber. He records his
saying that there will be nothing picked up until everything has been finalised
because the job has been stopped by Cvitan.
The note also refers to discussions
with Newman. Challita agreed in evidence that he had refused to allow DevCorp on
to the site
to remove the timber.
432) On 15 December DevCorp issued an Invoice to Challita headed
“Invoice Final Claim”. The gross claim was for $30,894.50
the ‘First Progress Claim’ of $18,025.00 and a ‘Further Claim
of Materials & Works to date’
of $12,869.90. Those amounts had
deducted from them an amount of $775.20 for ‘Material removed from
site’ by DevCorp.
The net amount claimed was $30,119.60.
433) The timber itemised as removed from the site was: ‘4
sheets 900 x 3.6 flooring, 10 off 100 x 50 Oregon (F8), 5 sheets bracing
8 of 250 x 50 Oregon (F8)’.
434) The invoice bore a statement declaring that the gross amount
claimed represented ‘58% of works’.
435) Materials Left on Site: Cvitan says after DevCorp ceased work
he understood that the framing work was not covered from the elements.
said that he did not take any steps to cover the materials on site as he
regarded that as DevCorp’s responsibility.
436) Challita was cross-examined as to the amount of materials
left on site by DevCorp at the time it ceased work. He said there was
eight lengths of timber 250 x 50 approximately about 19 or 20 lengths of 100 x
50. At another point he said that there were
approximately 10 or 15 lengths of
100 x 50, and three or four 250 x 50. He excluded from this statement the timber
now incorporated
in the frames.
437) He said the quantity surveyor had made a calculation, and
that DevCorp had picked all the timber up. Challita and later his son
evidence (in answers in cross-examination) of having been informed by neighbours
that carpenters from DevCorp’s new team
had been seen picking up the
timber. As the site had been disturbed overnight (it was not clear what precise
night was being referred
to) Challita said he called the Bankstown Police
station to report the matter. In re-examination he produced a card which had
name Constable Sparks written on it which he said was the constable he
438) Counsel for DevCorp critised both Challitas for not referring
to their evidence as to the removal of the timber in their affidavits
both Challita and his son that they had ‘stolen’ the timber
belonging to DevCorp. On several occasions it
was put to Challita that he was
lying, that it had not been removed by DevCorp and that he had decided to keep
the timber. He rejected
the accusation.
439) The Tribunal notes equally that DevCorp made no allegation in
the material it filed prior to the proceedings to the effect that
it had been
wrongly deprived of timber.
440) DevCorp’s allegation that Challita had wrongly deprived
it of new timber left on site was not raised in the material filed
prior to the
commencement of proceedings. It was put to Challita after DevCorp’s
witnesses had given evidence. The allegations
appear to have derived from the
evidence of the carpenter, Lukac, a witness introduced into the proceedings at
short notice on 17
May 1999 six months after they had commenced.
441) As will be considered in more detail later, he gave evidence
of having been paid in kind by Challita. Challita had provided him
with timber,
valued by them at $2000. Lukac’s evidence does not support in any degree
the suggestion that he was paid in unused
timber left behind by DevCorp. There
is some evidence from Lukac that he received some new timber, but the bulk of
the timber given
to him was used timber removed from the frames on the
instruction of Challita. That timber was the property of Challita. The payment
to Lukac is dealt with in more detail below.
442) Under cross-examination Cvitan referred to the period of 4
and 5 December. As to whether he gave Jurcevic instructions to suspend
the site, he said that he gave Jurcevic not to expend further monies until
further details were obtained (ts 194). He said
that ‘we needed to place
an order for timber’. He said ‘there wasn’t sufficient
materials there to carry
on work and we didn’t know the pitch of the roof
was going to be in order to buy in timber.’ This evidence points to
being little material on site as at the time works were suspended and lends
support to the evidence of the Challitas to that
443) Jurcevic when referring to the altercation that occurred on
19 November was asked in evidence in chief whether at that time there
material and equipment belonging to DevCorp and its contractors on site. He said
- ‘Yes, there was. We didn’t
take - we hadn’t - at that point
we hadn’t taken nothing off site.’
444) Challita said that the removal of the unused timber from the
site had occurred a couple of days after DevCorp’s solicitor
enquiring about the material.
445) In cross-examination Challita said that he had got a call
from his solicitor saying that DevCorp wanted to pick up the timber,
told the solicitor the job was shut down, and nobody was allowed to touch it
‘until see what we got to do’
(ts 843). He agreed that he had denied
them access as they had not come to fix the job. He said that he had not kept
the site secure
but did have a steel mesh barrier. He said the barrier had been
disturbed before the timber was removed.
446) He also said in re-examination that he had been rung by his
sister to say that DevCorp had rung her about picking up the timber.
told her that the site was shut as there was a dispute. He went to the site two
days later and there was no timber there.
447) At another point in his evidence Challita said that
DevCorp’s pick-up occurred about five or six weeks after they left
job, which if correct would locate the time around the middle part of January.
448) Challita son’s said that he believed that DevCorp had
picked up the material left on site, that he had been told that by
a neighbour
but could not provide a name (ts 1024). He said the timber had been removed
early in the morning and that is why the
police were called (ts 1026).
449) He said that about four lengths of 250 x 50 were left on the
site. He noted that the floor joists brought to site were F7 not
F8 as shown in
the invoice (Ex 15) (ts 1028)
450) Challita’s counsel submitted that the invoice of 15
December 1997 (Ex 15) was clear evidence that DevCorp had removed material
the site. There was no explanation offered by DevCorp’s witnesses as to
the reference to materials having been removed
from site, contained in that
451) The Tribunal’s conclusion is that DevCorp’s
unused timber was removed from the site on or about 15 December 1997.
of material reported by Challita as being left on site by DevCorp is broadly
consistent with the quantities referred to
in its invoice of 15 December. That
invoice was issued three days after Challita had refused DevCorp access to the
site and following
disputes between the party over being given reasonable access
to the site to remove the timber. Challita took the view that the dispute
unresolved, and may have wished to assert a lien of some kind over the unused
452) The Tribunal accepts that the Challitas found the
site’s barrier mesh disturbed on or about the morning of the 15th and
the materials had been removed overnight.
453) The Tribunal’s conclusions on these matters which were
the subject of great contest is that timber was removed overnight
on or about
the night of 14-15 December, that there is no evidence to support the conclusion
that the Challitas were responsible
for its removal and the most likely
explanation (based on the invoice statement, not on the hearsay accounts of the
alleged neighbour
statements) is that DevCorp arranged for its removal
surreptitiously because of Challita’s refusal to allow them back on to
site while the dispute was under discussion.
454) The Tribunal accepts that the only a small quantity of unused
timber was left on site being the four lengths referred to by Challita.
455) 16 December 1997: In Jurcevic’s diary there is a
statement ‘$2280’ alongside the name of DevCorp. There is
explanation as to its meaning.
456) 17 December 1997: Challita’s diary refers to him
ringing Newman to see if the job could be got moving, and Newman referred
negotiations between the solicitors.
457) 18 December 1997: Challita’s diary refers to Newman
ringing him to discuss progress of negotiations. That is the last diary
tendered. Around this time Cvitan recalls a meeting on site with the arbitrator.
458) 23 December 1997: On this occasion the Bankstown council
inspector, Mr Cowper, visited the site with a surveyor, Mathew Kemp,
following a
phone call from Challita on the 19th. The report of this visit is recorded in an
official Council form headed Request
for Inspection. Mr Cowper explained that
this was a frame inspection, a service which the Council can provide during the
a job. It is to be distinguished from a final frame inspection, which
occurs after any rectification work is completed (ts 926).
The report noted the
following matters:
1 - Blocking in floor joists undersized - Inadequate blocking in wall and
corners - Inadequate Fixing - Timber warped
and twisted - Bracing fixed
incorrectly & walls studs behind steel column to extend full length - Load
bearing lintels have been
packed - Profile studs to support lintels - Double
studs to support lintel ... - floor joists inappropriately fixed to perimeter
beams etc - double joists to be provided on L/B walls - bottom plates not fully
Unit 2 - Joists to be extended through to brick wall - lintels to be
supported by double studs - walls not plumb and vertical (General
to all units)
- Bracing - inadequate bracing, double bracing req’d - Beam over stairs
under sized - timbers with splits over
3 cm. Defective
Unit 3 - walls not plumb & vertical”.
Then there appears a note “all previous units mentioned
general to all units.”
459) In cross-examination Mr Cowper agreed that everything listed
was rectifiable. (s 927) He said this work would take a couple of
team of four or five. He felt that if it was necessary to replace the upper
level floor joists, it would not be necessary
to demolish the whole building but
simply the upper level.
460) Mr Cowper stated that all of the items which he identified in
the 3 December list remained as defects at the time of the inspection
December with the exception of the reference to the need for continuous lengths
of sheet bracing. He noted that there were
additional items on the note of 23
461) In answer to a question from Mr Wargon of the Tribunal, he
stated that his view was that the items inspected were all repairable.
He agreed that he had not recorded anything to suggest that the joist lay-out
was improper. His evidence was that the thickness
of the joist depended on the
span to be covered.
462) Opportunity to Rectify: Challita said that he and his father
gave DevCorp an opportunity to rectify in response to this report
from Mr Cowper
but agreed that as far as they were concerned at the time Steve had walked off
the job, and that had been made known
to them by 15 December 1997.
463) Attempts at Resolution December 1997-January 1998: As noted
on 5 December, DevCorp notified Challita that it was referring the
arbitration under the contract. On 17 December the MBA notified the parties that
it had appointed Mr George Zakos to arbitrate.
464) Challita was cross-examined as to attempts to arbitrate the
dispute. He said that arbitration was DevCorp’s suggestion,
and he agreed
to it. He agreed that an arbitrator came onto site. He said he was willing to
come to some agreement then as to the
defects. He agreed that he did not tell
the arbitrator about the roof problem. He denied that DevCorp made several
attempts to come
to an agreement with him.
465) A letter of 19 December from Challita’s solicitors
advised that Challita has invited a number of firms ‘to inspect
defective work and completing (sic) the subject matter of the contract’.
It referred to the time set for a preliminary
conference with the arbitrator on
7 January 1998.
466) DevCorp’s solicitors sent a letter on 5 January 1998
stating that their client remains ready, willing and able to complete.
dated 8 January 1998 from Mr Zakos, arbitrator, records that the preliminary
conference was adjourned to 14 January 1998
following a request from Challita
advised that he desired to have legal advice in relation to the preliminary
conference minutes.
467) Early January 1998: About this time, Mr Rashida (Rashida) of
LMA Constructions said he met with Challita and Cvitan on site.
On or about 21
January 1997 he gave Challita quotes for demolition and rebuilding. These are
discussed in more detail later in the
these reasons. He said he had met Challita
and Cvitan on site ‘about two weeks before that probably’ (ts 1337).
in cross-examination that on that occasion early in January he had
also given a quote to DevCorp to finish the job, not to Cvitan
but to someone
else who had come to his house in the evening. He denied that he quoted $16,000.
468) He thought that he may have quoted $60,000, being $30,000 for
labour and $30,000 for materials. (This is consistent with the
quote he later
gave Challita.) He said that he thought the $16,000 may have been a reference to
the money they said they were owed
by Challita (ts 1362). He believed DevCorp
did not have the manpower to do the job.
469) Work done by Lukac: As noted earlier, months after the
hearing had commenced, on 17 May 1998, DevCorp filed an affidavit it had
obtained from Lukac. Lukac, a licensed carpenter, swore the affidavit on 16 May
1999 in relation to work he had done at Condell Park
early in January 1998 with
Rados. He gave evidence on 18 May 1999.
470) Lukac said that in late December 1997 he was working with
Rados (the carpenter who had been consulted about working at the site
Sapina had left, but who had declined to take on the job). He said Rados
informed him that there may be some day labour work
at Condell Park.
471) He and Rados took on the work. Lukac said that he was
instructed to fix up some walls. He was instructed to straighten them or
them plumb. He was asked to remove floor joists from level one. He said both he
and Rados commenced on these tasks. He said
Challita asked him to remove the
floor joists in place and substitute bigger ones.
472) He said he worked on the back units. He said in evidence that
he straightened up some walls, some studs, removed flooring, yellow
flooring, and some floor joists. He said this was difficult work as the timbers
had weathered and were difficult to straighten.
473) He said Challita approached him after about a week and half
and said that everything had to pulled down and to start again. Rados
him a quote. Rados did not obtain the job.
474) Lukac said that he was paid by Challita in kind through being
able to take timber from the site. He said in his affidavit that
‘some’ of this timber was the timber used as floor joists removed by
he and Rados. He said in evidence that he was also
allowed to take some other
timber (‘4 x 2’) which was stored on the site. He said he was due
$2000 and Challita let him
take the equivalent in timber at $5 per lineal metre.
He acknowledged in cross-examination that Challita gave him a cheque (said
$1650) for the work but he gave it back in exchange for the timber. But in
cross-examination he said that the timber he took
away was the 250 x 50 used
joists. He did not refer to any other timber (ts 515). In re-examination counsel
for DevCorp who had called
Lukac asked him, ‘Did you also by some timber
which was stored on site?’ to which Lukac replied, ‘No, no,
He was then asked ‘Did all the timber that you got come from
what you pulled out?’ to which he replied, ‘Oh, probably
pieces was newer.’ (ts 515)
475) As to evidence that Lukac did work on the site and was paid
in kind with timber, Challita agreed that he been given 400 lineal
metres of 250
x 50. In re-examination Challita said that all the timber was used timber not
new timber. It was timber from the floor
joists at the front of the units. He
denied that any of the timber given to Lukac was from unused timber lying on the
site (ts 892).
476) The Tribunal’s conclusion is that a very small quantity
of unused timber, probably the four lengths referred to by Challita’s
as remaining on site, was given to Lukac, but that substantially he was paid
with timber removed from the works.
477) 14 January 1998: Mr Perks, an experienced builder, commercial
project manager and quantity surveyor engaged by DevCorp for the
visited the site on 14 January 1998. He said he had done some work for DevCorp
in the past and had been asked by them to
go to a meeting at the site. He saw
himself as being there so as to assist discussions a ‘fresh person’
avoid animosity’ (ts 569). He said he was also there to
look at the extent of works at the site and any defects.
478) As to defects, Mr Perks walked the site with Challita who
pointed out alleged defects. Mr Perks said - ‘he pointed out
defects to me, numerous all of which I agreed were defects. There was no doubt
should never have happened but they
were there.’ (ts 569) As to the defects he said some ‘would have
been corrected as
you went along.’ He added ‘A lot of them were
unexpected’ (ts 572).
479) He said he sought to have Challita agree to bring back
DevCorp’s workers on to the site. He believed Newman who was at
meeting was keen to address the problems and said men would be available at
short notice. Challita, he said, said there was no
way he would have them back
on the job. He acknowledged in cross-examination that the conciliation element
of the meeting was very
brief, and that he spent most of his time on site
inspecting the works.
480) As to the state of the site, Mr Perks considered that it was
closed, and criticised that there were uncovered materials and the
conditions had been adverse, with a lot of rain.
481) He gave a short report to DevCorp on 17 January 1998. He
examined the defects reported in the reports obtained by Challita at
(AMPA’s assessment dated 6 December 1997, EID Consulting’s report
dated 7 December 1997, and Council inspection
report dated 19 December 1997),
and gave an estimate as to the cost of remedying them taking into account the
possibility of reusing
existing material on site. He estimated the cost at $2700
involving two carpenters and one week of work.
482) He said in cross-examination that there was a
‘lot’ of material on site sufficient to carry out work on the
483) He said he did not check joist dimensions, though he was
aware that there was an issue in relation to the upper level floor joists
respect of three of the units. As to what he meant by ‘unexpected
problems’ he expressed surprise in cross-examination
that he used that
word (ts 593). He said that what he observed were studs that were bowing, that
were not braced though some had
temporary bracing. Nonetheless he felt that
‘a lot of the walls weren’t braced properly, there were studs that
lying properly to the top plate and they were chopped with bits of wood
and there were joists that didn’t span correctly; that
were spiked
incorrectly. I can go on ...’ (ts 595). He was shown a selection of
photographs taken at the site (date unknown)
and pointed to numerous defects in
relation to such matters as placement of noggins, fixing and absence of frames
around windows.
484) He excluded from consideration the recommendation that a beam
be demolished in the JH Quantity Surveying report of 10 December
1997 and had
suggested to DevCorp that they get an engineering report on that.
485) He acknowledged in cross-examination that he did not have the
reports obtained by Challita to which he referred in his report
of 17 January
1998 before him at the site visit (ts 585). He qualified this later by saying
that he had received the AMPA report
of 6 December 1997 and the EID Consulting
report of 7 December 1997 either at the site visit or before he wrote his letter
January 1998. He said he had seen the Bankstown Council report (at least
the second page), but he had not seen the J H Quantity Surveying
report of 5
December 1997 previously (as distinct from the report of 10 December 1997 which
he did have at the time of his report).
486) He said his inspection was confined to the ground level
framing. He did not go upstairs (ts 591). He did not look at work at
the back of
the site. As to his reservation in respect of the beam, he felt the advice given
was outside the expertise of a quantity
surveyor and that is why he suggested to
DevCorp that they get an engineer’s advice.
487) It was put to Mr Perks that if the beams did have to be
replaced in all affected units, the timber was not reusable, that the
the work would have been much higher, say $30,000 to $40,000. He said he found
that hard to believe. As to the defects he
observed he said there were
‘some that shouldn’t have happened and there are some that do
happen’ (ts 599). Into
the ‘shoudn’t have happened’
category he placed bracing, and the extent to which a proper bearing had been
to the floor joists upstairs, and some of the blocking pieces were not
done properly.
488) In re-examination he expressed the opinion that each of the
items could have been fixed had the carpenter stayed on site. He
carpenter should have been given an opportunity to rectify before being
dismissed from the site.
489) 16 January 1998: Attempts at arbitration were unsuccessful.
On this date Challita served a notice of termination. The notice
relevant provisions of the Contract dated 20 November 1997, being the term
providing for completion on or before 10 December
1997 and the term (standard
condition 8) permitting inter alia termination for suspending the work before
completion, or failing
to proceed with the works with reasonable diligence or in
a competent manner, or failing to comply with a notice requiring removal
replacement of defective work or improper materials.
490) It gave the following grounds for
termination.
work has not been completed.
2. You have wholly suspended the work before
completion.
3. You have failed to proceed with due diligence.
4. You have failed to proceed with the work in a competent
5. You have failed to rectify defective work.”
491) The contract was declared to be terminated
immediately.
492) 19 January 1998: Mr Douglas Cornish, a building consultant in
private practice who is a qualified builder, a qualified carpenter
original trade was carpentry, attended the site at the request of Challita, and
provided a report dated 20 January 1997.
It would seem that he also attended the
site a ‘few days before 20 January 1998’ when photographs (Ex 46)
were taken.
He said the two Challitas were there, only one of which he had met
previously. He said he understood that they were rectifying carpenters
493) Mr Cornish’s report was as follows:
to your instructions I have inspected the structural timber wall and upper floor
framing and advise as follows:
The works as constructed do not comply with the Timber Framing Code
As (sic) 1684, with the following observations made:
1. Wall frames not erected in a proper and workmanlike manner plumb
and straight.
2. Studs are not double nailed to plates.
3. Double studs are not provided to support window
4. Blocking is omitted to many wall junctions.
5. Floor joists are under size.
6. Floor frame is not adequately tied down to wall
7. Blocking to joists is under size and not tight
8. Floor sheeting is not adequately secured by gluing and
9. Bracing to walls incorrectly installed.”
494) Mr Cornish’s report then went out to
“Rectification will require:
(i) Removal and replacement of the total upper floor frame and sheet
(ii) Removal of all windows to permit the wall frames to be
straightened and plumbed
(iii) Reinstatement of windows.”
495) Mr Cornish’s report then went on to review the values
in Mr Hibbins’ report. He considered that the upper floor framing
sheet quantities were incorrectly calculated. He also gave estimates as to costs
of rectification and the amount of labour required
to fix the problems
identified. These estimates will be dealt with, as necessary, later in these
496) Mr Cornish was shown a representative sample of the
photographs (Ex 46) taken a few days before, and identified problems, marking
the photos as he went. Problems enumerated included insufficient nails, absence
of glue, wall frame out of plumb and out of level,
wall studs out of plumb,
trimming joist out of position, window frames out of level and not supported,
inadequate blocking, floor
joists (unit 1) extending into the cavity, frame
header not properly set into studs, lack of adequate nailing of plybrace. He was
particularly critical of the failure to have the upper level floor joists go
across the entire span to the outside wall. He said
the joists serve two
functions, to support people walking on the floor space and to stop the roof
from spreading (ts 1064). He described
it as ‘the most appalling standard
of workmanship that he had seen in a long time.’ (ts1066)
497) Mr Cornish played a video (Ex 47) taken the same day as the
photographs and gave a running commentary (ts 1068 -72) identifying
498) As to the interpretation of the vertical dimension 300 in the
original plans, he was firm that all dimensions depicted as it
was are frame
dimensions exclusive of adjacent items such as flooring. He referred to the span
tables in the Timber Framing Code
(Ex 64) to show how they are read to obtain
the size of joist required to support load-bearing walls. He also noted that
yellow tongue
sheet flooring made by CSR had been used. He said it had limited
waterproofing and should be covered within a month so as to avoid
absorbing too
much moisture and peaking up. As to timber, he felt that could be exposed for a
limited time, up to three months, before
warping and twisting might set in. He
said he say a lot of warped and twisted timber but he attributed it to
workmanship not weather.
499) Sapina’s Observations of Progress of Works after 19
November: Sapina said he did not return to the site after 19 November
he frequently drove past it from time to time. He noticed that ‘someone
else’ was working there about three
weeks later, and ‘they’
were putting up the floor framing, the flooring and they had begun to work on
the unit 1 upstairs
frame. He said that he continued to drive past, and that he
saw probably five frames on unit 1. He said that there ‘must have
gale or a storm within that week’ because the frames were knocked down. He
estimated that that was towards the first
week of December. He said that various
frames were now on the ground. He said he continued to drive past ‘after
because I got married then.’ He said that after he came
back from his honeymoon, about mid-January there had been no progress
job. He said he kept driving past and he saw another team of carpenters working
there. He said he saw them working on unit
4 which was the unit he intended to
proceed to on 19 November when he left the site. He kept driving past, and
noticed later that
they took work down and put some walls up to work out pitch
500) On later trips he noticed that they finished unit 4 and then
progressed to unit 3 and worked on units 2 and 1 together. He said
he had driven
past as recently as two weeks before giving evidence (May 1999).
501) Quotes for Demolition of Works and Re-erection of Frames: In
cross-examination Challita denied that he had to demolish the works
wanted to build something different in order to deal with the roof pitch
502) The new contractors were LMA Constructions Pty Ltd, principal
Rashida. LMA gave two quotes, one on 20 and the other on 21 January
503) Quote No 116 dated 20 January 1998 covered the following -
fix defects, replace all deep joists with 300 x 50, rip flooring up,
and fix the four wall frames and the roof frames. For those items the quote was
$5,500. There were some additional items
alongside is which is written the
figure $60,000, then at the bottom of the quote the total shown is $65,550.00. A
six weeks estimate
for works is given.
504) The next Quote is 84 numbers further along in the quote book
sequence and is numbered 200. It is dated the next day, 21 January
1998. Under
the heading ‘Description’ are written the words, ‘to fix and
rebuild to meet standards’. The
new quote covers demolishing the
‘four floor system’ and replacing 250 x 50 deep joists with 300 x
50. It also provides
for replacing all bowed and damaged studs on unit 1 and
units 3 and 4, and refers to 60 per cent of noggins requiring to be replaced.
also refers to bolting down all bottom plates to concrete floors, and replumbing
all walls, ground and flooring. The quote also
refers to Unit 2 being demolished
‘for same reasons above damaged was more than 90%’ (sic). This work
was estimated to
take three weeks, and the quote was $12,600.
505) Challita denied in cross-examination that he got the second
quote because he had now decided to demolish the previous work. At
another point
(ts 875) he agreed that the $12,600 quote would fix all the problems on units 3,
4 and 1 and allow for 2 to be demolished.
He also said that the extent of
demolition of all the framing works was to the extent of 80 or 90 per cent. He
agreed that the first
quote was for the supply and fixing of frames for the
entire project.
506) Rashida said that the second quote was for some refixing and
demolition. He said he did not do the demolition nor any other work
that quote. His explanation for having his quote so far away in the sequence
from the other quote was that he might simply
have been asked by Challita for a
quote to reflect a possible cost for demolition, as Challita had been intending
and had done that
job himself.
507) Demolition: In cross-examination Challita described the
degree to which works were demolished as 90 per cent to Unit 2 and as
others he replaced twisted studs and inserted studs as needed (see ts 889). He
said that after pulling down the frames he
sold the old timber for $2000 (400
lineal metres). After lengthy questioning he agreed that the labour component of
the demolition
of the framing work for the four units would cost $4000,
permitting the inference to be drawn that the timber was sold at an undervalue.
The Tribunal’s conclusion is that this was the material given to Lukac in
exchange for his work, though Lukac’s evidence
was not to the effect that
he carried out the demolition. It is unclear who carried out the
demolition.
508) Re-erection of Frames: Rashida said he did do the job of
erecting the new frames and that he was paid $65,550 as quoted. As noted
the quote had two elements, the first relating to replacing floor joists with
300 x 50 and related work, the second part
for $60,000 relating to the complete
framing job.
509) Rashida said he commenced the work in February. Rashida said
that when he commenced work all that was left in place from the
previous job was
a couple of walls, and he had to get rid of them (ts1344). Rashida explained
that when he first went to the site
he did not want the job, as he said no
carpenter likes taking over another job and possibly being blamed for problems
that belonged
to the previous job.
510) He said he was only prepared to do it as a fresh job. He
referred to the state of the works as he found them negatively: ‘I
lintels not right, the first floor, the second floor, and you know the floor was
just [indicated]. I can’t put the
floor - I wasn’t put my walls on
the floor like that. I can’t do it and I’m going to look bad at the
end of job.’
511) As to how much was ultimately paid to LMA Challita
acknowledged that his son did some work for that company which gave rise to
deductions from the price paid to LMA of, what were regarded as, his son’s
wages. Challita said that he paid for the materials
when they were delivered to
the site because the contractor said he was short of money. He acknowledged that
these details were not
set out in his affidavits. This evidence points to some
private arrangement the details of which are not clear to the
512) Challita said in cross-examination that he did not give LMA
any instructions about the roof. He said LMA already knew about the
said that Mr Rashida had been brought to the job by Cvitan and Jurcevic who had
asked him to finish the job (ts 855). Challita
said he had contacted a number of
carpenters, including a Mr Butts, who had worked on the Greenacre job, but he
declined to quote.
513) He says at the time of the quote from LMA he told Rashida
that if there is not enough headroom for bedroom he may have to build
degree pitch and Rashida said no problem. He denied that there was extra work
had to be done, in building a soldier wall
and in increasing the roof area. He
agreed that there was extra work in relation to the relocation of the dormer
windows. Rashida
said that he believed that he had built the frame in accordance
with the original plans. He did not recall making any change to the
affecting the roof volume.
514) As to the lay-out of the 300 x 50 joints he agreed that he
obtained an instruction from Alagha. It is dated 20 January 1998.
It certifies
that oregon bearers for units 2, 3 and 4 are to be 300 mm ‘as shown on my
drawing’. It states that ‘where
the load bearing wall is acting on
units 2, 3 and 4 it should be double bearers 300 mm deep by 50 mm.’ Alagha
said in cross-examination
that he produced this to make it clear what he had in
515) Electrical Works: Challita made a claim for the increased
cost of electrical work, an increase which he attributed to the delay
incurred in not being able to bring the electrician on to site when he first
planned, December 1997, when the framing was
expected to be complete. He said
the electrician, Mr Saliba’s, original quote (5 November 1997) was for
$10,300 but the work
ultimately cost $2200 more ($12,500) due to delay. Mr
Saliba’s work is recorded in four invoices issued between March and August
516) Mr Saliba gave evidence. He said that he charged the extra
$2200 because he missed out on a job when he was unable to start at
Condell Park
at the time intended in December. He said he had been led to understand by
Challita when he did the quote in November
that the roof would be on by
Christmas. He said he could have come onto site and done some roughing in. He
said he expected to do
the fitting out in January or February.
517) DevCorp Payment to Sapina: Cvitan acknowledged that Sapina
was not paid for his work for which he rendered a bill in November
after 22 September 1998, the date on which Sapina made an affidavit tendered by
DevCorp in the proceedings.
518) Inspection of Completed Works, September 1998: Newman
accompanied the surveyors, Coopers & Richards, engaged by DevCorp on
inspection of the works as completed. Newman’s second affidavit filed 23
September 1998, refers to the inspection. He
acknowledged that a number of his
comments were based on the report of Cooper & Richards.
519) Newman’s main observation was that the roof pitch had
been retained as per the original plans by raising it so as to raise
pitching points. This was achieved by what he called the provision of timber
stud frame ring beams throughout units 2, 3 and
4, called elsewhere in these
reasons a ‘soldier wall’. He rejected the suggestion that he could
have advised the use
of this technique to Challita. He said he measured the ring
beams at about 300mm. He had no notes of these measurements. He referred
affidavit to having taken photographs of the work in the roof.
520) He agreed with counsel for Challita that the point he was
trying to make in his affidavit was that the only reason for the change
joists to 300 x 50 that he detected at his inspection was the addition of
cantilevered flooring by Challita. He agreed
on the other hand that if 250 x 50
were undersized for the span then that would have justified changing the
Expert Evidence
521) In this section the Tribunal will deal with the evidence of
the independent experts engaged by the parties.
522) Quality of Plans: Oral evidence was elicited from Mr Mayoh,
an architect called by DevCorp specialising in documentation and
design, of PD
Mayoh Pty Ltd in relation to the quality of the plans. He was very critical of
their lack of specificity in relation
to a range of matters relating both to
structural matters and materials to be used. On the other hand Mr Cornish, the
building consultant
called by Challita, said the plans were quite adequate for a
carpenter to do a framing job. To similar effect, were comments by Mr
the Bankstown Council inspector called by Challita. He did not acknowledge the
suggestion of counsel for DevCorp that these
were poor quality plans. He felt
that plans were not all that material. He said - ‘Well it comes down to if
you have competent
people on the job that know what they are doing, they can
sort out all sorts of problems. Framework is framework provided you stick
basics and the Timber Framing Code. It really doesn’t matter too much
523) According to Mr Cornish they plans were poor quality to the
extent that it is necessary to add up lengths to get dimensions.
normal practice the draftsman would have given overall lengths instead of having
to measure each room and wall to get
the answer. Mr Cornish’s noted that
there is one error in the totalling of the dimensions on the plan as they
related to the
slab being 40 mm.
524) One of Challita’s experts, Mr Eid, agreed with Mr
Wargon of the Tribunal that the plans were best described as architectural
were to the principal object is to define clearly dimensions. Mr Eid considered
that there was not enough information on them
to say the 300 dimension
represented the depth of a joist, nor was there a note to indicate that the
dimension includes finishes,
ceilings and floors. (ts 1216). But his first
reaction on looking at the plans was that the 300 referred to a 300 deep beam.
525) In cross-examination it was put Mr Mayoh that while the plans
were basic, the omissions to which he referred would be capable
identified by a qualified builder, with background as a council inspector, and a
qualified architectural draftsman. It was
put to him that such people could have
raised these issues in formulating a quote. While he was less than clear in his
answers, he
appeared to acknowledge the point (ts 495-6). This point was the
subject of questions by Mr Wargon of the Tribunal. Mr Mayoh said
the plans could
only be interpreted on these matters if questions were asked. He said
nonetheless he was surprised such fundamental
information was not on the
drawings if only to assist neighbours in assessing the plans.
526) But Mr Mayoh felt that the head height problems were more
likely to be identified on site, rather than by inspection of plans.
spanning issues as much simpler.
527) He said plans of this kind were not of advantage to a client,
and left the client ‘wide open for extras and variations
as a result of
lack of documentation’. (ts 510) He said that the whole problem of the
headroom in all affected areas could
be resolved by a single cross-sectional
amendment of raising the roof pitch.
528) As to the particular question of how to interpret the
vertical dimension 300 above the ground floor ceiling, he said there was
such as cross-hatched lines to indicate what material it might be. He said it
could be a 300 slab, or a framed timber floor
running in any one of a number of
directions (ts 474). He said the dimension 300 could reasonably be interpreted
to allow for 250
joists ‘subject to span’ with the remainder being
finishing materials (ts 474). He was referred to the clean plan for
and 4 (Ex 8A) and agreed that alternative ways of running the joists included
north-south for the entire span of the lounge
room and garage, or inserting at
appropriate mid-points beams running east-west and running the joists over the
shorter span between
those most far apart. As to the latter alternative, he was
cross-examined. He said that the solution of then running extension beams
x 50 north south to the walls was feasible, as the spans covered simply carried
the load of the ceilings and not the live
loads and material loads that formed
part of the upper floor provided the upper floor was situated between the
east-west composite
beams (ts 506).
529) He said in re-examination that what he presumed had happened
was that the outside walls had been extended upwards so as to enable
the roof to
be pitched at a higher level, thereby increasing roof volume. He said that there
would be a significant cost associated
with such an increase.
530) He noted the markings made by Jurcevic on the clean plan, and
agreed that such an approach could be taken, and that such an approach
served the end of picking up loads that come down from the attic bedroom
531) The Slab and the Frame Lay-out: Mr Cornish could not recall
whether the error of 40mm to which he had found in the plan had been
repeated in
relation to the actual laying of the slabs. He recalled another area where it
was incorrectly laid out, in respect of
unit 1, and it was 400mm wider than it
should have been for a length of about 2.5 metres.
532) He did notice that the frame was laid out on the slab in a
way which gave rise to set-back or overhang. He said that in the ordinary
of building a carpenter sets out his bottom plate by using a chalk line, and
then flicks it to put a mark on the slab where
the frame is going up. He said he
then measures it and checks it against the plan. If there is an error he draws
attention to it,
and takes directions from the supervisor or the owner. He
agreed that the parties should develop a solution to perceived problems
1103). If the owner directed that something be built to plan which he thought
was wrong, he would proceed but write a letter
indicating that he considered it
be wrong and not bear any liability.
533) Mr Cornish said that the method of cutting on site is rarely
done today, the frames are now usually manufactured off site (ts
534) Site Management and Quality of Works: Mr Perks, an
experienced licensed builder with quantity surveying qualifications and many
years’ experience project managing major commercial building projects, was
called by DevCorp. Mr Perks is also referred to
in the chronology of events in
respect of 14 January 1998. Apart from the evidence canvassed there, he said he
had been present for
some of DevCorp’s case. As to what he had heard, he
expressed the opinion that Challita’s site management practices were
He referred to leaving materials stockpiled on site and leaving supervision
day-to-day to an apprentice (Challita). In contrast,
the expert called by
Challita, Mr Cornish, described it as a ‘typical building site’ in
relation to its tidiness (ts
535) Mr Cornish made no comments on the actual arrangements for
supervision of works (left to an apprentice) which the Tribunal regards
more serious concern to be addressed. Mr Perks said that an apprentice would not
be free to make decisions without referring
to someone else, such as a licensed
builder. He criticised, on the assumptions put to him by counsel for DevCorp,
the lack of attendance
of the licensed builder (Zeaiter). He said that a good
site supervisor would check critical works every day, with defects notices
issuing as appropriate. (ts 573)
536) In his report on the costs of rectification dated 17 January
1998 he commented on Challita’s service of notice of defects
in December:
‘For the carpentry work to achieve 35% completion before a defect notice
is served is not sound building practice.’
537) In cross-examination Mr Cornish agreed that a change of
significance to the work as agreed would normally be raised as a variation.
said the matter would normally be handled on site orally and recorded in a diary
note. If it was a relatively simple change the
plan might be marked up and
initialled. Mr Cornish agreed that where a significant issue arose as to how to
deal with a problem,
there should be discussion between the parties possibly
involving an independent expert.
538) Floor Joist and Timber Beam Layout: Mr Cornish referred to
the span tables (Ex 64). He said the vertical dimension shown did
not directly
provide the joist size, however it was appropriate to interpret it as a
reference to the joist size because the span
tables specified that a joist size
of at least 300 was needed for a span the distance of the loungeroom, and
similarly for a span
the distance of the garage as shown in the plans (ts 1108).
He said further in his opinion all dimensions are framed dimensions for
construction purposes. He considered that the 300 joist should have been used
across the entire span north-south. He was critical
of the use of the
load-bearing ‘trimmer beams’ the composite beams) set east-west at
the mid point of the adjacent lounge
room and garage. He acknowledged in
response to a series of questions from Mr Wargon of the Tribunal, that the span
tables did not
provide a conclusive view of situations where there were
additional elements of continuity provided for the span. He agreed that
tables he consulted related only to joists were the span was simply supported at
either end. (ts 1130-31)
539) Mr Cornish said that he had seen the east-west beams on his
site visit. He noted that extensions of 100 x 50 were then used to
outer walls. But he said that this produced a problem for the pitching of the
roof which would have been avoided had 300
x 50 been used all the way across. He
said the wall plate off which the rafter would be pitched would be set at the
height of 300
rather than 100. If set at the lower height that has an adverse
effect on the ability to retain the same roof angle while obtaining
the required
ridge height. (ts 1112-3)
540) In re-examination he said that the use of the composite beams
plus the extension beams to the outer walls would have been structurally
adequate. He reiterated his opinion that putting in the 100mm joist gave rise to
a change in the pitching as against using a 300mm
joist. Alagha, who drew the
plans, said in cross-examination that he saw 300 x 50 joists as critical not
only for structural safety
but also to give adequate head height for the pitch
541) These opinions fail to take account of the fact that a small
soldier wall (fascia) was used as a base for springing the pitch
of the roof.
542) Mr Frank McKinley, an experienced structural engineer engaged
by DevCorp, made an assessment of the engineering detail in the
name of AMPA
Design & Construction relating to the floor joists and timber beam layout
for units 2, 3 and 4. Mr Eid, a civil
and structural engineer called by Challita
in relation to the state of works on 6 December 1997 (and referred to in that
regard earlier)
also provided a report dated 5 October 1998 (Ex 70) commenting
on McKinley’s report.
543) McKinley’s report noted that the timber beam shown
comprises 2/250 x 50 F7 beams bolted together to form one unit. His
finding was
that this composite beam complied with the strength requirements of AS 1720.1,
and that it complies with the serviceability
requirements of AS 1720.1 provided
the initial moisture content of the timber was less than or equal to 15%. It
indicated that its
assessment of its structural capacity took as the assumption
that each composite beam was intended to support a timber first floor,
wall (lined both studs) and timber roof framing clad with roof tiles and
544) The report found on the other hand that the beam did not
comply with the requirement of AS 1720.1 in regard to the size and spacing
the through bolts required to ensure that the two members act together as a
unit. It noted that these bolts distribute the external
loads between the
members. In cross-examination he explained that he interpreted the detail to
require the through bolts to be placed
at 450 centres along the length of the
beam. He did not consider that bolting two M12 bolts secured by a metal shoe
between each
set of floor joists with these distances between them would provide
adequate support. He considered that it was inadequate to comply
with the loads
specified by the Australian Standards. He agreed in re-examination that an
outcome that has structural integrity is
545) In response to questions from Mr Wargon of the Tribunal, he
acknowledged that in forming a view as to whether the two beams joined
to act as a composite beam so as to resist the load that they bore, he would
have made his assessment having regard to the
capacity of the longer of the two
composite beams. He agreed with Mr Wargon that the span to be covered across the
garage ceiling
was longer by about two metres than the span required for the
lounge room ceiling. He agreed that it was possible that the deficiencies
in relation to the longer span may not apply to the shorter span. On the other
hand he expressed the view that both beams as
having to work ‘reasonably
hard’. (ts 533)
546) Mr Eid noted that the adequacy of the floor joist layout
would have to be determined from assumed loads. He noted the absence
spacing details on the beam details. Both vertical and horizontal spacings were
needed, he considered, to determine whether
the beam was acting together as a
547) Roof Pitch and Head-room: A report dated 23 September 1998
was prepared by PD Mayoh, an architect specialising in documentation
and design,
of PD Mayoh Pty Ltd for DevCorp. Mr Mayoh gave evidence in relation to his
report which included elevations and sections
derived from the plans and
enlargements of the scale of the plans upon which he based his findings.
548) The Tribunal considers that these enlargements, allowing for
the fact that the plans were architectural plans and may have had
dimensional errors, demonstrated clearly that had the upper level been built as
drawn there would have been significant head
room problems.
549) Mr Mayoh’s report assessed the plans taking account of
the variation of the ground floor height to 2600mm. It found that
height allowed over the stairs was unacceptable, and would be identified by any
competent carpenter or builder. It found
that the head height in the bathroom
did not provide the head height specified in Building Codes of 2100 over greater
than two thirds
of the floor area. It considered that the roof framing as
documented would not pass a Council inspection. It found a failure to comply
with head height requirements for the bedroom where two thirds of the room is
required to be over 2400.
550) He said that to achieve compliance it would be necessary to
extend external walls at eaves level by 600mm and that would have
a substantial
cost impact. He said if ridge heights are raised the matter would need to be
resubmitted to council because of possible
loss of amenity to neighbours who
would have been given the opportunity to comment on the original plans. He said
there can be significant
loss of amenity if ridge heights are raised on southern
boundaries.
551) He acknowledged in cross-examination that the BCA had been
altered in 1992 to allow for exceptions to the two thirds rule in
circumstances. He agreed that it was open to council to approve plans which do
not strictly comply with the building codes
or the light timber framing codes.
He acknowledged that he was not aware of what the relevant council’s
position might have
been in relation to raising the building by say 300mm. He
agreed that he was not in a position to comment on whether such an increase
a pitch of 34 degrees would met or fall outside the council’s original
552) Assessment of As-Built Lay Out: The main dispute between the
parties on this matter had to do with any alteration to the roof.
553) Challita denied that it had installed a soldier wall. He said
the villa units in their final form had remained consistent with
after taking account of the fact that the ground floor ceilings had been varied
(as accepted by DevCorp) from 2400 mm
to 2600 mm. He said that the discrepancy
of approximately 300 to 350 mm detected by experts for DevCorp was explained as
by the variation in ceiling height, and the remainder was explained by
usual building elements not referred to in the plan measurements.
He said the
plans only referred to framing dimensions. He said the other building elements
that affected the ultimate elevation of
the roof were roof battens, roof tiles
and the ridge capping.
554) As to how he ultimately resolved the problem Challita said
that he changed the pitching point with an increase in the area covered
section. He acknowledged that he placed the dormer windows higher. He denied
that the height of the walls increased beyond
the change from 2400 to 2600 that
had been accepted by DevCorp.
555) Challita was adamant that the issue re the roof pitch was
simply one of the difficulties that can arise in running on a site
readily able to be resolved.
556) Mr Eid explained that the main variation he detected in the
roof as built versus the plan was that there was no a continuous
gutter in one
section instead of it coming in as previously. He felt that was a better
approach from the viewpoint of cost considerations
and appearance, as it avoids
a kink in the gutter (ts 1213). He agreed that that would give rise to an
increase in the roof volume.
557) DevCorp produced a report from Cooper & Richards,
surveyors and consulting engineers, dated 17 September 1998, prepared by
der Zypen, registered surveyor (Ex 41). Mr van der Zypen gave evidence. He
inspected the development as built. He said his
instructions were to determine
the ridge heights of the four units, determining the first ground and first
floor levels, the ceiling
heights, the pitching point heights and the pitch of
the roof together with internal dimensions. Together with a written report,
van der Zypen relied on a set of 13 transparencies (Ex 42), used to show
variations between the development as built compared
with how it was depicted in
the approved plans. He also used a large transparency showing all the planes of
the units and a typical
front elevation for units 2, 3 and 4 (Ex
558) As to unit 1, the report noted (using actual compass points)
that the western wall of the family room and the northern wall of
room had shifted out by 400 mm. It noted that the roof is substantially the same
but there was a variation to the roof
above the ground floor laundry.
559) As to unit 2, it noted that the eastern wall of the main
bedroom had shifted easterly by approximately 100 mm.
560) As to units 2, 3 and 4 it made a common finding as to the
upstairs and the roof plan. The transparencies sought to demonstrate
upper floor footprint had changed, and that the roof plan has also changed in
that the return along the western side has
been shifted westerly, and the eave
width appears narrower than shown on the plan. In evidence he said that the
original roof plan
showed an indentation with a ridge in the valley and then
another ridge pointing up to the loft. He said that what had been built
fact the continuation of the gutter line to return to the front. He agreed that
that had resulted in a larger roof area.
561) In evidence he noted that the walls as built for units 3 and
4 did not correspond with the plan.
562) As to elevation it noted that in respect of Units 2, 3 and 4
the difference between the first floor (referred to elsewhere in
these reasons
as the ground level or ground floor) and the loft floor is generally 2.92
metres, and the difference between the loft
floor and the ridge cap is generally
3.73 metres.
563) It found - “When comparing these dimensions to those
noted on the plans there is an overall increase of 350mm from the
ground floor
to the ridge.” In cross-examination it emerged that the report did not
take into account the variation agreed
between DevCorp and Challita (for which
Challita said he had council approval) the outset the ground floor ceiling was
to be built
at 2600mm not 2400mm as shown in the plans. Consequently Mr van der
Zypen agreed that as against that set of dimensions the difference
between the
loft floor and the ridge cap was 130mm. (ts 552)
564) Mr van der Zypen in giving evidence demonstrated his findings
by overlaying the transparency showing the as-built measurements
contained on the relevant paper plan (for example Ex 9) using the same scale.
565) In cross-examination he was asked to compare his large
transparency (Ex 43) with the plan containing equivalent information issued
AMPA Design & Construction and stamped as approved by the Bankstown Council
on 8 September 1997. He indicated that he made
comparisons with Ex 8A. He
acknowledged that a plan of this kind may not be drawn exactly to scale, and a
degree of variation as
compared to his measurements could be explained on that
basis. He agreed that the variations in unit 4 were of the order of 10mm
case of the laundry, in respect of the kitchen 30mm and the master bedroom 10mm,
all areas on the ground level.
566) In the case of unit 2, a somewhat more significant variation
was found in relation to the northern wall of the master bedroom
increase of 88mm as against the marked dimension but he agreed that it was a
little shorter than the dimension as drawn
on the plan. He agreed that at most
he has found an increase in width, using Imperial measures, of about three and
half inches (ts
567) As to unit 1, he noted that there was a variation to the way
the roof was built over the laundry. The elevation in the original
plans showed
a skillion type roof but it was built in a hip form.
568) He acknowledged that in taking the measurements he had not
recorded the distances between the units or the setbacks from the
boundaries, as
they were not part of the instructions. He was not able to comment on whether
the actual footprint for unit 1 had
merely shifted on the site rather than being
larger overall.
569) In re-examination Mr van der Zypen was asked to look at his
survey as it related to the unit 2 loft area and in particular increases
roof volume. His answers were to the effect that a greater roof volume may have
been achieve by a change in the roof design
in the laundry area using a new
pitching point as compared to original plans and giving rise to a shallower
overall pitch. (See ts
556). He was cross-examined on this new evidence. He
found an increased roof volume as compared to plan of 5.5 x 1 metre. He said
‘The roof shown on the plan seems to be pitched off a different wall than
what actually happens out in the field.’ (ts
570) He said they surveyed pitching angles for units 2, 3 and 4,
and found 34 degrees, 34 degrees 30 minutes and 34 degrees respectively.
571) Mr Cornish, the building consultant engaged by Challita,
prepared a report dated 12 October 1998 commenting on the Cooper &
report. His report (Ex 63) concludes that taking account of setbacks, the survey
done by W Buxton and the space between
Units 1 and 2 the footprint of Unit 1 has
not moved. As to the Unit 1 laundry having a hip roof rather than a skillion
roof he saw
this as a minor alteration not requiring council
572) In the case of the Unit 2 bedroom he concluded that the
internal dimensions differ by 88mm from the approved plan, which is a
deviation not requiring council approval. As to the eaves, he agreed that they
appeared to be narrower than indicated on the
plans but they remained compliant.
As to the extension to the Eaves in ‘Units 3, 4 & 5 (sic)’ (this
is assumed to
be a reference to units 2, 3 and 4) he said their width has been
increased so that the fascia and the gutter are in one straight-line
back. He said this had resulted in the ridgeline being increased in height to
match the ridge heights for the rear of the
ridge. He said the overall height
had not been increased beyond that approved.
573) He agreed with the pitch measurements taken by Coopers &
Richards. His conclusion was that ‘the only substantial variation
increase in the eaves width which has raised the ridge height to the same level
as the rear portion beyond the step in the
wall...’ which he illustrated
with a sketch.
574) The main feature of the sketch set out on A4 paper is that it
shows an extension of the gutter and eave line in the bottom right
hand corner
making square what was otherwise an indented portion of that line. A second
sketch depicting the Southern elevation of
unit 2 showed that this change had
the effect of shifting the ridge to the east and widening the base of the
triangle constituted
by the floor of the upper level and the sloping roof
angles, thereby providing additional roof space on the Eastern side. Mr Cornish
said the height of the roof had been increased by increasing the width of the
eaves and the same pitch had been maintained.
575) Mr Cornish’s evidence was that the original plans for
units 2, 3 and 4 (he referred in this regard specifically to Ex 7
showed a short stud wall above the ceiling height of the ground wall for the
purpose of carrying the line of rafter to
support the Cape Code style of
construction of the roof. His preferred terms to describe this type of wall was
‘pole plate
wall’ or ‘dwarf wall’ and acknowledged that
‘soldier wall’ was another way of describing it. He said
additional construction associated with this element had been to provide the
short wall in the area where the eaves had
been extended.
576) Mr Eid, civil and structural engineer, in his report dated 5
October 1998 (Ex 70) made head height measurements of the structure
as built. He
said the minimum head height above the stair tread in unit 2 was 2190mm, and in
unit 4 2290mm. In the bathroom as built
he said there was a sloped ceiling so it
did not have a head height across its entire width of greater than 2100mm. The
minimum measurement
recorded using a line from the centre of the bath to the
ceiling was 1900mm. This head height did not he consider affect the proper
functioning of the room and would pass Council. He said it was necessary for two
thirds of the space to meet the minimum head height
requirement. In the case of
the bedroom head heights were because of the sloping ceiling below the specified
minimums but again based
on his measurement of the distance from the door
opening to the start of the slope (2200mm) the proper functioning of the room
not adversely affected.
577) He made a number of comments also criticising assertions in
the second affidavit of Newman relating to compliance with Council
requirements
and head height issues.
578) Rectification Costs: Mr Cornish’s assessment in his
report dated 20 January 1998 was that the whole of the upper floor
sheet flooring needed to be replaced in all units. He said he used the relevant
quantity guides which cover both labour
and materials costs, which he itemised
for the two categories of units (unit 1 and separately the other three units) to
costing of $33,077.00. He did not recommend demolition of the ground
floor frames, though noting many defects. His estimate of the
labour cost
associated with rectification of ground floor defects and pulling down the upper
floor frames would be three men at two
days each unit equates 24 man days @ $35,
total $6720. He also allowed $900 for other material required. (ts
579) In his opinion of the structure left by DevCorp all of the
floor joists had to be removed because they were undersized, practically
the wall frames would have had to be repositioned and straightened. He said a
minimum of 50 per cent, possibly as high as
80 per cent, were affected in this
way. He said 100 studs had to be replaced where straightening was needed. He
indicated that he
disagreed with the opinion of Mr Cowper as to the amount of
work needed to rectify the problems. He noted that Mr Cowper was a council
building surveyor and not a builder (ts 1120).
580) Mr Cornish’s estimate of the cost associated with the
additional dwarf wall element in Units 2, 3 and 4 was $990 for each
581) Financial Records, DevCorp: DevCorp’s accountant, Mr
Robert Newman of Norman & Associates, Accountants and Tax Agents,
called. His report of 4 August 1998 attached all financial records in his
possession relating to the Condell Park project. It
comprised an undated
document heading Summary of Expenses for the project, and a series of records
relating to timber and other materials
(invoice 4/11/97, $180; receipt 3/12/97,
$7227.17; receipt 31/10/97, $9579.74 and matching purchase order, 31/10/97
$9579.74; invoice
28/11/97 $958.36) MBA arbitration (receipt 4/12/97 $50);
payment reminder notice from Sapina Constructions (27/11/97, $4500), invoice
from Portland Structures (29/11/97) for $4500 (noting paid by cheque 5/12/97).
582) The Summary of Expenses records all amounts mentioned as paid
except for Sapina Constructions. Mr Norman was cross-examined as
Sapina had been paid (as he said he had not as at 22 September 1998 in his
affidavit, and in giving evidence in May 1999
said he had only been partly
paid). Mr Norman said he knew nothing about this matter (ts 563). Mr Norman
agreed that the records
only showed two relating to timber purchases as distinct
from other materials such as nails and the like. These are the receipts
31/10/97 and 3/12/97.
583) In addition the Summary of Expenses showed an amount due to
Jurcevic described as ‘Wages Supervisor’ for $3,124.40.
That amount
was paid subsequent to preparation of the report. A further line contained the
item ‘Wages Paul Supervisor’
(a reference to Newman) with the Amount
column blank. The total amount shown as expended is $30,119.60. This amount is
of the original claim in quantum meruit (later increased by $6,000 to
allow for a profit margin).
584) In cross-examination Mr Norman agreed that he was
DevCorp’s tax accountant only, that he was given these documents by
to prepare a report and was not involved in its business affairs.
585) Council Practice re Plan Amendments relating to Roof Height:
Mr Cowper, who gave evidence in relation to his site visits while
an inspector
at Bankstown Council, gave evidence when called by Challita as to Council
practice in relation to this matter. He said
he had 25 years’ experience
with Bankstown Council and about 8 years at Sutherland, before he had retired
recently. He said
a 300mm increase in roof height would normally require an
approval at Bankstown and that normally about 200mm is the variation that
be allowed without an amended plan (ts 913). Similarly a repositioning of dormer
windows, he said, would not require an amended
plan unless the change was really
big or a different type of window was installed or there was a significant
alteration to the aesthetic
appearance.
586) In response to a series of questions in cross-examination
it was a matter of degree as to whether it would be necessary to seek a
variation. As to rooms inside sloping ceilings he said
that it would be approved
if it complied with the two thirds, one thirds requirement. He said he was not
aware that the rule may
have changed with the new Building Code. But he said a
variation to head height that did not go beyond 200mm would not require an
amended plan (ts 934). He agreed that more labour and materials might be
required to effect such a change.
Quality of Plans and Absence of Specifications
587) The style and content of plans depends on their purpose. In
this case the plans were prepared for submission to council. Consequently
were in the nature of architectural plans. They were basic in their information.
They did not contain specifications. They left
to interpretation many matters of
588) They provided layouts and levels especially in relation to
the top floor, a matter of particular concern to council because of
overlooking
and overshadowing issues. They may have had shortcomings in their extent of
usefulness to neighbours and others affected
by the development application
process but those shortcomings are not relevant to this matter.
589) In the Tribunal’s opinion the plans were adequate for
the purpose of submission to council.
590) The plans were sufficient for competent builders and
carpenters for providing a quotation but additional information would have
required from the principal as to whether there were any special, specific
requirements. Without those instructions the principal
(Challita) must be
treated as having left specific choices to the judgement of a competent
591) The plans were sufficient for the competent carpenter to
proceed to undertake the erection of frames in respect of a small, standard
medium density development.
592) DevCorp did not have any difficulty quoting on them, and
their quote was a credible one, having regard to the later estimates
Hibbins and taking account of the price quoted by others before and after to
Challita for the same work.
593) As noted in the survey of the evidence, there was much debate
and the upper
level meant. Challita and his key building expert witness, Mr Cornish, held
firmly to the view that it represented
a joist dimension of 300 mm, while
DevCorp and its building experts said either that it was, or was capable
reasonably of being interpreted
as, a dimension which embraced a joist and some
adjacent materials such as yellow tongue flooring and the gyprock ceiling below.
594) The lower vertical dimension, 2400mm later amended to 2600mm,
in the Tribunal’s opinion clearly denotes a floor to underside-of-ceiling
dimension. Accordingly it follows that the next dimension could embrace the
ceiling material and possibly the flooring material.
It was possible to
interpret the next dimension of 300mm as embracing elements in addition to the
joist. The 300mm did not constitute
a specification as to joist size. It simply
described an architectural element.
595) Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that, without further
indication on the plan or in the agreement, the broader interpretation
by DevCorp is open to be made. That left the question of the size and the layout
of the joists to be governed by ordinary
considerations.
596) There were some deficiencies in the plan.
597) The plans contained a small dimensional error (40mm) as to
the width or extent of a boundary of the slab. This was a minor error.
capable of being observed and dealt with on site. The fact that it was not
satisfactorily addressed on site is attributable,
the Tribunal considers, to two
factors in particular: the carpenter Sapina’s error in not doing check
measurements; and the
poor site management practices of Challita, both discussed
later in these reasons.
598) There was also criticism of the absence of a complete set of
relative levels in respect of the elevations shown in the plans.
599) The modelling done by Mr Mayoh demonstrated that the plan did
contain an error of greater significance in relation to providing
for adequate
headroom in the attic level affecting the staircase, the bathroom and the
bedrooms. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
plans as drawn did not provide a
reasonable degree of head room in these areas.
Discussions preceding and the Agreement of 30 October 1997
600) The agreement of 30 October 1997 was preceded by discussions
between the parties. Several aspects of these discussions affected
course of the relationship between the parties and bore on the breakdown of
trust that quickly developed after work commenced.
601) The first factor was the impression that Cvitan sought to
create in Challita’s mind that DevCorp was an experienced and
resourced builder.
602) Challita was impressed by the ‘uptown’ address
that DevCorp’s letterhead displayed. While it is not unusual
business to have as its regular place of business an address different from its
registered company address, in this instance
the practical place of business as
admitted by Cvitan was the registered address, i.e. 44 Burwood Road, Burwood.
603) The declared principal address at the MLC Centre conveyed to
Challita the impression that he was dealing with a well resourced
and successful
company. It transpired that this was a serviced office address, and was rarely
physically attended by Cvitan. At the
height of the dispute in December 1997
this gave rise to a situation that while phone calls to the number given on the
were automatically diverted to Cvitan’s mobile phone, incoming
fax messages from Challita or his solicitors simply collected
at the serviced
office’s fax number and were not attended to.
604) Cvitan also failed to disclose that DevCorp did not have a
licence to do residential building work. That Cvitan was aware of
the need to
have a licence is reflected in the agreement entered into on 20 November. In
that agreement he misled Challita by placing
alongside the name of DevCorp in
the parties clause, ‘Licence No 666’, which was Newman’s
licence number.
605) The Tribunal is satisfied that in the conversations leading
to the making of the agreement, Cvitan gave Challita assurances that
sufficient workers at his disposal to enable completion of the framing work for
the four units within three weeks. DevCorp
failed to disclose the true position
that the company was new and this was its first job, even though Cvitan and
Newman had had a
long-term working relationship.
606) DevCorp did not disclose that it was to be Jurcevic’s
first job for Cvitan as a site supervisor (though they had known
each other for
a long time) and it was the first time Cvitan or Newman had ever worked with
Jurcevic’s relation, Sapina. Sapina
had a small business, and, as his
evidence disclosed, did not have teams of workers in permanent use but put them
together as needed
at short notice.
607) Equally the Tribunal is satisfied that Challita appreciated
that a three week turnaround on a framing job of this scale was unlikely
achievable, and accepts in that regard Challita’s son’s estimate
that a job of this kind would probably take five
to six weeks. Nonetheless the
Tribunal is satisfied that Cvitan in order to get the job gave the assurance
that it had the workers
at its disposal sufficient to complete the job in three
608) The time promise did not, the Tribunal considers, constitute
a term of the contract but it did constitute a misleading statement
that induced
Challita to enter into the contract.
609) On the other hand, Challita strenuously contended that the
agreement of 30 October covered the question of alteration of the
roof pitch if
there was insufficient headroom to build according to plan. The Tribunal is
satisfied that while Challita did raise
the roof pitch issue in his initial
discussions with Cvitan and Jurcevic at his home in September, DevCorp’s
representatives
(Cvitan and Jurcevic) did not give any assurance to alter roof
pitch without charge that could reasonably be construed as constituting
of the agreement ultimately entered into, or a representation inducing entry
into the contract. It was a matter only briefly
discussed, and Jurcevic simply
acknowledged it as a potential problem.
610) The Tribunal is satisfied that DevCorp proceeded to quote on
the basis of a roof as shown on the plan, pitched to 35 degrees.
DevCorp did not
agree to absorb any costs that might be associated with any significant
alteration of the pitch or the roof volume.
This was a matter to be dealt with
by way of a variation.
611) The principal terms of the agreement were those provided by
the quote signed by Challita read in conjunction with the plans.
indicated, only a limited status can be attached to the plans. They did not go
so far as to provided detailed specifications.
The question of what meaning is
to be attached to the progress payment schedule is discussed later.
612) There was no provision in the agreement for many of the
matters that routinely affect building contracts. For example, no mechanism
established for coordination and resolving on-site problems, dealing with new
instructions, obtaining variations, seeking extensions
and independently
resolving disputes as to payment.
Period of the First Contract: Problems between 30 October and 19 November
613) On 20 November 1997 the parties entered into a new contract,
but both saw the problems that occurred from 30 October to 19 November
relevant to the ultimate breakdown of their contractual relationship. Our
findings in relation to the issues which emerged in
that period
614) Site Management and Coordination: A key issue was effective
coordination of work. As the principal, Challita bore ultimate responsibility
for ensuring on his side that there was good site management practices. In its
role as framing contractor, DevCorp was responsible
for ensuring that it
conducted its work with due diligence. This issue can not be easily disentangled
from the specific building
issues that arose, to which the Tribunal turns first.
615) The Specific Building Problems: Three specific building
problems arose. By the second day of work, 6 November 1997, the problem
alignment of the frame and the slab had been identified. By 12 November 1997 the
issue as to the layout of the first floor
joists in units 2, 3 and 4 had arisen.
Around 16 November 1997 the problem of an apparent lack of adequate headroom in
the upper level of units 2, 3 and 4 had arisen.
616) As to the slab, the Tribunal is satisfied that there was a
general boundary discrepancy between slab and plan on the northern
side of the
plan of 40mm flowing from an inaccuracy in the plan dimensions. As laid, we are
satisfied that there was another discrepancy
of varying dimensions in the
laundry and garage areas of unit 4 with one element involving a discrepancy of
at least 200mm. (Mr Cornish
estimated 400mm.) The latter error can not be
attributed to the plan.
617) On commencement the carpenter, Sapina, failed to adopt the
prudent course of doing a string line check to ensure that the slab
and consistent with plan before proceeding to cut and lay out. He relied,
uncritically, on the plan and the slab being
in exact, or near exact,
conformity. This was an error of judgement that led to Sapina finding that his
frame as laid out protruded
over the slab and did not provide adequate cavity in
618) Sapina recognised the problem and blamed the plan. While
there was an error in the plan, the Tribunal agrees with Challita’s
perspective that the problem would have been readily identified if a check had
619) Sapina and Challita made attempts to adjust the frame. The
solution employed was to realign the frame slightly so that it was
cantilevered
at one end and the cavity was reduced at the other end. There was also some
infill done by Challita, probably on the
weekend of 15-16 November, to overcome
the larger discrepancy that affected the garage side of unit 4.
620) The problems were not, the Tribunal considers, fundamental
ones, and the solutions found were reasonable. Our conclusion that
fundamental is supported by the evidence that Challita’s nominated
builder, Zeaiter, came on to site around 12 November
1997, noticed problems in
relation to the framing but took no action other than to give advice to Challita
as to what he might do.
621) As to the joist layout issue, Sapina found himself in an
unfamiliar situation. His own cutting list had specified 300 x 50 joists,
he had intended to run over the entire span. He saw it as usual that the joists
would be run across the entire span of the
lounge room and garage, and therefore
ordered a depth of joist that met the relevant load requirements. But he was not
responsible
for ordering. His was a labour only subcontract with DevCorp. He was
supplied with 250 x 50 joists, and instructed to run them from
essentially the
mid-point of the lounge span to the mid point of the garage span.
622) The Tribunal is satisfied from Newman’s and
Jurcevic’s evidence that they were looking for some economies in relation
to timber purchases, and had conceived of using less deep joists than assumed by
Sapina. Neither appears to have taken account of
the possibility that Sapina
might be unfamiliar with the method involved in laying 250 joists. Jurcevic and
Newman at the time of
ordering had not anticipated the need for an engineering
detail to ensure that composite beams, running east-west at the mid points,
would be needed to ensure that load requirements were met.
623) The Tribunal is satisfied that Alagha (AMPA Design) drew the
original plans on the assumption that 300 x 50 would be used. Challita
understood the plans in that way. They both assumed that the joists would run
north-south for the entire span. Sapina separately
came to the same conclusion.
624) But their failure to make this assumption the subject of a
specification left it open to DevCorp to adopt any acceptable building
for providing support to the upper load and distributing other forces
appropriately.
625) The Tribunal is satisfied that the technique preferred by
DevCorp involving the use of 250 joists was sound from a structural
engineering
viewpoint in that it was able satisfactorily to carry and deploy the upper level
loads including the roof and roofing.
The Tribunal has already dealt with the
one criticism that remained, that of Mr Cornish in relation to the implications
a 250 depth for the pitching point roof. As previously explained, the
Tribunal does not accept that criticism.
626) To deal with the question of how to construct the composite
beam required by their preferred method of construction, Jurcevic
turned to Alagha to produce an engineering detail. Alagha denied issuing the
detail ultimately used.
627) Jurcevic was accused of manufacturing the drawing without
Alagha’s authority. The Tribunal regards Jurcevic’s evidence,
it some unsatisfactory elements, generally to have been credible. In contrast
the Tribunal considers that much of Alagha’s
evidence was not reliable and
influenced by a falling out with Jurcevic, in particular over other construction
projects that Alagha
and Jurcevic had been involved in.
628) Jurcevic gave a detailed account of his visit to
Alagha’s on the night of 12 November 1997, and the steps he undertook.
drew the detail after discussion, and said he then proceeded to produce it on
letterhead and have it signed off by Alagha. While
the detail did not contain
some features routinely incorporated by Alagha into his certificates and was on
a paper size that he did
not ordinarily use, there was evidence from Alagha that
at least on one other occasion he had issued a drawing without those features.
The Tribunal accepts Jurcevic’s evidence and is satisfied that Alagha
provided the detail as a supplement to the plan to enable
DevCorp to complete
the type of joist lay-out it preferred to use.
629) The next issue related to the adequacy of the headroom
provided for in the plan for the upper levels of units 2, 3 and 4. The
is satisfied from the evidence and the illustrations developed by Mr Mayoh that
there was a problem of adequacy of headroom
in the attic level.
630) In this regard, the Tribunal considers that Sapina acted
prudently. As the holder of a licence he is responsible for ensuring
work he does is compliant. As drawn, there clearly was a potential problem. That
possibility was, the Tribunal considers,
known to Challita. He had encountered a
similar problem in his Greenacre development. There was some evidence to suggest
that Alagha
had simply traced the Greenacre upper level dimensions on to the
Condell Park plan, though the Tribunal does not make a formal finding
regard. Challita’s consciousness of this potential problem led him, the
Tribunal considers, to raise it in his initial
discussions with Cvitan and
631) When Challita demanded that DevCorp proceed nonetheless with
the attic level, DevCorp were entitled to raise the question of
a variation.
Challita rejected that enquiry out of hand. He considered that DevCorp had
agreed to meet any variation of this kind
within the contract price. The
Tribunal’s finding, as noted earlier, is that such a term did not form
part of the agreement.
632) DevCorp were entitled to seek some independent clarification
of whether they faced a compliance problem in relation to proceeding
upper level and to have resolved the question of extras. They could have
proceeded in the way suggested by Mr Cornish, namely
to accept Challita’s
instruction and for DevCorp and Sapina to issue a disclaimer of any liability
for the consequences, but
they were not bound to act in that way.
633) There was much debate about what degree of alteration would
be required to achieve adequate head room and whether it was necessary
resubmit to Council for approval.
634) As to Building Code standards, it is clear that there may
have been an infringement of the conventional standard as it applied
1992. The standard was that at least two thirds of the area of the bathroom and
the bedroom must be at or above the required
headroom. The Tribunal accepts that
since 1992 it has been permissible under the ‘outcomes’ based
approach for that standard
to be departed from, if the reasonable functioning of
the room is not impaired and it remains safe. But the primary rule has not
abandoned, rigid application of it has simply been modified. It remains an
appropriate for a licensed tradesman to raise the
issue where the primary rule
is not satisfied.
635) One way of resolving an attic level headroom problem, without
altering the roof pitch, is to raise the pitching point. Another
is to increase
the roof volume by extending the span of the roof. As built the roofline was
altered as against plan so as to enclose
the area over the laundry and provide
for one continuous eave-line. That assisted in providing increased headroom and
in reducing
the extent to which the pitching point needed to be elevated
overall. As built, both of these steps were taken in a small degree
the headroom problem being solved with the ridge height, measured from the floor
of the attic level, being raised by 130mm.
In this regard, the Tribunal accepts
the finding of DevCorp’s expert witness, Mr van der Zypen from Cooper
& Richards,
that the overall change in the roof as constructed as compared
with plan involved raising the roof by 130mm.
636) Sapina, supported by DevCorp’s personnel, gave as one
of his grounds for concern that the roof height could not be raised
council approval. On the other hand Challita’s position was that it
depended on how extensive the change was, and
that a further approval would not
be needed in this case. The retired Bankstown Council inspector, Mr Cowper, said
a 200mm increase
in the ridge height would not, in his experience, require a
Council approval but one of 300mm would.
637) Viewed in isolation, the increase in the ridge height of
130mm is well under the point at which the plans would needed to be
resubmitted,
according to Mr Cowper’s assessment. However, when that distance is added
to the 200mm change in ceiling height
for the ground floor, (said to have been
cleared orally by Mr Cowper as not requiring an amended plan to be submitted),
the overall
change in the point of the ridge, as against the plan, as originally
drawn was 330mm. Mr Cowper was not asked whether the two changes
producing an overall increase of 330mm, would require a fresh approval.
638) Site Management: The Tribunal noted above that this was a key
issue and was a major source of contention in the proceedings.
639) Challita, as the owner/developer, had overall responsibility
for co-ordinating work at the site and ensuring that work could
be conducted on
an orderly basis, free of unreasonable interference. The Tribunal is satisfied
that his site management practices
arrangements were poor. The Tribunal has
already commented adversely on the arrangements made for his son to have
effective responsibility
for the site. The way in which disputes were handled by
Challita was poor. In the period to 20 November, he did not engage in an
process of giving notices of defects, and providing an opportunity to rectify.
His behavior in this regard is not the subject
of any adverse evidence giving
particulars after 27 November, when the new team came to the site. There is only
the generalised reference
by Jurcevic to Challita beginning to ‘nag’
640) Challita did not ensure that his licensed builder took an
appropriate level of responsibility for the site. Zeaiter had minimal
involvement with the job, and was largely oblivious to the difficulties that had
developed in the relationship between
DevCorp and Challita. While, as his
counsel pointed out in closing submissions, by engaging a licensed builder,
Challita did ensure
that the statutory requirement that insurance was in place
was met, that is not, in the Tribunal’s opinion, the limit of a
builder’s relationship to the projects that he or she takes on.
641) A licensed builder has other obligations which do not appear
to have been satisfied by Zeaiter. Zeaiter allowed Challita gave
responsibility for managing the site to his apprentice carpenter,
Challita’s son.
642) It is not acceptable practice for site management
responsibility to be given to an apprentice, especially where the apprentice
a child of the builder’s principal. Whatever the real strength of any
criticism or advice issuing from an apprentice, it
is unlikely to be viewed
positively by the qualified tradesman to whom it is directed. It is a recipe for
disharmony. Ascertaining
what the precise role was that was given to
Challita’s son was complicated by the tendency of his father to take over
the discussions
on matters that his father regarded as critical.
643) The Tribunal accepts Sapina’s evidence that Challita
tried to influence him to come and work directly for him. The Tribunal
satisfied that Challita did on or about 7 November seek to interfere in this way
with the contract with DevCorp.
644) By 19 November Challita had a range of concerns, some of them
justified, in relation to the way DevCorp was going about the job.
But the way
in which he went about dealing with his concerns on 19 November was
unacceptable.
645) These events were given considerable attention. The Tribunal
accepts Sapina’s account of these events so far as the conversations
threats made to him are concerned. Sapina impressed as a credible witness, and
one prepared to concede his error in relation
to the original problem of the
preparation for the lay-out of the frame and one who remained concerned for some
time after to try
to learn where he went wrong. Challita’s behaviour on
this occasion involved a complete failure on his part to observe reasonable
standards in respect of his site management responsibilities.
646) Challita had set on a course of getting rid of Sapina. He did
not use an orderly process of communication to convey his concerns
perceived problems with Sapina’s work. The Tribunal accepts that Challita
had reasonable concerns in relation to
the issue of Sapina’s timeliness,
which may have been due to factors mainly in the control of DevCorp. They should
managed by an orderly process on the site.
647) On the other hand, there were aspects of DevCorp’s
management which were unsatisfactory. They had engaged a carpenter who
have the capacity to deliver the job by the time discussed originally with
Challita. Despite Cvitan’s promise as to
the resources that DevCorp could
bring to the project, Sapina came alone to the site on some days, and rarely
with a team of three
or so. His attendance was intermittent, and he had another
job running simultaneously.
648) Sapina’s attendance record is partly explained by
DevCorp’s slowness in organising the delivery of materials to site.
Sapina’s diary entries reveal concern over this matter. In the survey of
the evidence, the Tribunal has sought to chart the
progress of delivery of
materials to site. The delays are also explained by Sapina having to refer
matters to site meetings for
resolution, the first occurring on 11 November,
another occurring over the weekend of 15 and 16 November. Nor was there any
involvement with the job during this period by DevCorp’s
qualified builder, Newman. Jurcevic’s request for a deposit
beginning of the job when none had been provided for in the contract and
DevCorp’s lodgment of a progress claim with
Challita on or about 13
November when so little work had been done contributed to Challita’s
growing distrust.
649) DevCorp’s conduct after 13 November is partly explained
by its view that it was entitled to a payment of its first progress
$17,123.75 as at 13 November 1997. Cvitan, Jurcevic and Newman’s evidence
was that their understanding of the reference
to “35 per cent” in
the agreement was to the point when DevCorp had expended the equivalent of 35%
of the contract price
by way of purchase of materials and provision of labour.
They did not include any clause in their quote to that effect, nor in the
subsequent agreement of 20 November 1997 when this question of interpretation
was known to be an issue.
650) Challita’s interpretation was that the ‘35 per
cent’ related to 35 per cent of completed works.
651) The question of the appropriate interpretation is discussed
later in these reasons.
652) Even if DevCorp’s interpretation is adopted, the
Tribunal is satisfied that 35 per cent of the project costs had not been
subject of expenditure, and in that sense had not been incurred. About $8000 had
been paid out for materials, and Sapina had
only done a few days work, and was
yet to receive any payment, in respect of his contract price of
653) The issuance of a progress claim as at 13 November 1997 was
premature, and DevCorp should have realised would be provocative
distrust and dissatisfaction on the part of Challita.
654) By 19 November DevCorp may well have had grounds, based on
Challita’s approach to site management, for terminating the
contract but
instead it chose to affirm the contract, entering a new, written contract on 20
655) Some of the site management concerns to which the Tribunal
has referred remained in existence after the new workers came on to
site around
27 November. For example Challita’s son continued to have a key role in
co-ordinating the project and Zeaiter’s
role remained marginal. Lukac, who
worked on site in early January 1998 and was called by DevCorp, said in his
affidavit that Challita
and his son ran the site, that it was a clean site and
that it was not particularly well co-ordinated.
Period of the Second Contract from 20 November
656) After Sapina was rejected by Challita, Cvitan agreed to find
new carpenters. On 20 November 1997 Cvitan and Challita signed a
new agreement,
intended to replace the previous agreement. It contained a new time schedule,
now with an express deadline of 10 December,
and by virtue of the use of an MBA
standard form, sought to apply a number of standard building contract terms to
the agreement.
For the parties the most significant change was the inclusion of
a liquidated damages clause, allowing for $1400 per week to be paid
in the event
of an overrun.
657) The agreement of 20 November 1997 had failed to address the
issues that remained between the parties as to headroom. Work was
proceeding,
with the frame layout issue addressed and the joist layout issue addressed,
though Challita remained unhappy with the
outcome. The head room issue was left
in abeyance. DevCorp had taken the initiative in having a written contract, but
steps to address the resolution of this issue.
658) Despite the promise to complete by 10 December Cvitan did not
have any new carpenters on site for several days.
659) While the evidence was not entirely clear on when was the
first day they attended, the Tribunal’s conclusion as noted earlier
that there were attendances of varying degree on 27, 28 and 29 November and on
1, 2, 3 and 4 December. At the end of the day on
28 November, Mr Hibbins,
quantity estimator, made an assessment of progress of works towards completion
at 29 per cent. He made a
further assessment on 10 December and estimated
progress at 34 per cent, just below the 35 per cent point.
660) Hibbins’ evidence was the only quantitatively expressed
evidence as to progress before the Tribunal. Hibbins was engaged
by Challita and
Hibbins’ methodology was attacked in cross-examination. But it remains the
only quantitative evidence available
to the Tribunal from an expert. DevCorp did
not produce evidence of any independent evaluation based on the criterion of
of completed works. Hence Hibbins’ estimate remains the most
probative evidence on this issue.
661) On or about Monday 1 December Challita had tendered a cheque
to DevCorp for $10,000 with a promise that a further payment of
$7,000 would be
paid the following Friday 5 December subject to the 35 per cent point being
reached and defects rectified.
662) Grounds for Extension of Time
663) On 3 December 1997 at about 1.45pm DevCorp wrote to Challita
demanding (what was referred to in evidence as) the second progress
Challita denied in cross-examination the suggestion (evidence of Sapina) that he
never intended to make any progress payments.
He referred to his decision to
tender a cheque for $10,000. He said that in his experience 35 per cent progress
had not been achieved.
664) Cvitan and Jurcevic gave evidence which suggested that by
this point they considered that the work was over 60 per cent complete
they were entitled to a further payment even though the first one remained in
dispute. Their subsequent ‘final invoice’
dated 15 December 1997 (Ex
15) described the claim as being for 58%. It became plain in the proceedings
that this calculation represented
the costs that they had incurred divided by
the total contract price. It did not represent an estimate of the actual on site
of the works.
665) Challita, through his solicitor, by letter dated 4 December
refused payment mainly on the ground that the relevant progress point
been achieved.
666) This exchange of correspondence is critical to the question
of whether DevCorp was entitled to cease work on the site, which
it did on 4
December 1997.
667) In its letter of 3 December DevCorp made a ‘claim for
extensions of time to completion dates so damages cannot be claimed
against our
company’. It relied on three grounds.
668) (1) The first ground referred to the inability to gain access
to the site on 19 November.
669) The Tribunal considers that that the event, lamentable as it
was, could not be brought forward as a ground for extension in circumstances
where after that event DevCorp had affirmed the contract, entered into a new
contract, had resumed works, brought in new carpenters
and had itself set a new
deadline. As submitted by counsel for Challita there was a novation of the first
contract, with a new contract
being substituted for one already made: Olsson v
Dyson (1969) 120 CLR 365 at 388 per Windeyer J. The intention of the parties,
Tribunal considers, was clear: see Vickery v Woods
[1952] HCA 7
(1952) 85 CLR 336
per Dixon J.
670) (2) The second ground was non-payment of the progress claim
of 13 November 1997, request renewed in the letter of 3 December
671) There was no mechanism under the contract for providing
independent certification of what progress had been achieved.
672) Was the reference in the original contract and in the second
contract in relation to 35 per cent of the completed works, or was
reference (as DevCorp) contends to DevCorp having incurred 35 per cent of its
contract costs?
673) Cvitan referred in evidence to the progress payment covering
material costs incurred, labour expended and a margin for profit.
He said that
he regarded it as acceptable to make the first progress claim on the basis of
‘[m]aterials on site and work in
progress’ (ts 82). On the other
hand as already noted Challita was of the opinion that the progress payment was
due when 35
per cent of the work contracted to be done was
674) Challita’s interpretation finds some support in the
evidence of those who worked for DevCorp. In his affidavit Jurcevic
refers to a
conversation with Challita in which Challita refers to the payment being due
when the appropriate percentage of the work
has been completed. Newman in his
evidence also refers to the matter in those terms. While DevCorp’s
witnesses depicted their
entitlement in the way mentioned, counsel for DevCorp
expressed his client’s position as being a claim in relation to a
‘percentage
of completion’ (ts 596).
675) As to the question of the usual meaning to be attached to a
progress claim expressed as 35 per cent, the Tribunal’s conclusion
it would ordinarily be interpreted in the way that Challita did as being payable
when 35 per cent of the works had been completed
satisfactorily.
676) If the alternative approach (costs incurred by contractor)
suggested by Cvitan and his witnesses were to be adopted the owner
drawn into assessing the extent to which the other contracting party had
expended money in relation to the job and thereby
become privy to internal
information as to purchases, labour costs and likely profit margin. If that was
the intention of the sub-contractor,
the Tribunal would expect to see this
possibility addressed by an express agreement to that effect, as occurs in
commercial building
projects. The owner/head contractor’s fundamental
interest once a price is agreed is timely completion free of defects. A progress
payments schedule in a residential building contract expressed in raw
percentages should ordinarily be interpreted as referring to
a percentage of the
works completed.
677) DevCorp’s letter demanding a progress payment also
referred to other problems with the job, which if not addressed by Challita,
would result in delays in completion. It is clear that by the date that DevCorp
served this request it was unlikely to be able to
complete the job by 10
December 1997; and if no extension of time was allowed it would be liable to pay
liquidated damages of $1400
678) Mr Hibbins’estimates as to the progress achieved as at
28 November and as at 10 December (in effect as at 4 December, as
no works were
done after that date) were the subject of vigorous attack in cross-examination
as to the methodology employed, but
as noted earlier they remain the only
quantitative estimates based on the criterion preferred by the Tribunal that it
has available
to it. DevCorp did not produce any independent evaluation of the
progress of works, possibly because of its view that costs incurred
progress to completion) was the relevant benchmark.
679) Consequently the Tribunal accepts Mr Hibbins’ estimates
as the best estimate of the progress of works. In both of his reports,
that there were defects that would need to be rectified. In cross-examination he
acknowledged that he was not called on
to site to assess defects but said that
he relied, in the case of the reference contained in his letter of 10 December,
on the reports
that had by that time been obtained by Challita.
680) Free of other factors, the position therefore as at 4th and
subsequently as at 10th December was that DevCorp had failed to meet
timetable. It had still not on the 10th reached the point of being entitled to
the first progress payment. Challita had given
notice of defects and was
entitled to have them attended to. At hearing DevCorp itself acknowledged that
at least $2700 worth of
work (Mr Perks’ estimate) was necessary to be done
to rectify defects. Taking account of that concession, the progress achieved
still fell short of 35 per cent.
681) In the United Kingdom standard forms of building contracts
frequently state that an instalment (or progress) payment is not due
relevant works are ‘properly done’. Noting that point, the question
of whether the existence of defects can
be taken into account before releasing a
progress payment is addressed in (Hudson) at [6-187]:
makes no difference that [instalment payment clauses in contracts] are
frequently expressed to represent the value of work
done, since
such a qualification is an obvious one in any provision for payment on account,
and will almost always be implied in
any event....”
682) Significantly DevCorp’s request of 3 December, as noted
by counsel for Challita in closing submissions, failed to conform
to cl 3(c) of
the contract. Clause 3(c) requires a statement that no wages are due and owing
in respect of the works at the date
of payment. Sapina had not been paid the
$4500 due to him at that date, and was not paid until about September 1998.
Portland Structures
had been paid for its work as at 29 November. Clearly
DevCorp’s notice did not comply in this regard with the contract.
683) (3) The third ground in DevCorp’s notice of 3 December
referred to the offer of part payment as being unacceptable.
684) The offer of a part payment in circumstances where a progress
payment has not become due does not involve a breach on the part
of Challita.
The position would have been different if a payment was refused after the 35 per
cent point had been reached free of
defects and with all payments of wages to
contractors proven.
685) None of the three principal grounds relied on by DevCorp
justified it in claiming extensions of time.
686) (4) The letter also contained other complaints but they were
not relied on as grounds for seeking extension.
687) One of these related Challita engaging in on-site
communication with the carpenters other than through Jurcevic. This clearly
been a major issue in the period to 19 November, and as already noted
Challita’s conduct may well have entitled DevCorp
to terminate the
contract. Instead DevCorp chose to affirm.
688) But there is no probative evidence before the Tribunal as to
whether that state of affairs continued after 19 November. In the
Tribunal’s view, and as noted already, the situation remained
unsatisfactory in so far as Challita’s on continued to
have significant
responsibility and there was minimal involvement by Zeaiter. But there was no
persuasive evidence before the Tribunal
to suggest that Challita or his son
continued to engage in conduct which was disruptive or interfered with the
ability of DevCorp’s
new team to get on with the job.
689) Importantly in this regard, none of the new carpenters were
called to give evidence as to site management issues. There was no
evidence to
justify a finding that Challita’s site management practices after 20
November 1997 justified DevCorp in discontinuing
work, a point it, perhaps,
recognised in giving this concern a subordinate status in its notice of 3
690) (5) There were two references in the letter, not given as
grounds for extension, being to ‘difficulties in the architectural
drawings, in the roof plan as drawn cannot be constructed, as such, and will be
regarded as a variation to contract.’
691) As noted, the notice did not rely on this as a ground for
extension. This was a serious issue requiring Challita’s attention.
little of the upper level framing had been done at the time work was suspended
and it was still possible for DevCorp to continue
work. The Tribunal agrees with
the submission of counsel for Challita that the work was nowhere near the roof
stage and that issue
need not have held up progress of the works at this
692) As submitted by counsel for Challita, DevCorp had by this
stage breached other terms of the contract dated 20 November in two
respects: as
already noted, they did not deliver a letter verifying that no wages are due in
respect of the works (cl 3(c)); and
they had breached the express condition that
they hold a current residential building licence (cond 20).
693) The Tribunal also agrees with counsel for Challita that the
steps taken between 5 and 10 December 1997 by bringing experts on
to site to do
inspections, and listing concerns in solicitors’ letters, in particular
the letter of 9 December involved the
giving of notice of defects to DevCorp.
Apart from the brief attendances on 3 and 4 December in response to Mr
Cowper’s first
inspection, DevCorp did not send any workers to the site to
respond to these notices.
694) The Tribunal is satisfied that by ceasing work on 4 December
1997 DevCorp repudiated its contract with Challita. Challita was
entitled to
accept the repudiation and thereby bring the contract to an end.
695) Termination
696) Challita issued a formal notice of termination after some
attempts at resolution on 16 January 1998. However the Tribunal considers
the critical act of acceptance of the repudiation occurred earlier in January
when Challita brought onto site Rados and Lukac
to undertake work on the frames
work which included the removal of upper floor joists for which they were paid
$2000 each, in Lukac’s
case in kind by way of supply of timber from the
site. The Tribunal has fixed Monday 5 January, the beginning of the first week
New Year’s Day as the most likely starting date for this work.
697) While acceptance of repudiation would ordinarily be notified,
in this instance the Tribunal considers that the employment of
Rados and Lukac
(and the extent of the works undertaken by them involving in particular removal
of the upper floor joists) involved
an unequivocal act of acceptance of
DevCorp’s repudiation: “conduct sufficiently manifest of such
acceptance of repudiation
will be sufficient”, Young,
‘Repudiation’ (1985) 1 Aust Bar Review 21 at 31; Holland v Wiltshire
[1954] HCA 42
(1954) 90 CLR 409
, 416 per Dixon CJ; Poort v Development Underwriting
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[1977] VicRp 52
[1977] VR 454
698) The Tribunal’s conclusion is that by the time the
formal notice of termination was given on 16 January 1998, Challita had
unequivocally terminated the contract. As to the grounds for termination given
in that notice, the Tribunal considers that
he was entitled to assert that the
work had not been completed, that DevCorp had suspended the works before
completion, that it had
failed to proceed with reasonable diligence, and that as
a consequence of suspending work it had failed to rectify defective
699) Demolition
700) The Tribunal considers that the defects identified were
capable of being resolved on site as defects in respect of works in progress
the contract not been terminated. The Tribunal is not satisfied that the defects
were so significant as to warrant substantial
demolition of the works, as
subsequently occurred. It will be apparent from the Tribunal’s earlier
comments that in so far
as experts called to the site by Challita listed the
upper floor joist lay-out as a problem, the Tribunal does not accept that
conclusion.
701) Other than in the case of Mr Cornish, it is noteworthy that
all of those called to the site assessed the defects as ones requiring
rectification on site as works in progress as distinct from being so fundamental
as to justify terminating the contract. Many of
the items shown on the video
presented by Mr Cornish were consistent with the picture given as to the state
of works by the experts
called to the site in early December. While Mr Cornish
recommended demolition of the upper floor framing (as far as it had progressed)
he did not recommend demolition of the ground floor framing.
702) Extent of Defects
703) In the survey of the evidence the Tribunal has sought to
record each of the assessments of the extent of defects especially those
by the witnesses called on to site by Challita between 3 and 10 December 1997
and by Mr Perks on or about 14 January 1998 and
Mr Cornish around 19 January
704) The following summary puts to one side the comments on the
joist lay-out issue made by Mr Cowper, Alagha, Mr Eid and Mr Cornish,
of the Tribunal’s rejection of their conclusions in regard to the
significance of that matter.
705) Mr Cowper’s comments referred to problems in relation
to bracing, the need to reposition bottom plates to bear fully on
piers, for sheet bracing to be in one continuous length and nailed securely and
for three full studs and three blocks to
all external and external corners and
wall intersections. DevCorp itself in its letter of 5 December referred to five
items of outstanding
work: metal bracing rear wall not correctly attached;
incorrect door width; lintel end-nailed only; number of under window studs
require replacement; triple grip timber connections needed for intersecting
floor joists over garage area. These items were based
on Newman’s
observations. Mr Eid, whose main interest and expertise related to the composite
beam and joist lay-out issues,
mainly concentrated on that area in his report of
observations made 6 December. He also referred to poor installation of metal
braces and improper installation and fixing of timber lintel.
706) Alagha also referred to a number of problems relating to the
fixing of the joists, and referred in addition to the need for more
be braced for wall between laundry and kitchen in unit 4, to twisted external
joists on eastern side and to bracing for
southern wall of unit 1 to be fixed.
707) Mr Cowper’s report of 23 December referred to several
problems in unit 1, which included inadequate fixing, timber warped
and twisted,
bracing fixed incorrectly, load bearing lintels having been packed, the need for
supporting double and profile studs,
bottom plates not fully supported. In
relation to all units he said walls were not plumb and vertical, and referred
again to inadequate
bracing as well as some timber having splits.
708) Mr Perks did not provide an itemised account of the problems
he saw on 14 January, but agreed that there were numerous defects.
based his conclusions on the reports supplied to him in particular that of
Alagha. His report and that of Mr Cornish were
provided after Rados and Lukac
had been brought onto the site. He did not undertake a full
inspection.
709) Mr Perks regarded some mistakes as ones that should not have
happened, such as inadequate bracing and the extent to which a proper
had been supplied to the joists upstairs, and that some of the blocking pieces
had not been done properly. In cross-examination
as previously noted he was
shown photographs and pointed to numerous defects in relation to such matters as
placement of noggins,
fixing and absence of frames around windows. He agreed
that he did not look at work at the back of the site nor go upstairs. In
circumstances Mr Perks should be treated as accepting the reports received by
Challita from Mr Cowper, Alagha and Mr Eid as
essentially sound. Counsel for
DevCorp’s closing submissions were to that effect.
710) Mr Cornish’s written report recorded items in generally
similar terms to the other experts. He referred to: wall frames
not plumb and
straight; studs not double nailed to plates; double studs not provided to
support window heads; blocking is omitted
on many wall junctions; floor frame
not adequately tied down to wall plates; blockings to floor joists under size
and not tight fitting;
floor sheeting not adequately secured by gluing and
nailing; bracing to walls incorrectly installed. In his oral evidence Mr Cornish
also referred to the degree of twisting and warping that had affected the site.
By this stage the site had been unprotected and closed
for five weeks, and
Challita had introduced new carpenters on to the site about two weeks before.
They were on site at the time of
Mr Cornish’s inspection.
711) Mr Cornish did not recommend abolition of the ground floor
frames though he noted many defects. He did recommend pulling down
of the upper
floor frames.
712) Cost of Rectification of Defects
713) In light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that the works
were not so poor as to warrant demolition, the Tribunal considers
that Challita
is only entitled to recover the cost of rectification of defects. As to those
costs estimates varied. Mr Cowper thought
the work involved would take a team of
four or five carpenters a couple of days (an estimate of approximately ten work
days). Some
of the work identified in Mr Cowper’s report as needing to be
done is similar to that which Lukac reported he and Rados as
doing in early
714) Mr Perks’ estimate was that the work needed would take
two carpenters a week’s work (also an estimate of ten work
days but given
after some work had been done by Rados and Lukac). It is difficult to assess
what degree of independent judgement
Mr Perks brought to this matter, as he did
not personally undertake a complete inspection, and relied substantially on the
of defects compiled by others. Mr Perks also said his estimate took into
account the possibility of reusing existing material on
site, though he did not
indicate what quantity was available in that regard.
715) Mr Cornish disagreed with the estimates of Mr Cowper and Mr
Perks. His report of 20 January placed rectification costs in respect
ground floor frames at three men two days each unit, total 24 man days @ $35.00
per hour, total $6720. He indicated in cross-examination
that this included a
component for pulling down the upper floor frame. He also made an allowance of
$900 for additional material
required, being 100 studs and accessories, $900. Mr
Cornish’s assessment was also made after some work had been done by Rados
and Lukac; and is affected by weathering of the exposed works during the
intervening period. Nonetheless it remains the most detailed
assessment of the
work still required to be done as at that date.
716) As to the items requiring rectification and their cost, Mr
Cowper’s estimates were the most contemporaneous. Mr Perks’
Cornish’s had been made after other workers have been introduced onto the
site, and weathering has occurred. On the
other hand Mr Cornish’s
criticism that Mr Cowper is an inspector rather than a builder needs to be taken
into account.
717) Mr Perks’ calculation made no allowance at all for new
material. Mr Perks’ estimate was labour only, and relied on
material on site. The Tribunal doubts that there was any significant quantity of
unused material on site, and that there
were many installed items that required
rectification and could not readily be reused. The Tribunal accepts Mr
Cornish’s general
view that some fresh material would have had to be
introduced to overcome some of the problems though the Tribunal doubts that as
many as 100 studs would have required replacement.
718) Mr Cornish’s general estimate is preferred also because
it was a more thorough and detailed attempt to estimate costs than
furnished by Mr Perks and is given by an experienced builder as compared to Mr
Cowper. But the Tribunal is not satisfied on
the basis of the photographs and
other evidence presented that the extent of replacement of timber given by Mr
Cornish is justified.
Some allowance should also be made to take account of
Challita’s duty to mitigate his loss. There was no evidence of any attempt
to protect the works by way of some form of covering.
719) The Tribunal’s assessment is that 12 man-days should be
allowed for the rectification works at the rate of $35 per hour.
That reduces Mr
Cornish’s estimate by half to $3360 and a small allowance should be made
for replacement timber, $300.
720) As previously indicated, the Tribunal’s conclusion is
that only a relatively small amount of timber was left on site by
DevCorp and
that was removed on or about 15 December overnight, when the site was closed and
unattended.
721) The Tribunal has already dealt at length with the evidence of
Lukac and the issue of what unused material belonging to DevCorp
remained on
site after 15 December 1997.
722) The Tribunal is satisfied that a small amount of unused
timber - probably four lengths of 50 x 250 did remain on site at the
and Rados attended, that it most likely was timber that still belonged to
DevCorp and some allowance should be made for
that in the calculation of
damages. The Tribunal is satisfied that the price of $5.00 involved an
undervalue. The Tribunal allows
4 x 6.4 lineal metres (see purchase order 31
October, Ex22) value of $8.00 per lineal metre, being $205.00 (rounded).
723) The Tribunal considers that the amount of $3360 should be
allowed for the labour component of rectification costs with $300 allowed
new material to replace studs. That should be offset against the $205 valuation
that the Tribunal has placed on the material
given wrongly to Lukac, producing a
balance of $3455.
724) Liquidated Damages Claim
725) The right to liquidated damages expires upon the completion
of the relevant works (see generally Hudson, 1169-70).
726) In closing submissions Challita gave the period of delay in
completion caused to him by DevCorp’s departure as being 11
weeks. That
claim includes provision for the period when the work was demolished and for
time involved in recovering the work could
only be sustained if it could be
shown by Challita that it was necessary to demolish and start again, and if it
could be shown that
work then proceeded expeditiously. But the Tribunal’s
view is that the work was not so poor as to warrant demolition.
727) The Tribunal considers that the actual period of delay by
which Challita was affected comprised the 24 days from 11 December
January 1998 when no work was done plus the time it would have taken to complete
the job had the existing work been retained.
728) Because Challita proceeded to demolish, there was a delay in
getting a new team started to take over the work. That period should
taken into account in calculating the period affected by liquidated damages. LMA
Constructions’ evidence is that it
took about six weeks to do the job. A
portion of that period involved bringing the work back to the stage it was at
when the decision
to demolish was taken. This period is not allowed. As
completed, there was some adjustment done in the roof frame area to address
roof height problem. As indicated earlier, the Tribunal’s conclusion is
that there was a minor adjustment involving the
eave-line in the laundry area
plus a small raising of the pitch through the use of a soldier wall. That was
extra work as compared
to the project for which DevCorp contracted.
729) The Tribunal’s estimate is that had the project simply
continued from the point it had reached, defects had been rectified
allowance is made for the extra work associated with the alteration to the roof
height, three more weeks would have been needed.
730) This assessment gives rise to a liquidated damages period of
6 weeks and 3 days (45 days), for which the damages payable pursuant
the contract are $9000.
731) Other Damages Claims
732) Demolition Costs: As already noted, the Tribunal’s view
is that the work was not so bad as to require substantial demolition.
event, the Tribunal notes that the quote placed before it for $12,600 was given
by LMA Constructions, which did not do the
work. The evidence was unclear as to
who did this work, and what was actually paid. The claim is
disallowed.
733) Challita makes two other claims, one for the difference in
price between the uncompleted contract and the completed contract,
the other for
extra costs associated with electrical works.
734) Additional Cost of Completion: Under general principles the
innocent party is entitled to damages attributable to the loss of
the original
bargain. As Hudson notes at [8-123] ‘in those cases where, in breach of
contract, the work has been left incomplete
or containing defects, whether by
abandonment or determination or otherwise, the measure of damages will prima
facie be the difference
between the reasonable cost to the owner of repairing
the defects or completing the work, together with any sums paid by or due from
him under the contract, and the sums which would have been payable by him under
the contract if it had been properly carried out.’
735) The defects claim has already been dealt with. In addition
Challita seeks the difference between the price agreed with DevCorp
price paid to LMA Constructions was, it is said, $14,050. The quote given by LMA
Constructions for the re-erection of the
frames had an element of $5,500 which
related to the cost of replacing the flooring joists with 300 x 50, ripping
flooring up and
tip charges. The Tribunal’s conclusion is that that work
was undertaken as part of the demolition and was not done by LMA Constructions.
736) The balance of the quote, separately itemised, was for the
amount of $60,000. That leaves a real difference between the two contracts
$8,500. For the reasons already given, the Tribunal does not regard it as having
been necessary for the work to have been completed
re-done. Two-thirds of the
work remained to be completed. Consequently, at most, only two-thirds of the
difference between the two
prices might be allowed under this head (i.e. $5667
to nearest dollar).
737) As noted in dealing with this matter in the survey of
evidence, how much was actually paid to LMA by Challita was not proven.
noted, Challita acknowledged that his son did some work for that company which
gave rise to deductions from the price paid to
LMA of, what were regarded as,
his son’s wages.
738) Challita said that he paid for the materials when they were
delivered to the site because the contractor said he was short of
acknowledged that these details were not set out in his affidavits. As the
Tribunal noted earlier, “This evidence
points to some private arrangement
the details of which are not clear to the Tribunal”.
739) The Tribunal does not have any satisfactory evidence before
it establishing the actual difference between the two contract prices.
is disallowed in its entirety.
740) The final element of claim relates to the electrician’s
charges. Challita was charged an extra $2,200 as against the original
he accepted from the electrician, Mr Saliba, because Saliba had to put off doing
the job by several months because of
DevCorp’s work not being completed in
December 1997 as had been anticipated. Saliba explained in evidence that he
the price because he had missed out another job in the
December-January period when Challita’s job fell through.
741) Challita had other options open to him when Saliba sought to
raise the price. He could have sought to hold Saliba to the original
got quotes from other electricians. The evidence is insufficient to satisfy the
Tribunal that the increased price was caused
by the delay in completion of works
by DevCorp. Had there been some element to Saliba’s original quote
stipulating a scheduled
starting date, and a penalty for that not being met, the
position may be different. The claim is disallowed.
742) Quantum Meruit Claim
743) It will be apparent from the reasons given that the Tribunal
considers that Challita did derive some benefit from the work done
before DevCorp ceased work. The Tribunal does not accept Challita’s
proposition that the work was valueless.
744) The case-law on principles to be applied in determining the
amount recoverable by way of quantum meruit mainly deal with circumstances
the claimant is an innocent party in respect of the breach of contract. In cases
of that kind (where a supervening factor such
as unenforceability prevents
reliance on the contract) the appropriate approach to assessment of the amount
due in quantum meruit
to a supplier of work and materials has been held to be
the reasonable cost of the work done and the money expended, rather than
the value of the work to the owner: see generally Renard Constructions (ME) Pty
Ltd v Minister for Public Works
(1992) 26 NSWLR 234 (CA)
at 276 per Meagher JA;
and an allowance may be made in making that calculation for a reasonable profit
element: Gray (Constructions)
Pty Ltd v Hogan
[2000] NSWCA 26
per Mason P at
[10]. Moreover, the contract price does not provide a ceiling in determining the
appropriate remuneration. Because
restitutionary principles are the foundation
of the claim, the claimant may recover more by way of quantum meruit than would
been permitted under the contract. This approach, which has been the
subject of criticism (see Covell & Lupton, Principles of
Remedies (1995) at
[4.36]) does have the benefit of acting as a deterrent to unlawful termination
on the part of the recipient of
the services (see Hudson [1-272]).
745) But in this case, DevCorp is the party in breach. Nonetheless
it would seem that in principle the party in breach should remain
entitled to be
recompensed for the value of any benefit that it has conferred on the innocent
party. Though much criticised (see
Goff & Jones, The Law of Restitution (4th
ed 1993) (Goff & Jones) 444-447, the common law position is less generous
not fully reflect this principle.
746) At common law a defaulting party may not recover any amount
by way of quantum meruit where the contract was an entire contract:
[1898] 1 QB 673
; Steele v Tardiani
[1946] HCA 21
(1946) 72 CLR 386.
If the contract is
not entire but divisible the position is that ‘the party in breach can
recover payment under the contract
for any divisible part or parts of service
rendered or goods supplied by him under the contract’: Goff & Jones
Goff & Jones provide the following test for distinguishing an
entire contract from a divisible one (at 409):
entire contract is one which provides expressly or impliedly that a party must
perform his part in full before he can recover
any part of the price or other
consideration due to him under the contract; in particular, in the absence of
anything to the contrary,
a contract is held impliedly so to provide where the
consideration is a lump sum or is otherwise unapportioned, or where the payment
of the consideration is postponed until completion of the
747) In the present case, the parties have in the body of the
contract described it as a ‘lump sum’ contract as distinct
‘schedule of rates’ contract. But the contract did provide for
progress payments at various percentage stages
of completion of the works. The
entire consideration was not postponed until completion of the works.
Accordingly, it constitutes
a divisible contract; see, for example, Ruxley
Electronics Ltd v Forsyth (1995) 3 WLR 118 at 129 where the House of Lords noted
criticism (in an appeal dealing with other questions) that the primary
judge found the contract was divisible because it provided
for progress
payments. The contract was for construction of a swimming pool.
748) DevCorp should be recompensed for the value of its work on a
rateable basis by reference to the contract price. But as a party
in breach it
should not be afforded the possibility available to an innocent party of
recovering more through application of general
restitutionary principles than
might apply if the contract was used as the reference point. In this case in any
event it does appear
that the contract price was similar to the market price at
the time for work of the kind DevCorp contracted to do.
749) An appropriate approach would be to allow 34 per cent as the
starting figure and then deduct from that the cost of rectification
750) That calculation gives a starting figure of: $17,510. That
should be offset against the amount of $3360 that has been allowed
labour component of rectification costs with $300 allowed for incorporation of
new material to replace existing timber especially
studs. That should be offset
against the $205 valuation that the Tribunal has placed on the material supplied
wrongly to Lukac for
work done by him.
751) Consequently, the net amount due to DevCorp under the quantum
meruit claim is $14,245.
CONCLUSIONS
752) Accordingly the applicant, DevCorp, is successful in its
application for an order that the respondent, Challita, recompense it
quantum meruit basis for work done and materials supplied, in the amount of
753) The respondent, Challita, is successful in his cross-claim
for damages, in that DevCorp unlawfully repudiated the contract made
November 1997 with him by ceasing to perform work under the contract as from 4
December 1997 and failing to complete by 10
December 1997. His claims for
rectification have been dealt with by way of reductions to the quantum meruit
claim. He is also entitled
to an order that DevCorp pay him $9000 by way of
liquidated damages.
Some Observations
754) These proceedings were conducted for almost their entirety in
the Commercial Tribunal. That Tribunal had a general power to make
an award as
to costs, as it thought fit:
Commercial Tribunal Act 1984
The practice as
to costs in that Tribunal was to follow normal Court practice of ordinarily
making an order as to costs in favour
of the successful party. Both parties in
these proceedings sought orders as to costs as part of their claim. The
proceedings were
conducted for the entirety of the presentation of evidence in
the Commercial Tribunal.
755) By dint of provisions closing that Tribunal and transferring
all remaining business to the Fair Trading Tribunal, the question
of costs now
falls to be addressed under the provisions governing the Fair Trading Tribunal.
In this Tribunal the principal rule
is that parties bear their own costs: Fair
Trading Tribunal Act 1998, s 48.
756) DevCorp has succeeded on its quantum meruit claim. Challita
has succeeded in his cross-claim. But in both instances they have
partially successful as compared with their overall claims.
757) DevCorp succeeded on its quantum meruit claim, though the
amount awarded is lower than its estimate. Challita succeeded in establishing
that DevCorp by ceasing work had thereby repudiated the contract causing him a
delay of 45 days’ duration. He did not succeed
in relation to the
questions of whether the works done were so bad as to be valueless and require
demolition.
758) The parties have sought an opportunity to address on costs in
light of the determination, and accordingly the question is reserved
for further
submissions.
1. In respect of the applicant’s application, that the
respondent pay the applicant $14,245.
2. In respect of the respondent’s cross-claim, that the
applicant pay the respondent $9,000.
3. Interest be payable in respect of Orders 1 and 2 at the rate
prescribed by cl 35 of the Fair Trading Tribunal Regulation 1999.
4. Leave to apply in respect of further orders as
i the question of the release of monies paid to the Registrar by
the applicant by way of security for the respondent’s
i costs in relation to proceedings unable to be continued on 3
December 1998 due to delay in reappointment of two members of
i costs in relation to the application made by the applicant for
the tribunal to disqualify itself made on 27 July 1999.
5. Exhibits be returned after 28 days.
certify this and the preceding 144 pages to be a true copy of the Judgement of
the Fair Trading Tribunal delivered in this matter.
Fair Trading
Judge KP O’Connor
Chairperson
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL .
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (498 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter