URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/236.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shreeve v Jourdan [2025] NSWCA 236 (28 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Shreeve v Jourdan
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 236
Hearing Date(s):
13 August 2025
Date of Orders:
28 October 2025
Decision Date:
28 October 2025
Payne JA at [1]
Kirk JA at [2]
Free JA at [3]
(1) Leave to appeal is
(2) The appellants are to file within seven days a
notice of appeal in the form filed as a draft notice of appeal on 23 May
(3) Appeal allowed.
(4) The orders
of the primary judge of 26 February 2025 are set aside and in lieu thereof the
following orders are made:
(a) The notice of motion filed 31
July 2024 is dismissed.
(b) The defendant is to pay the
costs of the plaintiffs on the notice of motion.
respondent is to pay the appellants’ costs.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Summary disposal – Dismissal of proceedings
– Abuse of process – Actions on judgments prior
to expiry of
deadline for enforcement – Proceedings brought four days before expiry of
limitation period – Whether bringing
an action on a judgment instead of
enforcing the judgment debt is necessarily an abuse of process – No
manifest unfairness
or oppression from mere delay
LIMITATION OF
ACTIONS – Action on a judgment – Interaction with enforcement
provisions in
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Limitation Act 1969
– Whether commencement of action on judgment circumvents time
restrictions which would otherwise apply – No circumvention
Legislation Cited:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Civil Procedure Act 2005
County Courts Act 1846 (9 & 10 Vict c
District Courts Act 1858
(NSW), ss 76, 80
District Court Act
Limitation Act 1969
Limitation Act 1958 (Vic), s
Limitation Act 1980 (UK), ss 17, 24
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 13.4
Cases Cited:
Bennett v Royal Bank of Scotland
[2004] EWCA Civ 988
[1853] EngR 463
(1853) 1 E & B 805
Blair v Curran
(1939) 62 CLR 464
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
[1996] HCA 25
Dennehy v Reasonable Endeavours Pty Ltd
(2003) 130 FCR 494
[2003] FCAFC 158
Duffy v De Rozzoli
[1887] NSWLawRp 38
(1887) 8 LR (NSW) 153
(Sugar) v Haryanto (Court of Appeal Transcript 17 July 1996)
GLJ v Trustees
of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[2023] HCA 32
Greville v Bird
(1867) 6 SCR (NSW) 253
Habib Bank Ltd v
Central Bank of Sudan
[2014] EWHC 2288 (Comm)
Herron v McGregor
28 A Crim R 79
Kuwait Oil Tanker Company SAK v Al Bader
[2008] EWCA Civ 183
[2008] All ER D 165
; EWHC 2432 (Comm)
Lowsley v Forbes
[1998] UKHL 34
[1998] 3 WLR
Mason v Nicholls
[1845] EngR 771
(1845) 14 M & W 118
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey
(2019) 100 NSWLR 218
[2019] NSWCA 102
O’Mara Constructions Pty
Ltd v Avery
(2006) 151 FCR 196
[2006] FCAFC 55
Williams v Jones
[1845] EngR 394
(1845) 13 M
Texts Cited:
KR Handley, Spencer Bower and Handley, Res Judicata (6th ed, 2024,
LexisNexis)
Principal judgment
Glenda Alice Shreeve (First appellant)
Colin Bruce Shreeve (Second
C&G Building Consultants Pty Ltd atf C&G Unit Trust (Third
Malachi Corporation Pty Ltd (Fourth appellant)
Raymond Brendan
Jourdan (Respondent)
Representation:
E Finnane (Appellants)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Uther Webster & Evans
(Appellants)
Results Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/106750
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[2025] NSWSC 102
Date of Decision:
23 May 2025
File Number(s):
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
In March 2006, the appellants, Mr and Mrs Shreeve and two associated
companies, obtained judgments in their favour in the District
Court against the
respondent, Mr Jourdan, requiring the payment of various sums in connection with
failed property development projects.
The debts were not paid and no enforcement
action was taken. In March 2018, four days before the expiry of the relevant
period, the appellants commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court,
relying on the available causes of action on the judgments (
2018 Supreme
Court Proceedings
). At the time those proceedings were commenced the
prescribed period of 12 years for applying for enforcement orders in respect of
the judgments (absent leave to apply out of time) was also due to expire in four
days. The practical effect of commencing the 2018
Supreme Court Proceedings was
to extend the period within which the appellants might be able to recover the
money owed, in circumstances
where the usual period for taking action to enforce
the judgments would otherwise have passed and leave would have been required
apply for enforcement orders.
On 17 July 2018, the appellants obtained a single default judgment against
the respondent for $764,442.04. No parties took any further
action until May
2024. On 6 May 2024, the appellants caused a bankruptcy notice to be
issued. This was subsequently withdrawn and
the default judgment set aside by
consent on the basis that it was defective. The respondent moved for a stay or
summary dismissal
of the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings on the basis that they
were an abuse of process. The primary judge held in the respondent’s
favour and dismissed the proceedings, on the basis that the proceedings
“circumvented” time restrictions which would
otherwise apply to the
underlying claims under
Limitation Act 1969
Civil Procedure Act 2005
The Court held, granting leave and allowing the appeal
(Free JA, Payne
and Kirk JJA agreeing):
As to the cause of action on a judgment
1. Notwithstanding various observations about the obscurity
of the cause of action and the relaxation of the rules regarding enforcement
judgments, the law has continued to recognise the availability of an action on a
judgment. The respondent concedes that the cause
of action persists and was
available to the appellants when they commenced the 2018 Supreme Court
Proceedings: [41]-[48].
Williams v Jones
[1845] EngR 394
(1845) 13 M & W 628
Reasonable Endeavours Pty Ltd
(2003) 130 FCR 494
[2003] FCAFC 158
Lowsley v Forbes
[1998] UKHL 34
[1998] 3 WLR 501
Kuwait Oil Tanker Company SAK v Al
[2008] EWCA Civ 183
[2008] All ER D 165
; EWHC 2432 (Comm), considered.
As to abuse of process
2. It is not inherently an abuse of process for a plaintiff
to bring an action on a judgment in circumstances where the plaintiff
instead have taken enforcement action directly in respect of the original
judgment. An action on a judgment, while available
as a legitimate cause of
action, can involve or become an abuse of process. The fact that the action has
been commenced within the
applicable limitation period does not mean that it is
incapable of constituting an abuse of process. However, there must be some
feature of the proceedings that warrants the characterisation of abuse of
process over and above the inherent characteristics of
the cause of action
itself: [49]-[61], [64].
Berkeley v Elderkin
[1853] EngR 463
(1853) 1 E & B 805
Greville v Bird
6 SCR (NSW) 253
Duffy v De Rozzoli
[1887] NSWLawRp 38
(1887) 8 LR (NSW) 153
[1845] EngR 771
(1845) 14 M & W 118
Bennett v Royal Bank of Scotland
[2004] EWCA Civ 988
ED & F Man (Sugar) v Haryanto
(Court of Appeal
Transcript 17 July 1996),
Kuwait Oil Tanker Company SAK v Al Bader
[2008] EWCA Civ 183
All ER D 165
; EWHC 2432 (Comm),
Habib Bank Ltd v Central Bank of Sudan
[2014] EWHC 2288 (Comm)
, considered.
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[2023] HCA 32
3. The respondent cannot point to any particular
characteristics of the litigation warranting a conclusion that the proceedings
are an abuse of process. The primary judge made no finding that the purpose of
the appellants commencing the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings
was improper. On
the evidence the appellants were not actuated by anything other than a desire to
recover the outstanding debts owed
to them. To the extent the respondent
complained of delay, the appropriate focus is upon the effect of the delay and
not the mere
fact of the effluxion of time. The respondent cannot show any
prejudice or manifest unfairness because of the delay since 2006, including
terms of the ability to conduct a fair trial: [65]-[66], [74].
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[2023] HCA 32
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v Holt
(2019) 100 NSWLR 218
[2019] NSWCA 102
4. Commencing proceedings a matter of days before the
expiry of the limitation period did not involve “avoiding” the
limitation period in any relevant sense. In the absence of any finding that the
appellants have acted in a way that is oppressive
or unfair to the respondent,
or otherwise involves the misuse of court processes, it was simply a matter of
bringing an available
action within the permitted time: [67]-[74].
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
[1996] HCA 25
Herron v McGregor
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
28 A Crim R 79
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
As to circumventing time restrictions
5. There cannot be discerned from the text, context or
Civil Procedure Act
a legislative intention that
the only available mode of achieving enforcement of the original judgment is by
enforcement within the
prescribed period under
Civil Procedure
or, after that time, with leave of the Court, to the exclusion of the
cause of action on the judgment.
Limitation Act
expressly recognises the existence of the cause of action. While there is
plainly overlap between these different ways of responding
to a judgment, an
action on a judgment is not to be treated as a mode of enforcement of the
original judgment itself, notwithstanding
that it necessarily prolongs the
period within which a plaintiff might ultimately recover the money owed: [4],
[28]-[37], [57]-[58],
Berkeley v Elderkin
[1853] EngR 463
(1853) 1 E & B 805
Greville v Bird
6 SCR (NSW) 253
, distinguished.
O’Mara Constructions Pty Ltd v Avery
(2006) 151 FCR 196
I agree with Free JA.
I agree with Free JA.
The common law recognises that when judgment is given requiring the
payment of a specified sum, the creation of the judgment debt
gives rise to a
cause of action on the judgment. The appellants (who should have a grant of
leave to bring their appeal) obtained
judgments in their favour in March 2006
against the respondent (
) requiring the payment of various
sums. The money was not paid. The appellants did not bring enforcement action in
respect of those
judgments. Instead, the appellants commenced proceedings in the
Supreme Court relying on their cause of action on the 2006 judgments.
so within the period allowed for actions of this kind under
Limitation Act 1969
Limitation Act
The practical effect was to extend the period within which the appellants might
be able to achieve satisfaction of their entitlement
to be paid the outstanding
sums, in circumstances where the usual period for taking action to enforce the
2006 judgments would otherwise
have passed and leave would have been required to
apply for enforcement orders.
question which arises on the application for leave to appeal is whether the
institution or maintenance of the Supreme Court proceedings
constituted an abuse
of process. The primary judge held that it did and dismissed the proceedings
accordingly. For the reasons developed
below, I respectfully disagree with his
Honour’s conclusion. The appellants had a legitimate cause of action which
they properly
invoked. There was nothing exceptional in the factual
circumstances relating to the institution or maintenance of those proceedings
that gave rise to an abuse of process. Mr Jourdan could not establish that he
was prejudiced by the delay. The fact that the appellants
had alternative rights
to enforce the 2006 judgment debts, which they did not exercise, does not mean
that it was an abuse of process
to take the course of suing on the judgments,
with all of the consequences that necessarily follow from invoking that cause of
Contrary to the approach taken by the primary judge, the provisions of
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil Procedure Act
governing the enforcement of judgments are not frustrated or circumvented where
a plaintiff chooses to bring an action on the judgment
rather than seek
enforcement of the original judgment. The fact that this prolongs the period
within which a plaintiff might achieve
ultimate satisfaction by recovering the
money owed is a reflection of the inherent characteristics of the cause of
The parties and the original dispute between the
appellants and Jourdan
first appellant, Glenda Shreeve, and the second appellant, Colin Shreeve, are
married. Mr Shreeve is the sole director of both
the third appellant (
G Building Consultants
) and the fourth appellant (
Corporation
). In the period before December 2003, the appellants were
involved in property development projects with a number of parties, including
project with Mr Jourdan. In December 2003 the appellants terminated their
involvement with the projects. The termination was the
subject of a deed dated
19 December 2003 (
December 2003 Deed
the December 2003 Deed, Mr Jourdan agreed to pay $145,000 to the Shreeves by 30
June 2004. Mr Jourdan was the guarantor of a
promise by another party to pay
$115,000 to C & G Building Consultants by 30 April 2004. He was also the
guarantor of a promise
by another party to pay $50,000 to Malachi Corporation by
30 June 2004. None of the money was paid in accordance with those promises.
2004 Proceedings in District Court and subsequent events
July 2004 the Shreeves commenced proceedings in the District Court claiming
against Mr Jourdan (and other parties who were guarantors
under the December
2003 Deed) $145,000 plus interest under the
District Court Act 1973
(NSW), for breach of the promise to pay under the December 2003 Deed. In
August 2004 C & G Building Consultants commenced proceedings
in the same
court claiming $115,000 plus interest from Mr Jourdan, by way of enforcement of
the guarantee he had given under the
December 2003 Deed. In August 2005 an
equivalent claim was brought by Malachi Corporation against Mr Jourdan for
$50,000 plus interest.
20 March 2006 the three District Court proceedings were resolved in favour of
the plaintiffs in each matter. Judgment was given
for the respective plaintiffs
for each of their claims (
2006 District Court Judgments
Jourdan did not pay any of the judgment debts owed to the respective plaintiffs
(being the present appellants). Both Mr Jourdan
and the appellants experienced
financial difficulties in 2006 and following. The appellants were concerned that
Mr Jourdan was on
the verge of bankruptcy and considered there to be a low
prospect of recovery from him. In those circumstances the appellants were
willing to incur the costs of enforcement action against Mr Jourdan and no
such action was taken.
was no communication between the appellants and Mr Jourdan between 2006 and
2018. For at least some of this time Mr Jourdan
resided overseas.
Commencement of Supreme Court proceedings in March 2018 and
obtaining of a defective default judgment
2017 the Shreeves became aware that Mr Jourdan was living in Sydney. They sought
legal advice. Following that legal advice, proceedings
were commenced by the
filing of a statement of claim in the Supreme Court on 16 March 2018
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings
). This was four days short of 12 years
after the 2006 District Court Judgments. That deadline was significant because
12 years is
the limitation period for bringing an action on a judgment. It is
also the prescribed period for seeking enforcement orders under
Procedure Act
in respect of those judgments. After 20 March 2018 it would
become necessary to obtain leave to apply for such enforcement orders.
link between the provision of legal advice and the commencement of the Supreme
Court claim was addressed in the evidence of both
Mr Shreeve and Mrs Shreeve in
the proceedings before the primary judgment. The affidavit of Mr Shreeve
included the following:
22. Thereafter we met with a solicitor, David Hooper
(Mr Hooper), about the prospect of recovering the judgments. After speaking
with Mr Hooper, I understand that there was a limitations period to enforce the
judgments in the District Court Proceedings which
was about to end.
As such, we decided to start new proceedings so that we could
recover those judgment debts, and the Statement of Claim was filed
proceedings on 16 March 2018.
Shreeve also gave evidence about the purpose of commencing the 2018 Supreme
Court Proceedings. She said that her intention in
filing the statement of claim
was “to recover judgments for the judgment debts under the
District Court Proceedings”.
statement of claim in the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings is brief and
straightforward in its pleading of the claims relied upon
by the appellants. In
respect of the claim made by the Shreeves the appellants plead that the Shreeves
commenced proceedings in the
District Court for monies due to them by Mr Jourdan
on a specialty debt, as a result of which they recovered judgment against Mr
Jourdan in the sum of $167,446.71. It is further pleaded that the judgment
remains wholly due and unsatisfied, and that in the premises
Mr Jourdan is
indebted to the Shreeves for $167,446.71. Interest is sought pursuant to
Civil Procedure Act
and the amount of interest said to be due is
specifically pleaded.
equivalent claim of C & G Building Consultants is pleaded, in the amount of
$134,530.36 plus interest. In relation to Malachi
Corporation, equivalent
allegations are made in support of a claim for $58,491.78 plus interest.
17 July 2018 the appellants obtained default judgment against Mr Jourdan in the
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings. However, the default
judgment was defective. It
took the form of a single judgment for $764,442.04 in favour of all of the
appellants. That was defective
in circumstances where the pleaded claims
concerned the appellants in separate capacities in relation to three distinct
appellants appear not to have appreciated that there was a problem with the
default judgment until 2024. In the meantime, they
did not take any action to
enforce the default judgment. Nor did Mr Jourdan take any action between 2018
and 2024 to set aside the
default judgment or pay the amounts owing to the
appellants.
6 May 2024 the appellants caused a bankruptcy notice to be issued based on the
default judgment for $764,442.04. After the bankruptcy
notice was served on Mr
Jourdan, solicitors acting for him wrote to the solicitors for the appellants
pointing out the defect in
the default judgment which I have described above.
Following that correspondence, the appellants consented to orders on 10 July
setting aside the default judgment on the basis of the defect identified by
Mr Jourdan’s solicitors. The bankruptcy notice
which had been issued in
May 2024 was also withdrawn.
5 August 2024 Mr Jourdan filed a defence to the statement of claim. The only
matter relied on as a defence to the claims is that
the proceedings disclose no
reasonable cause of action and are an abuse of
Application for strike out or permanent stay and
judgment below
Consistently
with the position pleaded in his defence, Mr Jourdan filed a notice of motion
seeking that the whole of the statement
of claim be struck out or, further or
alternatively, that the proceedings be permanently stayed as an abuse of
process. The interlocutory
application was later expanded to include an
application for summary dismissal under r 13.4 of the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW). That was put forward as an alternative form of order
if the Court concluded that the proceedings were an abuse of process:
r 13.4(1)(c). The power to stay proceedings, including on the basis that
they are an abuse of process, is conferred by
Civil Procedure
critical feature of the argument on the notice of motion was that Mr Jourdan
accepted that a judgment debt does create a new cause
of action by which a
plaintiff may bring an action on the judgment. It followed that, as the primary
judge observed in his reasons
for judgment, despite the terms of the notice of
motion Mr Jourdan did not in fact contend that no reasonable cause of action was
disclosed in the statement of claim. The sole basis for the interlocutory
application was the contention that the proceedings were
an abuse of process.
Jourdan has maintained the same approach on appeal. Argument in this Court thus
proceeded on the basis that the cause of action
invoked by the appellants in the
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings is one that continues to be recognised by the
essence of Mr Jourdan’s contention about abuse of process before the
primary judge was a complaint about the long period
of time that had passed
since the 2006 District Court Judgments. Measured at the date of hearing of the
notice of motion before the
primary judge, almost 19 years had passed since
those judgments were given. Mr Jourdan contended that the passage of time
to an “inordinate delay”, and that he had suffered
prejudice as a result. He relied in this regard on the significant
interest being claimed by the appellants in the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings.
primary judge essentially rejected Mr Jourdan’s complaint about prejudice
to him. On the question of his exposure to liability
to pay interest, his Honour
noted that it would remain open to Mr Jourdan to argue at trial that the Court
ought not order interest
Civil Procedure Act
including because of delay by the appellants in bringing the proceedings.
Moreover, in circumstances where the purpose of interest
is to compensate the
appellants for being kept out of the judgment sums which Mr Jourdan was obliged
to pay and has not paid, the
primary judge did not accept that the claim for
interest was a source of relevant prejudice.
to the possibility that the passage of time might entail prejudice because of
the delay in the trial of factual issues, the primary
judge suggested that when
a trial is conducted after a lengthy delay there is a presumed prejudice, but
that in the case of Mr Jourdan
“the presumption is weak”. That is
because the appellants sue on debts which are capable of being proved by the
of the District Court. There is no room for Mr Jourdan to dispute either
the existence of the debts or the fact that they have not
been paid. To the
extent that there might be factual issues about the reasonableness of the claim
for interest having regard to events
since 2006, that was not a matter that
meant a fair trial was no longer possible.
support of the proposition that there is a presumption that prejudice is likely
to be involved in the conduct of a trial after
a lengthy delay, his Honour cited
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
[1996] HCA 25
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
at 555 per McHugh J. It is necessary to say more about the judgment of McHugh J
in that case when considering the resolution of
the application for leave to
appeal. For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that the judgment should
not be treated as establishing
or recognising a general presumption that a trial
after a lengthy delay will entail prejudice. The point being made by McHugh J at
555 regarding “presumptive prejudice” was tied to his Honour’s
observation that legislatures make a judgment when
enacting limitation periods
that the chance of an unfair trial occurring “after the limitation period
has expired” is
sufficiently great to require the termination of the
plaintiff’s right of action at the end of that period.
primary judge accepted a submission of Mr Jourdan that the explanation given by
the Shreeves of their failure to take steps prior
to March 2018 to enforce the
2006 District Court Judgments was “vague and unpersuasive”.
His Honour described the evidence
given by the Shreeves on that topic as
“superficial”. His Honour likewise accepted Mr Jourdan’s
submission that
there was an absence of explanation for the inaction of the
appellants after they obtained default judgment in the Supreme Court
2018. However, notwithstanding those findings, his Honour did not consider that
the delay that had occurred was itself sufficient
to warrant the proceedings
being stayed or dismissed, in circumstances where neither actual prejudice nor
any other form of manifest
unfairness to Mr Jourdan was established.
argument which found favour with the primary judge was that the bringing of the
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings “circumvented”
time restrictions
which would otherwise apply to the underlying claims. Mr Jourdan’s
argument in this regard focused on
Limitation Act
Civil Procedure Act
concept of “circumvention” is a loaded one and care needs to be
taken to unpick the different aspects of the argument
advanced by Mr Jourdan. In
relation to
Limitation Act
, it was emphasised by Mr Jourdan
that the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings were commenced a few days before the
expiry of the applicable
limitation period of twelve years under
factual level the contention was that the purpose of commencing those
proceedings was to “avoid” the time restrictions
otherwise apply to taking enforcement action in respect of the 2006 District
Court Judgments. This was said to have been
“admitted” in the
evidence of the Shreeves.
argument building from
Civil Procedure Act
understood in the broader context of
of that Act, of which s 134 is part.
Section 103
Civil Procedure Act
, which is also in
provides that, subject to
, the procedure for enforcing a judgment or
order of the court is to be as prescribed by rules of court. Various rules are
so prescribed,
for example in
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(concerning measures for enforcing judgments and orders of the Supreme
Court and District Court). Pursuant to
a judgment debt (which is
defined in s 3 to include any amount payable under a judgment) may be enforced
by means of a writ for the
levy of property, a garnishee order or, in the case
of a judgment of the Supreme Court or the District Court, a charging order. A
writ for the levy of property is a form of writ of execution, according to the
definition in
significance of
Civil Procedure Act
for Mr Jourdan’s
argument is that it provides that an application by a judgment creditor for a
writ of execution, a garnishee
order, a charging order or an order for
examination may not be made, except by leave of the court, if the prescribed
period has elapsed
since the judgment was given or registered pursuant to
Except where the uniform rules prescribe a different period, the
“prescribed period” is twelve years:
Thus, as the heading
Civil Procedure Act
indicates, after the expiry of the
prescribed period judgments become “stale” when it comes to
enforcement by means of
writs of execution and similar measures.
temporal restriction is not absolute, because under
Civil Procedure Act
a court may give leave for an application by a
judgment creditor after the prescribed period has elapsed. The primary judge
particular emphasis on this feature of the statutory scheme:
[89] In any event, the modern temporal restriction on enforcing
a judgment has an inbuilt flexibility which ought ensure that a
creditor will not be shut out if it is fair, reasonable or just that enforcement
still be permitted in the circumstances
of the particular case. To put it the
will only preclude enforcement where it is not fair, reasonable
or just for enforcement to be permitted.
Civil Procedure Act
expressly provides that nothing in
Civil Procedure Act
limits the manner in which a
judgment or order of the court may be enforced apart from that Act.
primary judge construed
Civil Procedure Act
as manifesting
a legislative intention that in circumstances where a party is seeking to rely
on a judgment that is more than twelve
years old the appropriate (and
effectively exclusive) mechanism for enforcement is to seek leave under
Civil Procedure Act
so as to obtain enforcement of
that judgment outside the prescribed period. Based on that understanding of the
purpose and effect
Civil Procedure Act
, his Honour
characterised a party proceeding instead on a cause of action on the judgment as
“circumvent[ing] a liberal regime
imposed by Parliament”.
is evidently because the practical effect of proceeding on such a cause of
action can be to facilitate, or potentially facilitate,
enforcement of a new
judgment debt, outside the prescribed period that applied to the original
judgment debt and without going through
the process of obtaining leave under
Civil Procedure Act
the facts of the present case, the circumvention was not one that occurred
immediately at the point of filing, but rather as a
likely future consequence if
the proceedings came to fruition. When the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings were
commenced the appellants
were still within time to apply under
Civil Procedure Act
for enforcement of the 2006 District Court
Judgments. Had the appellants chosen instead to enforce the 2006 District Court
by application to a court under
they would not have required
leave. They could not be described at that point in time as circumventing the
time limit in
or the requirement for leave in respect of applications
outside the prescribed period. Any circumvention could only occur if and
the appellants were put in the position of being able to enforce a new judgment
debt after 20 March 2018. Although the primary
judge did not express the issue
in these terms, his Honour’s concern was evidently that the proceedings
were instituted in
a way that facilitated this later circumvention and/or that
maintenance of the proceedings after 20 March 2018 became an abuse of
because of that consequence.
Proceedings
of the kind brought by the applications on the cause of action on the judgment
will, the primary judge found, “deprive
Mr Jourdan, the Court and the
public interest of the safeguards sought to be provided by the requirement for
leave under
, which safeguards are intended by Parliament”. This
outcome was said to be “manifestly unfair to Mr Jourdan because he
deprived of the safeguards Parliament intends him to have. For the same reasons,
the outcome may otherwise bring the administration
of justice into
disrepute”. In formulating the conclusions in these terms, his Honour was
adopting the terminology of Lord
Hunter v Chief Constable of the
West Midlands Police
[1981] UKHL 13
[1982] AC 529
at 536, where his Lordship referred
... the inherent power which any court of justice must possess to prevent misuse
of its procedure in a way which, although not inconsistent
with the literal
application of its procedural rules, would nevertheless be manifestly unfair to
a party to litigation before it,
or would otherwise bring the administration of
justice into disrepute among right-thinking people.
appellants raised a number of grounds of appeal, but the common thread was that
the primary judge erred in finding that the 2018
Supreme Court Proceedings
involved an abuse of process. The role of this Court on appeal is to determine
whether his Honour erred
in that regard, applying the correctness standard of
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[2023] HCA 32
considering the correctness of his Honour’s finding, it must be borne in
mind that dismissing or permanently staying proceedings
as an abuse of process
is an “extreme step”:
at [17]. In
Gageler and Jagot JJ said at [3]:
... the grant of a permanent stay to prevent an abuse of process involves an
ultimate decision that permitting a matter to go to
trial and the rendering of a
verdict following trial would be irreconcilable with the administration of
justice through the operation
of the adversarial system. That ultimate decision
must be one of last resort on the basis that no other option is available. This
is why only an exceptional case justifies the exercise of the power of a court
to permanently stay proceedings. If a court refuses
to exercise its jurisdiction
to hear and decide cases in other than exceptional circumstances and as a last
resort to protect the
administration of justice through the operation of the
adversarial system, that refusal itself will both work injustice and bring
administration of justice into disrepute.
argument below Mr Jourdan also drew attention to the prospect of bankruptcy
notices being issued under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Bankruptcy Act
). Pursuant to
, there is a six year time limit on the issuing of a bankruptcy notice on
the basis of a judgment debt. There is no power to extend
that time. The time
limit for issuing a bankruptcy notices in reliance on the 2006 District Court
Judgments had therefore expired
in March 2012. If the appellants were to obtain
new judgments in the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings, that would effectively
a fresh period of six years within which bankruptcy notices might be
served on Mr Jourdan.
primary judge acknowledged that it was arguable that an additional reason why
the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings were an abuse
of process was that they
exposed Mr Jourdan to a re-enlivened risk of being subject to a bankruptcy
notice in circumstances where
that risk had otherwise passed, in connection with
the 2006 District Court Judgments, in March 2012. However, his Honour did not
reach a concluded view in that regard. Mr Jourdan did not seek to argue on
appeal, by way of notice of contention, that this was
an alternative basis on
which to sustain the orders of the primary judge. In the circumstances, it is
unnecessary to give this argument
any further consideration.
nature of the cause of action on a judgment
a plaintiff successfully sues on a debt, the original cause of action merges in
the judgment and is extinguished:
Blair v Curran
[1939] HCA 23
(1939) 62 CLR 464
[1939] HCA 23
; KR Handley,
Spencer Bower and Handley, Res Judicata
(6th ed, 2024, LexisNexis) at [1.04]. Court procedures for enforcement of
the judgment may then be enlivened. But the law has also
long recognised that a
judgment requiring the payment of money also creates a cause of action on the
judgment debt itself.
cause of action is described by Pollock CB in
Williams v Jones
[1845] EngR 394
Williams v Jones
[1845] EngR 394
at 264-265 in
the following terms:
It is plain that, on principle, an action of debt will lie upon the judgment of
a competent court, whether of record or not of record;
where a party has
recovered a sum of money by the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, a
debt is created, which may be
enforced by an action of debt in the superior
P likewise held at
[1845] EngR 394
(1845) 13 M & W 628
[1845] EngR 394
The true principle is, that where a court of competent jurisdiction adjudges a
sum of money to be paid, an obligation to pay it is
created thereby, and an
action of debt may therefore be brought upon such judgment. This is the
principle upon which actions on foreign
judgments are supported
noted by Alderson P this cause of action provides a means by which judgments of
foreign courts may become enforceable. But it is
equally available as a cause of
action in relation to judgments given within the same jurisdiction.
Historically, the cause of action
had a particular utility because of limits on
the enforceability of judgments, as explained by Finkelstein J in
Reasonable Endeavours Pty Ltd
(2003) 130 FCR 494
[2003] FCAFC 158.
His Honour considered the history of the cause of action in the context of
applying s 5(4) of the
Limitation Act 1958
(Vic) which provides that an
action shall not be brought upon any judgment after the expiration of fifteen
years from the date on
which the judgment became enforceable. Finkelstein J
[8] Speaking generally, there are three categories of action on
a judgment. One is an action to enforce a foreign judgment. For
the purposes of
a limitations statute it may be necessary to draw a distinction between an
action on a foreign judgment commenced
by writ and the enforcement of a foreign
judgment after it has been registered under legislation such as the
Judgments Act 1962
(Vic). It seems to be accepted that an action on a
foreign judgment is not governed by
The reason for
this is that such an action is treated as an action for a simple contract debt
[9] The second category is a new action which is based on a
judgment debt. Such an action is probably obsolete. But it once had
... [A]t common law a judgment could not be enforced after a year and one day.
However, within that period a plaintiff
could take proceedings by action in debt
on the judgment:
Chitty's Archibald's Practice
12th ed, vol 2, 1866,
Shaw v Allen
(1914) 30 TLR 631.
If the plaintiff obtained a fresh
judgment, time would start to run again. Presumably, the plaintiff could
continuously renew a judgment
in this fashion, at least until the court decided
that he was acting in abuse of its processes. ...
[10] The final category are proceedings which may or may not
amount to "actions", namely proceedings by way of enforcement, such
as by writs
of execution.
in his judgment Finkelstein J had explained the evolution of the law in England
and Australia concerning the common law rule
that a judgment could not be
enforced after a year and one day:
[2] ... Once it was the rule that when a year and a day had
elapsed after judgment, without execution being levied, the judgment
to have been satisfied. Following the enactment of the
Westminster
(13 Edw 1 c 45) a writ of scire facias (a warning) could be
served requiring the defendant to show cause why execution should not
against him notwithstanding the lapse of one year and one day: E Coke,
First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England
(A Commentary Upon
Littleton) 291a;
Underhill v Devereux
[1845] EngR 290
(1669) 85 ER 715.
This was changed
Common Law Procedure Act 1852
(UK). Execution could then issue
within six years from the recovery of the judgment without revival. After the
expiration of six
years, a judgment could be revived by leave or by writ of
Common Law Procedure Act
, ss 128, 129, 130 and 131. In England,
following the
Judicature Acts
, these sections were replaced by rules of
court which were to the same effect. The rules were adopted by the superior
courts in Australia,
although in Victoria the writ of scire facias was
Supreme Court Act 1958
an equivalent evolution in New South Wales the position concerning enforcement
of judgments is now governed by
Civil Procedure Act
primary judge observed in the present case, the law has moved a long way from
the old common law presumption that a judgment
was presumed to have been
satisfied after a year and a day had passed. In addition to the default period
for enforcement being much
longer (twelve years as opposed to a year and a day)
the conferral of discretion on the Court to grant leave to extend time gives
additional flexibility to an already liberal regime.
have been various observations about the obscurity of the cause of action, at
least as it relates to actions on domestic judgments.
In the passage extracted
above Finkelstein J referred to such actions as now “probably
obsolete”. The Final Report of
the Law Reform Committee on Limitation of
Actions (1977) (UK) described actions on a judgment as being “nowadays
indeed” (quoted in
Lowsley v Forbes
[1998] UKHL 34
[1998] 3 WLR 501
Kuwait Oil Tanker Company SAK v Al Bader
[2008] EWCA Civ 183
[2008] All ER D 165
EWHC 2432 (Comm) at [8] Teare J described the claimants in that case as
being entitled to seek a judgment against the defendant
upon the judgment they
had obtained in their first action against him, “however surprising that
Notwithstanding
such observations, the critical point remains that despite the relaxation of the
rules regarding enforcement of judgment
the law has continued to recognise the
availability of an action on a judgment. Mr Jourdan did not refer to any
authorities that
were said to cast doubt on the ongoing existence of the cause
of action. To the contrary, as I have emphasised above, the present
been conducted on appeal, as it was before the primary judge, on the premise
that the cause of action persists and was
thus available to the appellants when
they commenced the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings.
has it been established by past decisions that it is inherently an abuse of
process for a plaintiff to bring an action on a judgment
in circumstances where
the plaintiff could instead have taken enforcement action directly in respect of
the original judgment. The
position in England, in relation to actions on
judgments of English superior courts, is described in
Spencer Bower and
Handley, Res Judicata
in the following terms:
[2.47] The general rule is that an action will lie in an
English superior court on a judgment of any such court, and the burden
defendant to establish abuse of process.
position in Australia is no different. Reference is made in the footnote to this
Berkeley v Elderkin
[1853] EngR 463
(1853) 1 E & B 805
), at 807 where Lord Campbell CJ said that “prima
facie, an action lies on the judgment of any court of competent
“unnecessarily sues on a judgment of an English superior court may be
denied costs”, citing as an example
Mason v Nicholls
[1845] EngR 771
(1845) 14 M
Berkeley v Elderkin
the prima facie position as described by Lord
Campbell CJ did not prevail, such that an action was held not to lie on a
judgment of
the County Court. That is because the legislation which had
established the County Court (
County Courts Act 1846
(9 & 10 Vict c
95)) contained special provisions regulating the ways in which execution of a
judgment of that court could be
obtained, which were narrower than the modes of
execution which would be available if judgment were issued by a superior court.
Campbell CJ concluded at 639 that it was:
... quite clear ... that the intention of the Legislature was to confine the
remedy on the judgments of courts constituted under
that Act to the remedies
specifically provided in the Act. The policy of the Act was to give an easy and
cheap remedy for the recovery
of small debts. The intention of the Legislature
will be entirely defeated if the creditor is at liberty to [adopt the course of
bringing an action on the judgment in a superior court].
provisions in question conferred protections on a judgment debtor, including by
protecting certain property from execution. Such
protections would be lost if a
fresh judgment issued in the superior court. Under s 100, the County Court was
empowered, even after
an ostensibly final judgment, to rescind or alter any
order previously made and to make orders for the payment of debts by instalments
or in any other manner as the judge may think reasonable and just. Lord Campbell
CJ at 639 held that this situation enlivened the
principle that “where new
rights are given with specific remedies, the remedy is confined to those
specifically given”.
The implication was that the legislature did not
intend that an action on the judgment could be maintained in a superior court
the nature and enforcement of the judgment was subject to such specific
regulation. The issue was not analysed in terms of abuse
of process, but rather
as a limitation on the scope of the cause of action in its application to
judgments of this particular kind.
J at 639, agreeing that an action did not lie, held that the prospect of the
County Court being empowered to alter its judgment
even while an action on that
judgment was pending in the superior court was “so absurd that the
legislature must be understood
to prohibit the action”. Erle J likewise
agreed and characterised the judgment in the County Court as being “placed
a different principle from an ordinary judgment”.
Greville v Bird
(1867) 6 SCR (NSW) 253
Greville v Bird
it was held for similar reasons that an action did not lie in the Supreme Court
of New South Wales on a District Court judgment.
The reasoning of the Court
turned on provisions of the
District Courts Act 1858
(NSW) which
conferred specific protections on a judgment debtor. Under s 76, the
District Court was empowered to order the payment
of a judgment by instalments,
while under s 80 certain things were protected from seizure. Stephen CJ
held at 254 that the situation
was relevantly indistinguishable from
. His Honour reasoned that it was “most strange, that this
Court should give judgment and issue execution against all of the
goods of the
defendant, for the immediate payment of a debt, which the District Court may on
the day previous have allowed the defendant
to pay by instalments”.
Stephen CJ explained that this conclusion was not in conflict with
, because in
Greville v Bird
the issue was governed by the
intention of the legislature, as discerned from the
District Courts Act
that a suitor’s remedies ought be confined to those provided for in that
Faucett J at 255 reached the same conclusion, reasoning
that the defendant ought not be liable to be sued in the Supreme Court on
judgment of the District Court because “if he were so liable he might, at
the option of the plaintiff, be deprived of advantages
conferred on him by
situation that pertains where there is no legislative exclusion of this kind is
illustrated by
Duffy v De Rozzoli
[1887] NSWLawRp 38
(1887) 8 LR (NSW) 153.
It was held in
that case that an action did lie in the District Court on a judgment given in
the Supreme Court, as an aspect of the
general conferral of jurisdiction on the
District Court in respect of all pleas of personal actions where the amount was
specified monetary limit. The argument to the contrary, seeking to
Berkeley v Elderkin
, was rejected in circumstances where the
defendant was unable to point to any particular protections that were bestowed
relation to the Supreme Court that could be said to be denied to him
by reason of the action in the District Court. Darley CJ at
156 reasoned that,
Greville v Bird
, there was no basis to say that the plaintiff
was confined to the particular statutory remedies that applied in the court that
given the original judgment. Sir G Innes J, agreeing, could not see the
hardship in such a state of affairs: “If a man has
incurred a judgment
debt, I do not see why he should not pay it”: 156.
Bennett v Royal Bank of Scotland
[2004] EWCA Civ 988
), Mummery LJ (with whom Baker LJ and Collins J agreed)
referred at [4] to the following statement of Leggatt LJ (with whom Morritt
Brooke LJJ agreed) in
ED & F Man (Sugar) v Haryanto
(Court of Appeal
Transcript 17 July 1996) as setting out the general principles regarding actions
on an existing judgment:
Suing on a judgment, at all events for the first time, cannot be said to defeat
legislative policy. That is plain from the very language
of s 24. ... Here the
second action was, of course, brought within that limitation period. There are
two relevant ways of enforcing
a judgment: by execution and by action. It is
plain that the Court will not give judgment in an action on a judgment unless
that the action does not constitute an abuse of process, having
regard, amongst other things, to the availability of execution. It
would, in my
judgment, be for a defendant (or a person in the position of defendant) to show
that a second action did constitute
an abuse of process; the primary obligation
is not that of a plaintiff to justify the bringing of further proceedings.
Because, in
the event of abuse of process, the Court may intervene and refrain
from giving judgment in the second action, it cannot be said that
action proceeds without judicial scrutiny, even if the second action is a matter
of right and not discretion. Of course,
it favoured the appellant in the present
proceedings that it was a matter of discretion, even though, when he came to
exercise it,
he exercised it against the appellant.
The authorities to which our attention has been drawn show that the Courts have
always held the bringing of the second action to
be a matter of right, and in my
judgment that is what it is ...
similar conclusion can be drawn from the enactment of s 17 of the
Limitation Act
legislative policy in New South Wales on enforcement of judgments
with s 24 of the
Limitation Act
(UK) (considered in
), the legislature chose to enact s 17 in a form which
recognised the ongoing availability of the cause of action on a judgment,
notwithstanding
the prevailing rules limiting execution of judgments. The
legislature can be taken to have appreciated that it was preserving a cause
action that, of its nature, can have the effect of extending the period for
enforcement of the underlying obligation beyond the
period otherwise permitted
for direct enforcement of the original judgment. The legislature must also be
taken to have understood
that the limitation period described in s 17 did not
itself affect the time within which enforcement action would otherwise be
to be taken in respect of the original judgment. The enactment of the
Limitation Act
occurred following the recommendations of the Law Reform
Commission in a report of October 1967 which relevantly included the following
The present limitation provisions here and in England concerning judgments
apply, and s 17 of the Bill would apply, to an action
on the judgment, but not
to the processes of execution of a judgment:
W & T Lamb & Sons v
([1948] 2 KB 331). When exercising discretions concerning the
execution of a judgment after a long period, however, a court has regard
effect which the statutes of limitation would have if an action were brought on
the judgment:
Jay v Johnstone
[1893] 1 KB 189.
O’Mara Constructions Pty Ltd v Avery
(2006) 151 FCR 196
[2006] FCAFC 55
, the Full Court of the Federal Court held that the
legislature can be taken to have intended that s 17 would have the effect
by the Law Reform Commission.
observations of Leggatt LJ in
ED & F Man (Sugar) v Haryanto
maintenance of “judicial scrutiny” over the second action have a
particular resonance in the present case.
One of the concerns held by the
primary judge was that the leave requirement in
Civil Procedure
establishes a form of judicial scrutiny over the bringing of actions for
the enforcement of judgments outside the prescribed period.
His Honour’s
reasoning suggests that an action on the judgment is an abuse because it avoids
judicial scrutiny. That overlooks
the mechanism of judicial scrutiny described
by Leggatt LJ, being the ability to intervene if and when the second action is
of process. It would be circular reasoning to say that such
intervention is necessarily warranted whenever a second action is commenced
because the action is not subject to the different form of scrutiny that applies
to enforcement actions under
Civil Procedure Act
the facts in
, the Court of Appeal was not satisfied that the
plaintiff bank had engaged in any abuse of process. In doing so it rejected
equivalent to those advanced by Mr Jourdan in the present case, that
the bank had commenced the proceedings to obtain a second judgment
for the sole
purpose of “circumventing” the inconvenient fact that it was statute
barred from enforcing the original
judgment: [17]-[19].
Oil Tanker Company SAK v Al Bader
[2008] EWCA Civ 183
[2008] All ER D 165
; EWHC 2432 (Comm)
illustrates the kind of factual circumstances that could potentially give rise
in a particular case to an abuse
of process in connection with an action on a
judgment, or at least the need for special conditions to avoid such an abuse
In that case the plaintiffs had taken steps to seek to enforce the
original judgment, obtained in 1998, against such assets of the
defendant as
they had been able to identify. When a substantial amount remained outstanding,
but the date of limitation for enforcement
of the 1998 judgment was imminent,
the plaintiffs commenced an action on the 1998 judgment. At that time
enforcement action was ongoing,
including in Switzerland. In order to address
the overlap between the ongoing enforcement action and the new proceedings the
undertook that enforcement of any judgment in the second action would
be stayed until they had obtained permission from the Court
to enforce it, which
would give the opportunity the opportunity to review the matter and ascertain
that enforcement was appropriate
in the circumstances. The Court was satisfied
that in the circumstances the second proceedings were not an abuse of process.
same conclusion was reached in
Habib Bank Ltd v Central Bank of Sudan
[2014] EWHC 2288 (Comm)
on the basis of an equivalent condition being
imposed on enforcement of the second judgment.
Disposition of
the application for leave and the appeal
of the loaded language sought to be attached by Mr Jourdan, the state of affairs
facing the appellants as of 16 March 2018
was simply this:
(1) as a matter of direct enforcement action the 2006 District Court Judgments
were about to become stale. Unless they made an application
for a writ for the
levy of property, a garnishee order or a charging order in respect of the 2006
District Court Judgments by 20
March 2018, the appellants would only be
able to pursue that option for enforcement if they obtained leave under
Civil Procedure Act
(2) an alternative to direct enforcement action of that kind in respect of the
earlier judgments was the commencement of a new action
on the judgments, which
was still within time but needed to be commenced by 20 March 2018;
(3) the new action on the judgments, if successful, would have the practical
effect of allowing more time to seek recovery of the
outstanding money from Mr
Jourdan, including if necessary by taking enforcement action in respect of new
judgments if and when obtained
on that action; and
(4) the potential enforcement action that might be taken on the basis of new
judgments would include enforcement action under the
Civil Procedure Act
(within twelve years of the future judgments) and issuing a bankruptcy
notice within six years of judgment, pursuant to
this context, there is nothing remarkable about the evidence given by the
Shreeves to explain why they commenced the 2018 Supreme
Court Proceedings. The
Shreeves wanted to recover the outstanding judgment debts. They filed the 2018
Supreme Court Proceedings with
a view to achieving that outcome. It may readily
be inferred that they understood, having taken legal advice, that this was a
option available to them as a means of recovering the money owed to
light of the authorities considered above, it may be accepted that an action on
a judgment, while available as a legitimate cause
of action, can nevertheless
involve or become an abuse of process. The fact that the action has been
commenced within the applicable
limitation period does not mean that it is
incapable of constituting an abuse of process:
at [37]. However,
there must be some feature of the proceedings that warrants the characterisation
of abuse of process over and above
the inherent characteristics of the cause of
action itself.
the present case the primary judge made no finding that the purpose of the
appellants commencing the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings
was in any sense
improper, at least as that concept would ordinarily be understood in the context
of abuse of process. There was
no basis on the evidence to reach a conclusion
that the appellants were actuated by anything other than a desire to recover the
outstanding
debts that Mr Jourdan owed them.
the extent that Mr Jourdan complained of “delay” in commencing the
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings, the appropriate
focus is upon the effect of the
delay, in particular on the trial process, and not the mere fact of the
effluxion of time:
at [43], citing the analysis of Bell P in
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v Holt
(2019) 100 NSWLR 218
[2019] NSWCA
. Here the difficulty for Mr Jourdan is that he cannot show that
he will suffer any manifest unfairness because of the delay since
including in terms of the ability to conduct a fair trial. As explained above
the primary judge rejected Mr Jourdan’s
complaints of prejudice.
is also important to emphasise that the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings were
commenced within the time period allowed by s 17 of
Limitation Act
Brisbane South Regional Authority v Taylor
McHugh J considered the
nature and purpose of statutory limitation periods. This was in the context of
an application under
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
for an extension of time to bring a claim outside the limitation period. His
Honour at 552 noted that the effect of delay on
the quality of justice is
“no doubt one of the most important influences motivating a legislature to
enact limitation periods
for commencing actions”. After identifying three
other broad rationales for the enactment of limitation periods, his Honour
A limitation period should not be seen therefore as an arbitrary cut off point
unrelated to the demands of justice or the general
welfare of society. It
represents the legislature's judgment that the welfare of society is best served
by causes of action being
litigated within the limitation period,
notwithstanding that the enactment of that period may often result in a good
cause of action
being defeated.
Honour further developed the point at 555:
Legislatures enact limitation periods because they make a judgment, inter alia,
that the chance of an unfair trial occurring after
the limitation period has
expired is sufficiently great to require the termination of the
plaintiff’s right of action at the
end of that period.
Honour made similar observations in
Herron v McGregor
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
28 A Crim R 79
, quoted with approval in
follows that there is a critical difference between commencing an action within
the prescribed limitation period and seeking to
commence an action outside that
period. His Honour said, at 555:
If the action had been brought within time, it would have been irrelevant that,
by reason of the delay in commencing the action,
Dr Chang might have had little
independent recollection of his conversation with the appellant and that the
defendant might have
had difficulty in fairly defending itself. But once the
potential liability of the defendant had ended, its capacity to obtain a
trial, if an extension of time were granted, was relevant and important. To
subject a defendant once again to a potential liability
that has expired may
often be a lesser evil than to deprive the plaintiff of the right to reinstate
the lost action. This will often
be the case where the plaintiff is without
fault and no actual prejudice to the defendant is readily apparent. But the
a plaintiff's claim is seldom likely to be strong enough to warrant a
court reinstating a right of action against a defendant who,
by reason of delay
in commencing the action, is unable to fairly defend itself or is otherwise
prejudiced in fact and who is not
guilty of fraud, deception or concealment in
respect of the existence of the action.
these matters are appreciated, there is little substance in Mr Jourdan’s
complaint that the appellants only commenced the
2018 Supreme Court Proceedings
a matter of days before the expiry of the limitation period that applied. This
is not, as Mr Jourdan
would have it, a matter of “avoiding” the
limitation period. It is simply a matter of bringing an available action within
the permitted time.
is there any finding that the appellants have acted in the context of the
proceedings themselves in a way that is oppressive or
unfair to Mr Jourdan, or
otherwise involves the misuse of court processes. Despite the long passage of
time between the 2006 District
Court Judgments and today, there has in fact been
very little engagement with the Court’s processes. The period between the
giving of the District Court judgments in March 2006 and the commencement of
proceedings in the Supreme Court in March 2018 did not
involve the process of
any court. At most, the complaint of Mr Jourdan is that the appellants could
have invoked the processes of
a court by bringing enforcement action but they
the commencement of the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings the appellants moved
efficiently to obtain default judgment against Mr
Jourdan. Default judgment was
obtained four months after the commencement of proceedings. No complaint is made
for this to occur, or the manner in which it came about.
Again, there was a period of dormancy, from July 2018 and May 2024, when
was no engagement with the processes of the Supreme Court. There is no sense in
which it can be said that during this period
the appellants abused the processes
of the Court.
bottom line is that Mr Jourdan cannot point to any particular characteristics of
the litigation that warrant a conclusion that
the proceedings are an abuse of
process. That is so whether one focuses on the actions and purpose of the
appellants at the point
of commencement of the proceedings, or the maintenance
of the proceedings beyond 20 March 2018, or in 2024. The absence of any finding
in his favour of prejudice is particularly telling. Properly scrutinised, his
argument reduces to the proposition that to commence
an action on a judgment is
necessarily
to “circumvent” the legislature’s intention
that the only available mode of enforcement of the original judgment
enforcement within the prescribed period under
Civil Procedure
or, after that time, with leave of the Court. That is the notion
implicit in Mr Jourdan’s submission that the appellants brought
administration of justice into disrepute by filing an action which
“avoided” the time limit in
The primary judge in substance
accepted that proposition. His Honour’s reasoning did not turn on any
particular feature of
the evidence or any particular step taken or not taken in
the course of the 2018 Supreme Court Proceedings.
error in this approach, with respect, is that it attributes to the legislature
an intention that the regime in
Civil Procedure Act
enforcement of judgments is exclusive to the point that it would be undermined
by allowing for an action on a judgment that
can give rise to a fresh judgment,
and a prospect of later enforcement on that judgment. No such intention can be
discerned from
the text, context or purpose of
Civil Procedure
The law has long recognised that an action on a judgment involves a
response to a judgment which is distinct from direct enforcement
or execution of
that judgment. A necessary characteristic of the cause of action is that any
subsequent judgment will bring with
it the prospect of enforcement at a time
which is later than the time at which enforcement of the original judgment might
occur. That includes the prospect of enforcement of the subsequent
judgment at a time when it may no longer be possible to enforce
the original
judgment giving rise to the cause of action.
explained above, s 17 of the
Limitation Act
was enacted in a form which
expressly recognised the existence of the cause of action and in circumstances
where the legislature appreciated
that there were separate rules governing the
execution of judgments. There is plainly an overlap between those different ways
responding to a judgment, given that an action on a judgment is another means
by which a creditor may achieve satisfaction of an
entitlement to be paid. But
it is not to be treated, either in form or substance, as a mode of enforcement
of the original judgment
itself, in the sense in which
Procedure Act
uses that concept
Once this context is appreciated,
there is not a sound basis to conclude that the legislature’s objectives
in enacting
are undermined by allowing judgment creditors to take the
alternative course of bringing an action outside
conclusions are reinforced by
, which provides expressly that nothing in
“limits the manner in which a judgment or order of the court may be
enforced apart from this Act”. Even if an action
on a judgment is to be
characterised for these purposes as a means of “enforcing” a
judgment (which in my view is not
an accurate characterisation), s 138(1) makes
clear that the provisions of Part 8 were not intended to be exhaustive to the
of rendering it an abuse of process to bring such an action.
is not a situation, of the kind that arose in
Berkeley v Elderkin
Greville v Bird
, where the 2006 District Court Judgments were subject to
a special statutory regime affecting enforceability, the effect of which
be subverted by the prospect of fresh judgments to be obtained in the Supreme
Court. Aside from the temporal limitations that
have already been addressed, Mr
Jourdan did not submit that, having regard to
Civil Procedure
and any applicable rules of court, there was any relevant difference
between enforceability of the 2006 District Court Judgments
and the prospective
future enforceability of judgments obtained in the 2018 Supreme Court
Proceedings.
orders that I consider appropriate are:
(1) Leave to appeal is granted.
(2) The appellants are to file within seven days a notice of appeal in the form
filed as a draft notice of appeal on 23 May 2025.
(3) Appeal allowed.
(4) The orders of the primary judge of 26 February 2025 are set aside and in
lieu thereof the following orders are made:
(a) The notice of motion filed 31 July 2024 is dismissed.
(b) The defendant is to pay the costs of the plaintiffs on the notice of motion.
(5) The respondent is to pay the appellants’ costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (368 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter