URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2017/93.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Matumaini v Automobile Industries Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCATAP 93 (28 April 2017)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Matumaini v Automobile Industries Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2017] NSWCATAP 93
Hearing Date(s):
8 December 2015, 20 May 2016; Final submissions 28 October 2016
Date of Orders:
28 April 2017
Decision Date:
28 April 2017
Appeal Panel
K Rosser, Principal Member
L P Robberds QC, Senior Member
1. Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
NSW, the Appeal Panel dispenses with a further hearing on the quantum of the
loss or damage claimed by the Appellant.
2.The appeal is allowed in part and
the Respondent is ordered to pay to the Appellant the sums of $2,500, $1,588.19
and $184 making
a total of $4,272.19, such sum to be paid by 24 May
3.Otherwise the appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
APPEAL - CONSUMER LAW – failure to comply with consumer guarantees
under Australian Consumer Law (NSW) – major failure
available to consumer – consumer’s motor car breaks down – not
necessary for consumer to prove
a particular identified defect caused the
breakdown in order to make a successful claim – only necessary to prove
car was not
of acceptable quality
Consumer borrows money from finance company
to buy motor car – motor car not of acceptable quality – is supplier
to pay consumer the amount owing by the consumer to the finance
CONSUMER LAW – application of Australian Consumer Law (NSW) to
consumer claims in NSW
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Consumer Claims Act 1998
Fair Trading Act 1987
Trading Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act 2010
Cases Cited:
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
Lam v Steve Jarvin Motors Pty
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
O’Farrell v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2015] NSWCA 48
State Rail Authority v Consumer Claims Tribunal
Principal judgment
Mike Matumaini (Appellant)
Automobile Industries Pty Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
Counsel: R Francois (Appellant) 8 December 2015
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (Appellant)
P Lumley 20 May 2016 (Appellant)
B. Barhoum, Crown
Property Lawyers (8 December 2015) (Respondent)
20 May 2016 S.Javian
(Director of Respondent)
File Number(s):
AP 15/43720
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
18 June 2015
M Brophy General Member
File Number(s):
MV 15/15796
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an internal appeal under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(the NCAT Act) against a decision made in the Consumer and Commercial
Division of the Tribunal on 18 June 2015.
18 March 2015 Mike Matumaini (the Appellant) filed in the Tribunal a motor
vehicle application consumer claim against Automobile
Industries Pty Ltd (the
Respondent) seeking an order that the Respondent pay to him an amount of
application was defended and on 18 June 2015 it was dismissed by the Tribunal
because the Tribunal was not satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that the
cause of the Appellant’s motor vehicle requiring major repairs ten weeks
after he purchased it from
the Respondent was a defect present in the vehicle at
the time of supply.
2 July 2015 the Appellant filed a notice of appeal and on 20 August 2015 the
Respondent filed a reply to that appeal.
hearing of the appeal commenced on 8 December 2015. It was part heard on that
day. It was due to recommence on 29 April 2016 but
it was again adjourned to 20
Appellant was represented by a lawyer during the hearing of the whole of the
appeal. The Respondent was also represented by a
lawyer but not on 20 May 2016.
Its director, Mr Javian represented the Respondent on that day.
8 October 2015 the solicitors for the Respondent filed written submissions. The
Appeal Panel has taken those submissions into account
in preparing these reasons
for decision.
the reasons set out below, we have allowed the appeal in part. Further, we have
determined damages payable by the Respondent to
the Appellant in accordance with
our power to substitute a decision for the decision under appeal and to exercise
all the powers
of the Tribunal below in doing so: s 81(1)(d) and s 81(2) of the
Scope and nature of the appeal
appeals may be made as of right on a question of law, and otherwise with leave
of the Appeal Panel: s 80(2)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NCAT Act).
circumstances in which the Appeal Panel may grant leave to appeal from decisions
made in the Consumer and Commercial Division
are limited to those set out in
clause 12(1) of Schedule 4 of the NCAT Act.
Notice of appeal was lodged within the 28 day time period provided for in cl
25(4)(c) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
Appeal Panel directions
30 September 2016 the Appeal Panel gave the parties directions that the
Appellant file and serve by no later than 24 October 2016
written submissions on
the quantum of the loss or damage which he claims and how it was submitted that
each component of that quantum
is a loss or damage which flows from the alleged
breaches of the Australian Consumer Law 2010 relied upon by the Appellant.
Respondent was directed to file and serve written submissions in reply, no later
than 7 November 2016. Each party was directed
to reply stating whether they
consented to the Appeal Panel dispensing with a hearing pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (the Act) on the
quantum of the loss or damage claimed by the Appellant.
5 October 2016 the solicitor for the Appellant informed the Tribunal that the
Appellant would consent to the Appeal Panel dispensing
with a hearing, pursuant
(2). On 28 October 2016 the Appellant filed his written submissions and
served a copy by email on the Respondent and believed he
had served a copy by
express post on the Respondent. The Appellant subsequently learnt that due to an
administrative error those
submissions were posted to an incorrect address. On
10 January 2017 the Appellant rectified that error and sent a copy by express
post to the correct address. The Respondent has not replied to those submissions
nor to the Appellant’s submissions dated 18
December 2015 or 3 June
Appeal Panel have made an order pursuant to
(2) of the Act, dispensing with
a hearing on the quantum of the loss or damage claimed by the
Background to the claim
Purchase of vehicle
2013, the Respondent was carrying on business of a used car dealer under the
name of Sydneywide Wholesale Cars. On 23 October 2013
it sold a Kia Carnival
wagon to the Appellant. The notice of sale and the tax invoice showed that the
price was $7,640. The tax invoice
showed that $1,000 had been received but it
also showed that the customer was to pay $900 balance within 2 weeks.
the purpose of the Tribunal proceedings the Appellant swore an affidavit dated
14 May 2015.
few days before 23 October 2013, the Appellant attended at the
Respondent’s premises looking for a family vehicle as his wife
children were moving to Australia from Rwanda and he needed something large
enough for all of them to travel in. A person named
Arnold showed the Appellant
the wagon. The Appellant did not want to purchase at that time as he wanted to
discuss it with his wife.
He left $100 as a deposit. It appears that Arnold gave
the Appellant a receipt. There is some inconsistency between the receipt and
notice of sale and tax invoice. The receipt shows an amount of $6,990 with a
deposit of $100 leaving a balance of $6,890. Written
next to the $6,990 are the
words “Kia Carnival blue”. There is also written on the
3 month rego NC
12 months warranty N/C.
few days later the Appellant attended the Respondent’s premises a second
time. He had had a discussion with his wife and they
had decided to purchase the
vehicle. The Appellant again spoke to Arnold and told him that he needed finance
and Arnold referred
him to Carloan City. It appears that the Appellant contacted
Carloan City and ultimately he was given a loan of $9,763 by Australia
Zealand Banking Group Limited. As part of his evidence before the Tribunal, the
Appellant produced a letter from Australia
and New Zealand Banking Group Limited
to himself dated 23 October 2013. The letter referred to an ANZ car loan and
that the amount
of the contract was $9,763 with terms charges of $1,976.24.
his affidavit, the Appellant stated that on or around 23 October 2013 he
returned to the Respondent’s premises for a third
time to collect the
vehicle. On this occasion he saw a man named Sam who told him that he had to pay
a $1,000 commission and buy
a warranty for the vehicle as it did not come with a
statutory warranty. The Appellant was told that the commission was for
finding the vehicle for the Appellant and that the Appellant
needed a warranty because it was part of a package with the car. The
was very unhappy about these two requirements but understood that that was part
of how the sale was done and that he did
not have a choice. In his affidavit he
stated that he agreed to pay the commission of $1,000 and to purchase the
warranty for $1,995.
The warranty document shows that it was financed by Esanda
and that the price of the warranty was $1,995.
the same day after the conversation with Sam, the Appellant went to collect the
vehicle. Arnold handed him the keys and the Appellant
asked was everything okay
with the car. Arnold responded: “Yes, we have done the service for you, we
have checked the engine,
changed the water and the oil.”
his affidavit, the Appellant stated that his loan was approved by Esanda/ANZ in
the amount of $9,763 on 23 October 2013. He also
stated that on 5 November he
returned to the Respondent’s premises and paid $300 towards the
commission. He stated that the
remaining $600 was paid on 15 February 2014 to
finalise the commission. The Appellant produced to the Tribunal two receipts,
of which showed an opening balance of $900 with cash of $300 paid on 5
November 2013 and a closing balance of $600 on that date.
The other receipt
recorded that a final payment of $600 had been paid fully on 15 February 2014
and that it was in respect of a Kia
Carnival Blue 7 seater.
to both the tax invoice and notice of sale, the vehiclewas built on 2 March
2004; it had travelled 165,982 kilometres and
the registration expired on 22
January 2014. It appears that the $1,995 for the warranty was borrowed by the
Appellant and that it
was included in the Esanda/ANZ loan of
First breakdown
17 December 2013 the Appellant was driving the vehicle from his office at
Blacktown to his home at Penrith when the vehicle slowed
down and stopped. The
temperature gauge was not high and the vehicle was not overheating. He tried to
start the vehicle and it went
a few metres and stopped again. He then made a
call and had the vehicle towed away: see the Appellant’s evidence at T14
15 and par 16 of the Appellant’s affidavit.
Appellant rang the Respondent and he believes he spoke with Sam. He told him
that the vehicle had broken down and he could not
drive it. Sam told him that he
could try to go to a repairer who was a friend of his and who would be able to
fix it. He said that the friend might be cheaper than anyone
else. The Appellant was not offered a refund or told there was anything
that he could do in this situation except get the vehicle repaired. Sam gave the
Appellant the telephone number of a repairer
who the Appellant called. The
repairer was unable to provide the Appellant with assistance under his
Appellant then called Australian Warranty Network (AWN) with whom he had entered
into a Guardian Warranty Policy with a commencement
dated 21 October 2013. He
was told that he would need to take the vehicle to a repairer who was covered by
the AWN warranty. The
Appellant then organised for the vehicle to be towed to a
repairer, Penrith Car Service: see [16] – [21] of the Appellant’s
affidavit.)
8 January 2014 Penrith Car Service sent an email to AWN. Part of the email was
in the following terms:
Vehicle towed to our workshop. Inspected engine for mechanical damage and
carried out compression test. Found at least 2 cylinders
with a zero
compression. Upon further inspection with a camera inside the combustion
chamber/cylinder bore we found evidence of a
cracked piston and scouring of the
cylinder bore and could also see significant wear/damage to the
email went on to recommend removal and replacement with a second hand tested
engine as a cheaper alternative. A quotation was
then given in the email showing
the price of a second hand engine at $2,400 with a total cost for the second
hand engine, labour
and other incidentals amounting to $4,537.13.
Car Service carried out the above work and produced a tax invoice dated 21
January 2014 addressed to AWN in respect of the
work totalling $2,000.
does not appear to be any dispute between the parties that the maximum cover
provided by AWN for the above work was $2,000.
It therefore appears that the
Appellant was required to pay $2,537.13 to Penrith Car Service to carry out this
Second breakdown
[24] of his affidavit, the Appellant states that on or around the beginning of
April 2014 the vehicle broke down again. This occurred
approximately 12 weeks
after it was first repaired. He called AWN and was told that he needed to take
the vehicle back to Penrith
Car Service to diagnose the current issue. At
Penrith Car Service the Appellant was told that he would need to replace the
again (see pars 24 and 25 of the Appellant’s affidavit).
Car Service prepared a repair order dated 15 April 2014.
repair order gave a price of $5,460 inclusive of GST. It also included the
Vehicle brought to workshop as overheating, running rough and misfiring. Carried
out compression test: .... Pressure tested cooling
system: Found coolant leaking
into 1 & 3. Result: Unbalanced compression ratio. Possible cracked head or
blown head gasket between
cylinder 1 & 3 and water jackets. Recommend motor
be replaced ...
30 April 2015 AWN emailed the solicitor for the Appellant confirming details
concerning the January 2014 engine claim and the April
2014 claim. The January
2014 claim was assessed as being within the terms and conditions of the warranty
contract and the warranty
provided for a maximum claim amount of $2,000. That
amount was approved and paid direct to Penrith Car Service. The odometer reading
at the time of the engine replacement was 171,115 kilometres.
email stated that in respect of the April 2014 claim, the Appellant was directed
the issue. Penrith Car Service
confirmed that the head gasket had blown between cylinders 1 and 3 and due to
the engine suffering
from being overheated, it was suggested that the engine be
replaced. The email stated that as current problem was diagnosed to be
cylinder head, the warranty provided cover for the cylinder head up to the
amount of $550. That claim amount was approved
but the customer advised the
repairer not to proceed with the replacement of the engine.
his evidence in the Tribunal the Appellant was asked about the location of the
vehicle. He stated that he had it towed to his
office and that’s where it
was (T13). In pars 27 and 28 of his affidavit, the Appellant stated that the
repairs were going
to cost $5,460 and that he could not afford to pay this sum.
He decided not to go ahead with the repairs and that since that time
he has been
unable to drive the vehicle.
Evidence as to the cause of the
first breakdown
14 May 2015 Benjamin Roberts made a statement which was attached to the
Appellant’s affidavit. He stated that he had been
a qualified licensed
mechanic since February 2013, that he held a E-Safety inspection licence and
carried out mechanical repairs
and servicing of vehicles on a daily basis with
Penrith Car Service. He repaired the subject vehicle when it came to Penrith Car
Service in approximately 2013. He stated that on inspection of the vehicle he
found the cylinder number 2 on the rear of the motor
and one of the valves had
broken and fallen into the combustion chamber and then the piston had come up
and smashed it between the
top of the head splitting the piston in two. He
determined that the possible cause was a lack of maintenance over a long period
time as the motor was sludged. He understood the customer had owned the
vehicle for a short time and this issue would not have arisen
in that short
period from a lack of maintenance. He stated that it appeared that oil could
have been prevented from lubricating the
camshaft which then would make the
camshaft seize and cause the cam belt to skip a tooth. On further investigation
he found water
in the sump. He determined that the possible cause could be a
crack in the head between the water jacket and the oil gallery or a
gasket. He stated that he would deem this problem to be a major failure of the
vehicle. He did not work on the vehicle
for the second problem and stated that
he did not believe that the initial failure and the second failure of the
vehicle were related.
Maintenance of the vehicle by the
his evidence to the Tribunal, the Appellant was asked whether, during the period
that he drove the vehicle, he at any time
checked the oil and water levels. The
Appellant replied that he knew when the registration time came he would take it
for checks”. He stated that he knew there was water in the
vehicle because he checked it every morning. He said that maybe
once he checked
the oil but he did not remember: T24 – 25.
Costs incurred
after the first breakdown
the first breakdown the Appellant still needed to get to work and he had to hire
a replacement vehicle until he could sort out
his transportation. He incurred
hiring charges paid to Europcar of $617.76 for the period 17 December 2013
– 3 January 2014;
$326.06 for the period 3 – 14 January 2014 and
$643.82 for the period 14 January – 5 February 2014, making a total of
Appellant paid $184 for the towing of the vehicle from Blacktown to Penrith in
December 2013.
Appellant also made claims for $850 for registration of the vehicle in March
2014, for $585.38 for a green slip in March 2014
and $300 for some repairs in
March 2014.
Appellant also claimed $2,500 for the cost of the repairs to the vehicle carried
out in December 2013. The total of these above
amounts was
Notice of appeal
were four grounds of appeal which were summarised in written submissions dated
10 September 2015 as:
unreasonableness;
(2) Asking the
wrong legal question by failing to apply the correct legal test;
(3) Failure to
take into account relevant considerations; and
(4) Failure to
give adequate reasons.
the hearing before the Tribunal on 8 December 2015, the Appellant was granted
leave to amend Ground 3 by deleting the current particulars
and substituting
“the failure to consider the claim the Appellant made under
ACL, being that the vehicle was not fit for its purpose.” The Appellant
was also granted leave to amend Ground 4 by
adding to its particulars “(d)
why the Appellant’s claims in relation to
of the ACL were
dismissed.”
of the grounds argued raise questions of law.
Appellant’s
submissions
out below is a summary of the Appellant’s submissions on the four grounds
far as the ground of legal unreasonableness is concerned, the Appellant
submitted that the Tribunal would err if its decision was
unreasonable in the
sense discussed in
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
249 CLR 332.
Attention was drawn to what was said by the plurality at [75]
Appellant made the following submissions on this ground. At no time during the
hearing did the Tribunal or the Respondent put
in issue the Appellant’s
sworn evidence that he had checked the water on the vehicle and may have checked
the oil. There was
no evidence that if the Appellant had not checked the oil in
the eight weeks since he had purchased the vehicle hen that could have
cause of the car’s failure. There was no challenge to the
Appellant’s sworn evidence that all that had been discussed
when he bought
the vehicle was the need to register it in three months. There was no evidence
that any conduct by the Appellant,
such as abnormal use or the like, could have
caused the car’s failure. This was a vehicle which cost over $9,000: it
a cheap used car. None of these matters and the inferences from them
were discussed and considered by the Tribunal. All the Tribunal
had regard to
was that Mr Roberts had only identified a possible cause of the car’s
problems. The only rational inference was
that the problem was somehow inherent
in the vehicle at the time it was sold. There was no rational or intelligible
justification
given by the Tribunal in ignoring these matters and not
considering the evidence as a whole. Once regard was had to all the
circumstances,
and the conduct of the consumer was eliminated as a possible
cause, the rational inference was that the vehicle was not fit for all
purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied and thus was not of
acceptable quality within the meaning of
Australian Consumer
(ACL). Accordingly, the Tribunal’s conclusion to the
contrary, and focus on only one aspect of the evidence, was unreasonable
sense discussed in
far as the second ground of appeal was concerned, the Appellant made the
following submissions. The Tribunal asked itself the wrong
question by failing
to apply the correct legal test in relation to whether the vehicle was of
acceptable quality. The Tribunal’s
decision made it plain that it
considered that the relevant test was whether, on the balance of probabilities,
the Appellant could
establish the exact cause of the problems with the vehicles
so as to precisely identify a defect. However that was not the correct
and the correct question was that posed by
of the ACL. The statutory
requirements of that section were cumulative. Merely being free from defects was
not sufficient to make
the vehicle of an acceptable quality. It was also
required to be fit for its purpose and durable. A vehicle which cost a consumer
$7,640 and failed within eight weeks was not fit for its purpose or durable. The
Tribunal asked itself the wrong question and misconstrued
far as the third ground of appeal was concerned, the Appellant made the
following submissions. The Tribunal failed to consider
the claim the Appellant
of the ACL, being that the vehicle was not fit for its purpose.
The Tribunal gave no consideration or analysis to
or reasons as to why that
claim failed. The mere fact that the particular problem could not be identified,
did not axiomatically
lead to the conclusion that the Appellant had not
established that the vehicle was not fit for its purpose.
far as the fourth ground of appeal was concerned, the Appellant made the
following submissions. The Tribunal erred by not giving
adequate reasons for its
decision as it failed to make any finding as to:
Appellant’s unchallenged evidence as to his maintenance of the vehicle and
the representations made to him about the
condition of the car;
inferences that could be drawn from the totality of the evidence;
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the goods
(including any hidden defects) would have
regarded as acceptable;
(d) Why the
Appellant’s claims in relation to
of the ACL were
Appellant also made the following submissions. The Tribunal’s decision
failed to engage with the critical evidence and the
statutory requirements of
. The Tribunal thus failed to give proper reasons for its
Appellant’s further submissions
the adjournment of the hearing on 8 December 2015, the Appeal Panel arranged for
the Divisional Registrar to write to the solicitors
for the Appellant seeking
clarification of two submissions which had been made on 8 December by counsel
for the Appellant. The letter
referred to the second submission as
The second submission relates to the cause of the breakdown of the 2nd engine.
The Appeal Panel understands that the appellant’s
submission is that the
2nd engine failed not because of a defect in that engine, but because of a
defect in the car. The Appeal Panel
seeks to have this submission clarified and
be referred to any evidence in support of that submission.
18 December 2015, counsel for the Appellant responded as
The second submission suggested above is not how the Appellant understood what
was being said. There is no expert evidence about
the exact cause of the second
engine failure. Rather, what is reported at page 24 of the documents annexed to
the Legal Aid bundle
(email dated 30 April 2015 from Mr Plucknett) is that the
engine was overheating and a head gasket was blown. The reasons why the
was overheating and how the head gasket blew are not explained. In other words,
in the absence of expert evidence, it could
be a problem with the vehicleor the
engine. The resolution of that question is not material to the
Respondent’s submissions
Respondent’s submissions are summarised below.
Appellant could only establish a possible cause, not a likely cause nor an
actual cause which directly goes to the question of
whether the condition of the
vehicle was of acceptable standard and fit for its purpose at the time of sale.
The Respondent did not
breach the consumer guarantees. So far as the second
ground of appeal was concerned, one of the Tribunal’s considerations was
whether the Appellant could determine the probable cause of the first breakdown.
That was not the only factor to be considered but
establishing a probable cause
of the first breakdown was a central element in answering the question of
whether the vehicle was of
acceptable quality at the time of sale. The Tribunal
assessed the ACL and applied the correct legal test in its findings.
far as the fourth ground of appeal was concerned, although the Tribunal’s
decision did not specifically make reference to
whether the vehicle was fit for
its purpose, this component formed part of the criteria in determining whether
the vehicle was of
acceptable quality at the time of sale. On this basis, the
Tribunal did not fail to take into account all of the relevant considerations
it was required to assess whether the vehicle was fit for its purpose when
determining whether the vehicle was of acceptable quality.
the question whether the vehicle was free from defects, safe and durable as a
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state
and condition of the goods
(including any hidden defects of the goods), would regard as acceptable having
regard to the matters in
(3) of the ACL, were concerned, the vehicle was
serviced on or about 25 September 2013, by Great Western Mobile Mechanical
The Respondent was required to provide a Pink Slip also referred to as
a “pre-vehicle inspection report” and such a report
could only be
obtained after an authorised mechanic inspected the vehicle and verified that it
was roadworthy and therefore “safe”
to drive. Had this inspection
not been satisfactory, a white slip would have issued which meant that repairs
were required before
the vehicle could be safe to drive. The vehicle was
inspected on two separate occasions by two different mechanics and the vehicle
was safe, durable and free from defects at the time of sale.
to the Respondent’s written submissions was a tax invoice dated 25
September 2013 from Great Western Mobile Mechanical
Repairs. It was for $100 and
it gave the following description:
Kia Carnival
check over car.
is not clear whether this tax invoice was tendered before the Tribunal but the
Appeal Panel will proceed on the basis that it was
an exhibit.
Appellant inspected and test drove the vehicle prior to its purchase and he was
satisfied with both the inspection and the test
drive as he did not raise any
concerns about the car’s appearance, its finish and/or the manner in which
it drove. Had there
been issues with the test drive (vehicle was slow and
sluggish, vehicle was overheating etc) then it would have revealed that the
vehicle was not of acceptable quality at the time of sale.
far as the fitness of the vehicle for the purposes of
(2) (a) and
the ACL was concerned, taking into account that the vehicle was just under ten
years old, the price of $7,640 and the odometer
reading was 166,040, the vehicle
was fit for its purpose and durable at the time of sale.
use of the vehicle by the Appellant caused the problems with the vehicle and
affected its durability. The failure of the Appellant
to service the vehicle
when due (three months or 5,000 kilometres whichever occurs first) was failure
of the Appellant to take reasonable
steps to avoid the quality becoming
unacceptable. Nor did the Appellant take steps to regularly check the oil
levels. (The Appeal
Panel notes that the submission concerning three months or
5,000 kilometres, was apparently based upon an incorrect reading of the
warranty policy).
Appellant was required to service the vehicle when it reached 5,000 kilometres
and this was one of the requirements under the
warranty purchased by the
Appellant. The Appellant had no intention of servicing the vehicle at the time
required under the warranty
policy and the Appellant only had the intention of
servicing the vehicle when it was due for registration. The Appeal Panel notes
that this submission is also based upon an incorrect reading of the AWN warranty
policy. The relevant clause in the policy provided
for the Appellant to
To maintain a regular service schedule in accordance with manufacturer’s
specifications with a qualified motor mechanic at
intervals not to exceed 10,000
(ten thousand) kilometres or 6 (six) months, whichever occurs first, an
allowance of no more than
2,000 (two thousand) kilometres or 30 (thirty) days
beyond the stated intervals will be accepted. In addition any Motor Vehicle over
the age of 10 (ten) years or excess of 200,000 (two hundred thousand) kilometres
must also have a motor mechanics safety check and
oil change at intervals not
exceeding 3 (three) months or 5,000 (five thousand) kilometres whichever occurs
first, an allowance of
no more than 1,000 (one thousand) kilometres or 30
(thirty) days beyond the stated intervals will be accepted.
the Appellant had admitted that there were no signs that the vehicle was
overheating before the major failure, it was not possible
for the vehicle to
travel over 5,000 kilometres had these defects been present at the time of
first breakdown was caused not only by lack of maintenance by the Appellant but
also by the abnormal use of the vehicle by the
relation to the second major failure, in circumstances where there were problems
with the vehicle after having the engine replaced
meant that the only rational
inference was that the Appellant was using the vehicle abnormally and failed to
properly maintain the
car. He caused the condition of the vehicle to deteriorate
and caused the vehicle to be of unacceptable quality after the time of
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
(the ACL NSW) is in the following
Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or
manufacturer of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
(a) goods supplied to a consumer are not of acceptable quality; and
(b) the only reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality were
specifically drawn to the consumer's
attention before the consumer agreed to the
the goods are taken to be of acceptable quality.
(a) goods are displayed for sale or hire; and
(b) the goods would not be of acceptable quality if they were supplied to
a consumer;
the reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality are taken, for the
purposes of subsection (4), to have been specifically
drawn to a consumer's
attention if those reasons were disclosed on a written notice that was displayed
with the goods and that was
transparent.
(6) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer to whom they are supplied causes them to become of
unacceptable quality, or fails to take
reasonable steps to prevent them from
becoming of unacceptable quality; and
(b) they are damaged by abnormal use.
(7) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer acquiring the goods examines them before the consumer
agrees to the supply of the goods; and
(b) the examination ought reasonably to have revealed that the goods were
not of acceptable quality.
Consideration
Appellant relied upon the High Court decision in
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
(2013) 249 CLR 332
, to support his first ground of
have doubts whether this High Court decision is applicable in this appeal and
having regard to our finding in relation to Ground
2, we find it unnecessary to
make any findings on this ground.
in the Tribunal Member’s reasons for decision, reference was made to the
provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law 2010
being adopted in NSW
pursuant to
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW). It was stated that
those provisions applied to the proceedings. We are of the view that the
references thereafter by the Tribunal
Member to subsections of
ACL” should be taken to be intended references to the ACL (NSW) (see s28
Fair Trading Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act 2010
Tribunal’s reasons set out part of the report of Benjamin Roberts which
referred to the “possible” cause that
led to the major repair. The
Tribunal Member stated that she was mindful of the use of the term
“possible cause” and
that the author did not state probable cause.
The Tribunal Member stated that the standard of proof required was on the
probabilities and that the failure or defect that led to the need for
the repairs was not readily apparent from the evidence before
the Tribunal. The
Tribunal Member then went on to say that the Tribunal was satisfied that the
Appellant had not proved to the requisite
standard what the problems were that
necessitated the first repair. The Tribunal then concluded that since the
Appellant had not
been able to establish the cause of the problem, the Tribunal
could not make a finding that the repairs required were as a result
of a defect
which would render the vehicle being not of an acceptable standard at the time
reasoning in this way, the Appeal Panel is of the view that the Tribunal fell
into error. The question which the Tribunal had to
consider and answer was
whether, at the time of the sale, the vehicle was of acceptable quality as that
phrase is defined in s 54
(2) of the ACL NSW. In other words it was not
necessary for the Appellant to prove that at the time of the sale, there was a
identified defect which caused the vehicle not to be of an acceptable
we conclude that the Tribunal erred in law when it asked itself the wrong
question and failed to properly consider whether
there was a failure to comply
with the consumer guarantee of acceptable quality set out in s 54. This raises a
question of law in
respect of which the Appellant has a right to appeal. In
these circumstances, we are satisfied that it is appropriate to set aside
Tribunal’s order.
Conclusion on liability
noted above, we have decided to substitute a decision for the Tribunal’s
are satisfied that on the available evidence that the vehicle purchased by the
Appellant was not of acceptable quality because
it did not satisfy the
requirements of s 54 (2) (a), (c) and (e) of the ACL NSW. In our view those
conclusions result from the facts
that this vehicle was purchased for $7,640 and
after less than 8 weeks use in which the vehicle had travelled 5,133 kilometres,
engine would not work and it was necessary to replace that engine at a cost
of $4,537.13 in order for the vehicle to operate again.
We are further satisfied
that the failure to comply with the consumer guarantee of acceptable quality was
a major failure, in that
the vehicle would not have been acquired by a
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure:
coming to this conclusion, we have rejected the Respondent’s submissions
directed at liability. In particular, we are not
satisfied that the evidence
supports a conclusion that:
(a) The use of
the vehicle by the Appellant caused the problems with the vehicle or affected
its durability;
non-servicing of the vehicle when it had travelled 5,000 kilometres, was a
failure to take reasonable steps to avoid the quality
of the vehicle becoming
unacceptable; and
(c) Failure to
regularly check oil levels, was a cause of the breakdown.
are of the view that even if the facts relied upon to support the
Respondent’s submissions occured, they would not result
in the vehicle
being of acceptable quality. Further, even if prior to the purchase, the vehicle
was not slow or sluggish or not overheating
when the Appellant test drove it, it
does not follow that the vehicle was of acceptable quality.
are satisfied that no examination which the Appellant may have made of the car
would have revealed the defect which caused the
engine to fail, given the extent
of the work apparently carried out by the Penrith Car Service in its attempt to
find the defect
which caused the engine to fail.
Grounds 3 and
view of our finding concerning Ground 2, we do not consider it necessary to make
findings in respect of Grounds 3 and 4.
Remedies available to the
Appellant seeks orders under
Consumer Claims Act 1998
that the Respondent pay to the Appellant:
(1) The amount
owed by the Appellant to Esanda which, at 25 October 2016 was $11,495.73.
commission of $1,000.
(3) Expenses
incurred by the Appellant with respect to the vehicleof
will consider each of these claims later in these
Appellant’s submissions dated 3 June 2016
3 June 2016 the Appellant filed a written submission. Included in this
submissions (the 3 June submission) was the following:
7. If the Appeal Panel accepts that the Tribunal below erred and that the car
supplied by the respondent to the appellant breached
the statutory warranties
due to the fundamental failure of the engine, then the respondent wrongly failed
to itself properly repair
the vehicle or refund the appellant the purchase
price: cf paragraphs 18 to 23 of the appellant’s affidavit sworn on 14 May
) and section 261 of the
Australian Consumer Law
8. Further, the respondent knew that the appellant had obtained finance to
purchase the vehicle as it referred the appellant to “VehicleLoan
City”: paragraph 7 of the Affidavit (and the fact that payment was
received by the respondent from Esanda).
9. Accordingly, the obvious consequence of the respondent’s failure
(a) supply a durable vehicle which was fit for its purpose or free from defects;
(d) ensure the vehicle was properly repaired or to refund the purchase price of
the vehicle once it fundamentally failed;
the appellant was required to attempt to repair the vehicle through other means
– which cost him an extra $2,500 and which
held the obvious risk the
repairs done by others would not be successful (and they weren’t);
the appellant was then without the vehicle and the appellant had to find other
means of transport; and
the appellant was left still owing money to Esanda for an entirely useless
10. In these circumstances, if the respondent had complied with its statutory
obligations then one of the obvious ‘counter
factuals’ for the
purpose of assessing compensation is that the respondent would either have
properly repaired the vehicle
itself or refunded the money. In the first
circumstance, the appellant would have a vehicle he could use and he would be
driving the vehiclehe bought from the respondent. In the second
circumstance, he would have been able to quickly payout Esanda. It
must also be
kept in mind that the appellant had purchased the vehicle for use for his family
and travel to work; upon the car’s
failure and the respondent’s
other breaches of its statutory duties, there was no obligation on the appellant
to prioritise
payment of Esanda over his and his family’s need for
transport which had been caused by the respondent’s contravening
The amount now owing to Esanda is plainly, and primarily, due to the
respondent’s contravening conduct.
11. In making orders under
(1) of the CCA,
(1) of the CCA
requires that the orders be “fair and equitable to all parties to the
12. If the appellant establishes that he has suffered loss and damage as a
result of the respondent’s conduct it cannot be
equitable” to refuse to compensate him.
13. The rights and remedies set out in sections 259 to 266 of the ACL provide a
framework for assessing the respondent’s conduct
as required by
of the CCA having regard to the respondent’s (lack of) compliance with its
statutory obligations with respect to refunds and
repairs and its conduct
overall: cf
(2) (e), (g) (vi) of the CCA. As the Appeal Panel
observed at its first hearing in relation to the orders sought in the Notice of
Appeal, the claim in this Tribunal is under the CCA and the only orders that can
be made by the Tribunal are set out in
in light of the obligation in
of the CCA.
14. Accordingly, while the assessment under
of the CCA may take into
account the relevant provisions of the ACL, that is not the jurisdiction
conferred on the Tribunal and to
construe the Tribunal’s powers as limited
by the ACL is an error: cf
Craig v South Australia
(1995) CLR 163 at
15. Ultimately, it may be that there is no difference in terms of establishing a
right to damages under section 259 (4) of the ACL
and fair and equitable
compensation for the purpose of the CCA. But it is an error to view the
Tribunal’s powers as limited
by those in the ACL.
the vehicle was sold to the Appellant the Respondent breached s 54 of the ACL
NSW. Because of those breaches
of the ACL, Division 1 –
Subdivision A – Action against suppliers of goods, gave the Appellant the
rights set out in
that Subdivision.
failure to comply with the relevant guarantee was a major failure (s 260 of the
ACL NSW) with the result that s 259 (3) enabled
the Appellant to (a) notify the
Respondent that he rejected the vehicle; or (b) by action against the
Respondent, recover compensation
for any reduction in the value of the vehicle
below the price paid by the Appellant.
259 (4) also enabled the Appellant by action to recover damages for any loss or
damage suffered by the Appellant because of
the failure to comply with the
guarantees if it was reasonably foreseeable that the Appellant would suffer such
loss or damage as
a result of such a failure.
260 provides as follows:
When a failure to comply with a guarantee is a major failure
A failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259 (1) (b) applies
to a supply of goods is a
major failure
(a)the goods would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure ; or
(b)the goods depart in one or more significant respects:
(i) if they were supplied by description – from that
description; or
(ii) if they were supplied by reference to a sample or
demonstration model – from that sample or demonstration model; or
(c)the goods are substantially unfit for a purpose for which goods of the same
kind are commonly supplied and they cannot, easily
and within a reasonable time,
be remedied to make them fit for such a purpose; or
(d)the goods are unfit for a disclosed purpose that was made known to:
(i) the supplier of the goods; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements
in relation to the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
and they cannot, easily and within a reasonable time, be
remedied to make them fit for such a purpose; or
(e)the goods are not of acceptable quality because they are
the failure had not been a major failure and if the failure could have been
remedied within a reasonable time, s 259 (2) (a) would
have enabled the
Appellant to require the Respondent to remedy the failure within a reasonable
261 deals with the situation where under s 259 (2) (a) a consumer requires a
supplier of goods to remedy a failure to comply
with a relevant guarantee. The
section enables the supplier to comply with the requirements by repairing the
goods or replacing them
with an identical type or by refunding any money paid by
the consumer for the goods. However that situation did not arise in this
because the failure was major and s 259 (2) (a) only applies if the failure is
not a major failure.
Appellant did not notify the Respondent that he rejected the car. So the only
possible remedies available to the Appellant under
the ACL NSW were to recover
compensation under s 259 (3) for any reduction in the value of the vehicle below
the price paid by the
Appellant for the vehicleand damages under s 259 (4).
However there was no evidence of a reduction in
Consideration of the Appellant’s submission
the following paragraphs we give consideration to the 3 June submission made on
behalf of the Appellant.
refer to [7] of those submissions. In [17] of his affidavit sworn 14 May 2015,
the Appellant related a telephone call he made to
the Respondent and informed
Sam that the vehicle had broken down and he could not drive it. In [18] of the
affidavit the Appellant
stated that he was not offered a refund or told that
there was anything else that he could do in this situation, except get the
repaired. He said that the reason he had called Sam in the first place
was because he thought Sam was responsible for the problem,
as he only had the
vehicle for such a short period of time. He did not state that he asked for a
refund or that he rejected the car.
Paragraphs [19] to [23] of the affidavit
deal with Sam giving to the Appellant the telephone number of a repairer; the
Appellant’s
calling AWN and being informed that he would need to take the
vehicle to a repairer who was covered by AWN’s warranty; the
Appellant’s organising for the vehicle to be towed to Penrith Car Service;
AWN providing the Appellant with a summary of the
problem with the vehicle and
the repairs conducted; and the fact that the Appellant had to contribute a
further $2,500 towards the
cost of the repairs as the warranty company only
covered $2,000 of that cost.
take the reference to s 261 in [7] of the 3 June submissions to mean that that
section imposed an obligation upon the Respondent
to repair the vehicle or
refund the Appellant the purchase price. As we have explained above, section 261
had no application to the
facts of this case because the failure to comply with
the guarantee was a major failure.
therefore do not accept the submission made in [7] of the 3 June
submissions.
also do not accept the submissions made in [9] of the 3 June submissions. The
vehicle was not entirely useless. The reference at
[9(d)] (sic) of that
submission again appears to be wrongly based upon s 261 of the ACL NSW. The
facts that the vehicle travelled
approximately 5,077 km from the date of
purchase to the date of the first breakdown – and it was apparently used
after 5 February
2014 (the last date of hiring a substitute car) with a
substitute engine until early 2014 (the date of the second breakdown), shows
that it was not entirely useless.
do not accept [10] of the 3 June submissions. The Appellant was given rights
under the ACL (NSW) but did not exercise all of them.
We do not agree that the
amount owing to Esanda is plainly and primarily due to the Respondent’s
contravening conduct. We are
of the view that the Appellant owes the money to
Esanda because he borrowed it and apparently has not been repaying the
instalments.
do not agree with the submissions in [11] – [15] of the 3 June
submissions. The
Consumer Claims Act (NSW)
(the CC Act) and now
Fair Trading Act 1987
(the FT Act), do not, of themselves,
create any causes of action. They are predicated upon the existence of causes of
action that
arise independently from them. The cause of action may be founded
upon contract, tort, debt, statute or any other sufficient basis
in law. All
that is required is that the cause of action is available under New South Wales
law to the consumer at the relevant time
and provides a legitimate legal basis
for the consumer to make a claim of a type listed in s 3A (1) (a) to (e) of the
the corresponding definition in Pt 6A, against the supplier. If there
is such a claim and the other requirements in relation to jurisdiction
the Tribunal then has power to make orders of the types listed in s8 (now ss79N,
79O and 79P of the FT Act), having regard
to the legal entitlements of the
parties under the causes of action upon which the claims are based:
Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
are therefore of the view that it is not correct to say that “while the
assessment under s13 of the CC Act
take into account the relevant
provisions of the ACL .....”: [14] of the 3 June submission. If the
provisions of the ACL NSW
were not taken into account in this type of case, the
consumer would not have a cause of action based on the ACL NSW: see in
the last sentence in [164] of
do not agree with the submissions in [13] of the 3 June submission. Because the
failure was a major failure there was no statutory
obligation on the Respondent
to repair the vehicle. The Appellant did not exercise his statutory right to
reject the vehicle and
thus there was no statutory duty on the Respondent to
refund the purchase price: see ss 259 – 261 of the ACL NSW).
the 3 June submission the Appellant referred to the requirement in s13 of the CC
Act that when making an order the Tribunal must
make such orders as, in its
opinion, will be fair and equitable to all the parties to the claim. It was
submitted by the Appellant
that if he established that he had suffered loss and
damage as a result of the Respondent’s conduct, it could not be
and equitable” to refuse to compensate him (see [12] and [13]
of the 3 June submissions). In [13] of the submission reference
was made to s13
(2) (e), (g) (vi) of the CC Act.
at [136] it was stated that if the terms of s 13 (1) were thought to
require the Tribunal to apply its own notions of fairness and
equity when making
orders rather than making orders in accordance with the applicable law, that
would be an error.
referring to the decisions of the Court of Appeal in
O’Farrell v
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 48
State Rail Authority
v Consumer Claims Tribunal
(1988) 14 NSWLR 473
the Appeal Panel in
stated that those decisions establish that s 13(1) does not have the
effect of requiring or allowing the Tribunal to make orders
otherwise than in
accordance with the law. The Appeal Panel stated that what s13 (1) did was to
provide an express statutory indication
that the Tribunal, when exercising any
discretion or making any evaluative judgment in determining what order should be
made, should
take into account what was fair and equitable having regard to the
circumstances of all the parties.
regard to the rights given to the Appellant by the ACL (NSW) and the fact that
the Appellant did not exercise the right of
rejecting the vehicle or taking
action against the Respondent to recover compensation for any reduction in value
of the vehicle below
the price paid by the Appellant, we are of the view that
the orders it makes will be fair and equitable to each of the parties to
mentioned above [13] of the 3 June submission also referred to s13 (2) (e) and
(g) (vi) of the CC Act. Those subsections are in
the following terms:
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), when the Tribunal
is considering whether or not to make an order or orders under this Part, the
following factors are relevant, so far as they are material to particular
circumstances of the case:
(e)whether any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted
on or used against the claimant:
(i) by any other party to the claim ..
(g) where the subject of the claim is a contract for the supply of goods or
services or a contract collateral to such a contract:
(vi) the commercial or other setting, purpose and effect of the
Appellant has not brought to our attention any evidence of any undue influence,
unfair pressure or unfair tactics. No submission
was made that undue influence,
unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted on or used against the
Appellant did not submit that some particular aspect of the commercial or other
setting, purpose or effect of the contract, was
such that it should result in a
particular order being made.
are therefore of the view that nothing has been raised by the 3 June submission,
or any other submissions made on behalf of the
Appellant which causes us to make
an order different from the orders proposed to be made and which are set out at
the end of these
reasons for decision.
Findings on the claim in
relation to the commission payment
refer to [20] and [21] of the 3 June submission.
was very little evidence before the Tribunal as to why the commission was
payable. It is summarised in [11] – [13] above.
However the evidence, such
as it was, tends to indicate that the $1,000 “commission” was not
part of the purchase price
of the car.
Respondent breached the guarantee given by s54 of the ACL NSW: the vehicle was
not of acceptable quality. As the failure to comply
with that guarantee was a
major failure, the Appellant was given the right by s259 (3) of the ACL NSW to
notify the Respondent that
he rejected the car.
the Appellant rejected the vehicle he could have, at his election, required the
Respondent to refund the money paid by the Appellant
for the vehicle and an
amount that was equal to the value of any other consideration provided by him
for the vehicle: s263 (4) (a)
(i) and (ii) ACL NSW).
are of the view that the commission paid by the Appellant came within s263 (4)
(a) (i) and (ii).
the Appellant did not reject the vehicle nor exercise the election given to him
by s263 (4). He kept the vehicle and arranged
for it to be repaired and a
substitute engine installed.
those circumstances we are not satisfied that the Appellant is entitled to an
order for the refund of the amount of the commission.
Findings on
the claim in relation to out of pocket expenses
Appellant has claimed payment of the following amounts which were paid by him
after the first breakdown:
(a) Registration
of the vehicle $850.00
(b) Green slip
for the vehicle $585.38
costs in December 2013 $184.00
(d) Hire car
costs incurred during the
(e) period from
approximately 17
(f) December
2013 to approximately
(g) 5 February
2014 $1588.19
(h) The amount
which the Appellant
contribute towards the cost
replacement motor and
(k) associated
costs of repairs $2,500.00
our view, the payments of the $184, the $1,588.19 and the $2,500 are recoverable
by the Appellant. They are recoverable as damages
for losses suffered by the
Appellant because of the failure to comply with the guarantee that the vehicle
was of acceptable quality,
as it was reasonably foreseeable that the Appellant
would suffer such losses as a result of those failures: s 259 (4) ACL
the replacement of the engine replacement, the vehicle was driven for
approximately 12 weeks when it broke down again.
diagnosis, Penrith Car Service confirmed that the engine was overheating,
running rough and misfiring. Upon further diagnosis
it was found that the head
gasket had blown between cylinders 1 and 3 and that due to the engine suffering
from being overheated,
it was suggested that the engine be replaced. The price
quoted by Penrith Car Service to replace the engine was $5460.
the evidence does not enable a finding to be made as to whether it was the
replacement engine or the vehicle which caused
the above problems after the
engine was replaced. In these circumstances, we are not satisfied that the
second breakdown was caused
by the vehicle not being of acceptable quality at
the time it was purchased.
are therefore not satisfied that the Respondent is liable for any costs arising
after the replacement of the engine, including
the sum of $850.00 for
registration of the vehicle and the $585.38 for the green slip. Both of those
amounts were paid in March 2014,
after the engine was
Findings in relation to the claim for payout of the sum
owing to Esanda
Appellant also claims an amount payable by him to Esanda which is in excess of
$12,000 and has interest accruing at the rate of
$3.42 per day. This represents
the money borrowed by the Appellant to purchase the vehicle and the warranty:
was a significant difference between the vehicle when purchased by the Appellant
in October 2013 and the vehicle when it broke
down for the second time around
the beginning of April 2014. The vehicle had different engines at those two
points in time. As noted
above, we are of the view that the first breakdown was
caused by the vehicle as purchased not being of acceptable quality. However,
second breakdown could have been caused by the replacement engine. Unless on the
balance of probabilities, the evidence excludes
that possibility, it cannot be
concluded that the cause of the second breakdown was a breach of s54 of the ACL
(NSW) at the time
of the original purchase in October 2013. In our view the
evidence does not exclude that possibility. Accordingly we are of the view
the claims for payment by the Respondent to the Appellant of the amount owing to
Esanda must fail.
Appellant made submissions with the object of showing that there had been no
“double dipping’ by the Appellant. The
Appellant concluded those
submissions with a submission that any attempt to try and quantify a
“benefit” received by
the consumer is outweighed by the equally
difficult task of quantifying the opportunity “loss” of the consumer
what they contracted for. It was submitted that the balance struck by
the ACL, being a refund of the purchase price without any deduction,
principled basis for compensation (being that of putting the consumer back in
the position they would have been but for
the contravening conduct).
reference to the refund of the purchase price in that submission appears to be
based upon s 261 of the ACL NSW. However, for the
reasons we have given above,
that section had no application to the facts of this case.
submission was made by the Appellant that the obvious consequence of the
Respondent’s failure to:
(a) Supply a
durable vehicle which was fit for its purpose or free from defects; and
(b) Ensure the
vehicle was properly repaired or to refund the purchase price of the vehicle
once it fundamentally failed; was that:
Appellant was required to attempt to repair the vehicle through other means
– which cost him an extra $2,500 and which
held the obvious risk the
repairs done by others would not be successful (as they were not);
Appellant was then without the vehicle and had to find other means of transport;
Appellant was still left owing money to Esanda for an entirely useless
reference at (b) of that submission again appears to be based upon s 261 of the
are of the view that it is not correct to say that the vehicle was entirely
useless. The facts that it travelled approximately
5075 km from the date of
purchase to the date of the first breakdown – and it was apparently used
after 5 February 2014 (the
last date of hiring a substitute car) with a
substitute engine until early April 2014 (the date of the second breakdown),
it was not entirely useless.
Appellant made further written submissions on 28 October 2016. These further
submissions summarised the Appellant’s submissions
on loss and damage. The
only new submissions were in relation to the expenditure for registration and
green slip. It was submitted
that the costs expended on those items were wasted
on a vehicle that did not justify that expenditure given its limited life span.
That submission does not alter the conclusions expressed above on the claims for
registration of the vehicle and the green slip.
A claim made in earlier
submissions of $300 for repairs in March 2014 was not included in these
submissions and we take it that that
claim is no longer
Appeal Panel makes the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
NSW, the Appeal
Panel dispenses with a further hearing on the quantum of the loss or damage
claimed by the Appellant.
(2) The appeal
is allowed in part and the Respondent is ordered to pay to the Appellant the
sums of $2,500, $1,588.19 and $184 making
a total of $4,272.19, such sum to be
paid by 24 May 2017.
(3) Otherwise
the appeal is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a
true and accurate record of the reasons for decision of the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal of New
South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter