URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2002/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McGraw v Commonwealth Bank of Australia Limited [2002] NSWCC 56 (19 December 2002)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: McGraw v Commonwealth
Bank of Australia Limited
[2002] NSWCC 56
Kathleen Mary
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Limited
CASE NUMBER: 60067
of 2001 of 2002.00
CATCH WORDS: Statutes & Delegated
Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage
DATES OF HEARING: 11/10/02, 15/11/02, 19/12/02.
DECISION DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:Mr Wilkins
instructed by Jones Staff & Co.
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr M Newton instructed by
Abbot Tout.
1. This is an application by Kathleen Mary McGraw against her employer, the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Limited (formerly Colonial
State Bank Limited),
in which she claims injury on 11 and 23 October 2000 at Narellan Vale and
Granville Railway station when she
suffered injuries on journeys between her
place of abode and her place of employment when walking along a path to a bus
going up stairs at a railway station. In fact, as I shall reveal in my
summary of her evidence, the applicant gave evidence only
of the first injury
alleged on 11 October 2000. She claims weekly payments of compensation under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(“the Act”) from 11
October to 8 November 2000, medical expenses under
and interest.
2. The issues were indicated at the commencement of proceedings by Mr Newton
of counsel for the respondent in a manner for which I
am grateful as being
injury, incapacity and the application of
of the Act.
3. The applicant gave evidence and I have no hesitation in indicating that
she struck me as a witness of truth who gave a sensible
and moderate account of
her injuries and disabilities, and on occasions made admissions against
interest. I accept her evidence
wherever it is relevant.
4. The applicant was born on 28 May 1949. On 11 October 2000 she was living
in Sydney, in fact at Narellan Vale near Campbelltown.
She was then working for
the State Bank.
5. At that point the respondent agreed that it inherited the liabilities of
the State Bank of New South Wales by acquisition and merger.
6. On the abovementioned day the applicant was to work for the respondent at
the Colonial Tower in Parramatta. Before that date she
had no problem with
either of her knees.
7. On the above date the applicant left her home for work after having
breakfast. She was required to walk across two roads and then
embankment onto a grass verge. The bus stop, where I gathered she was
accustomed to catch a bus to work, was across the
road from where she was at
8. It was at that point that the applicant said that her right knee gave way
as she put her foot down and that her leg buckled. She
said she had a sharp
pain on the inside of the right knee. She said that when her foot was fully on
the “floor” pain
shot up her right knee, and her leg buckled beneath
9. I asked a clarificatory question at this time. The applicant said that
her foot was indeed on the ground and that she was, at
the time her pain
occurred, stepping from the pavement onto a grass verge. She said she was at
the time moving her right leg forward.
She said the grass verge was, she
thought, on the same level as the pavement.
10. Resuming her examination in chief, the applicant said she could not put
her “full” foot on the ground at this time.
She denied that she
fell to the ground. This is of relevance in view of her history reported in a
report of Dr Dave, her treating
orthopaedic surgeon. She said she stopped,
maybe only for a few seconds, following the attack of pain and then continued
her journey.
She said she crossed the street and entered the bus when it
arrived and that it stopped at a railway station. The applicant then
the stairs of the railway station on tiptoe, as she did when she got off the
train at her destination to go to work.
11. At work the applicant waited and found that at 10:00 am her pain had not
subsided so she spoke to a supervisor.
12. The applicant then went to a medical practice in Parramatta where she
thought she consulted a Dr Saba, who sent her for a x-ray.
subsequently collected and she returned to see Dr Saba.
13. The applicant returned to work and stayed there until 4:15 pm. She did
not return to work the following day. Dr Saba gave her
a certificate for two
days off. The applicant thought at this time that she had a sprain but by the
following Sunday her leg was
14. She therefore saw Dr Ghaly, another general practitioner, who referred
her to a Dr Dave. Dr Ghaly in the meantime referred her
for physiotherapy,
which she undertook for a week. It was the physiotherapist who suggested
referral to an orthopaedic surgeon and
that led to Dr Ghaly’s referral of
the applicant to Dr Dave.
15. The applicant said that she was off work for three works until a date in
November. When she was asked whether this date was 8
November 2000 she was not
sure, but she thought she was off work for about three weeks. I shall trace the
medical certificates which
demonstrate the period when the applicant was off
work in a moment.
16. The applicant said that her right leg kept giving way for maybe seven
days and that it was strapped up and that she then had some
improvement. She
said that after three weeks she agreed to try work and return to work and said
that she has had no pain since then.
17. In cross examination the applicant reiterated that while walking to the
bus stop, her right leg gave way. She said after that
she had great difficulty
walking but proceeded to work by bus and train. She said in fact that it was
her knee joint which had given
18. The applicant did not recall being seen by a Dr Kinny (to whose report I
shall come later) for the respondent, but was asked to
assume that she saw him
on 7 December 2000, as indeed she did according to Dr Kinny’s report, and
told him that on 11 October
2000 she was walking to work when her right knee
suddenly gave way under her, and she agreed that that was a correct history.
agreed that it was not precipitated by any injury or anything unusual in her
19. The applicant also agreed that she had suffered a previous injury at
Engadine while working in March 1997. She said however that
this was an injury
to her right foot, not to her right knee, as I understood her evidence.
20. I trust I will be excused if I do not refer to all of the other matters
in Mr Newton’s skilful cross examination as they
do not to my mind impact
on the applicant’s claimed entitlement.
21. Coming to the medical evidence, Exhibit A is the applicant’s
medical case, and it consists firstly of a report of Dr Dave,
orthopaedic
surgeon, dated 21 January 2002, which contains a history of the applicant
falling on her way to work on 11 October 2000.
This history is clearly
incorrect having regard to the applicant’s evidence. He described her
injury as an aggravation of
a pre-existing condition in view of the absence of
symptoms before the accident.
22. Next in the exhibit is a report on a plain x-ray of the right knee from
Dr Angela Preda, which offers the opinion that there is
slight degenerative
thinning of the medial compartment of the knee joint consistent with early
osteoarthritic change. It would appear
to be the basis of Dr Dave’s view
that there was an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes in the
subject injury.
23. Dr Dave’s handwritten note to Dr Ghaly, dated 6 November 2000,
which is next in the exhibit does not add to the matter.
24. The next documents in the exhibit are a number of medical certificates
from Dr Ghaly proving total incapacity for work for the
period of compensation
claimed, 11 October to 8 November 2000. I see no reason not to accept the
opinion of the treating general
practitioner in this regard.
25. Next in the exhibit is a letter of instruction to Dr Dave dated 14
October 2002 from the applicant’s solicitors advising
that the applicant
did not injure her knee due to a fall on the footpath, and providing a history
that the applicant was in fact
walking normally and put her right foot on the
ground, and contemporaneously with that act felt sudden pain in the right knee,
that the applicant did not fall at all. Dr Dave wrote back in response to
questions as to whether the journey itself, in the sense
of the walk to the bus
stop as distinct from the pre-existing condition, played any part in the
production of her symptoms, and whether
the weight bearing involved in placing
her foot on the ground in the course of an ordinary step was sufficient to
commence her symptoms.
He said in his reply that in relation to the first
question, the journey to the bus stop “may well have” partially
contributed
to the applicant’s symptoms which were from an aggravation of
a pre-existing condition, and that it was “possible”
applicant placing her foot on the ground in the course of an ordinary step may
have caused her symptoms. Thus Dr Dave supported
a causal contribution from the
applicant’s walking on her journey home to an aggravation of a
pre-existing condition, causing
her incapacity for work. I shall come later to
the question whether this satisfies the onus faced by the applicant.
26. Exhibit 1 was the report of Dr Noel Kinny, general surgeon, qualified by
the respondent itself, and he, it is sufficient to say,
thought that the
applicant had suffered no particular injury associated with her walking, and
that the pain she suffered in her knee
and consequent incapacity for work was
purely caused by the pre-existing degenerative condition in her patello-femoral
27. I prefer the view of Dr Dave in this regard, coming as it does from the
applicant’s treating orthopaedic surgeon, who also
had the opportunity to
consider the correct history the applicant gave after a letter was written to
him by her solicitors following
her giving evidence. I should add that his
subsequent report was tendered by consent on a later occasion after the original
It seems to me that Dr Dave’s opinion fits more closely with the
applicant’s history than that of Dr Kinny, and I accept
Dave’s language where he says the journey to the bus stop “may well
have” contributed to the applicant’s
symptoms is a little loose, but
on balance I think he intended here to express a view on the probabilities,
although the same cannot
be said of his later use of the expression
“possibly”.
28. Mr Newton’s helpful written submissions for the respondent indeed
appear to assume that Dr Dave expressed himself in terms
of the onus of proof
required of the applicant; certainly he does not submit otherwise. It seems to
me in any event that if one
regards Dr Dave’s opinions as being expressed
as a possibility rather than a probability, there is a sufficiently compelling
sequence of events between the applicant’s walking and placing the whole
of her weight on her right knee and feeling pain,
and also between the
applicant’s walking up a steep embankment immediately before she did so,
and her suffering pain when stepping
from a pavement onto a grass verge, as to
enable me to find on the whole of the evidence that Dr Dave’s hypothesis
applicant’s activities at this time constituting an aggravation
of pre-existing degenerative changes in her right knee is to
be accepted as a
probability rather than a mere possibility: see
Adelaide Stevedoring Co Pty
Ltd v Forst
[1940] HCA 45
(1940) 64 CLR 538
Tubemakers of Australia Pty Ltd v
(1976) 10 ALR 303
, referred to by Mr Wilkins in his submissions,
to which may be added
EMI (Australia) Ltd v Bes
(1970) 2 NSWR 238
MLA Holdings Pty Ltd v Smith
(1996) 13 NSWLR 224.
29. The next question is whether, assuming I conclude as I have just done,
the applicant is covered by subsection (1) of
of the Act in any event.
This reads:
“A personal injury received by a worker on any journey to which this
section applies is, for the purposes of this Act, an injury
arising out of or in
the course of employment, and compensation is payable accordingly.”
30. Subsection (3) refers to the journeys to which the section applies and
includes (a) “the daily or other periodic journeys
between the
worker’s place of abode and place of employment” which is the
present case.
31. I drew the attention of counsel at the hearing to a decision of Burke J
of this Court in
Armao v Ladue Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] NSWCC 16
(1992) 8 NSWCCR 440
lies in the worker’s path. That is because Burke J concluded that
“personal injury” where used in
meant only injury within the
first “leg” of the definition of that term in
of the Act, so
that it did not include an aggravation of pre-existing disease, which is one of
the categories in the second “leg”
of the definition in
subparagraph (b) thereof.
32. Mr Wilkins in his carefully researched written submissions argues that
this decision was given before that of the High Court in
Zickar v M G H
Plastic Industries Pty Ltd
(1996) 140 ALR 156
where, he says, the majority
of the High Court held that subparagraph (b) of
of the Act is not to be
construed as excluding an injury being an aggravation etc of a disease within
the meaning of paragraph (b)
from being personal injury within the
meaning of paragraph (a), so that the two terms are not mutually exclusive. Mr
indeed correct in this submission. Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ so
held at 174 and Kirby J generally agreed. As Mr Wilkins submits,
this accords
with previous authority such as
Murray v Favelle Mort Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 13
Hume Steel Ltd v Peart
[1947] HCA 34
(1947) 75 CLR 242.
authorities may be added
Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co Ltd v
[1967] HCA 10
(1967) 117 CLR 19.
Colliar & Colliar v Bulley
[2000] NSWCA 1
19 NSWCCR 302
, to which Mr Wilkins referred, contains a recognition by Davies
AJA at 326 [72] that cases which fall within
may yet fall also within
33. The importance of all of this is that as I have said, in
Burke J held that where a worker’s injury on a journey to which
prima facie applied was to be characterised as an aggravation of a pre-existing
disease, it could not also be a “personal injury”
within the meaning
of either the first “leg” of the definition of “injury”
of the Act, or within
itself, so that the worker failed.
34. I have to say that in light of
, which was decided well
appears wrongly decided. Wright C in what is, with
respect, an exceptionally well researched decision in
Houani v Chubb Security
Australia Pty Ltd
(2000) 21 NSWCCR 242
, referred to by Mr Newton, examined
this issue at 257 [50] - 265 [73] and without saying that
wrongly decided, he being bound by it, nevertheless found that an aggravation of
an existing disease could still be also “personal
injury” within
I am indebted to the learned Commissioner’s research,
and I agree with his conclusion.
35. In this case of course, even if I accept Dr Dave’s opinion, the
applicant suffered an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative
changes in her
knee. The question is whether this can also be “personal injury”
within the first “leg” of
of the Act. I
think it can be and is. The applicant after all suffered a sudden physiological
change in that she suffered acute
pain in her right knee. This was diagnosed by
Dr Dave as an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes. As Wright C
at 265 [75], the medical opinions “are general
and do not fully explain the mechanics of an apparently frank injury causing
aggravation of possibly pre-existant disease or affecting a person with a
propensity for that disease” in that they do not
precisely explain what
occurred within the applicant’s knee when she felt pain there. Most cases
of aggravation of pre-existing
degenerative changes are the same in this
respect. That does not exclude recovery in those cases and I do not think it
should here.
Quite clearly the applicant had pre-existing degenerative changes
in her knee and the question is whether the pain that she felt
at the time of
her alleged injury, and which persisted for the period of her incapacity, was an
aggravation of a pre-existing “disease”
within subparagraph (b) of
of the Act and/or a “personal injury” within the first
I think it was both. After all, the applicant, in a
knee which was not symptomatic immediately before the subject incident, suffered
sudden pain in it at a time when it was under load, so that her leg buckled
beneath her, after she had walked up a steep embankment
and stepped with her
body weight on the affected knee from the pavement onto grass. Not to describe
this incident as constituting
both “personal injury” and an
aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes seems to me a tortured use of
I consider that the applicant suffered both a “personal
injury” within the first “leg” of
of the Act and within
of the Act, and an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes within
subparagraph (b) of
36. What then? The applicant, says the respondent in its submissions, falls
foul of subsection (1D) of
This reads:
“Subsection (1) does not apply if the personal injury resulted from the
medical or other condition of the worker and the journey
did not cause or
contribute to the injury”.
37. This was inserted by Act no. 214 of 1989,
and schedule 1, which came
into operation on 31 March 1990. I was favoured by the respondent’s
counsel with the Second Reading
speech accompanying that legislation. In the
speech of Mr Fahey, who was at that time Minister for Industrial Relations and
Employment,
in the Legislative Assembly, there is reference at Hansard page
12928 to this subsection where it is said:
“Under the provisions of the Bill, journey injuries which are not
caused or contributed to by the journey and are not otherwise
work related would
not be covered. Heart attacks, strokes etcetera, suffered on journeys between
covered if they are either contributed to by the
journey - for example by the stress involved - or causally related to the
employment.”
38. The corresponding speech of the Hon. E P Pickering, at that time Minister
for Police and Emergency Services and Vice President
of the Executive Council,
in the Legislative Council, was also provided, and at Hansard page 14220 it says
“In summary, coverage will not be provided for journey injuries
which are not caused, or contributed to, by the journey and
are not otherwise
work related. Only if there is a relevant connection with the journey should
injuries on periodic journeys be
claimable. Injuries occurring on journeys
between home and work which result from a medical condition suffered by the
worker will
continue to be covered if they are either contributed to by the
journey - for example, by the stress involved - or causally related
employment”.
39. The clear legislative intention to my mind is to exclude from
coverage for “injuries” so called, which result purely and simply
from medical conditions suffered by the worker and
not from anything that
occurred on the journey.
40. That does not end the problem of interpretation of
question that arises is whether the applicant bears the onus of disproving its
operation or whether the respondent bears
the onus of proving it. The
respondent of course submits the former in its written submissions, and the
applicant the latter. No
authority bears directly upon the point.
41. “Fault” within
of the Act must be proved by the
respondent:
Workcover Authority of New South Wales v Billpat Holdings Pty
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 565
at 596, cited by Mr Wilkins. Mr Newton is indeed
correct in his submission that the onus point was originally conceded, not
Aardvark Security Services Pty Ltd v Ruszkowski
(1993) 13 NSWCCR
at 16 per Handley JA, the case referred to in
as authority for
this proposition. However his Honour’s citation of
Djordjevich
[1955] HCA 19
(1955) 91 CLR 512
at 519-20 there is in point. That case, with
respect, is a simple application of the dictum “he who asserts must
and one can readily see that in that
created a defence
for an employer against the prima facie application of
, it was for the
employer to prove it. The language of
is similar to that of
because both subsections begin with “subsection (1) does not apply if
...” so that a defence for an employer is created
against the
worker’s claim if the elements of the subsection can be established by it.
One would have thought that these principles
applied as much to
on the authority of
and that is my view. That
makes little difference in this case, as I have concluded that the applicant has
carried the onus of negativing
on the probabilities if, contrary to my
views, she must assume it.
42. The second question is whether the “or” in
read conjunctively or disjunctively. Mr Newton for the respondent submits that
it is disjunctive and Mr Wilkins for the
applicant does not address the
question. I think Mr Newton’s submission is to be accepted. If one
interprets “or”
as conjunctive, it means that whoever has to prove
or disprove the operation of the section - the respondent or the applicant -
show that the journey did not (or did) cause
contribute to the
injury. When one reads the Second Reading speeches, the clear legislative
intent behind the subsection is to exclude
liability where a journey
contributed to an injury. Accepting Mr
Newton’s submission that “or” in subsection (1D) is
disjunctive, and that,
to quote his submissions (at page 5), the phrases
connected by “or” are “alternatives that the applicant ought
satisfy the court of”, the result is that it is sufficient to negative the
operation of the section that the journey
contributed
to the injury even
if it did not
it. As to the word “cause”, I gratefully
adopt the reasoning of Bishop J in
Gavalas v Mont Base Pty Ltd
(unreported, 8/11/02) to which Mr Newton referred me with Mr Wilkins’
consent after written submissions were filed. To the
authorities cited by his
Honour on the meaning of this expression may be added
March v E & M H
Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506.
I note here that the facts of that
case, which resulted in the applicant failing, were somewhat different to the
present case, in
that the applicant simply suffered an epileptic fit on a
journey and was injured, the fit being the sole cause of injury and on his
Honour’s findings unconnected with the employment or the journey.
43. “Contribute” would seem to pose a lesser connection with a
given event than the term “cause”. So much
would seem to be
established by such authorities as
Commissioner of Police v Hallenstein
[1996] VicRp 51
(1996) 2 VR 1
Repatriation Commission v Cruise
[1994] FCA 1322
(1994) 35 ALD 69
Mills v Australian Postal Commission
(1994) 32 ALD 489.
It seems to me
that if the “or” between “cause” and
“contribute” in subs (1D) is disjunctive,
as Mr Newton submits and I
accept it is, the word “contribute” must be given some work to do,
in that it must connote
something different from “cause”, and I
think it does. I think it connotes a connection of a less strict kind between
events than that required by “cause” in that the connection required
is simply that to “contribute” to an
outcome, an event may be simply
one of several which have a real or operative influence, even if a minor one, on
the outcome in question.
however consider that the “but
for” test postulated by Hogg C in
Molloy v Gosford City Council
(unreported, 13/7/00) referred to and disagreed with by Bishop J in
is the correct one. It is not enough to prove that had the
applicant not been on the journey concerned, an “injury”
have occurred; what must be proved is that the journey contributed causally,
even if in a minor way, to the happening of
the injury.
44. Applying this reasoning to this case, it is obvious that if I accept that
there was an aggravation of degenerative changes constituted
applicant’s actions immediately before she experienced pain in her knee,
as I have, the journey contributed to the injury,
even if it did not cause it.
45. It is notable that when the legislature inserted
of the Act (by Act
no. 20 of 1996,
and schedule 1.2, which came into operation on 12 January
1997) it did not, as it did in
to add the word
“substantially” before “contribute” where that word
appears in subs (1D), and that in
it specifically provided that
apply in respect of an injury to which
(inter alia)
applies. The obvious intention was to preserve the separate regime of
entitlement for compensation which exists in
46. In my view, the applicant in this case may well have failed had
“substantially” been inserted before “contribute”
to bring it into line with
which requires employment to be
“a substantial contributing factor” to an injury. This is because
the contribution of
the worker’s activity in this case immediately before
she experienced pain in her knee by way of an aggravation of pre-existing
degenerative changes was indeed relatively minor. After all, at the highest all
she did was walk up a steep embankment, and then
having done that, walk on the
level between a footpath and a grass verge. It is true that I have accepted
that this activity was
an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes, but
it was a relatively minor one. It would not qualify as a
“substantial”
to apply, in all probability, and had
“substantially” in
appeared before
“contribute”, the subsection, as I have said, would probably have
applied to exclude recovery. The fact
that the word “substantially”
does not so appear seems to me decisive in this case. That small aggravations
of degenerative
changes could qualify before
was inserted as injuries under
of the Act or its equivalent elsewhere is demonstrated by the decision of
Watts Peterson Automotive Pty Ltd v Peterson
[1994] NSWCC 30
(1994) 10 NSWCCR
which followed
Treloar v Australian Telecommunications Commission
[1990] FCA 511
(1990) 97 ALR 321
, and see also
Chalmers v Bank of NSW
(1979) WCR 188.
That such aggravations may also constitute “personal injury”
simpliciter
within the first “leg” of
is demonstrated by
in the earlier authorities I have cited. The result is that
, which was, as I have already pointed out, decided before
, does not prevent me from deciding, as I have, that what occurred
to the applicant in this case was “personal injury”
within the first
of the Act.
47. The applicant is therefore entitled to succeed in her claim. As I have
pointed out, the certificates of Dr Ghaly prove total
incapacity for work during
the period of compensation claimed, and the applicant is entitled therefore to
an award under
in respect of that period, together with an order in respect
expenses. No submission was made by either counsel about interest
on compensation awarded, and I shall hear submissions about that
reasons are published.
48. The figure of $557.69 per week is claimed in the application as the
applicant’s current weekly wage rate under
I have agreement from
counsel that this rate is correct. I have made an award at that rate.
49. I make the following findings:
1. Injury to applicant on a periodic
journey between her place of abode and place of employment on 11 October
2. Resulting from such injury applicant totally incapacitated for work
from 11 October to 8 November 2000.
50. I make the following award in the applicant’s favour:
$557.69 per week from 11 October to 8 November 2000 under
Respondent to pay applicant’s medical and like expenses under
Respondent to pay applicant’s costs.
Mr Wilkins instructed by Jones Staff & Co appeared for the
Mr M Newton instructed by Abbot Tout appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter