URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SCULLY v HCCC [2013] NSWNMT 7 (20 June 2013)
Matter No: 042/2012
SCULLY V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
[2013] NSWNMT 7/
INQUIRY INTO AN APPLICATION FOR RE-INSTATMENT UNDER SECTION
Applicant for review: Amelia Anne
Health Care Complaints
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM,
(Chairperson)
Ms S L Smiltnieks (Nurse Member)
Mr P Newman (Nurse
Ms L Wrightson (Lay Member)
Date and place of Hearing:
Tuesday 26 March 2013, Wednesday 27 March
2013 at Sydney and by written submissions received from the respondent on 18
April 2013.
Date of reasons for decision
NON PUBLICATION ORDERS APPLY
Representation:
Applicant: the applicant appeared in
Respondent: Ms P Dwyer of counsel instructed by
Ms R Lewis, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Application
under s 163 A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
for review of order cancelling registration – Where HCCC opposes
application – Whether risk to the public if former Endorsed
Enrolled Nurse
is re-instated to register – Whether former nurse has insight into the
effect of her past inappropriate conduct
– whether former nurse has
demonstrated by her actions that it is appropriate she be restored to the
register – Where
former nurse has undertaken and completed on-line ethics
course; where nurse’s written material in support of application and
oral evidence demonstrates conflicting attitude about her insight. Whether
appropriate to grant application if deemed necessary
to place conditions on
registration HELD – Former nurse has demonstrated to the necessary
evidential standard that it is appropriate
to grant re-registration but subject
to conditions.
Legislation cited:
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
Section 3, s3A, s139A,
s139B, s163A, s163B, s163C, Schedule 5D Cl.7.
Mental Health Act 2007
Cases cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Ex Parte Tziniolis:Re the Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR 488;
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 21
In Re Jason
Martin [2010]NSWMT 13
Law Society of New South Wales v Walsh
Nelson v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 7
Peter Cecil Harcourt
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
Rajesh Dinakar v Medical
Council of NSW [2012] NSWMT
(unreported 12 December 2012)
(1948) 77 CLR 403
[1948] HCA 45
Re Mansoor Haider Zaidi
Zaidi v HCCC
[1998] NSWSC 335
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
20 June 2013 the Tribunal granted an application made by Ms Amelia Anne Scully
for a re-instatement order under s 163B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) No. 86a
(“the National Law”) subject to
conditions.
Tribunal also made a non publication order under clause 7 of Schedule 5D to the
National Law prohibiting the publication of names
of a patient and his immediate
family members, as well as that of the applicant’s witnesses, save for the
purposes of the reasons
for decision provided to the parties to these
proceedings.
Tribunal ordered that each party pay their own costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
The background leading to the application and the
hearing of the re-instatement application
4 November 2011 a differently constituted Tribunal found complaints instituted
by the Health Care Complaints Commission (“HCCC”)
against Ms Amelia
Anne Scully (“the applicant”) of professional misconduct and
unsatisfactory professional conduct proved.
That Tribunal ordered that the
applicant’s registration on the register of health practitioners kept by
the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia (“the Board”) in
association with Australian Health Practitioner Registration Agency
(“AHPRA”) be cancelled. The Tribunal also ordered that a
period of at least one year elapse before the applicant could
apply under s163A
of the National Law to review the cancellation of her
registration.
complaints proved against the applicant are:
that her conduct
demonstrated the knowledge, skill or judgment she possessed, or the care she
exercised, in the practice of nursing
fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a nurse of an equivalent level of training or experience;
that she had
been guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the practice of
particulars in the complaint before the earlier Tribunal assert, in broad terms,
that the applicant engaged in an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship
with a patient, Mr BT, (“Patient A”), and continued to engage in
such relationship after
she became aware that Patient A was subject to a
Community Treatment Order (“CTO”) under the provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(NSW) (“the
Mental Health Act
Tribunal also found she failed to report the relationship to her employer, and
engaged in smoking marijuana with Patient
19 November 2012 the applicant wrote, by email, to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council advising that she wished to “re-apply
for nursing
re-enrolment”. Without objection from the HCCC, the Tribunal accepted
this correspondence as an application under
s 163A of the National
hearing commenced before the Tribunal on 26 March 2013. The applicant was
self-represented. The HCCC was represented by Ms P Dwyer
of counsel instructed
by Ms Lewis of the HCCC. Ms Dwyer orally advised the Tribunal that the HCCC
opposed the applicant’s
application for a re-instatement order. As the
applicant had not received the documents relied on by the HCCC the matter was
to the following day, and the applicant was advised by the Chairperson
of her right to seek an adjournment of her application. The
applicant told the
Tribunal that, although she had not been served with any documents by the HCCC,
she had at her home copies of
the documents relied on by the HCCC (which were
the documents relied on at the earlier hearing) other than the transcript of the
hearing. The applicant was provided with a copy of all relevant documents,
including the transcript of the previous hearing, and
the matter was adjourned
on that day. On 27 March 2013 the applicant advised the Tribunal she wished to
proceed with her application,
and did not seek to further adjourn the
the hearing the applicant tendered, without objection, a reference dated 12
November 2012 from Ms SL, Nurse Manager, Mental Health
Inpatient Services, Royal
North Shore Hospital. The Tribunal also received, without objection, a letter
dated 2 February 2013 prepared
by the applicant the contents of which she
affirmed as being true and correct. We also received without objection two
from a Ms CC, registered nurse and Ms KK EEN-RN. The applicant also
relied on a certificate relating to the completion by her of
an on-line ethics
course relating to nursing which she undertook between 9 December 2012 and 23
December 2012. Each of the applicant’s
referees, and Ms AS, Nurse Unit
Manager, Royal North Shore Hospital gave oral evidence to the
HCCC relied on three volumes of documents 1-24 which were tendered, again
without objection, to us. At our request we were supplied
with correspondence
from the applicant’s former solicitors to Dr Katie Seidler (“Dr
Seidler”) and a report prepared
by her. Dr Seidler is a clinical and
forensic psychologist who prepared a report relied on by the applicant at the
previous hearing.
At the conclusion of the hearing the Tribunal made orders
that the HCCC should file, within 14 days, written submissions setting
conditions, if any, it would seek in the event the Tribunal found it appropriate
to grant the applicant’s application.
The HCCC did not file its
submissions in the time ordered, and on 10 April 2013, sought an extension of
time until 19 April 2013
to file its submissions. The applicant was granted an
extension of time to file submissions, if any, in reply within a further seven
is unnecessary that we set out a detailed background to this matter. The
relevant background is found in the previous Tribunal’s
reasons. The
documents which were before the previous Tribunal were also provided to us. We
therefore broadly summarise the important
matters noted by the previous
Tribunal, and refer to the applicant’s new material. Unless noted to be
an assertion, the following
factual matters are found by us to be relevant
applicant was born in December 1967. The applicant was first enrolled as an
Endorsed Enrolled Nurse on 13 March 2008. In August
2008 she successfully
completed a continuing education programme in Mental Health Nursing.
previous Tribunal noted at [13] the applicant “came to nursing at a mature
age”. She commenced employment at the
East Wing, Manly Hospital as an
Endorsed Enrolled Nurse in March 2008. The East Wing is a unit for the
hospitalisation of mentally
ill patients. The applicant had, prior to her
commencement at Manly Hospital, begun living at the nurses’ quarters at
Vale Hospital. She remained living in these quarters until 2009 when she
obtained her own accommodation.
applicant met Patient A’s sister, Ms CT (“Ms T”), when Ms T
moved into the nurses’ quarters. They became
good friends.
applicant met Patient A at a birthday party in January 2008. Patient A’s
sister told the applicant that Patient A had previously
been admitted to the
East Wing, Manly Hospital.
June/July2008 Patient A was admitted to the East Wing. He was initially placed
on the “acute” side of the ward. He
remained an in patient for
approximately six to eight weeks.
The applicant asserted before the previous Tribunal that she told the Clinical
Nurse Supervisor, who was in charge of the wing at
the time, she knew Patient A
and that she “was good friends with his sister”. (reasons [18]).
During Patient A’s
admission the nurse admitted that she came into contact
with him on a number of occasions in a nursing context, and made entries
his clinical notes on six occasions. The applicant was aware at the time of
Patient A’s admission he had a serious mental
illness, with a history of
schizophrenia and poly-substance abuse, long standing drug issues, and
“some self harm ideation”
(reasons [29]).
Wayne Thomas, an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse, who was working on the East Wing, and
also living in the nursing quarters, spoke to the
applicant after he observed
her bringing cigarettes and money to the ward for Patient A. He also asserted
that, on one occasion
at the nurses’ quarters, the applicant was with
Patient A’s mother and sister, and asked him to speak to them about
A’s condition.
A was discharged from the hospital in September 2008 subject to a Community
Treatment Order (“CTO”) made under
Mental Health Act
August 2008 Patient A’s sister, who was pregnant, moved from the nurses
quarters into a small unit with her mother and uncle.
After the baby’s
birth the applicant regularly visited Patient A’s sister. During her
visits Patient A was present
at the unit. Patient A also attended social
functions, including barbeques, at which the applicant was present.
Christmas Day 2008 the applicant attended lunch at the unit. Patient A was
present and the applicant smoked marijuana with him
11 January 2009 the applicant admitted she commenced a sexual relationship with
Patient A “apparently in the nurses’
quarters” (reasons [26]).
The applicant admitted a sexual relationship continued until April
October 2009 the applicant moved into her own accommodation. Patient A stayed
at her home on a frequent basis.
her evidence before the previous Tribunal the applicant admitted that she first
became aware that Patient A was, after his discharge
from the East Wing, Many
Hospital, still a patient of the Area Health Service “maybe about a month
after the relationship started”
or “It might have only been a couple
of weeks” (reasons [31]). The applicant admitted that after Patient A had
her at the nurses’ quarters a number of times following his
discharge from the East Wing, that Mr Thomas had a conversation
with her when he
said to her that she was “breaching the Code of Conduct” (reasons
6 November 2009 the applicant attended a meeting with Patient A and his sister
with Patient A’s case manager.
22 May 2009 the Chief Executive Officer of the Northern Sydney Central Coast
Area Health Service wrote to the NSW Nurses and Midwives
Board reporting the
applicant’s relationship with Patient A. The letter referred to Patient
A’s diagnosis, that the
applicant’s immediate manager had discussed
the situation with the applicant, “and she [the applicant] is of the
that this situation is appropriate” (reasons [45]).
16 December 2009 the applicant was transferred on a temporary basis by the
Northern Beaches Mental Health Service to Lavender House,
21 December 2009 the applicant, who asserts she was really angry and had been
drinking, broke into Patient A’s flat and “threw
everywhere”.
5 January 2010 the applicant attended a family meeting with Dr Ladd. Dr Ladd
was Patient’s A’s then treating psychiatrist.
Family members
including the applicant were noted to “strongly request” that
Patient A be trialled on a reduction of
his depot injection. Dr Ladd recorded
in his notes that he had made it clear to the family, and the applicant, that
Patient A’s
condition was not “Drug Induced Psychosis”.
Patient A is recorded as steadfastly believing that was his condition rather
than Chronic Schizophrenia (Paranoid Type) (Dr Ladd’s diagnosis).
24 February 2010 the applicant attended a Mental Health Review Tribunal Hearing
when Patient A’s CTO was extended for a further
six months.
29 March 2010 the applicant attended a meeting with Patient A’s Clinical
Nurse Specialist. The notes on that occasion reveal
that the applicant disputed
Patient A’s diagnosis, disagreed with Dr Ladd, and asserted he suffered
drug induced psychosis.
16 April 2010 Patient A, whilst staying overnight with the applicant, assaulted
her. She obtained an Apprehended Violence Order
(“AVO”) but did not
pursue assault charges. The applicant’s relationship with Patient A
ceased at this time.
applicant was interviewed by representatives of the HCCC on 10 August 2010. At
the time of her interview the applicant told the
HCCC representatives that she
was aware of the Code of Conduct, and would never breach it again. She said
“I would never let
this happen again” (reasons [6]).
applicant resumed her relationship with Patient A one week after her interview
with the HCCC’s representatives.
applicant asserted before the previous Tribunal that she ceased her relationship
with Patient A at about Mother’s Day 2011
(8 May 2011).
4 November 2011 orders were made by the previous Tribunal including an order
cancelling the applicant’s registration and
further providing at least one
year elapse before the applicant could apply for review of that
cancellation of her registration the nurse obtained other employment. At the
date of the hearing before us she was working
in three part-time positions: as
an office cleaner, a night-filler and a sales assistant.
applicant asserts she has maintained her friendship with Patient A’s
sister but does not see Patient A and has no relationship
9 December 2012 and 23 December 2012 the applicant completed an on-line ethics
course provided by the National Council of
State Boards Nursing, an approved
continuing education provider accredited by the Alabama Board of Nursing. The
applicant asserted
she was unable to locate any suitable ethics course in
Australia which she could complete taking into account her employment
commitments.
Matters in issue
following issues required determination by the Tribunal:
applicant demonstrate genuine and sincere remorse for her actions in respect of
her relationship with Patient A;
applicant understand the basis on which the findings of professional misconduct
and unsatisfactory professional conduct were
what has the
applicant done to demonstrate she has learnt from the findings of the earlier
is the applicant
likely to breach any ethical requirements found in the relevant codes of conduct
in the future, or does she now fully
appreciate the purpose and relevance of the
ethical requirements in the relevant codes of conduct;
applicant acknowledge and appreciate the harm she has, or may have, caused to
Patient A, his family, her nursing colleagues
and the general public;
having regard to
the serious findings of the earlier Tribunal should any re-instatement order be
subject to conditions; and
in the event the
Tribunal determines conditions should be imposed, what conditions would be
appropriate.
Relevant legal principles and the National
was not a matter of controversy that the applicant bears the onus of proving she
is a fit and proper person to be engaged in the
profession of nursing as an
endorsed enrolled nurse. Nor was it is dispute that the standard of proof to be
applied by the Tribunal
is the civil standard of proof, that is on the balance
of probabilities. Because of the nature of the jurisdiction, as set out in
(2) (a) and s 3A of the National Law, is protective of the public, the Tribunal
must be satisfied to a high level of probability
that the applicant is
“fit and proper to be held out to the rest of the profession, to patients
and to the whole of the community
as a person worthy of their confidence”.
In Re Jason Martin
[2010] NSWMT 13
; Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
60 CLR 336)
is appropriate that, at this point in our reasons, we set out the relevant
provisions of the National Law. Section 163A (1) provides
a person may apply
to the appropriate review body (in this case the Tribunal) for the review of a
“relevant order”.
Section 163 A (4)(b) defines a “relevant
order” to be “an order that a person’s registration as a
health practitioner be cancelled”.
Tribunal’s powers on review relevant to this application are found in
s163C which provides as follows:
(1) The appropriate review body
must conduct an inquiry into an application for review and may then do any of
the following--
(a) dismiss the application;
(c) make a reinstatement order;
"reinstatement order"
is an order that the person may be
registered in accordance with Part 7 if--
(a) the person makes an application for registration to the National Board;
(b) the relevant National Board decides to register the person.
(3A) Any condition imposed on a person's registration by the National Board
under Part 7 applies but only to the extent that it is
not inconsistent with
conditions imposed or altered by the appropriate review body under subsection
(4) The appropriate review body may also impose conditions on the person's
registration or alter the conditions to which the person's
registration is to be
subject under the reinstatement order.
(5) The order on a review under this section may also provide that the order
is not to be reviewed under this Division until after
a specified time.
Tribunal’s task in conducting the inquiry for review of the earlier order
is found in s 163B. That section provides:
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order, or any
findings made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into account, the
review must take into account any complaint made or notified
to a Council or a
National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about the person,
whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the making of the
order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the complaint was
referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was taken on the
relevant legal principles in respect of an application to be re-registered are
not in doubt and have been discussed in many decisions
of courts, including the
High Court of Australia, intermediate appellate courts, as well as tribunals.
(1948) 77 CLR 403
[1948] HCA 45
per Latham CJ,
Dixon and Williams JJ at [33]
Ex Parte Tziniolis; Re the Medical
Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR 488;
Peter Cecil Harcourt Dawson v Law
Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
; Re Mansoor Haider Zaidi
[2006] NSWMT 6
Zaidi v HCCC
[1998] NSWSC 335
per Mason P at 15)
have already referred to the fact that in this application it is the applicant
who bears the onus of proof. That onus is a high
onus in a re-instatement
application.
In Re Jason Martin
the Medical Tribunal of NSW explained first the
purpose of the jurisdiction is “not punishment or further
punishment”
of the former practitioner, rather the jurisdiction being
exercised is for the protection of the public.
decided in the context of lawyers who have been removed from the roll of
practitioners, the principles enunciated in such
cases are generally apposite to
these proceedings. The High Court has made it plain that the power to
re-instate should “be
exercised with great caution and only upon solid and
substantial grounds”. However a court (or a tribunal) should exercise
discretion having regard to the facts of each case (see
found in a dissenting judgment, the remarks of Kirby P (as his Honour then was)
have been adopted and applied in other decisions in this
Tribunal. His Honour explained:
There is no public interest in
denying forever the chance of redemption and rehabilitation to former
practitioners. On the contrary,
the public is better served if, in appropriate
cases, those who have offended, once they have affirmatively proved reform, are
a second chance ....
In Re Jason Martin
the Medical Tribunal pointed out it is not “a
question of what an applicant has suffered in the past. It is a question of his
[her] worthiness and his [her] reliability for the future”. That Tribunal
noted the difficulty associated with predicting
how a practitioner will
behaviour in the future and remarked that “the decision in the particular
case is to a greater or lesser
extent dependant upon the Tribunal’s
assessment of the applicant”. The Tribunal explained “in making
that assessment
[the tribunal] may “draw inferences from what has happened
in the past and in particular, what led to his [her] being removed
in all applications in which the Tribunal in NSW is involved under the National
Law the guiding principle and object in s3A applies.
That section provides as
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the
protection of the health and safety of the public must be the paramount
consideration.
The evidence
applicant’s evidence falls for assessment into three discrete
(i) the matters
in her application and written statement;
(ii) her oral
evidence in chief and answers given in cross-examination by Ms Dwyer and those
posed by the Tribunal; and
referees’ evidence both oral and written.
also took into account:
findings of the previous Tribunal;
applicant’s answers in her interview with the HCCC; and
report and recommendations of Dr Seidler, and the applicant’s attitude to
those recommendations.
now discuss this evidence and consider whether or not the applicant has proved,
to the necessary standard, that she is a fit and
proper person such that she
should be able to apply to the Board for registration as a health practitioner
under the relevant provision
of the National Law.
applicant’s email dated 19 November 2012 and her letter dated 2 February
applicant’s email dated 19 November 2012, as earlier noted, was treated by
the Tribunal as the applicant’s initiating
application under s163A of the
National Law.
her email the applicant explained that losing her registration “was
completely devastating for me” because she had
worked hard to obtain her
registration, that she was a caring person and “a career in nursing suited
me and I feel I was very
good at it”. She also explained that she had
learned a valuable lesson “in that the Code of Conduct is to be taken
seriously”.
the preceding paragraph of her email the applicant said:
The last 12
months have by far been the worst of my life, all starting with losing my
registration. I have never had to struggle
financially this badly before, even
as a single mother. I have been unable to secure a fulltime job and so I am
currently working
3 part time jobs in order to keep a roof over my head and food
on the table. In have been in a very dark place all year and the
only light at
the end of the tunnel, and the only thing that has kept me going is knowing that
I could re-apply for my registration
I have literally been counting down the
applicant explained that she had not attended Ms T’s child’s
birthday party because she knew Patient A would be there.
The applicant
completed her email explaining that she really wished to resume her career in
mental health nursing, and said she
is “truly remorseful”.
now turn to the applicant’s letter dated 2 February 2013 which she relied
on in support of her application. It is necessary
we refer to this letter in
some detail for three reasons. First, it was written not long before the
hearing. Secondly, the contents
of the letter were affirmed by the applicant as
being true and correct, and relied on by her as her statement in the
proceedings.
The majority of the letter is focused on, and details, what the
applicant described “as what this man [Patient A] has put
through”. Thirdly, because the HCCC submits the letter demonstrates a
lack of insight by the nurse of the effect of her
conduct on Patient A, but
rather highlights the detriments the applicant suffered from the relationship.
It is strongly relied on
by the HCCC in its stance that the applicant’s
application should be dismissed.
applicant commenced her letter by stating she “had no idea how to prove
that I will not re-offend”. She explained
she does not dispute her
relationship with Patient A. She also explained she understood the nature of
the previous Tribunal’s
order was protective of the public and not
punitive, and went on to say she would not have made this application if she was
desperate to get my registration back and to continue in the
career that I felt I was so good at”.
applicant stated her intentions in respect of Patient A had been to help him,
but she went on to say “I do realise that
I should never have had the
relationship in the first place as people with mental illness are vulnerable and
I did send the wrong
signals in having a relationship with him, he now feels
discriminated against because he can’t have a relationship with any
nurse.........”. In the following three typewritten pages of her letter
the applicant sets out details of abusive behaviour
she says Patient A
perpetrated on her including physical violence. The applicant asserted that
Patient A had “used me for
sex”. She went on to
[Patient A] is manipulative just like his mother in which he
has a disturbing enmeshed, co-dependant relationship. The lies this
told me over whelm (sic) me, and the stories he has told his mother about me are
incredible, he had no loyalty to me whatsoever,
he would make these stories up
him money or drugs.
It is a very dysfunctional family and his sister can vouch
for all I’m saying
applicant further referred to Patient A’s behaviour as
I got back with him 4 months after the worst assault. He
breached the AVO by ringing me the day before he was due to go to court for
assault charges the police laid on him. Coincidence? No way, the wheels set in
motion a day after that with his mother contacting
me to write a statuary [sic]
declaration saying he hadn’t punched me in the face and that he was
‘unwell’ at the
time. He wasn’t unwell he had just given up
smoking pot and was trying to give up cigarettes. He has a long history of
and 90 percent of those assaults perpetrated by him, including the ones
on me; he was not psychotic; he remembers them well and has
even laughed about
punching a female police officer in the face. He is used to getting away with
everything under the mental health
act [sic] and uses it to his advantage when
he does the wrong thing.
in her letter the applicant explained “if I meet new people now and it
looks as though there could be chemistry between
us I would ask them if they
have ever been in a psych ward. It would seem a strange question at the time I
suppose, but I need to
look out for myself now and I never want to make that
mistake again”.
applicant provided details of the on-line ethics course she has undertaken, and
explained that she had not been able to do any
other educational course because
she is working three jobs. She said, although she has weekends off,
“there are no courses
available on weekends”. She referred her
economic dependence on her jobs. The applicant concluded her letter referring
the mistake she had made, which she said she would never
(ii) The applicant’s oral evidence in chief, during her cross
examination and in re-examination;
the commencement of her oral evidence the applicant referred to her letter dated
2 February 2013 in the response to a question
posed by the Chairperson as
you very much indeed. Is there anything that you want to change or add to that
I was focusing on in this letter was all about trying to prove that I would not
reoffend. What I did not really go into, I
may have just briefed on at the end
of the letter, was the fact that what I had done was wrong and that I now
realise, and that was
there from the beginning. I knew what I was doing was
wrong in the fact that I would not let him show any public affection towards
in case we got seen by his case manager, somebody that worked at east wing, so
that was in my head. I knew what I was doing was
wrong. When the relationship
became in depth, that just sort of left my mind and that is something that I
truly regret.
I know what I did was wrong because of the fact that he [sic] did send
messages that were wrong. There was the power imbalance.
There was the
boundaries I crossed and I should never have crossed those boundaries. I can go
a lot more into the ethical boundaries,
the lack of professionalism and I can
give examples.
(transcript 27 March 2013 p4-5)
in her evidence in chief the applicant said that if she saw a nurse in a
relationship with a patient she would follow the example
of Mr Thomas and speak
to the nurse about the inappropriate nature of the relationship. She went on
to explain:
There is the power imbalance because you know so much
hand in that relationship. I knew everything he had done without him even
telling me, and I definitely had the upper hand. I will
refer to my notes again
especially, well due to the fact that he has completely and utterly no insight
into his mental illness, so
me being privy to all that information I could have
easily thrown that back in his face saying, "Well, you did this and you did that
and you were psychotic when you did this", and he would never have volunteered
that information to me (1) Because he is in complete
denial of his mental
illness; (2) Because he would have been embarrassed by it and (3) quite possibly
because he has no memory of
a lot of things due to being psychotic at the time
of all this.
Okay, he already had a dim view of the mental health service. By me having a
relationship with him, it has caused that to become
quite worse. He hates the
whole mental health system. Hates the service. He does not want to engage,
hence the CTO being in place.
If there was no CTO he would not engage in
services at all and then he would become unwell because he would be off the
and there is the fact that he is very sexually inappropriate towards
the nurse. Now by me having an intimate relationship with him
as a nurse, he
then gets the idea any nurses are fair game. So if he is unwell and in
hospital, his sexual inappropriateness would
tenfold and then that would put
nurses, that are meant to look after him, at risk. So indirectly I have
actually done that.
(transcript 27 March 2013 p6).
Dwyer cross-examined the nurse by reference to the earlier Tribunal’s
finding at [42] of its reasons where the members noted
that the nurse lacked
insight, and that they observed “no contrition on the part of [the
applicant]”. The applicant
responded to this reference saying she had
been “too busy being defensive” and had not wanted to admit “I
the wrong thing, that I had let down a patient, that I had let down the
nursing profession”. She agreed that, before the earlier
Tribunal, she
had not shown contrition because she was being defensive. She also agreed that,
at that time, she saw herself as the
victim, and that since the last Tribunal
proceedings she had learnt that she had a detrimental effect on Patient
Dwyer took the applicant to a number of places in the Peer Reviewer’s
report where the peer reviewer was critical of the
applicant, and she accepted
the criticisms of her were properly made, including that her relationship with
Patient A had the effect
of potentially being detrimental to his mental health,
to adversely affect his engagement with the mental health service, and that
their joint use of marijuana sent conflicting messages to Patient A. The
applicant also acknowledged her actions with Patient A
may have an indirect
adverse impact on other nurses who may be involved with him in the future.
applicant also accepted that:
inappropriate for her to have introduced Patient A into the nursing quarters
where other professionals engaged in a therapeutic
relationship with him were
relationship with Patient A was likely to be confusing and compromising for both
answers given by
her before the former Tribunal were defensive; and
on re-reading
her letter dated 2 February 2013 that it was defensive.
applicant expanded her answer about her letter where she referred to herself as
the victim, elaborating in the following manner:
This is not in
order to play the victim", it does seem that way. When I read through it now it
is almost as if, okay, he did all
this stuff to me but I am still not saying in
this letter that what I did was wrong.
following exchange occurred between Ms Dwyer and the applicant:
you accept that somebody reading that as an outsider it appears that you still
are very angry with Patient A and have spent a lot
of time in this letter
blaming him for what happened to you rather than accept the responsibility?
I know I'm not angry with him. I have no hate or malice towards him. He is a
very vulnerable person. What I was trying to
do, this took me days to write.
So I had to go through my memory and try and and my point was trying
to be, okay, I say all of
this stuff that he's done to me, and then say at the
end of it, "Do you think in my right mind I would ever go back to having a
relationship
with a patient?" That would somehow prove that I would not
reoffend, but I really don't have any malice or hate towards him. This
in the recesses of my mind that I had to bring forward and just try to remember
all of this stuff and I sort of had a list
and and it is quite
defensive. It is still being it is still trying to put the blame on
him whereas I have not explained that
the onus is on me. I was the one who had
a relationship with a patient who was mentally unwell.
challenged about her ongoing knowledge of statements alleged to have been made
by Patient A to his case manager, the applicant
acknowledged it was
inappropriate for her to have such knowledge. She went on to say the reason she
recorded the hearsay statements,
which she said had been conveyed to her by
Patient A’s sister, was because she thought this demonstrated how her
sending “the
wrong signals” had made Patient A feel he was
discriminated against, and this had an adverse impact on his mental health.
She agreed the statement in her letter about Patient A’s case manager
appeared critical of the case manager and could be construed
as blaming or
criticising someone else.
applicant was also strongly challenged by Ms Dwyer about her recorded interview
with the HCCC on 10 August 2010 when she said
she had ceased her relationship
with Patient A and would never offend again, but within days resumed her
relationship with him.
The following questions were posed to the
you told the Health Care Complaints Commission on 10 August 2010 that there
had been that violent episode and you would never
get back with
just one week later, that relationship with Patient A resumed?
tell this Tribunal that you would not have another relationship with a
you have previously said to authorities, who are questioning you about your
ethical obligations, that you would not have a relationship
with a patient and
then you resumed with the relationship again?
you accept that becomes a little harder to believe you?
has changed then?
whole way of thinking towards the entire thing. The whole letting
down the entire profession, affecting his mental health, just
the whole ethical
involvement.
relationship with Patient A ended around Mothers Day 2011, so that is
around May 2011, and it ended because Patient A's mental
health had deteriorated
and he was becoming violent again, is that right?
that was I gave him an ultimatum about drugs, plus he sort of sat there for a
long time telling me that he never loved me and
just used me for
the relationship with him ended because his behaviour was very destructive, is
that right? I am trying to summarise it?
his behaviour towards you was totally inappropriate?
relationship didn't end because of your understanding of the breach of the
ethical code, did it?
at that stage, no.
the same situation arose today, would you have a more developed understanding of
the ethics involved?
yes. Yes, yes. I mean throughout the entire relationship I wanted was because
I was a nurse privy to all this information
and I would say things to him
because I had the upper hand, well you know, he was psychotic at that time and
because I had the knowledge
of his mental illness, and the education, nobody
else could have said those things to him. So it would have affected his mental
(transcript 27 March 2013 p 17 -18)
applicant was also cross-examined about her attitude to recommendations made by
Dr Seidler. We will refer in more detail to this
report shortly. The applicant
agreed she had not taken up the recommendation of obtaining assistance from a
psychologist to address
her history of exposure to domestic violence, and
self-medication with alcohol, although she agreed such assistance would be
to her. She explained that when she lost her registration her
principal focus had been on obtaining employment to avoid eviction
housing for non payment of rent. The applicant did acknowledge that
psychological assistance could be provided to her
on 12 occasions payable by
Medicare, that it would be of benefit to her, and she agreed that, if thought
appropriate by the Tribunal,
she would attend a psychologist for
counselling.
the applicant’s referees had given oral evidence, the applicant
spontaneously sought to correct the favourable impression
the Tribunal may have
gained from Ms K’s evidence that the applicant had demonstrated remorse
for her actions at about the
time she lost her registration. The applicant
to clarify something. She was saying in Ms Dwyer's questioning that she
thought I was remorseful at the end, as she called it,
the event. I actually
don't think I was remorseful at that stage when I lost my registration. I think
I was remorseful because
of the fact that I had lost my registration but not
because of the effect I'd had on Patient A's mental health. Now I feel I am
remorseful for I know what I have done, not even potentially done, the effect I
have had on his mental health by having a relationship
(iii) The applicant’s referees including the oral evidence of Ms KK
applicant relied on written references provided by Ms SL (“Ms L”),
Nurse Manager, Mental Health Impaired Services,
Royal North Shore Hospital
(“RNSH”) dated 12 November 2012. Ms L was not available to give
oral evidence to the Tribunal.
applicant advised at the date of the hearing that Ms L was no longer the Nurse
Manager having been appointed to another position.
Ms L’s reference did
refer to her knowledge of the applicant’s proceedings before
the Tribunal. The reference did report that, during the period
the nurse worked
at RNSH (October 2010 to November 2011), she had excellent clinical skills and
was able to build rapport with patients.
Ms L also said the applicant was
hardworking and conscientious, and well respected by her colleagues.
second reference relied on by the applicant was from Ms CC (“Ms C”).
It was undated and unsigned. However Ms C made
herself available to give oral
evidence by telephone to the Tribunal. Ms C also worked with the applicant at
RNSH. She acknowledged
in her reference that she was aware that the applicant
was de-registered “due to having a relationship with a patient”.
C commented on the applicant’s conduct saying “this could not have
been more unexpected and is so incongruent from
the way I have known and seen
[the applicant] to conduct herself with patients”.
C further wrote:
[The applicant] is an intelligent woman and nurse.
She has always show initiative and is continuously undergoing professional
development.
She is an ethically sound nurse and has always been up to date
with learning new policies and knowing her rights and responsibilities.
certain that she would never engage in a relationship with a patient or be in a
situation similar to this, ever again. I believe
that she has reflected on what
has happened and has learnt from her mistakes.
her oral evidence Ms C confirmed she had written the reference provided about
three months earlier. She denied any specific knowledge
applicant’s involvement with Patient A whilst an in-patient, or any
knowledge of his CTO.
KK (“Ms K”), registered nurse, provided a reference dated (4
February 2013), but unsigned, in respect of the applicant.
She also made
herself available to give oral evidence by telephone. She explained that she
had worked with the applicant in the
Psychiatric Emergency Care Centre
(“PECC”) at RNSH for a period of about eighteen months commencing in
October 2010.
At the time Ms K worked with the applicant she too was an
enrolled nurse. She has since gained her general registration. In her
reference Ms K said she had always found the applicant to be
“professional, sufficient and hold a moral code of conduct
with patients.
I found her to be responsible, reliable and non-judgemental towards not only
patients but staff”. She explained
on learning of the applicant’s
conduct that she “found it to be extremely out of character on [the
applicant’s]
K said the applicant had been “absolutely devastated and sincerely regrets
what has happened”. She also said that
the applicant “has been
quite upset and depressed over losing her registration, as nursing is her number
one passion in life”.
She went on to opine “I believe that [the
applicant] has reflected on what has occurred and redeemed herself. I feel that
the suspension for the past 12 months has been more than sufficient punishment
her oral evidence Ms K said she was not aware the applicant had continued her
relationship with Patient A when she became aware
that he was on a CTO. She
explained that the applicant had not mentioned that her relationship with
Patient A had a bad impact on
him saying “Okay, I don’t think she
mentioned that it had a bad impact but she understood that it would have a bad
on him.....”. (transcript 27 March 2013 p 46).
K explained that her statement that the applicant had changed was based on her
attitude at the time “this happened”
in that “she was in love
and didn’t feel that she had done anything wrong” and contrasted
this to her present attitude
saying “but now in the fullness of time that
she had (not transcribable) and realised she has done wrong”. Ms K went
to opine that the applicant “is a very different person now to when this
event happened”.
K also opined that, in 2011, the applicant was not defensive about what occurred
in the Tribunal and being de-registered. She
explained that the applicant was
“more regrettable and upset”. She also said “She knew she did
wrong. She felt
the punishment was appropriate for what she had
AS (“Ms S”) was the Nurse Unit Manager during the period the
applicant was employed at RNSH. Ms S gave oral evidence
to the Tribunal by
telephone on very short notice at the request of the applicant. She explained
during the applicant’s employment
at RNSH, where she was her direct line
supervisor, that the applicant “was always professional, courteous”
and was, in
her opinion, “an excellent nurse”. Ms S advised she was
aware of the complaints made about the applicant and the findings
previous Tribunal.
S was questioned by Ms Dwyer about her attitude to the re-employment of the
applicant as follows:
knowing what you do know now about Ms Scully's relationship with
Patient A, are you prepared to offer her your support if she
ever returned
to work within the unit?
I'd like to think she'd learnt á lesson and, you know, given the time she
was with me she was, you know, always professional
and, you know, her knowledge
and skills in relation to mental health I've never had any concerns with. I'd
like to be able to support
her in a position, but obviously I don't have that
power to make that. That would have to be in discussion with my senior
question was really getting at whether you would personally, knowing
Ms Scully because you worked with her previously, be prepared
to offer her
your professional support if she
(transcript 27 March 2013 p 66)
(iv) the applicant’s interview by representatives of the
is unnecessary we summarise the applicant’s interview with representatives
of the HCCC as relevant parts of that interview
are extracted in the previous
Tribunal’s reasons. What is relevant for the purpose of our determination
is weight which we
can afford to the applicant’s present stated intention
of not engaging again in similar conduct with Patient A, or any other
with whom she has a therapeutic relationship. It is not in dispute that the
applicant told the HCCC’s representatives
at that interview she understood
the Code of Conduct “in depth now, and I’ve read it. I would never
breach it again,
I would never let this happen again”. However one week
after the applicant made this statement in August 2010 she resumed
relationship with Patient A.
(v) the report and recommendations of Dr Seidler
Seidler’s report, which was before the previous Tribunal, was not included
in either party’s material in these proceedings.
The report was provided
to the Tribunal at our request.
Seidler was requested by the applicant’s solicitors to prepare a report
for the purposes of the hearing before the previous
Tribunal. Dr Seidler was
asked to express an opinion on a number of matters including whether there was a
risk that the applicant
would repeat the conduct the subject of the complaint.
Seidler opined that it was “highly unlikely” that the applicant
would engage in similar behaviour again. However,
she went on to identify what
she described two remaining risks in respect of professional standards in the
future. The first identified
risk was the applicant’s “somewhat
naïve understanding of the complexities of ethical practice”. The
risk identified was “[the applicant’s] poor emotional coping
skills superimposed on a history of exposure to domestic
violence and alcohol
Seidler’s recommendations for addressing the first identified risk were
that the applicant should practice under “a
probationary type arrangement
for a period of twelve months during which time she has regular access to
professional mentoring or
supervision that has a primary focus on ethical
practice and professional responsibilities”.
The identified
supervisor/mentor was a nurse unit manager. The psychologist’s second
recommendation was that the applicant
consult with a psychologist for
intervention in respect of domestic violence and alcohol
consumption.
(vi) The findings of the previous Tribunal
have already set out the previous Tribunal’s conclusions at the end of the
hearing, and to the factual matters found by that
Tribunal. We consider the
findings of the previous Tribunal at [114] relevant to our deliberations. There
the Tribunal said:
Consequently, the evidence before
the Tribunal satisfies it on the balance of probabilities first that Ms Scully
lacked the knowledge
of her professional and ethical responsibilities through
plain ignorance or through avoidance of addressing them. Second that Ms
exercised seriously poor judgment in not acting in accordance with her
professional and ethical responsibilities as a nurse.
This poor judgment arose
either through her avoiding addressing knowledge essential to the practice of
nursing or by making the decision
not to act on that knowledge. This substantial
lack of knowledge and exercise of seriously poor judgment in relation entering
remaining in and failing to report the personal then sexual and personal
relationship with Patient A as well as the smoking of marijuana
demonstrated conduct that was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a nurse of equivalent level of training
or experience as Endorsed
Enrolled Nurse Amelia Scully. Furthermore, her conduct was both improper and
unethical in all these regards.
extremely relevant to our consideration of the applicant’s present insight
and attitude are [125], [126] and [129] of the
previous Tribunal’s
The Tribunal considers this answer to be at least
equivocal. [the applicant] said she realised how serious the matter was,
that she had articulated previously and then re-entered the
relationship. But she also gave Patient A’s abuse of her as an
reason for leaving the relationship. When that reason is added to the other
reason she gave in her statement for leaving the
relationship, namely that
Patient A chose drugs over her, it becomes clear why the Tribunal could not
accept Dr Seidler’s opinion
that [the applicant] ‘now impresses as
having satisfactory insight into the consequences of her actions...’.
Because the Tribunal had no basis for being confident that [the applicant]
appreciated that, as part of her professionalism as a member
of the nursing
profession, she has a responsibility to maintain a professional boundary between
herself and any person she was caring
for as a patient, it could not accept Dr
Seidler’s opinion that it was ‘highly unlikely’ that Ms Scully
would repeat
her previous misconduct.
As already noted, the Tribunal did not see any insight and so no contrition
on the part of [the applicant]. Nor did [the applicant]
show any remorse for the
effect she had had on Patient A. She saw herself as the victim. She said she was
good for Patient A’s
mental health, but he not for hers. She considered
herself abused by him and that she had to leave the relationship because of his
preference for drugs over her.
The applicant’s submissions
have already referred in some detail to the applicant’s statement dated 2
February 2013, and to relevant parts of her oral
evidence before us, and it is
unnecessary we repeat those matters. Notwithstanding the Tribunal made orders
permitting the applicant
to file written submissions in reply, on or about 1 May
2013 the applicant advised the Tribunal’s Coordinator that she did
wish to make any further submissions.
The written submissions provided by the HCCC
had the benefit of written submissions provided by Ms Dwyer at the commencement
of the hearing (“the opening submissions”),
and detailed written
submissions forwarded to us from the HCCC as provided in our orders addressing
the issue of conditions in the
event we determined that the applicant should be
re-registered, but subject to conditions. (“the final submissions”).
the opening submissions Ms Dwyer referred to the decision of
Hardy v HCCC
[2009] NSWMHT 21, Nelson v HCCC [2009] NSWMHT 7,
and in particular, the
discussion in that decision of the principles in
In referring to
the applicant’s expressed intention not to re-offend Ms Dwyer drew out
attention to the decision of Powell JA
Law Society of New South Wales v
[1997] NSWCA 185.
She submitted at [14] “Although a
practitioner’s expressed intention not to re-offend is relevant to
mitigation, it will
have little weight unless accompanied by an understanding of
the wrongfulness of the conduct”.
her oral submissions Ms Dwyer reiterated the position adopted in her opening,
namely, that it is the HCCC’s view that “at
this stage” it is
not appropriate for the applicant to be re-registered, and accordingly the
applicant’s application
should be dismissed.
Dwyer referred to four matters which she submitted would presently cause the
Tribunal concern:
the content of
the applicant’s letter of 2 February 2013 because it is defensive and
portrays the applicant as “the victim”;
the recency of
the letter dated 2 February 2013;
the failure to
take up Dr Seidler’s recommendation of counselling; and
the failure to
immediately after de-registration to do a suitable ethics
the final submissions the HCCC, after referring again to the heavy onus on the
applicant, and having referred to a number of relevant
authorities, drew the
Tribunal’s attention to the summarising of the relevant principles to be
considered in a re-instatement
application in
Rajesh Dinakar v Medical
Council of NSW (2012) NSWMT
(unreported 12 December 2012)
submissions also cogently point out at [16] it cannot be assumed “that a
change has occurred because some time had gone
by and it has not been proven
that anything of a discreditable kind has occurred; re-formations of character
and behaviour can occur
but their occurrence is not the usual, but exceptional
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR
submissions are critical of the applicant’s failure to make enquiries
during the year preceding
her application. The submissions also assert a lack of understanding of ethical
issues by reason of the
applicant’s statement in her letter of 2 Feburary
2013 where the applicant reports “if I meet new people now and looks
though there could be chemistry between us I would ask them if they have ever
been in a psych ward”, albeit noting this
statement was qualified in the
applicant’s oral evidence.
HCCC submitted we should be cautious before placing too much weight on the
applicant’s demeanour before us because “[t]he
remorse has been very
late in coming and was only evidenced on the day on which the Applicant gave
evidence”. Our attention
was also drawn to the fact that the applicant
acknowledged the remorse she had expressed to a colleague at the time of the
was not genuine and she had only recently felt genuinely
remorseful.
to the final submissions are a number of proposed conditions in the event we
determine the applicant should be re-registrered.
But we note at all times the
HCCC maintained the position that application should be
Discussion and findings
Rajesh Dinakar
the Medical Tribunal set out, with reference to authority,
nine principles to be considered when dealing with an application of this
Those stated principles, the majority of which we have earlier referred to in
these reasons under the heading “relevant
law”, can be conveniently
summarised as set out below. They provide a sound structure for our findings in
this matter. Where
appropriate, we have grouped the summarised principles. The
Tribunal has also considered under these headings the issues we identified
requiring resolution in paragraph 40 of these reasons.
(i) it cannot
be assumed that because time has elapsed that the applicant has changed
(ii) proof is
required that a person such as the applicant is a different person;
(iii) protests
of innocence on a re-instatement does not necessarily mean the application will
be refused;
is convenient we deal with these three principles as a group. The evidence
relevant to these matters came substantially from the
applicant herself, and
their veracity depends upon our assessment of her credibility, and to a limited
extent the evidence of her
the Tribunal recorded earlier in these reasons, whether or not a health
professional is likely to re-offend again is difficult
to predict, and the
Tribunal’s assessment in that circumstance of the applicant’s credit
assumes significant weight in
its determination.
Tribunal notes that the applicant was self-represented. This presented a unique
opportunity to observe the applicant’s
demeanour throughout the hearing.
In this regard the comments of Lord Justice Wilson, writing extra judicially in
the UK, have particular
force. His Honour explained in the
lecture given by him in 2002 the benefit a judicial officer derives from his or
her ability to observe a self represented litigant.
His Honour’s comments
have resonance in a case such as the present one when the applicant’s
ability to cope under the
stress of conducting her own proceedings gives some
insight into her coping abilities, attitudes, and maturity.
were acutely conscious that the applicant did not act in accordance with her
expressed statement to the HCCC in August 2010, but
within a week of saying she
would never re-offend had resumed her relationship with Patient A. Before the
previous Tribunal she
sought to excuse this behaviour on the basis she was
already guilty of a breach of the Code of Conduct, so a further breach with
same patient did not compound her inappropriate conduct. Because of her action,
and inability at that time to understand her
ethical responsibilities
Patient A were continuing ones, our examination of her credibility was
more rigorous than may otherwise have been the case. Her
action at that time
supported Dr Seidler’s opinion that the applicant’s understanding of
the relevant codes of conduct
applicant’s letter of 2 February 2013 of itself, and without her oral
evidence, caused us considerable disquiet that the
applicant had gained insight
into her conduct. This was particularly so as the letter was written not long
before the hearing. The
letter chronicles in great detail the conduct Patient A
perpetrated on the applicant. While we do not doubt the applicant suffered
domestic violence and perhaps sexual exploitation in her relationship with
Patient A, and that her experiences and attitude are inevitably
coloured by that
abuse, she was able in her oral evidence to explain satisfactorily to us that
she had set out this evidence in an
attempt to demonstrate she would not resume
a relationship with Patient A. But, more relevantly, she explained that it
demonstrated
his chronic mental health problems, which she acknowledged she had
exacerbated by having a relationship with him.
accept the applicant’s oral evidence about her purpose in framing her
letter in the manner she did. We also accept that
the applicant’s
spontaneous correction of the evidence given by her referee, Ms C about her
remorse (or lack of remorse) at
the time of her de-registration, demonstrated a
witness who was candid with the Tribunal. We had no reason to doubt the honesty
of the applicant’s evidence on this or other topics. We found the
applicant to be a credible witness.
took into account the criticism rightly levelled at the applicant by Ms Dwyer
that she could be perceived as trying to place blame
on Patient A’s case
worker, rather than acknowledging she should not have current information about
Patient A. However, the
applicant frankly conceded this and other aspects of
her letter could be discerned as trying to “shift the blame” from
herself to Patient A, his family and his Case Worker.
Tribunal found the applicant’s answer as to why she included a reference
to Patient A’s mother plausible. We accept,
as she had received no
material from the HCCC, she did not know if Patient A’s mother would be
called as a witness. Her statement
circumstances, be construed as a pre-emptive one.
proof of change of character was demonstrated to us by the nurse’s
expressed contrition which we found to be genuine, her
ability to articulate
that her conduct had not only damaged Patient A’s therapeutic relationship
with his health care professionals,
but had also potentially caused difficulties
for other nurses associated with his care in the future.
Tribunal also took into account the fact the nurse was honest with her
colleagues at Royal North Shore about the cause of her
de-registration, albeit
we accept she did not provide her colleagues with details of the ongoing
relationship. We also accept that
she acted in a financially responsible manner
when de-registered working in three part-time jobs to ensure that she could
her own appropriate housing.
Tribunal did not hesitate in accepting the applicant’s perception that the
loss of her registration has enabled her to understand
the benefit her
registration afforded her to practise in a profession she found rewarding both
financially and intellectually. To
this end the Tribunal was satisfied that the
applicant’s appreciation of those benefits occurred during the last twelve
also gave weight to the fact that Dr Seidler was of the view that the applicant
was not likely to engage in similar conduct with
another patient in the future.
summary, we find the applicant demonstrates remorse for her actions, and that
she understands the basis on which the previous Tribunal
found that she was
guilty of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(iv) the effect
of the order to be made is not to punish the offender but to protect the public.
Is the applicant a fit and proper
person to be held out to the public, and the
profession as a fit and proper person to practise nursing;
(v) it is to be
remembered that the applicant’s position is one of greater disadvantage
that a person applying for registration;
suffering and loss of the applicant has experienced is not the relevant
propose to now discuss the evidence relevant to these three factors. While we do
not doubt that the effect of the cancellation
of the applicant’s
registration has had the indirect consequence of causing her hardship and grief,
our focus is on whether
she is a fit and proper person to practise nursing.
Tribunal was impressed with the high regard in which each of the
applicant’s referees held her professional expertise whilst
working with
each of them at RNSH. We found Ms S’s evidence, given at very short
notice, to be impressive, and we gave considerable
weight to it. We accept that
Ms S was not in a position to confirm any employment would be offered to the
applicant if she was re-registered,
but she unequivocally confirmed her support
for the applicant.
(vii) has the applicant satisfied the onus she bears to satisfy the Tribunal she
is a fit and proper person to be registered;
is made clear in
while the onus is a high one, much depends on the
Tribunal’s assessment of the applicant as a witness. In dealing with this
aspect of the applicant’s application we do not accept her failure to seek
out and complete an ethics course at an earlier
time in Australia should be
considered as a disqualifying factor. We accept the applicant’s evidence
that her three jobs precluded
her undertaking an ethics course except during the
holiday period or on weekends and that suitable course was available at those
times. She is to be commended for seeking assistance from her former colleague
at RNSH to source and complete an on-line course.
find her unilateral action in locating and completing the on line ethics course
demonstrates the applicant has learnt from the
findings of the previous
applicant’s failure to attend counselling as recommended by Dr Seidler did
cause us some concern particularly given the
applicant’s vulnerabilities
identified by Dr Seidler. We accept that the applicant’s employment may
have placed obstacles
to regularly attending upon a psychologist, particularly
as the applicant’s evidence demonstrates she is aware of the Medicare
rebate for a number of counselling sessions.
(viii) the applicant’s position is to be assessed at the date of the
hearing, that is her current fitness to engage in practice,
not at the date of
the misconduct; and
(ix) the ultimate matter to be determined is whether or not the Tribunal is now
satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper
person to be re-registered
either with our without conditions.
is also relevant we discuss these two criteria together. We have already made
findings that we accept the applicant’s evidence
at the date of hearing of
her contrition, her insight into the wrongfulness of her conduct, and its effect
on Patient A, and other
members of the health profession. Those findings are
relevant to our assessment that the nurse is
prima facie
currently fit to
apply for re-registration as at to-day’s date because she now demonstrates
insight into her past conduct,
has taken some steps to address her deficiency in
ethics, and has a sincere desire to resume a profession in which she was
proficient. In making this assessment however we consider that the
nurse’s return to practice should be supported with conditions
assist her by providing emotional assistance and professional support and
19 April 2013 the Tribunal was provided with conditions sought by the HCCC in
the event that we determined the applicant should
be able to apply to the
National Board for re-registration. For convenience we have annexed and marked
as Appendix “A”
to these reasons the document received from the HCCC
setting out the proposed conditions.
considered carefully whether the applicant should be precluded for engaging in
practice as a mental health nurse for a period of
one year after
re-registration. The Tribunal discerned this order was sought to enable a period
of time to elapse during which the
nurse could complete a further ethics course,
and receive mentoring.
Tribunal considered the merits of such a condition. We accept that the
imposition of a condition of this nature would not place
the applicant in a
position of responsibility with vulnerable patients suffering a mental illness,
and would afford her the opportunity
to undertake a further appropriate ethics
course and receive counselling.
Tribunal is cognizant that the applicant has, since her first registration,
worked in the mental health area and she has obtained
extra qualifications in
this area. However, the Tribunal is of the view that her evidence demonstrates
that her understanding of
the relevant codes of conduct, and the ethical
considerations in respect of nurse/patient relationships is still somewhat
or misguided. A period of six months in which the applicant can
address these issues through counselling, mentoring and completion
of a more in
depth ethics course will assist her in her practice of nursing and be protective
of the public. The Tribunal is thus
satisfied the restriction on practise in
the area of mental health nursing for a period of six months is an appropriate
to be made. This finding is not to be construed as a finding that the
applicant would not be a fit and proper person to practise
without conditions.
Rather, the Tribunal sees the imposition of the proposed conditions as steps
which will buttress the applicant’s
ability to meet stresses in the future
should they arise, particularly in the complex and often stressful area of
mental health nursing.
HCCC submit that the conditions to be imposed should include a provision that
the applicant undergoes a program of mentoring for
two years. The Tribunal sees
merit in this proposal if any registered nurse, particularly a nurse working in
a public hospital in
the mental health area, could provide such mentoring.
However, it is the Tribunal’s view that mentoring for a period of 12
months will be a sufficient period to assist the applicant. The evidence before
us did not suggest the type of mentoring envisaged
in the HCCC’s proposed
conditions could be provided by RNSH if the applicant obtained employment at
that hospital, but rather
would be provided by an outside provider. The
Tribunal proposes before making its orders in this matter to seek input from the
implementation and monitoring.
Tribunal is of the view that the requirement the applicant attend counselling is
an appropriate one. We propose to order that
the applicant attend upon her
general practitioner and obtain a referral to an appropriately qualified
psychologist, and attend such
sessions as that psychologist may, in his or her
discretion, recommend. This is to address the emotional vulnerabilities
highlighted
by Dr Seidler, but not subject of any action by the applicant since
Dr Seidler’s report. We also find the applicant should
be required to
provide evidence to the Council of her compliance with such a condition.
HCCC also seek an order that the applicant undergo two specific ethics
are cognizant that difficulties have been encountered in the past with such
orders as funding cuts and other administrative matters
can mean a particular
nominated course may not be available at a specified university at a given time.
Further, we are unaware of
any “one on one” ethics courses provided
by the St James Ethics Centre, or the attendant costs of such ethics training.
We think a condition which requires the undertaking, within a period of 12
months from the date of our orders, of an ethics course
approved by the Council
should overcome any practical difficulties.
HCCC also seeks that the applicant, for a period of three years, notify any
employer of the findings of the previous Tribunal
and any conditions imposed by
this Tribunal. We see such a condition as an appropriate one, and one which is
not difficult to implement
and monitor.
HCCC provided extensive submissions on costs. As we have determined that the
applicant’s application should succeed it
is unnecessary we refer to the
HCCC’s submissions based on lack of success by the applicant which are
predicated on the general
principle in this jurisdiction that costs follow the
HCCC placed reliance on the principles enunciated in
HCCC v Dinkler
[2009]NSWMT 8.
The submissions draw analogy with circumstances of an
applicant for an extension of a limitation period to commence litigation where
defendant is frequently awarded costs.
13 of Schedule 5D to the National Law reposes a discretion in the Tribunal in
awarding costs. Here the HCCC opposed at all
times the applicant’s
re-instatement application, and only provided draft conditions on the specific
request of the Tribunal
following completion of the hearing. Further, a
sitting day was lost by reason of the failure of the HCCC to be able to prove
of the documents on which it relied on the applicant, and which it
appears were not served in the time provided in the orders made
Directions Hearing.
all relevant considerations we are satisfied in the circumstances of this case
that the appropriate order is that each party
pay their own costs of and
incidental to the application. We note that it is unlikely that the applicant,
who has at all times been
unrepresented, has incurred any legal
PROPOSED ORDERS
to s163B(1)(c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Anne Scully (“the health practitioner”) shall be re-instated to the
register of Endorsed Enrolled Nurses maintained
by Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency in conjunction with the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia.
to s 163B(4) the following conditions are imposed on the health
practitioner’s registration:
(a) The health
practitioner shall not practise in the area of Mental Health Nursing for a
period of six months from the date of these
(b) The health
practitioner must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of twelve
months commencing as soon as practicable
after the date of these orders with a
registered nurse (Division 1) (“the mentor”) who does not have
conditions on his/her
registration.
(c) The mentor
must be approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW (“the
Council”) and in order to facilitate
compliance with this order the health
practitioner shall submit as soon as practicable to the Council the name,
address and evidence
of the qualifications of the mentor who has agreed to act
as her mentor.
(d) The health
practitioner must:
(i) authorise
the mentor in writing to notify the Council of any failure without reasonable
excuse to comply with the mentoring program
as set out in Order 3 including but
not limited to failure to attend mentoring meetings;
(ii) personally
notify the Council in writing of any failure to attend mentoring meetings and
provide information to the Council of
her compliance with the mentoring program
as provided in Order 3 of these orders;
(iii) provide
to the Council a copy of the conditions contained in these orders signed by the
health practitioner and by the mentor.
event the mentor is unable or unwilling to continue the role of mentor the
health practitioner shall as soon as practicable
notify the Council of the
mentor’s position, and nominate a substitute mentor to the Council for
approval. The health practitioner
shall comply with all the obligations created
by these orders in respect of the substitute mentor as though the substitute
is the mentor.
(f) The health
practitioner shall within two months of the date of these orders attend upon a
general practitioner and obtain a referral
to a suitable psychologist for the
purpose of receiving counselling in respect of domestic violence, alcohol abuse
and any other
relevant condition identified by her general practitioner.
(g) The health
practitioner is hereby authorised and directed to provide to her general
practitioner and any psychologist to whom
she is referred pursuant to order 2(f)
a copy of the Tribunal’s reasons for decision dated 4 November 2011 and a
copy of these
reasons for decision and orders in the version published on
obtaining the referral provided in order 2(f) of these orders the health
practitioner shall forthwith attend on the psychologist
to whom she is referred
for such consultations as the psychologist shall in his or her discretion shall
(i) The health
practitioner shall not later than nine months from the date of these orders
provide evidence to the Council of her
attendance upon the psychologist to whom
she is referred.
(j) The health
practitioner shall within twelve months of the date of these orders enrol in and
complete at her own expense an ethics
course such as the online course MCM9017
provided by Monash University or such other ethics course as may be approved by
the Council.
compliance by the health practitioner with order 2(i) she shall on or before 30
April 2014 provide evidence to the Council
of her completion of the Monash
University course or such other course approved by the Council.
health practitioner must within 8 weeks of the mentor referred to in order 2
being approved by the Council provide to the Council
a mentoring plan developed
in consultation with the mentor. The plan must detail:
(a) specific
objectives / outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives / outcomes
must relate to, but are not limited to,
the following areas; professional
boundaries and responsibilities, Nursing Codes of Practice and Ethics, relevant
ethical guidelines
and the legislative framework within which nurses are
required to practice;
(b) specific
education, professional development and learning activities planned to achieve
the specified objectives / outcomes;
(c) timeframe/s
for completion of identified activities and outcomes / objectives;
(d) evidence
which will demonstrate objectives / outcomes have been met; and
(e) schedule of
meetings with the mentor.
health practitioner must within four months of the date of these orders, and
again within eight months and twelve months of the
date of these orders provide
to the Council a mentoring report which is co-signed by the mentor
addressing:
(a) progress
towards or achievement of specified objectives / outcomes;
challenges / issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these; and
(c) any changes
to practice resulting from mentoring / associated learning.
health practitioner shall for three years from the date of this order upon
obtaining employment as an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse
undertake the
(a) provide the
Council with the name and contact details of all nursing employers (including
agency placements) prior to commencing
(b) authorise
each nursing employer in writing
(i) to notify
the Council of any breach of the conditions or unsafe practice; and
exchange information with the Council related to compliance with the
conditions.
(c) inform all
current and any future employers of these orders imposing conditions before
commencing work/employment as a registered
(d) provide a
copy of the reasons and orders of the Tribunal dated 11 November 2011 and a copy
of the these reasons and orders in
the form published by Austlii to each
(e) provide
to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the health practitioner and
by, or on behalf of, each employer indicating
their awareness of the conditions
and authorisation within one week of commencing work with such
the event that the health practitioner or the Council seek a review of these
conditions the appropriate review body for the review
of the conditions imposed
in orders 2 to 5 inclusive of these orders is the Council. In the event that
the health practitioner’s
principal place of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales the appropriate review body shall in
those circumstances
be the relevant National Board.
each party pay their own costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chairperson
Ms S L Smiltnieks
Nurse Member
Mr P Newman
Nurse Member
Ms L Wrightson.
Appendix “A”
Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal
Ms Scully - Proposed Conditions
registrant is not to work in the area of mental health until approved by the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales.
registrant must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 2
years with a registered nurse (Division 1) who
does not have conditions on
his/her practice. The registered nurse mentor must be approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of
registrant must:
(a) Provide the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name, contact details and resume
of the registered nurse who has agreed
(i) As mentor;
specified in the conditions.
(b) Authorise the mentor
(i) To notify
the Council of any breach of the conditions including repeated failure to attend
mentoring meetings; and
exchange information with the Council in relation to the registrant’s
compliance with the conditions.
(iii) Provide
to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
mentor indicating awareness of the conditions
authorisation.
Mentoring Plan
registrant must submit a mentoring plan developed in consultation with the
mentor within 8 weeks of the mentor being approved
by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW. The plan must detail:
(f) Specific
objectives / outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives / outcomes
must relate to, but are not limited to,
the following areas; professional
boundaries and responsibilities, Nursing Codes of Practice and Ethics, relevant
ethical guidelines
and the legislative framework within which nurses are
required to practice
(g) Specific
education, professional development and learning activities planned to achieve
the specified objectives / outcomes;
(h) Timeframe/s
for completion of identified activities and outcomes / objectives;
(i) Evidence
which will demonstrate objectives / outcomes have been met;
(j) Schedule of
meetings with the mentor.
Mentor Report
registrant must provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a mentoring
report which is co-signed by the approved mentor
addressing:
(d) Progress
towards or achievement of specified objectives / outcomes;
challenges / issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these; and
(f) Any changes
to practice resulting from mentoring / associated
mentoring report must be provided to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
every 3 months for a period of at least 2 years.
Medical Practitioners
attend for treatment by a psychiatrist of her choice, at her own cost, at a
frequency to be determined by the treating psychiatrist.
Ms Scully is to notify
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of the name of her treating
psychiatrist within 2 weeks and is to
authorise the treating psychiatrist to
inform the Medical Council of NSW of failure to attend for treatment,
termination of treatment
or if there is a significant change in health status,
including a temporary change.
registrant must:
(a) Provide the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name and contact details of all
treating health practitioners.
(b) Inform all
current and any future treating health practitioners of the conditions
(c) Authorise
the Council to provide each treating health practitioner with a copy of the
Tribunal decision.
(d) Authorise
each treating practitioner to inform the Council of termination of treatment,
serious / immediate concerns about fitness
to practise or repeated failure to
attend appointments.
(e) Provide to
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a copy of the conditions signed by the
registrant and by each of the treating
health practitioners indicating awareness
of the conditions and
authorisation.
registrant is to undertake the Medical Ethics MCM9017 course conducted on line
by Monash University. The commencement date should
be no later than the
commencement of second semester 2013 or a date given prior approval by the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of
registrant is to undertake an intensive one on one Ethics Course conducted by
the St James Ethics Centre in Sydney or other relevant
course in Ethics as
approved by the Council.
Evidence of completion
registrant is to provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW evidence of
successful completion of the course signed by
an individual authorised by the
education institution within 14 days of completion of the
Notice to Employers
Matter No: 051/2012
SCULLY V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
[2013] NSWNMT
INQUIRY INTO AN APPLICATION FOR RE-INSTATMENT UNDER
SECTION 163A
Applicant for review: Amelia Anne
Health Care Complaints
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM,
(Chairperson)
Ms S L Smiltnieks (Nurse Member)
Mr P Newman (Nurse
Ms L Wrightson (Lay Member)
Date of Orders
5 July 2013
to s163B(1)(c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Anne Scully (“the health practitioner”) shall be re-instated to the
register of Endorsed Enrolled Nurses maintained
by Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency in conjunction with the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia.
to s 163B(4) the following conditions are imposed on the health
practitioner’s registration:
(l) The health
practitioner shall not practise in the area of Mental Health
period of six months from the date she gains employment as an Endorsed Enrolled
(ii) enrols in
and commences the ethics course referred to in Order 2 (j) of these orders.
(m) The health
practitioner must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of twelve
months with a registered nurse (Division
1) (“the mentor”) who does
not have conditions on his/her registration commencing four weeks from the date
of obtaining
employment as a Endorsed Enrolled Nurse or at a date as approved by
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW (“the Council”).
(n) The mentor
must be approved by the Council and in order to facilitate compliance with this
order the health practitioner shall
submit to the Council as soon as practicable
but not later than four weeks after obtaining employment as an Endorsed Enrolled
the name, address and evidence of the qualifications of the mentor who has
agreed to act as her mentor.
(o) The health
practitioner must:
(iv) authorise
the mentor in writing to notify the Council of any failure without reasonable
excuse to comply with the mentoring
program as set out in Order 3 including but
not limited to failure to attend mentoring meetings;
(v) personally
notify the Council in writing of any failure to attend mentoring meetings and
provide information to the Council of
her compliance with the mentoring program
as provided in Order 3 of these orders;
(vi) provide to
the Council a copy of the conditions contained in these orders signed by the
health practitioner and by the mentor.
event the mentor is unable or unwilling to continue the role of mentor the
health practitioner shall as soon as practicable
notify the Council of the
mentor’s position, and nominate a substitute mentor to the Council for
approval. The health practitioner
shall comply with all the obligations created
by these orders in respect of the substitute mentor as though the substitute
is the mentor.
(q) The health
practitioner shall within two months of the date of these orders attend upon a
general practitioner and obtain a referral
to a suitable psychologist for the
purpose of receiving counselling in respect of domestic violence, alcohol abuse
and any other
relevant condition identified by her general practitioner.
(r) The health
practitioner is hereby authorised and directed to provide to her general
practitioner and any psychologist to whom
she is referred pursuant to order 2(f)
a copy of the Tribunal’s reasons for decision dated 4 November 2011 and a
copy of these
orders together with the reasons for decision in the version
published on Austlii.
obtaining the referral provided in order 2(f) of these orders the health
practitioner shall forthwith attend on the psychologist
to whom she is referred
for such consultations as the psychologist shall in his or her discretion shall
(t) The health
practitioner shall not later than nine months from the date of these orders
provide evidence to the Council of her
attendance upon the psychologist to whom
she is referred.
(u) The health
practitioner shall within twelve months of the date of these orders or within
such other time period as specified by
the Council enrol in and complete at her
own expense an ethics course such as the online course MCM9017 provided by
Monash University
or such other ethics course as may be approved by the
compliance by the health practitioner with order 2(j) she shall within four
weeks of completion of the ethics course provide
evidence to the Council of her
completion of the Monash University course or such other course approved by the
health practitioner must within eight weeks of the mentor referred to in order 2
being approved by the Council provide to the
Council a mentoring plan developed
in consultation with the mentor. The plan must detail:
(k) specific
objectives / outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives / outcomes
must relate to, but are not limited to,
the following areas; professional
boundaries and responsibilities, Nursing Codes of Practice and Ethics, relevant
ethical guidelines
and the legislative framework within which nurses are
required to practice;
(l) specific
education, professional development and learning activities planned to achieve
the specified objectives / outcomes;
(m) timeframe/s
for completion of identified activities and outcomes / objectives;
(n) evidence
which will demonstrate objectives / outcomes have been met; and
(o) schedule of
meetings with the mentor.
health practitioner must within four months of obtaining employment as an
Endorsed Enrolled Nurse, and again within eight months
and twelve months of
obtaining such employment provide to the Council a mentoring report which is
co-signed by the mentor addressing:
(g) progress
towards or achievement of specified objectives / outcomes;
challenges / issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these; and
(i) any changes
to practice resulting from mentoring / associated learning.
health practitioner shall for three years from the date of this order upon
obtaining employment as an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse
undertake the
(f) provide the
Council with the name and contact details of all nursing employers (including
agency placements) prior to commencing
(g) authorise
each nursing employer in writing
(iii) to notify
the Council of any breach of the conditions or unsafe practice; and
exchange information with the Council related to compliance with the
conditions.
(h) inform all
current and any future employers of these orders imposing conditions before
commencing work/employment as a registered
(i) provide a
copy of the reasons and orders of the Tribunal dated 11 November 2011 and a copy
of the these orders and the reasons
published on 20 June 2013 in the form
published by Austlii to each employer.
(j) provide to
the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the health practitioner and by,
or on behalf of, each employer indicating
their awareness of the conditions and
authorisation within one week of commencing work with such
the event that the health practitioner or the Council seek a review of these
conditions the appropriate review body for the review
of the conditions imposed
in orders 2 to 5 inclusive of these orders is the Council. In the event that the
health practitioner’s
principal place of practice is anywhere in Australia
other than in New South Wales the appropriate review body shall in those
circumstances
be the relevant National Board.
each party pay their own costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chairperson
5 July 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (442 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter