URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Maendel [2013] NSWMT 3 (8 March 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Maendel
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 3
Hearing Date(s):
04/03/2013-07/03/2013
Decision Date:
08 March 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr K Ilbery
Ms A Collier
See paragraph 82
Catchwords:
Treatment by practitioner of his mother, putting patient into palliative
care instead of referring her for further investigation and
management.
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 86a
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
King v Health Care Complaints
[2011] NSWCA 353
Pillai v Messiter (No 2)
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
Sabag v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2001] NSWCA 411
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Christopher Maendel
(Respondent)
Representation
P Strickland SC (Applicant)
M Lynch (Respondent)
K Bourke (Mr A
Fischli and Mr A Blough)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Hicksons Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Irene Maendel, then 70 years of age, collapsed on 2 March 2010. She died on 8
March. Between these dates she was treated by the
respondent. The Health Care
Complaints Commission (the "HCCC") instituted these proceedings arising from the
respondent's treatment.
Some background
respondent is Mrs Maendel's son. He is one of ten siblings. Their father is Mr
Jake Maendel.
respondent was born in the United States of America in 1968. He qualified as a
medical practitioner in that country in 1994.
his parents, the respondent is a member of a church community known as the
Bruderhof. In November 2005 the respondent came to
Australia and took up
residence in a Bruderhof conclave near Inverell in New South Wales known as the
Danthonia community. The community
included a healthcare clinic in which the
respondent worked as a general practitioner on a voluntary basis.
were also registered nurses in the community who provided their services when
needed. This was not often and they worked in
other occupations at the same
time. For example the two nurses who gave evidence before the Tribunal usually
operated a 'sign' business
owned by the community.
January 2005 the respondent became a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners. In addition to credits derived
from his American
qualifications he needed to pass examinations to become a member of the
fellowship.
August 2006 to June 2008, as well as his work in the clinic, the respondent also
worked as a Visiting Medical Officer at the
Inverell Hospital, in particular in
the accident and emergency department.
2009 the respondent's parents came to Australia with the intention of remaining
for about a year. They lived in the Danthonia community
and apparently developed
a close relationship with other church members.
Some general observations
Tribunal thinks it necessary to make the following observations at this early
(a) The respondent was an honest witness. This was conceded by the
(b) Despite a number of failings in the treatment of his mother, the Tribunal
accepts that the respondent acted at all times in a
manner that he perceived was
in the best interests of Mrs Maendel. The HCCC also conceded this point.
(c) Other than a desire for his mother to remain in the caring environment of
the church community the respondent's actions were
not dictated by any
directions or guidelines forming part of the church's
(d) Whether or not Mrs Maendel was entitled to Medicare or travel insurance
benefits played no part in the choice of treatment.
The initial incident
Maendel collapsed at about 8pm on 2 March 2010 in a bathroom attached to the
community dining hall. She was unconscious and received
immediate attention,
especially from registered nurses who were quickly available. The respondent was
summoned and arrived within
five minutes. He found his mother unresponsive and
vomiting. There were no signs of physical injury. A Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
produced a reading of '3' out of '15'. This is a particularly low result
indicating a very serious condition.
respondent that she had a very bad headache but no
chest pain. She exhibited no
focal neurological signs. She soon lapsed back into
unconsciousness.
respondent considered the possible causes of his mother's condition and came to
the view that she had most likely suffered a sub-arachnoid
haemorrhage, a
'stroke'. He used this conclusion as a
"working diagnosis"
in order to
provide ongoing treatment for his mother.
respondent informed his father of his diagnosis and said that Mrs Maendel needed
to be taken to a bed in order for her condition
to be stabilised. Mrs Maendel
was first of all moved to a bed within an apartment in the Danthonia complex and
then later moved to
her own home. She was placed in a new 'hospital' bed and
provided ongoing care until her death on 8 March.
The Notice of Complaint
Nicole Maendel made the original complaint to the HCCC. She is the wife of Mr
James Maendel who is one of the ten Maendel siblings.
The complaint was
widespread in its allegations, as can be seen from Exhibit G. The Notice of
Complaint ultimately filed by the HCCC
is derived from this document but is much
more limited in its scope. An Amended Notice of Complaint was filed during the
A copy is annexed to this judgment.
care given to Mrs Maendel from 3 to 8 March 2010 was provided by the respondent,
registered nurses and also carers from the community.
There is no doubt that, as
palliative care, the regime was sympathetic and competent.
broad terms the HCCC alleges that this care should not necessarily have been
palliative. Rather it should have been pro-active
and directed to establishing
the patient's chances of recovery.
HCCC says that following the emergency intervention by the respondent, about
which it does not complain, he should have referred
Mrs Maendel for an immediate
CT scan of her brain, had her hospitalised and turned over her care to an
independent doctor and arranged
for specialist opinion. These actions would also
have been necessary to give informed advice to Mr Maendel, the patient's proxy.
should have also have kept better records.
HCCC alleges that although the respondent's diagnosis may well have been
correct, his management of his mother was entirely inappropriate.
One alleges unsatisfactory professional conduct under Section 139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 86a
(the "National
Law"). Most of the particulars of the complaint were admitted together with a
concession that the alleged conduct
amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Some particulars were not admitted or admitted with qualification.
Particular 2
was not pressed by the HCCC.
Two is also brought under Section 139B. It alleges a failure to keep proper
records. It was admitted.
admissions made a good deal of the evidence tendered irrelevant or less
Three alleges professional misconduct under Section 139E, the particulars being
the same as those relied upon in respect
of Complaints One and Two. This
complaint was not admitted.
assessing the complaints the Tribunal was acutely aware of their seriousness.
Acknowledging that the onus of proof on the HCCC
was on a balance of
probabilities, the Tribunal nevertheless approached the matter on the basis
outlined in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
respondent indicated that he wished to have a separate hearing in respect of
protective orders. His entitlement to this course
was made clear in
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353.
This judgment,
therefore, is concerned only with the establishment, or otherwise, of the
complaints.
facts of this case are unusual. The conduct which was wrongful was carried out
in a context in which the doctor at all times acted
in accordance with his
perception of the best interests of his patient as the prime consideration. The
ultimate issue of whether
there had been professional misconduct was very
difficult to resolve. As will be seen below the Tribunal's decision was not
unanimously. Ultimately the HCCC failed in respect of Complaint Three
because it had the onus of proof and, when applied on the
standard, the Tribunal in its evaluative judgment did not accept that the HCCC
had proved its case.
Resolving the disputes in Complaint One
already mentioned nearly all of the particulars in Complaint One were admitted
together with a concession that the conduct alleged
amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct within Section 139B. It was left to the Tribunal to reach a
decision in respect of
Particulars 1(e), 1(f), 4(a) and 4(b). Each will be dealt
with in turn.
respondent's resistance to the allegation in Particular 1(e) is based on whether
the instructions to nursing staff were appropriate
for pro-active care or, on
the other hand, for palliative care. If it was the latter then the respondent
says the instructions were
not necessary. Based on the evidence of Dr Raftos and
Dr Gibbons the Tribunal agrees with the respondent's position that the
instructions
were not required for palliative care. If, however, it is accepted
by the respondent that investigative and positive care should
undertaken, as is evident from his admission to Particular 1(d), then it must
follow that the instructions to the nursing
staff should have included the
regular monitoring of the patient's physical and neurological state.
respondent's answer to this point, and to some extent generally, was that if he
should not have been treating his mother in the
first place then he cannot be
criticised for the manner of his treatment. He effectively asked the Tribunal to
say once it was accepted
that he should not have been treating his mother then
his continued treatment of her should not be criticised.
Tribunal disagrees with this approach. The fact is that the respondent did
continue to treat his mother and must therefore be
susceptible to criticism of
any failings in the continuing treatment.
Tribunal being satisfied that pro-active care was, at least initially,
appropriate, the failure to give instructions to effect
such care must result in
establishment of Particular 1(e).
1(f) was further amended to delete the words "
including as to the extent to
which any drowsiness was due to morphine
". On this basis the alleged facts
were admitted. They were not however conceded to amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
accepting that palliative care was not necessarily appropriate and also taking
into account that the respondent was the only
medical practitioner providing
treatment to the patient, in a home setting, the Tribunal is of the view that
proper practice required
the practitioner to closely monitor and assess the
patient's clinical and neurological state. It is correct that the failure to do
so is a product of the failure to implement an investigative management regime.
Nevertheless the failure must be seen in its own
right, although no doubt when
examining protective orders the setting against which the failure occurred would
be taken into account.
The Tribunal therefore finds the conduct was
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
issue about Particular 4(a) was whether the respondent formed a judgment that
the patient should only receive palliative care.
As the Tribunal understands the
respondent's position, he admits this particular provided it is taken to include
a consideration
of his mother's wishes. Accepting that to be the case the
Tribunal finds the particular proved and that, because no CT was ordered
local independent opinion was sought, the facts constitute unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
respect of Particular 4(b) the issue is really the same. The Tribunal does
accept that the advice given to Mr Maendel did include
options besides
palliative care (as set out in the respondent's statement from paragraph 40),
but once again, given the failure to
carry out full investigations, the
recommendation was internally flawed. Therefore the particular is found proved
and amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal is satisfied, based on its findings and on the admissions that every
particular in Complaint One has been proven to the
Complaint Two
Two was admitted together with a concession that the conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Complaint Three
Three relies on the particulars of Complaints One and Two to establish that the
respondent was guilty of professional misconduct
under Section 139E. This
section is in the following terms:
"139E Meaning of "professional misconduct" [NSW]
For the purposes of this Law, professional misconduct of a registered
health practitioner means-
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration."
is clear from the terms of Section 139E that the various particulars under
Complaints One and Two can be accumulated in order to
reach the conclusion of
professional misconduct.
the present case the accumulation of the particulars, especially those in
Complaint One combine to create an allegation that the
respondent, by his
actions and omissions, deprived the patient of a chance of recovery which she
may have had if a pro-active approach
had been taken. It is a part of this
allegation that by not fully informing Mr Jake Maendel of the possibility of
recovery consequent
upon appropriate investigations that Mr Maendel was not
able, as proxy for his wife, to make an informed decision about the options
available for future treatment.
extensive admissions made by the respondent limited the necessity to make
findings of fact. There were however some areas of dispute
which require
discussion.
first such issue is the extent to which Mrs Maendel had been alert and active
between her collapse and death.
HCCC relied on the clinical notes of the nursing staff together with, in
particular, the observations of a Ms Dorrie Rhodes, as
contained in a letter she
wrote on 8 May 2010 (Exhibit B, Tab 5). The following portion of the letter is
the most significant:
"It was during that next night while Meg Loewenthal and Rose Mommsen were
with her that she woke up and asked what had happened to
her. That whole day
(Thursday, March 4) was a gift to us all. Irene was awake and quite conscious.
She greeted many brothers and
sisters by name including many children. I was so
touched how several times when I entered the room or came over to her, she waved
at me and smiled. When Amber and Regina came in to help me turn Irene in her
bed, she opened her eyes and looked at each in turn,
"Ambs? Gina!" However it
was also very hard to witness her puzzlement over why she was in bed and what
had happened. She asked several
times, "What happened to me?" or, "am I sick?"
She wanted to get up to take a shower. I didn't know what to say to her. Amber
I were with her that morning and we often were at a loss at what to tell
Irene about her situation. It was just so new for all of
is no doubt that the description given by Ms Rhodes suggests an extended period
of particularly alert conduct on the patient's
opposing view was presented by the respondent together with the evidence of two
registered nurses, Mr Fischli and Mr Blough.
Fischli performed shifts as a registered nurse and also made observations of Mrs
Maendel during casual visits to her room. Mr Blough's
involvement was more
limited. He looked after the patient from 10pm to midnight on 4 March and then
from about 3am to about 6am on
7 March. He did not make observations outside his
shift times.
Fischli's observations of the patient's general condition can be summarised in
these portions of his oral evidence.
(a) "Q. What's the significant one?
A. There was a group of children that had come in to see her and they sang a
song to her or something like that and she woke up and
they were talking to her
and she seemed to be responding and that was very unusual and I was in the room
at that time, and because
I don't believe Jake Maendel was in the room and
because it was so unusual, I saw a camera there and I grabbed the camera to take
a picture so that he could have a picture of his wife, you know, awake and
alert, and by the time - it was a digital camera and by
the time I turned it on
and got to a place where I could take a picture, she was unconscious again.
Q. You said that she seemed to be responding when the children were singing
songs. What was she doing?
A. Well, she - her eyes opened up and she - she may have said a word or two
to them. You know, you could see that she was taking in
the fact that they were
there and singing to her.
Q. So you don't recall an occasion when there was a large group of children
and she could name each of them by name?
Q. She didn't do that in your presence?
A. Well, I was there at that, what I just described. Her entire period of
lucidity, in my memory, was about a minute; sixty seconds
or so." (T 42.5)
(b) "Q. It is not the case is it that her lucid moments were usually only for
a few seconds?
A. That's correct, her lucid moments were only for a few seconds." (T
(c) "Q. I beg your pardon?
A. Every time I came in to my memory she was unconscious, I don't remember
coming in and seeing her awake." (T 44.22)
(d) "Q. Do you remember was her speech normal?
A. I only ever heard her say a couple of words at a time and it was hard to
assess whether - I mean it wasn't, you know, there wasn't
enough said to really
assess is this normal speech or not, I certainly never heard her formulate a
Q. But the words that you heard sound well formed as if her tongue was
working well and the word was a correct word?
A. I don't have any recollection of anything different or strange, I just
remember her saying, "My head".
Q. You said she opened her eyes, when you saw her eyes open did they appear
to be focusing and working in coordination with each other,
were the pupils
normal, do you remember that sort of thing?
A. The incident I screamed earlier when the children were there, she appeared
to be recognising the people that were there for that
minute or so, and then she
drifted off, her eyes were closed and she became unresponsive and if you tried
to get her back she had
a bit of response.
Q. When you say when you tried to get her back, what--
A. Well, if you called her, whatever, tried to, you know, it wasn't like she
had just gone to sleep, you couldn't - you couldn't -
for example, I changed her
IV at one point, she didn't react to that like a normal person would, if a
person was asleep and you stuck
a 20 gauge catheter in their arm they'd probably
wake up, and she didn't respond like a normal person." (T 51.18)
is to be recalled that, certainly in the morning, Mr Fischli made his
observations on the same day that Ms Rhodes alleges the conscious
activity on
the patient's part.
already stated, Mr Blough's involvement was limited. It was, subject to this
limitation, consistent with the evidence of Mr Fischli.
For example, he said:
"Q. Firstly, from a nursing point of view, was she asleep, was she
unconscious, was she comatose? What was your understanding of her
condition from the nursing point of view?
A. She was unconscious. Did not respond to normal speaking or what one
would, you know, how one responds to somebody to see if they're
- to talk to
them or touch them and get a response. She did not respond to those kinds of
HCCC submitted that the description given by Ms Rhodes was corroborated by the
nursing clinical notes. In particular, reference
was made to the patient often
turning herself, smiling, talking and enquiring about her condition. There are
some references to drinking
water and sucking on a sponge. There is this entry
on 5 March at 4pm:
"Wide awake when children came - big smiles and hellos to
entry requiring particular mention is at 7am on 6 March, which states:
w/singing smiled".
There was a suggestion that the entry read
singing ..."
. The Tribunal thinks the entry should be read as the patient
having woken up
singing rather than singing on her part. This is not
only more consistent with the appearance of the note but also with the
unlikelihood
of her waking up and immediately singing.
Tribunal does not accept that the nursing notes corroborate Ms Rhodes'
statement. This is for the following reasons:
(a) The statement refers to a
"whole day"
of consciousness and activity.
The notes do not show this.
(b) Ms Rhodes refers to the events including recognition of children as
occurring on 4 March whereas the notes suggest this may have
occurred, at least
to some extent, on 5 March.
(c) Ms Rhodes' description, and this is said without criticism, is obviously
influenced by the spiritual feelings she experienced,
no doubt influenced by her
obvious affection for Mrs Maendel.
(d) The letter was also an apparently cathartic exercise on Ms Rhodes' part
together with an endeavour to provide comfort to its
Tribunal also notes that it was informed that Mr Fischli and Mr Blough were
facing disciplinary proceedings by their professional
body. There was an
impression of a defensive attitude taken in their evidence although the Tribunal
would not make any finding of
conscious dishonesty.
Tribunal's ultimate view is that the clinical nursing notes are the most
reliable indicator on this issue. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the patient was
generally unconscious from 3 to 8 March but that, in particular on 4 and 5
March, there were periods when she
was awake, able to respond to questions, able
to take some fluids and to recognise various persons, including children, who
her. These periods of lucidity were probably of limited duration and
certainly did not extend over hours let alone the "
" described
by Ms Rhodes.
Tribunal also finds Dr Maendel's evidence consistent with the notes and further
accepts that on each occasion that Dr Maendel
was informed of some conscious
activity on the part of his mother that he attended upon her and re-evaluated
her condition. The Tribunal
also accepts that on each such re-evaluation Dr
Maendel found no overall improvement in the patient's state. This is a separate
as to whether he should have acted upon the reports alone to generally
reassess the treatment regime.
next issue of importance concerns the wishes of Mrs Maendel. As already stated
it is accepted that Dr Maendel acted according
to his perception of his
patient's wishes. It is also accepted that his assessment of these wishes was
that the patient would not
have wanted pro-active treatment in the
circumstances. It was at first thought that Dr Maendel's statement that his
mother's view
was that she should receive all treatment that was humanly
possible and then leave matters in the hands of God was inconsistent with
general approach which was that she should be allowed to remain amongst her
family and friends and not receive aggressive treatment.
On close examination of
the evidence, however, the Tribunal is satisfied that the doctor had a genuine
belief that his mother would
not have elected to receive aggressive
respondent sets out his understanding of his mother's wishes in his
supplementary statement in Exhibit 1 at Tab 1. The HCCC, while
acknowledging the
sincerity of the respondent's belief in the patient's wishes, said that the
respondent's interpretation was not
based on a reasonable interpretation of his
discussions with his mother and also did not take into account the possibility
might have changed her mind. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
respondent did have reasonable grounds for his belief derived from
discussions with his mother particularly as expressed to him and set out in
paragraph 8 of the supplementary statement. The Tribunal
notes however that the
scenarios described in conversation with Mrs Maendel do not mirror the illness
which later befell her.
relation to a possible change of mind, this of course can never be excluded;
however, there is no basis upon which the respondent
could have predicted a
change of mind nor any reason why he might have suspected that would occur.
next point of importance concerns the respondent's conversations with his
father. These are comprehensively set from paragraph
40 of his statement (Tab 1
in Exhibit 1). It is worth setting them out here.
"40. I explained to him that on the basis of my examination and
assessment, she had suffered a serious subarachnoid hemorrhage with
prognosis, I explained to him that she could die any time; that she could
re-bleed further from the site; and that she could
deteriorate and die from the
effects of the bleeding that was already present. I told my Dad that we needed
to make a choice between
aggressive medical and surgical intervention at a
tertiary center versus a palliative approach where our goal would be comfort
I explained to him that I was confident I could provide palliative care at
which could only be
performed in the hospital like ventilation on a respirator.
41. I explained what I believed would happen if we called an ambulance and
transferred her to Inverell Hospital. She would require
intubation with sedation
and paralysis and be placed on a ventilator to protect her airway during
transport and also to help decrease
pressure in the brain. She would then need
to be air-lifted to a facility on the coast with a neurosurgical unit. I
explained that
in effect that she would be evaluated to see if she was a
candidate for surgery to prevent a re-bleed. Dad asked me if I thought
like that would help and I explained that surgery would do nothing to reverse
the effects of the bleed that had already occurred
but that it could prevent a
re-bleed, and that I doubted she would be a good candidate for surgery.
42. I also explained that there was no guarantee that aggressive medical
or surgical care would result in a good outcome, and that
there was a
significant likelihood that she could die en route or alone in an ICU on the
coast. I also explained that with the sedation
and paralysis required for
intubation, he might not have another opportunity to converse with Mom. I told
him that in my opinion
there was a poor chance of recovery with aggressive care
and surgery and that I felt the best option was to simply keep her comfortable
at home. My Dad agreed to keep Mom at home."
is further explanation described in paragraph 44.
was submitted by the HCCC that the version of conversations set out in the
deposition of Mr Jake Maendel should be accepted over
the respondent's version.
The Tribunal does not agree. Mr Maendel's statement is obviously a summary of
his recollection given a
year after the event. In addition, it is apparent from
Exhibit H that Mr Maendel makes no criticism of the respondent's actions.
email includes:
"Jake is, and always has been, fully satisfied with every aspect of the
care his wife Irene received from Chris and the nursing team.
He believes that
the treatment decisions he made accord with what she would have wished, had she
been able to make her wishes known.
My client considers that the complaint filed
with the HCCC by Mrs Nicole Maendel is unfounded and in bad faith, and notes
of his other eight children share his views regarding the care his wife
accepted that the respondent was acting with the wishes of the patient as the
prominent dictator of his actions, the next question
that arises is whether this
approach is valid in itself. On the assumption that there was a proper basis for
knowing the patient's
wishes, Dr Gibbons said:
"the doctor's obligation is to
follow the patient's wishes"
(T 111.38). The Tribunal is of a similar view.
However, in the present case this view does no more than express an acceptance
the respondent's actions were based on a valid perception of the patient's
wishes. It does not extend to justify those actions where,
on objective
assessment, they were inappropriate.
last issue requiring comment is the overall environment in which the respondent
found himself. It is important because of the
respondent's submission that his
failings should be looked at in a 'global' sense emanating from his initial
error of taking on his
mother's post-stabilisation care.
making the initial wrong decision to treat his mother he then took on a number
of roles and was subjected to a number of stressors
that probably dominated his
thought process and impeded his capacity to divert from the course that he
following passages of evidence are important:
"Q. The second thing I want to put to you was a suggestion that looking
back that you were significantly overreaching yourself, now
before you answer I
want to tell you what the ingredients of the suggestion are so I'm not putting
this to you as you were doing
this, I am only putting it to you for your
comment, do you understand?
A. I think so.
Q. While this was all going on, let's start off at stabilisation, there is
no criticism of anything you did in relation to the emergency
criticism seems to start once stabilisation has occurred. From then on you were
the sole treating doctor, you were the
sole diagnostician, and I don't mean
human, I mean you didn't have the assistance of CTs or anything else; you were a
son with natural
feelings for your mother which no doubt would have included
some shock and grief.
A. That's right.
Q. You were your father's advisor. You were the sole person providing him
with information.
Q. You were the continuing dictator in a benign sense of the mode of
Q. You were the sole liaison between your siblings and your mother in
terms of what's going on. You were no doubt a considerable support
father although presumably other members of the church would have also been
there for him?
A. They were.
Q. Yes, as a simple human being having regard to what you've told us about
what you did you would no doubt have - could no doubt have
used extra sleep. You
were physically at stress and strain, do you agree with that?
Q. Lump all of those things together as being all happening at the same
time, you're in all of those roles; do you looking back now
or what would you
like to say about the suggestion that you were significantly over reaching
A. I would agree with that in that sense.
Q. Can I add into the mix that you were operating with a lack of peer
support, do you accept that?
the Tribunal is firm in its view that the respondent should be regarded as
having committed a series of errors, it does accept
that once the initial wrong
decision was made the respondent became trapped by the surrounding circumstances
and stressors outlined
above so that he became fixed to a course of action in
which the subsequent errors almost became inevitable.
Was there professional misconduct?
assessing whether the respondent's actions amounted to professional misconduct
the Tribunal was guided by the following passage
from the decision of Kirby P
(as he then was) in
Pillai v Messiter (No 2)
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
""Misconduct" means more than mere negligence:
The words used in the statutory test ("misconduct in a professional
respect") plainly go beyond that negligence which would found
a claim against a
medical practitioner for damages: Re Anderson, (at 575). On the other hand gross
negligence might amount to relevant
misconduct, particularly if accompanied by
indifference to, or lack of concern for, the welfare of the patient: cf Re
Anderson (at
575). Departures from elementary and generally accepted standards,
of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be heard to say
that he or she
was ignorant could amount to such professional misconduct: ibid. But the
statutory test is not met by mere professional
incompetence or by deficiencies
in the practice of the profession. Something more is required. It includes a
deliberate departure
from accepted standards or such serious negligence as,
although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an abuse of the privileges
which accompany registration as a medical practitioner: cf Allinson (at
760-761). These are the approaches which have been taken
in our courts. They
have been taken in the courts of England where such misconduct is alleged. And
they have similarly been taken
in the courts of the United States. The entry in
Corpus Juris Secundum, vol 58, (1948) at 818, reads:
"Both in law and in ordinary speech the term 'misconduct' usually implies
an act done willfully with a wrong intention, and conveys
the idea of
intentional wrongdoing. The term implies fault beyond the error of judgment; a
wrongful intention, and not a mere error
of judgment; but it does not
necessarily imply corruption or criminal intention, and, in the legal idea of
misconduct, an evil intention
is not a necessary ingredient. The word is
sufficiently comprehensive to include misfeasance as well as malfeasance, and as
to professional people it includes unprofessional acts even though such
acts are not inherently wrongful. Whether a particular course
of conduct will be
regarded as misconduct is to be determined from the nature of the conduct and
not from its consequences.""
very last sentence in the above quote has particular relevance to this case. On
the basis of Dr Raftos' evidence the likelihood
is that Mrs Maendel would have
been severely disabled or died, notwithstanding proactive treatment. She may,
however, have fallen
into the 30% of cases where a full or near full recovery is
achieved. If she was denied the opportunity to fall into this category
consequences of the respondent's conduct could not be more dire. Dr Raftos also
said that signs of consciousness might have
indicated a better chance of falling
into a positive category (T 68.2).
as stated in the above passage from
it is the nature of the
conduct and not its consequences that are relevant.
Tribunal was also mindful that it should not work backwards from a decision that
it did not ultimately wish to suspend or cancel
the respondent's registration.
is, of course, difficult to divorce Mrs Maendel's death, including the
possibility that she might have returned to a normal life,
from consideration.
Nevertheless the respondent's conduct must be seen as a sincere attempt to act
in the best wishes of his mother.
Taken with the overwhelming responsibilities
that were thrust upon him both as the doctor, the family representative and the
support of his father, the Tribunal does not think that there was
professional misconduct on the respondent's part. He did not act
indifference, he did not have a wrongful intention and he did not act in any
manner deliberately designed, or reckless of the
possibility that further harm
would be caused to the patient.
addition, the Tribunal recognises that the very essence of its function is
derived from the necessity to protect the public. This
is enshrined in Section
3A of the National Law which states:
"3A Objective and guiding principle [NSW]
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration."
aside the fact that the respondent no longer practises in Australia, the
Tribunal does not believe that the respondent's treatment
of his mother would
give rise to or be indicative of any similar treatment to members of the public.
In fact, the evidence is to
the contrary recalling that Dr Maendel said that in
every other case in which there was a suspicion of a sub-arachnoid haemorrhage
he had immediately referred the patient for a CT scan and hospitalisation.
Tribunal has no doubt that the wrongdoings of the respondent were serious both
as admitted by him and found by the Tribunal. They
not only occurred on separate
occasions but included basic acts of medical practice from the failure to
instigate proper investigation
and review to the absence of proper record
addition, the wrongdoings highlight the very good reason why the medical
profession proscribes the treatment of family members
by practitioners. This
case is a stark example and reminder to the medical profession that no matter
how well intentioned a doctor
might be it is fraught with risk and danger to
treat a member of one's own family.
confluence of treatment of a serious condition with the emotional reaction of
being a son to the patient and also the principal
source of support and
information to his father and wider family have resulted in the string of errors
made by the respondent.
the same time the Tribunal accepts that every action of the respondent was well
intentioned, that his diagnosis was almost certainly
correct and in all
likelihood he afforded his mother her final days in the manner she would have
wished and without the rigours of
rough and lengthy transportation, invasive
investigation and possibly surgery and death in a hospital away from her church
and community
environment.
Sabag v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2001] NSWCA 411
at paragraph
83, Sperling AJA said that professional misconduct was
"a matter of degree
and judgment"
. The Tribunal is acutely aware that the possible consequences
(death as opposed to survival) of the respondent's unsatisfactory conduct
suggests a high degree of culpability. Nevertheless, in the judgment of the
Tribunal the overall circumstances of the respondent's
actions were such that
they ought not be classified as misconduct. The Tribunal is not satisfied, on an
evaluative and objective
basis, that the HCCC has proved the allegation of
professional misconduct.
has already been mentioned that this result was not a unanimous decision of the
members of the Tribunal. Two members took a different
view on the establishment
of Complaint Three. However, by the application of Section 166(3) of the
National Law the decision of the
Deputy Chairperson, in this circumstance, is
the decision of the Tribunal. As the Deputy Chairperson was of the view,
together with
one other member of the Tribunal, that Complaint Three had not
been established, then that is the decision of the Tribunal.
dissenting members of the Tribunal did not wish to provide a separate judgment
but were satisfied to rely on the following observations
of their views. The
difference of opinion between the members of the Tribunal was not as to any
findings of fact, rather it was because
two of the members were satisfied that
the HCCC had 'crossed the line' of proof in establishing that the respondent's
errors were
so serious as to constitute professional misconduct. The following
findings were of particular relevance to their decision:
(a) There had been a substantial departure from known accepted standards of
care. These included treating a family member, the failure
to have a CT scan,
the failure to consult other local practitioners (of which three or four were
known to him and were available)
or a specialist.
(b) The failure to reassess the patient's condition, in particular following
reports of conscious activity on her part and having
regard to this evidence
from Dr Raftos:
"WITNESS: I don't know that anyone has looked at the effect of the
different portions of the treatment for subarachnoid haemorrhage
individually
but it would certainly be reasonable to say, for instance, that since the use of
nimodipine to reduce the incidence
of ..(not transcribable).. spasm the outcome
from subarachnoid haemorrhage has improved. So it would be reasonable to say
you had someone with subarachnoid haemorrhage and you didn't give them
the nimodipine and you didn't give them treatment to control
their cerebral
oedema and intracranial pressure then their outcome would be - then their
predicted outcome would be worse. So if
those therapies weren't given then they
would do worse."
(c) Even if honestly misguided the respondent's above erroneous actions were
deliberate.
(d) The respondent's advice to his father was of a nature one might expect from
a son. It was not the objective advice that a doctor
should provide to a
relative required to make a momentous decision.
(e) Mr Maendel no doubt took serious account of the advice given to him because
it came from a medical practitioner.
(f) The respondent allowed himself to simultaneously be an adviser to his father
and family, a support to his father and the sole
treating doctor and medical
(g) Although not with deliberate intent the respondent moderated his
explanations to his father to fit his perception of his mother's
dissenting members of the Tribunal considered the above factors to amount to
such serious conduct as, within the guidelines set
amounted to professional misconduct.
conclusions of the Tribunal, in respect of this part of the proceedings, are as
(a) Complaints One and Two of the Amended Notice of Complaint are found to be
established.
(b) Complaint Three is found not to have been established.
(c) The matter is stood over for the consideration of protective orders to 22
(d) The costs of the hearing to date are reserved.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter