URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Christina (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 8; (3 February 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Christina (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 8
Hearing Date(s):
3 February 2025
Date of Orders:
3 February 2025
Decision Date:
3 February 2025
Guardianship Division
B L Bowman, Senior Member (Legal)
M Bain, Senior Member
(Professional)
J V Le Breton, General Member (Community)
Guardianship
1. A guardianship order is made for
2. The Public Guardian is appointed as
the guardian.
3. This is a continuing guardianship
order for a period of 12 months from 3 February
4. This is a limited guardianship order
giving the guardian(s) custody of Christina to the extent necessary to carry out
the functions
5. The guardian has
the following functions:
decide what access Christina has to others and the conditions of access,
effective from 27 February
b) Advocacy
To advocate
generally for
c) Accommodation
where Christina may reside, effective from 27 February 2025.
guardian may authorise others including members of NSW Police and the Ambulance
Service of NSW to:
i) take Christina to a place
approved by the guardian.
ii) keep her at that
iii) return her to that place should she
leave it, effective from 27 February 2025.
To decide what health care Christina may receive, effective
from 27 February 2025.
f) Medical/Dental consent
make substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental
treatment, where Christina is not capable of giving a
valid consent, effective
from 27 February 2025.
g) Services
To make decisions
h) Restrictive Practices
To give or withhold
consent to restrictive practices used to influence Christina’s behaviour,
effective from 27 February 2025.
CONDITIONS:
conditions of this order are:
a) Standard Condition
exercising this role the guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring
Christina to an understanding of the issues and to obtain
and consider her views
before making significant decisions.
b) NDIS Restrictive Practices
The guardian(s) may only consent to the use of
restrictive practices to influence Christina’s
(i) as a last resort to prevent
Christina harming herself or others; and
accordance with a behaviour support plan which has been developed by a behaviour
support practitioner after having conducted
a functional behavioural assessment
upon Christina, and which is reviewed regularly (and no less than every 12
months) and/or reviewed
as soon as practicable if there is a change in
circumstances which requires the plan to be
1. The estate of Christina is subject
to management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
2. The management of the estate of
Christina is committed to the NSW Trustee and
3. This order be reviewed by the
Tribunal within three years.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – 17-year-old woman currently living in a secure care
program – leaving the care of the Minister and moving
to Supported
Independent Living – multiple diagnoses – whether secure care orders
made by the Supreme Court of NSW impact
on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to
make an order – found that the Tribunal’s powers are not restricted
– considered
the subject person requires assistance for some important
decisions in future as she transitions to SIL – limited informal
consistent supports to assist her in making decisions – Public Guardian
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – whether the subject person
is capable of managing her affairs – the “special
circumstances”
approach – where the subject person’s finances
were very simple at the time of hearing but were likely to increase in
complexity when she transitioned to SIL – limited knowledge and ability to
handle and manage money – found to be in her
best interests that a
financial manager be appointed – NSW Trustee appointed.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWSC 498
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
Department Family and Community Services; Re “Lee”
[2015] NSWSC 2144
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
(1983) 3 NSWLR
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2003] NSWSC
[2013] NSWSC 1223
[2012] NSWSC 1006
(Parameters of Protected Estate Management Orders)
[2014] NSWSC 1106
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Guardianship Application
Christina (the person)
(applicant)
Minister for Communities and Justice (carer)
002: Financial Management Application
Christina (the
Grace (applicant)
Minister for Communities and Justice
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
C Pearson, appointed separate representative for Christina
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00418170
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal made a guardianship order for 12 months and appointed the Public
Guardian as guardian for Christina with functions of
advocacy, access,
accommodation with the ability to authorise others, health care, medical and
dental consent, services and restrictive
Tribunal made a financial management order and committed the management of
Christina's estate to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
The order will be
reviewed within three years.
the end of these Reasons for Decision are lists of the people who attended the
hearing. [Appendix removed from publication.]
is a 17-year-old young woman who is currently living in a secure care program in
Southwest Sydney known as “The Cottage”.
Christina prefers to
be called Chris. For the purposes of the reasons and meaning no disrespect, the
name Chris is used. Chris is
part of the Sherwood program. She will be turning
18 in late February 2025. She has been under the care of the Minister since 15
July 2015. Her mother is Patricia and her grandfather is Don.
submitted a document authored by Clinical Neuropsychology Registrar Mr Taylor
authored on 11 September 2023 which outlines that
Chris has previously attracted
diagnoses of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD), Oppositional defiant
disorder (ODD), Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder (OCD), complex trauma, Tourette
syndrome, conduct disorder, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD),
developmental delay.
late 2020, an application was filed with the NSW Supreme Court for a secure care
8 November 2024, Department of Communities and Justice Caseworker Grace
submitted a guardianship application seeking to have the
Public Guardian
appointed with an advocacy function.
is currently subject to multiple restrictive practices detailed in a Behaviour
Intervention Support Plan authored by a senior
psychologist from 1 April 2024:
environmental restraint (routine for Chris and co-residents) including locked
doors, cupboards, access
to laundry and office, restricted access to sharps;
food; chemicals; internet; community-line of sight; physical restraint (escort)
and chemical restraint (psychotropic medication quetiapine routine and
8 November 2024, Department of Communities and Justice Caseworker Grace
submitted a financial management application seeking to
appoint the NSW Trustee
and Guardian.
11 December 2024, an order was made appointing separate representation.
Solicitor Carey Pearson has accepted the appointment.
was unable to attend the hearing. Ruby (DCJ Casework Manager) attended the
hearing and assumed the role of substitute
GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION
The Tribunal's jurisdiction to make a guardianship order
Tribunal understands that Chris is currently the subject of orders of the
Supreme Court in its parens patriae jurisdiction, commonly
referred to as secure
care orders. In advance of the hearing questions were raised about whether these
orders impacted on the Tribunal's
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (“the Act”) provides as
15 Restrictions on Tribunal's power to make guardianship orders
(1) A guardianship order shall not be made in respect of a
(a) if the person is under the age of 16 years, or
(b) in the case of a person who is the subject of an order made
by the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction with
respect to the
guardianship of persons-unless the Supreme Court consents to the making of the
(c) in the case of a person who is the subject of an order made
by the Children's Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under
section 79A of
the Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998-unless the
Children's Court consents to the making of
question for the Tribunal was whether the secure care orders constituted an
exercise of the Supreme Court's jurisdiction with
respect to the guardianship of
persons such that the Tribunal could only make orders with the consent of the
Court. Relevantly, this
issue was dealt with in
Family and Community Services; Re “Lee”
[2015] NSWSC 2144
which Brereton J states at [9]:
“The Public Guardian has sought guidance as to how the guardianship
functions and the role of the Court will interact. At least
as I presently
understand the position, the (NSW)
Guardianship Act 1987
is expressed in terms
that it does not affect the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Court. That
means, I think, that to the extent
that this Court makes provision in respect of
Lee's care, it would prevail over the guardianship function. But it does so only
the extent that the Court by order makes such provision, and only to the
extent of any inconsistency. As I propose to discharge the
secure accommodation
order and the recovery order, there will be no subsisting orders in place
concerning Lee's management, other
than those of the Guardianship Division of
NCAT. However, until I am satisfied that an appropriate guardianship order is in
I do not propose entirely to vacate the field, but to keep Lee's
management under the supervision of the Court. She is not a ward
of the Court
and she is not the subject of a committee of the person, but it is well
established that in the parens patriae jurisdiction,
the Court can make orders
pertaining to the welfare of an incapable person without making them a ward or
appointing a committee.
At this stage, I am not making any such order, leaving
it open to the Guardianship Division to make such orders as it is persuaded
appropriate, and to the Public Guardian to make decisions under the authority
conferred by those orders. Accordingly, for the
time being, I do not think that
any difficulty of conflicting jurisdictions or orders is posed for the Public
, the Court appears to make a distinction between the
exercise of parens patriae jurisdiction to make a person a ward or appointing
committee and the exercise of parens patriae jurisdiction to make other orders
(such as the authorisation of medical treatment
or secure care). In
, Brereton J states that the former is an exercise of its
As such, a person under secure care orders is not the subject of an order made
by the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its
guardianship of persons and therefore is not captured by
Accordingly,
we were satisfied that the Tribunal's power to make orders with respect to Chris
was not restricted by
of the Act.
What did the
Tribunal have to decide?
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
Is Chris someone
for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she a disability which
prevents her from being able to make important
life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian and how long should the order last?
Chris someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she has a
disability which prevents her from being able to make
important life
of the Act provides that we may make a guardianship order for a person if we
are satisfied that the person is “a person in
person in need of a guardian is “a person who, because of a disability, is
totally or partially incapable of managing their
person”: the Act,
The disability must restrict them in one or more major life activities to
the extent that they require supervision or social habilitation:
Commonly, we consider the person's ability to make important personal,
health and lifestyle decisions; the ability to make such decisions
being a major
life activity that impacts on the person's ability to function normally in the
community with others.
Evidence and submissions
were provided with the following health and medical reports about Chris:
Management Support Plan dated 1 April 2024 prepared by the senior
psychologist;
report dated 11
September 2023 from Mr Taylor, Clinical Neuropsychology Registrar; and
report dated 23
October 2024 from a Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist.
summary the evidence indicates that Chris has diagnoses including ADHD, Complex
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, FASD, Tic Disorder,
and a mild intellectual
disability. Chris has a complex social history characterized by adverse
childhood experiences including inconsistent
care, neglect, and sexual abuse in
the family environment and multiple placements in out of home care.
Taylor reported the following findings:
neurocognitive assessment results showed general intellectual ability in the
very low range, well below the level of
her age matched peers.
performance on tasks measuring executive function was broadly reduced, and well
below age expectations. While her non-verbal
abstract reasoning and ability to
inhibit a prepotent verbal response met age expectations, she demonstrated
significant difficulties
with verbal abstract reasoning, mental-flexibility and
task shifting, planning and organisation, and problem-solving and conceptual
flexibility, with evidence of perseveration and no appreciable benefit from
corrective feedback.
Specifically,
her deficits in problem-solving and conceptual flexibility, will negatively
impact her capacity to flexibly implement
strategies, learnt and developed in
the therapeutic setting, across the wide variety of real-world scenarios that
might indicate
their use. Additionally, her mental rigidity and inability to
benefit from corrective feedback, suggests that she will require significant
additional scaffolding and support to effectively apply therapeutically derived
strategies.
difficulties with planning & organisation and plan implementation, may
impact her ability to implement the most appropriate
approach for a given
real-word situation.
performance in tasks of verbal memory was reduced, and below age
expectations.
Behaviour Management Support Plan outlined that Chris’ key behavioural
challenges include sexualised behaviour and absconding.
These behaviours have
presented frequently in community and are a high risk for her health and
wellbeing. Chris is a vulnerable,
young person when unsupervised in the
community with significant risk of exploitation. Chris does not demonstrate an
understanding
of the risks associated with these mentioned behaviours. Chris has
limited ability to self-regulate her emotions and manage her stress
effectively,
which appears to be a significant factor in her use of maladaptive, challenging
behaviours. Chris requires continuous
support, supervision, and timely carer
intervention. She requires full support to access the community and to maintain
community presence and full support to manage transport. Chris relies
on the targeted support from her Casework Team to assist with
decision-making.
evidence at the hearing, and the reports provided in advance of the hearing,
were all consistent with the view that Chris has
difficulties in making informed
decisions for herself.
Findings and conclusions
accepted the evidence provided in the clinical reports outlined above. We
accepted on the basis of this evidence that Chris requires
support to meet her
daily needs and to manage day-to-day choices and decisions.
are satisfied that Chris is at least partly unable to manage her own activities
of daily living and has impaired decision-making
abilities. We decided that
because of the incapacities arising from her disabilities, Chris is “a
person in need of a guardian”
for whom a guardianship order may be
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so,
what order should be made?
of the Act outlines a number of equally important factors for us to
consider and balance in the exercise of our discretion. These
matters have no
hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration. However, the
Tribunal must undertake a balancing exercise
for its consideration of the
of the Act. When undertaking this task, the Tribunal may be
guided by the principles that are set out in
of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
The Tribunal has had regard to each of the mandatory
factors of the Act, which are only referred to herein to the extent
that they are of particular relevance to the decision made by
Overview of evidence
Manager Casework (DCJ) provided written and oral evidence to the following
Chris has been
residing in The Cottage since June 2024. It has not been an easy transition for
Chris. She has been hospitalised on
occasion for self-harming incidents. She has
also absconded from the placement on occasion and placed herself in unsafe
situations.
For this reason, it was submitted that the authorise others
function would need to be given to an appointed guardian to ensure that
could be returned to her accommodation if she absconded.
It is proposed
that Chris transition to Supported Independent Living accommodation upon turning
18. She is not presently funded for
Supported Independent Living (SIL)
accommodation. It is proposed that a change of circumstances application be
submitted in anticipation
of her turning 18 and no longer being under the
parental responsibility of the Minister. A change in her accommodation may
also necessitate
a change in her National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
service providers.
As Chris exits
the Sherwood Program, she will need to transition to mainstream health services.
There is also a need for Chris to
transition from paediatric to adult
submitted that the appointed guardian should
have the authority to decide what
access Chris has to others and the conditions of access to ensure that she is
protected from abuse.
NDIS support coordinator agreed with Ruby's comments above and was supportive of
a guardianship order being made. She stated that
Chris would not be able to
navigate the NDIS system or understand and sign service agreements. Accordingly,
she submitted that the
appointed guardian should hold the services
Behaviour Support Plan outlined that Chris is currently subject to multiple
restrictive practices including environmental restraint
(including locked doors,
cupboards, access to laundry and office, restricted access to sharps, food,
chemicals, internet and community-line
of sight); physical restraint (escort)
and chemical restraint (psychotropic medication quetiapine routine and
separate representative was supportive of a guardianship order being made. She
submitted that Chris is entering into a period
of significant change as she
exits the Minister's care and the Sherwood Program and transitions into
adulthood and more independent
living. There are many important decisions to be
made, and a guardianship order would promote Chris’ interests as she
into adulthood. She submitted that the evidence weighed in favour of
the Tribunal exercising its discretion to make an order.
views of Chris
provided a clear view about guardianship. Chris accepted her diagnoses. However,
she contended that she could make her own decisions
and there was no need for a
guardian to be appointed. Chris had concerns about the restrictive practices.
She was very focused on
her phone and being able to have unrestricted access to
Findings and conclusions
have had regard to Chris’ views and her strong desire to live without
restrictions and make her own decisions. We have balanced
this with our
obligations under
(2) of the Act to ensure Chris’ welfare and
interests are paramount, and that she is protected from neglect, abuse and
exploitation.
have decided that Chris requires the assistance of a guardian for some important
decisions regarding her future needs. Chris is
a vulnerable young person who is
transitioning from out of home care to the adult disability system. She has
limited informal and
consistent supports to assist her to make decisions in her
best interests and has a history of behaviours of concern. We consider
important that Chris is guided to make decisions which will protect her from
harm and ensure her health, welfare and rights are
Accordingly,
we found that there are decisions to be made about where Chris will live, what
services she will receive and who will
have access to her. There will be a need
to obtain and share health information to ensure that accommodation and services
meet Chris’
needs. We found that there is no practicable way for decisions
appointing a guardian. We accepted the evidence about Chris’ history of
absconding from her placement and found that the authorise
others function would
promote her best interests.
accepted the evidence that Chris is compliant with her medication, which
includes major medications. We accepted the evidence that
Chris is unable to
provide her own medical consent, and we considered whether it is practicable for
decisions about medical and dental
treatment to be made without appointing a
guardian. We concluded that it was not practicable.
accepted evidence that Chris is presently subject to restrictive practices at
The Cottage which will likely be continued in a SIL
environment. In NSW, a
restrictive practice may only be used if informed consent is provided by the
person subject to the proposed
restrictive practice, or in circumstances where
the person is unable to provide informed consent, by a guardian who is conferred
a restrictive practices decision making function, and in accordance with any
conditions associated with the guardian's appointment.
Historically,
when appointing a guardian with a restrictive practices function, it has been
necessary for the Tribunal to closely
scrutinise the proposed use of restrictive
practices and determine what type(s) of restrictive practice a guardian may be
to consent to the use of. In the current regulatory framework, it is
no longer essential for the Tribunal (as a protective jurisdiction)
prescriptive in its orders when appointing a guardian with a restrictive
practices function.
role of the Tribunal is to consider firstly, whether there is a need for a
guardian to make a decision regarding the use of restrictive
practices, and
secondly, to consider who is appropriate to make such decisions. In appropriate
circumstances it may not be necessary
to be prescriptive as to the particular
category of restrictive practices that a guardian may consent to, as there are
appropriate safeguards in place through the regulatory framework to
mitigate against the inappropriate use of restrictive practices.
Being overly
prescriptive may, at times, not be in the best interests of the person subject
to a guardianship order because it may
impede the ability of a guardian to make
prompt, appropriate decisions in light of a person's changing
circumstances.
the current matter, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a need for a
guardian to be appointed for the purpose of consenting
(or withholding consent)
to the use of restrictive practices, and it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to
prescribe any particular
category of restrictive practices that a guardian may
make decisions about. The exercise of this function, however, must be in
with the conditions attached to the Tribunal's order, and in
accordance with the requirements of the relevant regulatory scheme.
considered the evidence and reached the conclusions noted above we made the
guardianship order encompassing the functions as
set out in the Tribunal's
Who should be the guardian and how long should the
order last?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person's guardian if
there is a private person who can be appointed:
this case, there was no private person that we could appoint as guardian for
Chris. We therefore appointed the Public Guardian.
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it was made.
decided to make a continuing guardianship order for 12 months because it is
likely that there will be decisions that need to be
made by a guardian for at
least this length of time. At the end of the 12 months, there will be another
hearing at the Tribunal to
review the guardianship order.
Tribunal was satisfied that continuing the guardianship order will promote
Chris’ welfare and interests, and that the restriction
on her autonomy,
freedom of decision and action, and self-reliance is proportionate to her
capacity to make her own decisions. We
considered her views. There is no spouse
to provide their view. There is no other practicable way to make the needed
decisions. There
was no evidence to indicate that the guardianship order would
be detrimental to family relationships or cultural and linguistic environments.
We were satisfied that the order was made for the shortest practicable time
consistent with Chris’ welfare.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
APPLICATION
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions to be considered by the Tribunal are:
incapable of managing her affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Chris’ affairs and is it in their best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing her affairs?
[2012] NSWSC 1006
, White J assessed the history of case law in
relation to financial management and noted that initially the issue of
capability was
approached by referring to hypothetical or abstract notions of
the ordinary affairs of man. However, the Court now assesses the person's
capacity to do what they are proposing to do [58]. White J used a "rational
appreciation" of assets test to determine a person's
capability to manage his or
her affairs. He adopts the reasoning of Barrett J in
[2003] NSWSC
who said that the task of the Court in these circumstances:
“... is to make a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the person
concerned to cope with the ordinary routine affairs
of living, particularly so
far as they concern the person's property...the requisite judgment is to be made
in the light of objective
physical facts concerning the relevant person's
property, money and other assets and the way the person is able to look after
If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does not matter
[2013] NSWSC 1223
, Justice Lindsay confirmed that the question
focuses attention on the special circumstances of the person. His Honour stated,
Of central significance is the functionality of management capacity of the
person said to be incapable of managing his or her affairs,
not: (a) his or her
status as a person who may, or may not, lack "mental capacity" or be "mentally
ill"; or (b) particular reasons
for an incapacity for self-management.
test for determining a person's capability to manage his or her affairs has been
described as follows (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[307]-[308]):
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his or her own affairs in a
reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of
a [financial manager]
charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and interests?
[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with (making and
implementing decisions about) his or her own affairs
(person and property,
capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with due regard
to his or her present and prospective
wants and needs, and those of family and
friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense,
consideration may be given to:
past and present
experience as a predictor of the future course of events;
support systems
available to the person; and
the extent to
which the person, placed as he or she is, can be relied upon to make sound
judgments about his or her welfare and interests:
see Lindsay J in
[2015] NSWSC 498
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
relevant time for considering whether a person is incapable of managing his or
her affairs is not merely the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
at 86). See Lindsay J in
L (Parameters of Protected Estate Management Orders)
[2014] NSWSC 1106
“Each case must, of course, be considered on its own facts, including not
only actual facts presently known but also, so far
as they can be known,
prospective developments.”
Overview of evidence
evidence as set out above in respect of the impact of Chris’ disabilities
upon their ability to make important life decisions
applies to her capacity to
manage her financial affairs.
was very clear about financial management and agreed that she needs a financial
manager. Chris is a very vulnerable young person
with very limited experience
managing her own finances.
applicant provided the following information at the hearing about Chris’
financial affairs:
Chris receives
the Disability Support pension
The payment is
paid into a bank account in her name
expenses include her phone, medication, clothes, nails and hair
Chris has no
savings and no significant assets
expected to receive a Victims Recognition Payment upon turning
the application for financial management, it was stated Chris does not have the
skills or capacity for money management. Chris
has never been responsible for
managing or handling money independently, nor had to manage bills and financial
responsibilities.
Concerns were raised about Chris’ capacity to manage her
rent and bills independently. Due to Chris’ significant vulnerability,
there are concerns that Chris is vulnerable to exploitation and harm by others
that may hope to take her money from her.
Taylor found that Chris demonstrates relatively greater difficulties with
numeracy (i.e., a poor understanding of numbers and their
magnitude),
memorisation of number facts (mathematical relationships), and thereafter
difficulty applying mathematical concepts,
facts, or procedures to solve
quantitative problems.
Consideration
evidence about Chris’ financial affairs indicated that they were very
simple in nature at the time of the hearing. She is
living in an out of home
care placement and the evidence indicated that she was receiving considerable
support to manage her money.
Chris is able to undertake basic activities relating to accessing and spending
her money, we noted it is envisaged that arrangements
will be put in place for
Chris to receive a range of more formal supports and services which may include
living independently in
alternative accommodation. There will be a greater
degree of complexity in relation to her finances in the future, including the
need for more budgeting and setting up of arrangements for the payment of
regular expenses.
into account the evidence of Chris’ poor numeracy skills and her
disorganisation and difficulties with planning, initiating
and following through
on tasks as well as Chris’ own evidence about her money management skills,
we were satisfied that, as
a result of her disabilities, Chris is not capable of
managing the full range of her financial affairs into the immediate future.
were satisfied, on the evidence, that Chris is not capable of managing her
Is there a need for another person to manage
Chris’ affairs and is it in her best interests for a financial management
to be made?
considering the issue, the Tribunal had regard to the documents referred to
above and the oral evidence given at the hearing.
is a vulnerable young person who has no budgeting skills and is due to receive a
victims recognition payment. As the pre-conditions
to making a financial
management order are satisfied, the power to make a financial management order
can be exercised. Having regard
to the statement of principles contained in
of the Act which require that we observe, among other things, the principle that
Chris must be protected from neglect, abuse, and
exploitation, we have decided
that it is appropriate to exercise the power to make a financial management
evidence was that Chris does not currently have the range of skills to
independently take the kinds of actions that will be required
to facilitate her
greater independence as she transitions to adulthood, particularly if she moves
to SIL accommodation. These include
engaging with Centrelink about the
appropriate income support payment she should be receiving as well as setting up
arrangements
to ensure income is allocated to pay for the goods and services
found that, if no financial manager is appointed, there is the risk that Chris
will not have access to money to support herself
and may not be able to meet her
expenses and daily needs. We also found that without a financial manager, Chris
would be at risk
of financial exploitation.
were satisfied that there is a need to make financial decisions for Chris and
that it is in her best interests to appoint a financial
manager to do so because
there is no other practicable way of managing her finances.
should be appointed as financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under
the Act, the Tribunal must act with the interests of the person
as the paramount consideration and in accordance with the other principles set
of the Act.
of the Act provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial management
order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the person's
estate or may
commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
was no private person available to be appointed as Chris’ financial
manager. We appointed the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
accepted the submissions of the separate representative that the order should be
reviewed. Chris expressed a desire to learn to
budget and manage her own
affairs. We decided that the order should be reviewed in three years. This would
give sufficient time for
several matters to be pursued and key arrangements to
be put in place in relation to Chris’ finances. It would be appropriate
review the order in light of any capacity building assistance Chris may have
received and her ability to manage various aspects
of her affairs at that
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (289 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter