URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Minister Administering the Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979 v Broom & Webster & Webster [2002] NSWRT 25 (18 February 2002)
Minister Administering the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
v Broom & Webster & Webster
[2002] NSWRT 25
(18 February
File No. 01/38931
RESIDENTIAL TRIBUNAL
: Minister Administering the Environmental Planning
& Assessment Act 1979
: Broom, Webster &
APPLICATION
: Termination of residential tenancy
APPEARANCES
: Mr Ventura of Counsel for the Applicant
instructed by Hicksons Lawyers;
Ms A Curtis, Solicitor of Woolf
Associates, Solicitors
: 20 December 2001 at
Legislative Provisions:
Sections 58 & 64,
Residential
Tenancies Act 1987
Residential Tribunal Act
1. Time is extended to bring this application.
2. The tenancy is
terminated and vacant possession is to be given to the landlord on 2 April
3. Each party to bear their own costs.
REASONS FOR DECISION
These reasons are prepared in accordance with section 45 of the
Residential Tribunal Act 1998
. They are prepared from the file of the
Residential Tribunal, notes taken by the member at the hearing and the
member’s recollection.
The proceedings were not sound recorded.
written residential tenancy agreement was entered into between the applicant and
the respondent to occupy premises for the purpose
of a residence. The premises
were described as ... and are situated on the eastern side of ... Road, Upper
Castlereagh and just north
of the international rowing course. The agreement
made on 20/10/91 provided for a fixed term of five years commencing on 19/04/91
and ending on 18/04/96. No provision was made for a rental bond to be paid. The
lease provided that a further five-year term could
be entered into. A second
five-year term was entered into commencing 20/04/96 and ending 19/04/01. The
rent remained unchanged for
both terms at $10 per week. It was agreed at the
hearing no further fixed term agreement had come into existence and the tenancy
was now on a continuing basis.
The landlord gave a notice of termination
dated 26/06/01 that sought vacant possession on 31/08/01. The grounds for this
notice were
based on the provisions of section 58 of the Residential Tenancies
Act 1987 (the Act). The tenants did not give vacant possession
as required in
the notice so the landlord lodged and application with the Tribunal for orders
terminating the residential tenancy
agreement and a date for vacant possession.
The reason for seeking the orders was that the property was required for
planning purposes.
The application was signed and dated 02/10/01 and was
received at the Tribunal on the same day.
The applicant landlord acquired
the land by compulsory acquisition as notified in the Government Gazette 19
April 1991. By deed of
agreement it was to be handed over to the Penrith Lake
Development Corporation (PLDC) when that corporation required it for their
purposes. The PLDC was incorporated in 1978 for the purpose of planning,
researching and developing the Lakes Scheme. The Lakes Scheme
is the staged
extraction of sand and river gravel from lands that are generally situated north
of the Penrith central business district
and straddle the Castlereagh Road. Once
the sand or river gravel has been extracted the site is turned into a lake or
other landform.
The lakes and landforms are then dedicated to the Minister
Administering the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
for recreation
and urban purposes. By deed of agreement between the Minister and the PLDC, made
on 03/12/91, the PLDC would not commence
to win gravel or sand from that part of
the land on which the premises was located until the current lease has ended.
The PLDC entered
into a Profit a Prendre agreement with the Department of Urban
Affairs and Planning (DUAP). It provided,
, for the PLDC to
request the premises be made available to it for the purpose of winning sand and
gravel. This agreement also provided
that where the government impedes/changes
the operations then any extra costs to the PLDC arising from this are to be met
government. The PLDC held the view that this would apply should the
premises remain occupied. On 28 March 2001 the PLDC wrote to
DUAP and requested
the property be given to the PLDC for its purposes.
Mr Ian Stainton, the
chief executive officer of the PLDC, tendered a written statement and gave
evidence at the hearing. He said the
PLDC had excavated a large pit,
McArthy’s Pit, which is situated east of the premises on the other side of
the lake. Ground
water rises in the pit and the corporation has to removes it.
To solve this problem the corporation proposes to fill the pit from
from an adjoining site that came available to the PLDC from Pioneer, the subject
premises and from land further to the
west of Castlereagh Road. The cost of
hauling fill material was said to be $0.045/cub m/100m. The further the distance
to haul the
fill the greater the cost. Once McArthy’s Pit is filled it
will be ultimately be returned to the government for release in
Should the PLDC gain possession of the site certain things have to be done
before the house can be demolished and
overburden stripping can commence. These
things are;
Archeological Assessment (inspection and report) 4
NDHAG survey (estimate 4 weekends) 4 weeks
Collection and
interpretation – photos, salvaging 4 weeks
Relocation of trees 3
Demolition of house 6 weeks
Stripping of overburden 4
In response to questions from the respondent Mr Stainton stated
dewatering of the McArthy Pit commenced in about April 2001 and the
cost of this
is about $2500 per month. The fill from the subject premises will be about one
third of the total required. Once filled
it will take about three years before
the site will suitable for further development.
A plan was shown to Mr
Stainton titled Overburden Stripping. This plan was undated but showed the
subject site was to be stripped
in 2009/10. Mr Stainton’s response to this
was that the manner in which the land was mined varied on a daily basis and the
plan as tendered was not one that was closely followed. Mining may commence in a
particular area but progress could change because
of topography or structures
The respondent identified differences in the evidence of the
applicant as to the quantity of fill that was required for the McArthy
his statement dated 12/12/01, Mr Stainton estimates the amount of overburden
available from the subject premises to be about
97,200 cubic metres but in his
oral evidence he said the amount required was 350,000 cubic metres. In a minute
to Mr Stainton from
Scott Macklin, the PLDC’s Senior Planning Engineer, he
states the amount of overburden available from the site of the premises
The respondent tendered to the Tribunal
written statements from Mr Webster, tenant, and Anita Curtis, solicitor. The
applicant was
given leave to allow questions to these people on the
statements.
Mr Webster was the only tenant who appeared at the hearing.
He tendered a written statement and gave oral evidence. He along with
and sister are the tenants named on the residential tenancy agreement. His
parents purchased the premises in 1951. He
moved out in 1960 when he married.
His father passed away in 1986 and his sister and her husband moved in to stay
with his mother.
His sister later divorced and stayed to look after their
mother. He often stays at the house to spend time with his mother. His sister
stays with his daughter but spends time at the premises to be with her
Mrs Webster is now 89 years old. In mid September 2001 she
suffered a stroke and was admitted to hospital. She was discharged in late
October and is convalescing at Mr Webster’s home. She uses a walking
frame. She is to attend physiotherapy in January 2002.
A letter was tendered
from Dr Reddy to the tenant’s solicitor dated 5 December 2001. He
"To my knowledge Mrs Webster’s wish is to return to her own
to her own home and familiar surroundings to recover quickly.
under a lot of stress and her blood pressure is still high and she needs to be
relocated to her own home."
Mr Webster also believed the tenancy could
continue until such time as Castlereagh Road was closed. The lake will
eventually cross
the road. The road is not to be closed until an alternate road
is constructed. In a letter to Mr Webster on 21 May 2001 the Mayor
City Council said that the PLDC has advised the relocation of Castlereagh Road
has been scheduled to occur at approximately
Mr Webster has
calculated the amount of overburden available from the site to be 41,648 cubic
metres. He also challenged the cost
of dewatering as not being accurate. There
are other pits on the land controlled by the PLDC and the stated cost could
include the
costs of dewatering the other pits.
In regard to the studies
to be carried out before the premises are demolished Mr Webster said he would
cooperate with the various
groups to allow them access. Ms Curtis, the solicitor
from Woolf Associates, gave evidence that she had contacted the Heritage Council
of New South Wales and the Nepean District Historical Archaeology Group. Both
these organisations advised her that a person could
occupy the premises while
they undertook their work.
The Tribunal finds the
notice of termination to be valid. The Act provides that where a tenant fails to
deliver up vacant possession
as specified in the notice, the landlord may within
30 days of that date apply to the Tribunal for an order seeking termination of
the tenancy and vacant possession of the premises. In this matter the date
specified for vacant possession was 31 August 2001. The
application was lodged
on 2 October 2001, which is 32 days after the date of vacant possession, and
outside the time set in the Act.
This point was not raised by either of the
parties. The Tribunal, pursuant to section 74 of the
Residential Tribunal Act
, has power to extend time and in these circumstances does
Where a notice of termination is given under section 58 it is the
task of the Tribunal to determine whether, in the circumstances
of the case, it
is appropriate to make the orders for termination and vacant possession of the
The applicant has argued before the Tribunal that the premises
are required to provide fill for the McArthy Pit as well as provide
gravel. The evidence shows the available sources of fill on the eastern side of
Castlereagh Road to be limited to two sites.
They are the old Pioneer plant site
and the subject premises.
The Tribunal is unable to determine the
quantity of fill available from the site occupied by the premises but it is
satisfied that
any fill east of Castlereagh Road for the McArthy Pit must
include the subject premises. The remainder of the fill must come from
western side of Castlereagh Road. The Tribunal is satisfied the landlord has an
agreement with the PLDC that any delays caused
by the landlord that increases
costs to the PLDC then those increased costs are to be met by the government.
The tribunal is satisfied
the premises are now required for the purpose of the
PLDC and that the least expensive option is to take the fill nearest to the
McArthy Pit which includes the subject premises.
The respondents occupied
the land as owners since 1951 and when the government acquired it they remained
in the premises as tenants.
The period of tenancy is about 11 years. During that
period they have seen their land excavated and the lakes expand to about 50
metres from the back of the house. They paid rent of $10 per week during this
period. Mr Webster has his own residence but stays
at the premises from time to
time to visit his mother. At the time of the hearing no body was living there.
Ms Broom, Mrs Webster’s
daughter, was staying with her niece, Mr
Webster’s daughter. Mrs Webster has lived in the home for about 50 years.
She suffered
a stroke in September and is convalescing at her son’s
residence. Mrs Webster gave no evidence at the hearing and neither did
The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Webster has no need of the
premises as a place to live and no evidence was tendered that satisfies
Tribunal Ms Broom requires the premises as her principal place of
Dr Reddy states " to my knowledge Mrs Webster’s wish is
to return to her home under the care of her daughter". Such a statement
that Dr Reddy has not talked with Mrs Webster about this and he may be relying
on other people for this view. From this he
draws the conclusion that it would
be desirable for Mrs Webster to return to her home to aid in her recovery. This
evidence does
not satisfy the Tribunal that it is essential for Mrs Webster to
In weighing the circumstances of the tenants
against those of the landlord and in consideration of the evidence before it the
is satisfied the tenancy should come to an end. The Tribunal, having
regard to the length of the tenancy and the period of occupation
of the premises
by the respondents, extends the date for vacant possession.
Tribunal orders;
1. Time is extended to bring this
application.
2. The tenancy is terminated and vacant possession is to be
given to the landlord on 2 April 2001.
3. Each party to bear their own
Residential Tribunal
18 February
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter