URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Michael (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 2; (12 March 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Michael (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 2
Hearing Date(s):
12 March 2025
Date of Orders:
12 March 2025
Decision Date:
12 March 2025
Guardianship Division
K A McMahon, Senior Member (Legal)
Dr M J Wroth, Senior Member
(Professional)
D R Sword, General Member (Community)
1. The estate of Michael is subject to management under the
NSW Trustee and
Guardian Act 2009
2. The management of the estate of Michael is
committed to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Catchwords:
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – subject person is 57-year-old and is diagnosed
with early onset dementia –– subject person
is incapable of managing
his affairs due to cognitive difficulties ––need for a financial
management order despite enduring
power of attorney – who should be
appointed as financial manager – need for independent management –
estate committed
to the NSW Trustee and Guardian
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Guardianship
Cases Cited:
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
[2015] NSWSC
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
[2013] NSWSC 1495
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2003] NSWSC 819
[2013] NSWSC 1223
[2012] NSWSC 1006
Re W and L (Parameters of Protected Estate Management
[2014] NSWSC 1106
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Financial Management Application
Michael (the
Rebecca (applicant)
Logan (attorney, joined party)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
M Streeter as Separate Representative
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00386893
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a 57-year-old man of Macedonian heritage. He is diagnosed with early onset
is separated from his former spouse, Pauline. They have four children, Elise,
Logan, Mathew and Tim. Michael’s parents
are Hank and Marcella. Michael
has a sister, Rebecca.
no disrespect but to assist in ease of reference, we will refer to Michael and
his family members by their first names in
these reasons.
a progressive breakdown in the marital relationship, Pauline left the family
Pauline, Michael continued to reside
in the family home. Hank and Marcella own, and have also resided at, this
five years ago, Elise moved into a unit owned by Michael and Pauline in South
Sydney. In late 2024, Logan got married and has
moved into a duplex owned by
Michael and Pauline in Inner Southwest Sydney. Mathew and Tim continue to reside
at the family home.
years ago, Hank purchased a unit in Macedonia. The unit is in
Michael’s name and is unoccupied. Around 12 months ago, Hank
transferred
another property which he owned in Inner West Sydney to Rebecca.
2024, Michael made a number of enduring powers of attorney and enduring
guardianship appointments as follows:
(1) On 9 July 2024, he appointed Rebecca as his attorney, and his friend,
Vincent, and niece, Charlotte, jointly as his substitute
(2) On 9 July 2024, he appointed Rebecca as his attorney, and Vincent and
Charlotte jointly as substitute attorneys.
(3) On 19 September 2024, he appointed Logan as his attorney (general power).
(4) On 10 October 2024, he revoked the enduring power of attorney and enduring
guardianship appointments made on 9 July 2024.
(5) On 26 November 2024, he appointed Logan with enduring power of attorney.
are differences of view as between Michael’s children, on the one hand,
and Rebecca and Hank, on the other, as to the
management of Michael’s
financial affairs. In the context of their competing attempts to provide support
to Michael, their
relationship has broken down and conflict has arisen within
the family.
18 October 2024, the Tribunal received an application from Rebecca for a
financial management order for Michael. Rebecca expresses
concern about the
management of Michael’s assets and his interests in a family law property
settlement with Pauline. She states
that Michael is without income, that he is
dependent on financial support from Hank, and is at risk of his estate not being
effectively
managed to ensure that he has funds for future care.
The hearing
the end of these Reasons for Decision are lists of the parties to the
application and the witnesses who attended the hearing [Appendix
removed for
publication.]
General Principles
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) provides as follows:
4 General Principles
It is the duty of everyone exercising functions under this Act with respect to
persons who have disabilities to observe the following
principles:
(a) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given
paramount consideration,
(b) the freedom of decision and freedom of action of such
persons should be restricted as little as possible,
(c) such persons should be encouraged as far as possible, to
live a normal life in the community,
(d) the views of such persons in relation to those functions
should be taken into consideration,
(e) the importance of preserving the family relationships and
the cultural and linguistic environments of such persons should
recognised,
(f) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to
be self-reliant in matters relating to their personal, domestic
and financial
(g) such person should be protected from neglect, abuse and
exploitation,
(h) the community should be encouraged to apply and promote
these principles.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) provides as
36 Guiding principle to be applied to practice and procedure
... The “guiding principle” for this Act and the
procedural rules, in their application to proceedings in the Tribunal,
facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings.
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions to be considered by the Tribunal are:
(1) Is Michael incapable of managing his affairs?
(2) Is there a need for another person to manage Michael’s affairs and is
it in his best interests for a financial management
order to be made?
(3) If so, who should be appointed financial manager?
Issues and Evidence
were provided with statements and submissions from Rebecca, Logan, and third
parties, health professional reports, financial documents,
and other material
relating to Michael’s estate and property settlement. The material
provided addresses issues relating to
family history and relationships over many
years. For the purposes of providing these reasons, we do not detail all the
but do so as necessary to determine the application before us.
is not in issue as between Michael’s family members that he requires
either an appointed attorney or a financial manager
due to the progression of
his dementia. The issue more in dispute between them is who that should be.
Health professionals’ evidence
a report dated 1 July 2024, Dr Doe, Geriatrician, states to the effect
(1) Michael has significant cognitive impairment with a Mini-Mental State
Examination (MMSE) score of only 21/30 and Alzheimer’s
pathology confirmed
on a PET scan. His cognitive impairment is likely due to early onset
Alzheimer’s dementia.
(2) He demonstrates an inability to retain important information regarding his
finances and is unable to make informed decisions.
Michael is at risk of being
financially exploited and is not able to manage complicated financial issues
relating to his divorce.
The stress and depression arising from his traumatic
divorce may be a contributing factor but is less likely.
(3) Michael demonstrates that he had the ability to appoint persons to act on
his behalf in relation to financial and lifestyle choices.
He consistently
expressed his wish for his father and sister to take up these roles.
Jane, Clinical Neuropsychologist, assessed Michael in September 2024. In her
report, Dr Jane states to the effect that:
(1) Michael was stressed and worried about the enduring power of attorney and
guardianship that he had recently assigned to his sister.
He expressed wanting
to change it to his four children because his sister is “not a good
person” and “has other
agendas”. Michael was unable to explain
why he had assigned an enduring power of attorney to his sister given his
complex relationship
(2) Neuropsychological assessment is consistent with Michael having
Alzheimer’s disease. He has deficits in his ability to
information and retain it, with his visuospatial functioning, language, and with
his executive function. He has difficulty
with reasoning, arithmetic, mental
flexibility, inhibition, planning, and with problem solving.
(3) In terms of his decision-making capacity, Michael displays widespread
cognitive impairment and has had a recent history of inconsistency
vulnerability in terms of financial decision-making.
(4) Michael’s insight into the extent of his cognitive difficulties is
extremely limited.
(5) He will benefit from the support of a substitute decision-maker. There is
significant conflict around his enduring power of attorney
appointments. The
appointment of a financial manager may be of more benefit to him.
Michael’s financial affairs
the basis of the documents provided and the oral evidence at the
(1) Michael previously worked as a facility manager for around 12 years and as
an insurance manager for around 21 years. He stopped
working around four years
ago. His dementia is progressing. It is unlikely that he will be able to be
employed again.
(2) Currently, he has no income other than some money his father provides to
him. He does not contribute to bills at the family home.
Expenses such rates,
utilities, and household groceries are covered by his father.
(3) Michael is not in receipt of any social security payments, such as Newstart
or a Disability Support Pension. He has superannuation
but has not accessed
this. He may be able to make a claim for total and permanent disability.
(4) The duplex in Inner Southwest Sydney is not subdivided and comprises two
units. One of the units is occupied by Logan and the
other unit is rented out.
Michael and Pauline have a mortgage on the duplex. A significant amount is still
owing on the mortgage,
roughly in the vicinity of $500,000.
(5) Logan states that he is paying $400 a week rent for the unit in Inner
Southwest Sydney. There is no formal lease. The unit requires
repairs including
damage to the balcony. He is assisting with the repairs. The other unit is
leased out for $700 per week, but he
states it is in a better condition.
(6) Elise does not pay rent at the South Sydney unit. However, she helps to pay
the bills such as the rates and strata fees, utilities,
and some repairs.
(7) For at least several years, Pauline has been primarily responsible for
managing financial matters relating to the joint assets
and income, liabilities
of the marriage, and management of their bank accounts.
(8) The unit in in Macedonia, is unoccupied and not generating any income. The
unit was used recently by Rebecca’s daughter
and her friends for a period
of time whilst they were travelling on holiday in Europe.
(9) Rebecca states that Hank purchased the Macedonia property for all the
family, although it is in Michael’s name.
(10) Around 12 months ago, Hank transferred a property that he owned in Inner
West Sydney to Rebecca. He states that he did this
“so she can help
[Michael]”.
Property settlement
focus of Rebecca’s application relates to concerns that Michael’s
interests be protected in relation to a property settlement
with Pauline. Dr Doe
states that Rebecca reported that Michael had been forgetful and anxious around
this process, and concerns about
Michael’s inability to make decisions.
2024, Rebecca assisted Michael to instruct Law Firm A. In evidence are copies of
correspondence between them and Law Firm B who
are representing Pauline and
advice provided to Michael in relation to a settlement. No court proceedings are
on foot. However, Law
Firm A have sought that both Michael and Pauline provide
financial disclosure to assist in a settlement.
states this process was halted by the intervention of Michael’s children
who have arranged for him to instruct other
lawyers, Law Firm C. She states that
Pauline is influencing her children to Michael’s detriment. Rebecca states
that she is
motivated to protect the interests of Michael and his children.
children in turn allege that Rebecca has improperly influenced Michael. They
state that she has acted unilaterally
and is motivated to protect her own
interests, for example, in relation to the Macedonia property and her
inheritance.
have been discussions within the family about whether, and to what extent, the
assets of Michael and Pauline should be liquidated,
how this should occur, and
how this will impact on the financial interests of their children. There are
competing concerns expressed
and divided views within the family.
it appears that any property settlement is in a state of
Enduring guardianship and enduring power of attorney
appointments
are competing allegations that Michael was unduly influenced to make the various
appointments and revocation of appointments
during 2024.
states that Michael sought her assistance, and that the enduring guardianship
and enduring power of attorney appointments,
done on 9 July 2024, were further
to legal advice and following Dr Doe’s assessment. She relies upon Dr
Doe’s assessment
and the views expressed by Michael, which are supportive
of him wanting her help and to appoint her as his attorney and his guardian.
Logan takes issues that her appointment accords with Michael’s wishes.
copy of the enduring power of attorney dated 9 July 2024 is before us. There is
no irregularity on the face of the document. It
is duly witnessed by a
solicitor, Kate, who certifies that she explained the effect of the enduring
power of attorney to Michael
and that he understood it.
in evidence is Michael’s revocation of this appointment and subsequent
general power of attorney and enduring power of
attorney appointments made by
him, following him changing lawyers to Law Firm C.
evidence is a detailed correspondence from Law Firm C setting out the
circumstances of these appointments and the views expressed
by Michael.
copy of the enduring power of attorney dated 26 November 2024 is in evidence.
There is no irregularity on the face of the document,
and it is duly witnessed
by a solicitor, James, who certifies that he explained the effect of the
enduring power of attorney to Michael
and he understood it.
Firm C, state that they conferred at length with Michael and that he expressed,
on several occasions, his concerns about appointing
Rebecca as his attorney, and
his intention that he would prefer to appoint Logan instead.
Streeter queried Michael’s capacity to make any of the 2024 appointments.
He submitted the evidence did not establish that
Michael had the requisite
degree of understanding required to make the enduring powers of attorneys,
noting that the degree of understanding
required will vary with the extent and
complexity of the maker’s affairs. In this case, Michael’s affairs
are complex,
particularly with regard to his multiple property interests and
intermingling interests with family members (See
Szozda v Szozda
NSWSC 804).
In Mr Streeter’s view, Dr Doe did not apply the right test to
assess his capacity.
interactions with Michael at the hearing were consistent with the evidence of Dr
Doe and Dr Jane, that he has cognitive impairment
arising from dementia. He had
evident memory deficits, word finding difficulty, and difficulty with his verbal
expression. Michael’s
evidence indicates in effect that:
(1) He has difficulty recalling details of any past or current enduring power of
attorney appointments, and whether he wanted changes
to be made.
(2) He appeared to express a preference for Logan to be his attorney.
(3) He does not want Rebecca to be involved in his affairs. She has intimidated
and stalked him, and has previously said she will
(4) Whilst aware that he has ownership of properties in South Sydney, Inner
Southwest Sydney, and Macedonia, he is uncertain of whether
he held properties
jointly, receives any rental income, and all of the details of their occupation.
He is aware that family members
occupy properties. He wants to leave a legacy
for his children. Together, as a family, he states that they can work this
(5) His father meets his day-to-day expenses and is currently “his
(6) His superannuation is for when he passes away and for his family.
(7) He agrees that he has dementia, which is “now part of his life,”
however, at this time, “he is confident”
in his ability to manage
his affairs. There are no major financial decisions that are necessary to make
at this time.
(8) When we asked about whether his affairs with his ex-wife were settled, he
said that he is “not fully aware, but we have
spoken,” and that
“he needs help and advice to sort this out,” but thinks that it
“can be sorted”.
the basis of Mr Streeter’s submission, his interactions with Michael prior
to the hearing were also consistent with him not
having a sound appreciation of
his income, assets, and liabilities. For example, Michael thought that his unit
in South Sydney was
worth around $30,000 and his unit in Macedonia around 150
Euros. In relation to any family law settlement, he stated nothing needs
done. Michael expressed a preference for Logan, and not Rebecca, to be his
Family relationships
is not in issue that:
(1) Michael and Rebecca have had a tumultuous relationship at times.
(2) There was an incident in 2013 whereby Rebecca made a threat to Michael
during a telephone call. Following this, Michael made
an application for an
Apprehended Domestic Violence Order (ADVO) against Rebecca.
(3) The ADVO application was withdrawn and dismissed following an agreement
reached by Michael and Rebecca at a Community Justice
Centre, which included
that they would not have contact.
(4) There was a period of estrangement between Michael and Rebecca for around 10
years. They have been more reconnected, however,
from around 2016.
(5) There have been difficulties and tension in the relationship between Rebecca
and Pauline over the years.
(6) Issues arising in the relationship between Rebecca, Michael, and Pauline has
impacted on the amount of contact that Rebecca has
had with Michael’s
children. In recent years, however, they have been more reconnected.
(7) Some of the issues causing tension within the family relate to arrangements
with Hank and Marcella, and there are competing allegations
made about their
children accessing funds from them.
(8) The relationship between Rebecca and Michael’s children has
deteriorated, particularly due to events arising during 2024
and in the context
of Michael’s decline and steps taken by them in response.
(9) Since around September 2024, Rebecca has not been in direct contact with
Michael. Michael is stating that he does not want contact
states in effect that:
(1) Although her relationship with Michael has had its ups and downs, they have
a close bond stemming from their childhood and their
sibling relationship.
(2) During significant periods such as the COVID-19 lockdowns, Michael began
reaching out to her more frequently and they began reconnecting.
(3) Michael reached out following disclosure of the breakdown of his marriage
and sought out her support from late 2022. Other family
members were not doing
enough to support him at this time.
(4) She was active in arranging for medical assessments and other supports and
sought to involve Michael’s children. It is
not the case that she sought
to exclude them, and she wants to continue to involve them in decisions.
(5) Michael’s children have misunderstood her intentions and the steps she
has taken to support Michael and have now influenced
him against her.
(6) Her motive and commitment have been, and continues to be, Michael’s
wellbeing, and to ensure his welfare now and in the
longer term.
states in effect that:
(1) Rebecca has not been a stable presence in his family’s life but a
disruptive one. Mainly, there has been estrangement and
periods of no contact.
She is domineering and manipulative, and causes Michael a lot of stress.
(2) Rebecca is not primarily motivated to protect Michael’s interests but
rather her own. She showed her “true colours”
by “going behind
their backs” and pressuring Michael to appoint her as his attorney.
She failed to consult with Michael’s
children about this and the
other steps she has taken.
(3) Rebecca seeks to undermine Michael’s relationships with his children.
Her suggestion that his children have not consistently
supported him is
incorrect. They did arrange medical assessments and other supports.
(4) It is best that Rebecca has no further involvement in Michael’s
(5) His motivation has been, and continues to be, Michael’s wellbeing and
to ensure his welfare now and in the longer term.
views expressed by Michael’s other children are consistent with
the documents provided is a statement from Pauline and other members of
Michael’s extended family and friends. This
is consistent with there being
divided views and a history of conflict in the family. Consistent with this also
is the evidence of
the family members at the hearing.
evidence indicates that:
(1) He provides a lot of financial support to Michael.
(2) Michael needs help to make financial decisions due to his dementia.
(3) Rebecca should be the one to help Michael to manage his finances.
(4) There are complex issues within the family about properties. He said:
“everything is complex and mixed up in our situation”.
(5) Pauline should not be involved in making financial decisions for Michael.
Is Michael incapable of managing his affairs?
[2012] NSWSC 1006
, White J assessed the history of case law in
relation to financial management and noted that initially the issue of
capability was
approached by referring to hypothetical or abstract notions of
the ordinary affairs of man. However, the Court now assesses the person’s
own capacity to do what they are proposing to do [58]. White J used a
“rational appreciation” of assets test to determine
capability to manage his or her affairs. He adopts the reasoning of Barrett J in
[2003] NSWSC 819
who said that the task of the Court in these
circumstances:
“... is to make a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the person
concerned to cope with the ordinary routine affairs
of living, particularly so
far as they concern the person’s property...the requisite judgment is to
be made in the light of
objective physical facts concerning the relevant
person’s property, money and other assets and the way the person is able
look after them. If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does not
matter [26].”
[2013] NSWSC 1223
, Justice Lindsay confirmed that the question
focuses attention on the special circumstances of the person. His Honour stated
“Of central significance is the functionality of management capacity of
the person said to be incapable of managing his or
her affairs, not: (a) his or
her status as a person who may, or may not, lack ‘mental capacity’
or be ‘mentally
ill’; or (b) particular reasons for an incapacity
for self-management.”
test for determining a person’s capability to manage his or her affairs
has been described as follows (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
, [307]-[308]):
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his or her own affairs in a
reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of
a [financial manager]
charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and interests?”
“[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with
(making and implementing decisions about) his or her own
affairs (person and
property, capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with
due regard to his or her present
and prospective wants and needs, and those of
family and friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense,
consideration may be given to:
(1) past and present experience as a predictor of the future course of
(2) support systems available to the person; and
(3) the extent to which the person, placed as he or she is, can be relied upon
to make sound judgments about his or her welfare and
interests: see Lindsay J in
[2015] NSWSC 498
, [38]; and
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
relevant time for considering whether a person is incapable of managing his or
her affairs is not merely the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
at 86). See Lindsay J in
L (Parameters of Protected Estate Management Orders)
[2014] NSWSC 1106
from Michael, the consensus of view expressed by Rebecca, Hank, Logan, Elise,
Tim, and Mathew is that Michael is incapable of
managing his financial
affairs. This is consistent with the suitably qualified and independent expert
opinion of Dr Doe and Dr Jane.
Whilst Michael agrees that he has dementia, he
states that he is confident in his ability to manage his affairs at this time.
interactions with Michael were consistent, however, with him not having a
reasonable appreciation of his income, assets, and liabilities,
and what needs
to be done to manage his affairs, or an ability to exercise sound judgement. Dr
Jane’s assessment is that Michael’s
insight into the extent of his
cognitive difficulties is extremely limited and he demonstrates inconsistency
and vulnerability. We
were satisfied that Michael is incapable of managing his
financial affairs.
Is there a need for a financial management
order and is it in Michael’s best interests that the order be
was not in issue as between Michael’s family members that he requires
either an appointed attorney or a financial manager
due to the progression of
his dementia. The issue more in dispute between them is who that should be.
appointment under the enduring power of attorney dated 9 July 2024 has been
revoked. In her application, Rebecca sought
an order appointing herself as
Michael’s financial manager. We will consider this later in our
considered whether we should dismiss the application on the basis that Logan is
able to act as Michael’s attorney under the
enduring power of attorney
appointment dated 26 November 2024. We decided not to do this having regard to
the following considerations:
(1) Logan states that Michael had capacity to appoint him under the enduring
power of attorney dated 9 November 2024, and that this
appointment should
be respected. The detailed evidence from Law Firm C as to the circumstances of
the appointment weighs in favour
of this view.
(2) However, more persuasive is the evidence of Dr Doe and Dr Jane which details
Michael’s significant cognitive impairment
and his recent history of
inconsistency and vulnerability in terms of his financial decision-making.
(3) Whilst Michael appointed Logan on 9 November 2024, he appointed Rebecca a
relatively short time earlier on 9 July 2024. This
enduring power of attorney is
duly witnessed by Kate, Solicitor. We accept Dr Doe’s evidence that
Michael was expressing a
preference for Rebecca at this time. He later expresses
being stressed about this to Dr Jane.
(4) Whilst we consider there is merit in Mr Streeter’s submission that
Michael did not have capacity to make either of these
enduring power of attorney
appointments, and given the complexity of his affairs, our decision does not
turn on a finding regarding
whether or not he had capacity. Of greater concern
is Logan’s capacity to act as an attorney in his best interests.
(5) Our interactions with Michael at the hearing were consistent with
him wanting Logan to manage his affairs. This is an important
consideration. However, this is also outweighed by our concerns about
Logan’s capacity to act as his attorney.
(6) It is not in issue that Logan has progressed well with his education,
qualifications, and his professional career as a physiotherapist.
He presented as capable and committed to Michael’s welfare. Logan has
the support of his siblings and wants to have regard
for Michael’s
(7) Mr Streeter did not support us dismissing the application on the basis that
Logan can act as attorney. We agreed with his submission
that essentially it is
too difficult for Logan to navigate a path prioritising Michael’s best
interest when there are competing
financial interests of his own, his mother,
his siblings, his grandparents, and also his aunt.
(8) As submitted by Mr Streeter, Logan did not demonstrate that he is able to
manage the competing and conflicting interests within
the family. He did not
demonstrate an ability to manage his own conflict of interest.
(9) Logan has a conflict of interest arising from his occupation of the Inner
Southwest Sydney unit, however, his evidence does not
sufficiently demonstrate
insight into this, or an ability to manage a conflict of interest moving
forward. He said that “he
is happy to pay more rent if this is an
issue”. When we asked him how this would be decided, he said “it
would be decided
by his parents”.
(10) Similarly, Logan considers that financial issues relating to Elise’s
occupation of the South Sydney unit can also be worked
out through discussion
with his parents, and respecting their views that she lives there.
(11) Logan states that what “[Michael] and [Pauline] and their children
all want is a 50/50 split of assets to avoid unnecessary
legal costs associated
with the divorce”. As detailed in his evidence, Logan states that a plan
can be worked out to split
assets and to generate income for Michael.
(12) Significantly, the thrust of Michael’s evidence is that a property
settlement between his parents is a simple matter.
He expresses a clear view
that no further legal advice is required. In our view, however, even on the
basis of Logan’s evidence,
it is not a simple matter. There are multiple
properties involved, a significant mortgage on the Inner Southwest Sydney
duplex, and
family members occupy properties. There are decisions required as to
the split of assets, whether assets should be liquidated, if
so, in what order,
and how this should be done.
(13) Logan said that his view that it should be 50/50 was not informed by legal
advice. Instead, it was based on an agreement reached
within the family.
(14) Logan expresses a clear view that the Macedonia property can be sold as a
first step to provide income for Michael. However,
as noted by Rebecca, this may
not be a straightforward process and it is in Macedonia. He states that other
properties should be
(15) We accept Rebecca’s concern that securing an income for Michael is a
pressing matter. Her evidence that the property settlement
has stalled at the
stage where Pauline was asked by Law Firm A to provide financial disclosure but
has not done so is consistent
with the legal correspondence provided. Some
months have progressed since then.
(16) As noted by Mr Streeter, there are pressing matters in relation to securing
an income for Michael and Michael’s potential
entitlement to disability
benefits and insurance. Despite his assets, Michael is without income and is
reliant upon the support being
provided by Hank, including for his basic daily
(17) In some respects, Logan’s evidence indicated a lack of proactivity
and/or reliance upon Pauline and her management of
the marital assets. For
example, in relation to the issue of insurance on the South Sydney and
Inner Southwest Sydney properties,
he would need to ask his mother as he does
(18) We had concerns about Logan’s ability to distinguish between
Michael’s ability to express views and his capacity
to make decisions.
Logan said that Michael’s dementia was at an early stage. He said that he
should follow Michael’s
wishes about his properties and about his property
settlement. This is despite the evidence of the health professionals regarding
Michael’s significant cognitive impairment, his lack of capacity, and his
lack of insight.
(19) Proceeding on this basis of placing too great an emphasis on
Michael’s expressed wishes, engenders too great a risk for
Michael in view
of his age, his significant disability, vulnerability, and likely future care
(20) Further, in assessing what is in Michael’s best interests, it is
important that we have regard to the views of Hank, who
is his father and his
carer. Hank did not express support for Michael’s finances being managed
by Logan, but rather a preference
for Rebecca and a concern about Pauline.
(21) The suggestion that we should not place weight on Hank’s views as
Rebecca is forceful and manipulative of her parents
is not persuasive. Hank
presented as well able to express his views. His observation that
“everything is complex and mixed
up in our situation” is most
(22) It is unlikely that Logan will be able to objectively consult with and have
regard to the views of Hank and Rebecca. Indeed,
Logan makes clear that he wants
Rebecca to have no involvement whatsoever. He has fixed views as to her and
motives and the Macedonia
property. We accept, however, that whilst Rebecca and
Michael have had periods of estrangement, in recent times, they have been more
connected and he was wanting her support.
whilst Logan proposed that he act as an attorney, he was open to a financial
management order being made. He was open to
the NSW Trustee and Guardian (NSWTG)
being appointed. His main concern and that of his siblings was that Rebecca not
be appointed
under an order as Michael’s financial manager.
regard to all these considerations, we were satisfied there is a need for a
financial management order and that this is in
Michael’s best
Who should be appointed as financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act
, the Tribunal must act with the interests of the person
concerned as the paramount consideration, and in accordance with the other
principles set out in
of that Act.
Guardianship Act
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a
financial management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the
estate or may commit the management of the estate to the NSWTG.
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
then Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of
The NSWTG now exercises the role of the Protective Commissioner.
the side of the then Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest
independence of the statutory office, the advantages of
a dispassionate and
neutral approach in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the
best interests of the person, expertise
and experience in managing estates, an
impeccable reputation, and the security provided to an estate against loss or
advantages of the appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (that is, less fees), a greater
familiarity with assets and
liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a disability
to interact with the
manager so as to exercise a greater influence over the
broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection for,
knowledge of, the protected person and concern for his or her quality of life,
and particular qualities or qualifications enabling
family members to act as
Court considered that interrelated property interests in a family situation,
where a conflict of interest and duty may be “more
apparent than
real,” should not necessarily present an absolute bar to appointment of a
family member who is otherwise appropriate.
However, when appointing a family
member, a decision-maker must be satisfied that the estate, income, and capital
assets will be
utilised to advance the interests and quality of life of a
protected person rather than to eventually increase the assets of the
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
, Hallen AsJ stated at
“It would be unwise to attempt any definition of the matters that may
legitimately be enquired into to determine whether the
applicant is suitable.
Each case must depend on its own circumstances. Needless to say, however, the
Court must consider, at least,
the proposed manager’s character, honesty
and ability to manage, diligently, the managed person’s property in the
person’s best interests.”
matters or “guidelines” that should be considered when determining
who to appoint as financial manager, as established
Holt & Anor v
Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, are discussed and expanded upon
by Lindsay J in
[2013] NSWSC 1495
gave consideration to whether we should appoint Rebecca but decided that it is
in Michael’s best interests that we appoint
the NSWTG because:
(1) Whilst Rebecca asked that we consider her for appointment, this does not
accord with Michael’s currently expressed views,
and he does not want to
have contact with her at this time. Rebecca acknowledges that these are
significant factors and will make
it difficult for her to do the role.
(2) Rebecca states that she and Michael have had a tumultuous relationship over
the years. She agrees that she made a threat to kill
him which led to the ADVO
application but that this was not serious threat. Rather, it was something said
in the heat of the moment
when they were arguing.
(3) She states that they had since reconnected, particularly so since 2022, and
that she has become an important source of support
with the challenges he is
facing with his cognitive decline and his divorce. She states that she helped
him access health care, a
lawyer to update his superannuation nomination, and
with other tasks. She attributes the subsequent breakdown in their relationship
to misunderstandings of his children regarding her motives and Pauline’s
influence on them. She states that they have now influenced
Michael against her.
(4) When we asked her how she would approach the role of financial manager in
circumstances where Michael is not wanting contact
with her, she said that she
would work on building her relationships with his children, which she states in
turn will improve Michael’s
views of her. Whilst we accept her evidence on
this issue is well intentioned, it is not realistic given the strength of their
views currently. In any event, it will likely take time and delay, which
is contrary to Michael’s interests given the pressing
matters that need to
be addressed. As matters stand, she is not able to constructively consult with
Michael or his children.
(5) Further, as submitted by Mr Streeter, Rebecca also has a conflict of
interest if she is appointed. Whilst her evidence at the
hearing is that she is
not opposed to the Macedonia property being sold, Rebecca has also stated that
Hank purchased the property
for all the family, although it is in
Michael’s name. Her daughter and friends have stayed at the property.
There are also
issues of contention arising from the transfer by Hank of the
property in Inner West Sydney around 12 months ago. Hank states that
he did this
so that Rebecca “can help [Michael]”. Whilst we accept that she is
genuinely concerned for Michael’s
interests and his welfare, it is
apparent also that she is concerned about the financial interests of her
parents, and the viability
and appropriateness of their financial support to
(6) Rebecca also raises the issue of funds provided by Hank to Michael and
Pauline, and to their children over the years. As noted
by Mr Streeter,
this potentially raises issues relevant to a property settlement between Michael
and Pauline. Logan raises issues
of funds provided by Hank to Rebecca over the
years as well, thus complicating her role, if appointed.
(7) A further reason not to appoint Rebecca is that the focus of her concerns is
Michael’s property settlement with Pauline,
rather than a longer-term role
in managing Michael’s financial affairs. She states in effect that she
envisaged handing over
the reins to his children once this was resolved.
(8) These factors outweigh Michael’s previously expressed view reflected
in his decision to appoint her and the evidence as
to her suitability by reason
of her professional experience and background.
(9) Whilst asking that we appoint her, she was also open to the appointment of
sought Michael’s view as to whether we should make a financial management
order appointing the NSWTG. He said that he was
not sure and appeared to have
difficulty with his ability to comprehend information and being able to express
his views. We accept,
however, that the thrust of Michael’s evidence is
more to express his preference that Logan manage his affairs. This is an
important factor for us to consider.
gave consideration to whether we should appoint Logan as Michael’s
financial manager. Having regard to the matters outlined
earlier in these
reasons, we had concerns as to his suitability to be appointed.
We considered that the matters raising concern about
his capacity to act as
attorney were applicable also to his capacity to act as Michael’s
financial manager. In our view, the
supervision of the NSWTG would not
sufficiently guard against the risk that Michael’s best interests will not
be sufficiently
prioritised in decisions.
consider that it is in Michael’s best interests to have the NSWTG
appointed. The NSWTG is independent and has expertise in
managing estates. It is
of benefit that they are appointed in circumstances of conflict and divided
views within the family. The
NSWTG is able to objectively consult and have
regard to the views of Michael and his family members, as appropriate. This
in all the relevant information being available to ensure that decisions
are made in Michael’s best interests. The appointment
of the NSWTG as an
independent manager is likely to assist in preserving family relationships. The
NSWTG is able to make decisions
objectively and in Michael’s best
the appointment of the NSWTG will result in greater fees being incurred, this
factor is outweighed by other factors that we
have identified.
accordingly committed the management of Michael’s estate to the
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter