URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2017/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Graham [2017] NSWMHRT 5; (16 May 2017)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO GRAHAM AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
20 JULY 2017
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2017] NSWMHRT 5
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Ms Judith Walker
Deputy President
Dr John Basson
Psychiatrist
Mr Peter Champion
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
16 March 2017 (adjourned)
13 Apirl 2017
MSPC Long Bay Correction Centre
APPLICATION:
Amended Conditional Release Order
1. Having reviewed Mr Graham, pursuant to
sections 46
Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
, the Tribunal orders that Mr Graham is
released subject to the conditions set out below.
2. Mr Graham is to be discharged from Long Bay Correctional Centre as soon as
practicable following the issuing of this order, on
a date to be determined by
the Governor/General Manager or delegate having regard to Mr Graham’s care
and treatment needs including,
but not limited to:
mental state;
availability of accommodation; and
availability of services in the community upon release.
3. If Mr Graham is not discharged within three (3) months of the issuing of
the order, the Tribunal will hold a further review to
consider the reasons for
4. While Mr Graham remains in Long Bay Correctional Centre, he will obey all
directions of the Governor/General Manager or delegate
as to medication,
attendance at appointments, tests for the taking of medication or other
substances, and leave of absence from that
5. Mr Graham is to accept Ms A and Mr B, of the local Community Mental Health
Service as his case managers. He shall be managed by
the case managers in
accordance with the NSW Ministry of Health
Guidelines for Forensic and
Correctional Patient Ground Access, Leave, Handover, Transfer, and Release
(PD2012_50).
6. Mr Graham shall meet with one of his case managers, either at his home or
at the local Community Mental Health Service. The case
managers will decide how
often these meetings will take place, and where they are to take place.
7. Mr Graham is to participate in any education, training, rehabilitation,
recreational, therapeutic, or other programmes which his
case managers asks him
8. Mr Graham must attend a mental health facility if directed to do so by his
case manager or psychiatrist.
forensic patient may also be scheduled and taken to a mental health facility
Mental Health Act 2007
9. The case manager may nominate a delegate to act as case manager in his or
her place from time to time.
Psychiatrist
10. Mr Graham is to accept Dr R of the Goulburn Community Mental Health
Service as his treating psychiatrist. He shall be managed
by the treating
psychiatrist in accordance with the NSW Ministry of Health
Guidelines for
Forensic and Correctional Patient Ground Access, Leave, Handover, Transfer, and
(PD2012_50).
11. Mr Graham shall meet the treating psychiatrist at the local Community
Mental Health Service. The treating psychiatrist can nominate
an alternative
venue for the meetings to occur. The treating psychiatrist will decide how often
the meetings will take place.
12. Mr Graham is to accept the medication and other treatment prescribed by
his treating psychiatrist. He shall take the medication
in the way prescribed by
the treating psychiatrist.
13. If the psychiatrist is concerned about Mr Graham’s mental state,
the psychiatrist may direct him to attend a mental health
facility and seek
admission to that facility as a voluntary patient. Mr Graham must immediately
comply with that direction.
forensic patient may also be scheduled and taken to a mental health facility
Mental Health Act 2007
14. The treating psychiatrist may nominate a delegate to act as treating
psychiatrist from time to time.
Community Justice Program
15. Mr Graham shall engage with and accept the supervision, support, and
programs provided to him as part of his involvement with
the Community Justice
Program (CJP) through his CJP clinical consultant, Mr L or delegate and other
CJP staff involved in his support
and will comply with all reasonable directions
from those persons.
Drugs and Alcohol
16. The only mind or mood altering drugs that Mr Graham is to consume are
those prescribed by the treating psychiatrist or regular
registered medical
practitioner.
17. Mr Graham must not take any illegal drugs or substances (or legal
synthetic versions of illegal drugs).
18. Mr Graham must not consume any alcohol.
19. Mr Graham must promptly submit to any test for the detection of the use
of drugs and substances, including alcohol, as shall be
requested from time to
time by Mr Graham’s case manager. These tests may be administered randomly
at the discretion of the
case manager.
Accommodation
20. Mr Graham is to live at XX, an Intensive Residential Support (IRS)
accommodation site operated by Lifestyle Solutions (‘XX
IRS’). If he
wishes to live at another address, he must first obtain approval from the
Tribunal at a review hearing.
21. Mr Graham must comply with the protocols and house rules of the XX IRS
which apply to clients’ accommodation, safety and
support at the site.
22. Mr Graham must comply with the management and behaviour support plans
developed for him by Lifestyle Solutions and CJP staff.
In particular, he must
not leave the XX IRS except for the purpose of appointments, activities or other
visits organised in the community
by the IRS staff and must be transported to
such appointments, activities or visits by IRS staff. He must accept
line-of-sight supervision
by IRS staff at all times on these excursions away
from the XX IRS.
23. Mr Graham to comply with all reasonable direction from XX IRS staff,
including attending scheduled appointments or emergency treatment
with health,
mental health and other service providers and medication administration as
prescribed to him by his GP, other health
or mental health provider.
24. Mr Graham may not travel interstate, except for the Australian Capital
Territory (ACT) on scheduled outings with IRS staff, or
overseas without first
obtaining the written approval of the President or a Deputy President of the
25. Mr Graham must not engage in unlawful conduct or conduct that could give
rise to a reasonable apprehension that the safety of
himself or of any member of
the public is, or could be, seriously endangered.
26. Mr Graham must not approach or otherwise seek to initiate any
interactions with any children under the age of 16. This includes
frequenting any areas (e.g. schools, parks, etc.) during periods where there is
reason to suspect there would be presence of
children under the age of 16 (e.g.
schools during school hours, parks on school holidays or after school,
27. Mr Graham is restrained from using the internet or any type of telephone
except in the presence of a staff member of the XX IRS,
his case manager or
treating psychiatrist, and only for the purpose of communicating with family and
friends and educational or business
purposes (e.g. online learning, obtaining a
driver’s licence, completing business transactions, etc.).
Other conditions
28. Mr Graham is to provide his case manager with a recent (head and
shoulders) photograph of a quality acceptable to the case manager.
Alternatively
he must co-operate while the case manager or delegate takes a photograph of him.
The case manager is to provide a copy
of the photograph to the Tribunal.
29. Mr Graham must attend any Mental Health Review Tribunal reviews according
to arrangements as notified in advance to him, his case
manager, and his
solicitor, in writing by the Tribunal.
30. Mr Graham shall attend any reviews which are requested by the Community
Forensic Mental Health Service.
31. Mr Graham shall allow the sharing of information about his treatment,
progress and management between the Community Justice Program
(CJP), Lifestyle
Solutions, his community mental health team, his treating psychiatrist and any
other person or persons providing
health care, management and support services
32. The breach or repeated breach of any of these conditions can lead to
consequences for Mr Graham, including revocation by the Mental
Health Review
Tribunal of his conditional release and confinement back in gaol or a mental
health facility.
Deputy President
Dated this day: 16 May 2017
1. This is the 12
Tribunal review of Eric Graham who is
currently detained in the MSPC, Long Bay Correctional Centre. Mr Graham’s
legal representative
is seeking conditional release at this review. The Tribunal
had adjourned the previous review.
2. In 2011 the District Court found that on the limited evidence available
that Mr Graham committed the five of the offences named
on the indictment and he
was found not guilty with respect to three of the offences named on the
indictment. Bail was continued and
the matter was adjourned.
3. At a judge alone trial, the Court found that based on the limited evidence
available, Mr Graham committed the offences. The Court
imposed a series of
concurrent limiting terms totalling 5 years to expire 26 April 2017.
4. At sentencing, Her Honour recommended in the strongest possible terms
that, pending referral to the MHRT, he be held at the Long
Bay Correctional
Centre Forensic Hospital Wing, or other alternate mental health facility.
TRIBUNAL REQUIREMENTS
5. This is a review pursuant to
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act”). Under
Tribunal is required to review the case of each forensic patient every six
months. On such a review the Tribunal may make orders
as to the patient’s
continued detention, care or treatment or the patient’s release.
6. The Act has special evidentiary requirements in relation to leave or
release which must be satisfied before the Tribunal can grant
leave or release.
In view of this, the Tribunal requires notice of applications for leave or
release to ensure that the necessary
evidence is available. This process also
enables the Tribunal to provide notice of such applications to the Minister for
the Attorney General, and any registered victims who are entitled to
make submissions concerning any proposed leave or release. A
notice was provided
to the Tribunal prior to this review for an application for conditional release.
7. The Tribunal must be satisfied pursuant to section 43 of the Act:
that the safety of the patient or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered if conditional release is granted.
8. Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must consider the principles set out in section 40 of
the Act and
Mental Health Act 2007
as well as the following matters under
when determining what order to make:
(a) whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
(b) whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control of the person is necessary for the person’s
protection from serious harm or the protection of others from serious harm,
(c) the continuing condition of the person, including any likely
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects
such deterioration,
(d) in the case of a proposed release, a report by a forensic psychiatrist
or other person of a class prescribed by the regulations,
who is not currently
involved in treating the person, as to the condition of the person and whether
the safety of the person or any
member of the public will be seriously
endangered by the person’s release,
(e) in the case of the proposed release of a forensic patient subject to a
limiting term, whether or not the patient has spent sufficient
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
9. The Tribunal considered the documents presented to the
10. Mr Graham attended the hearing and was represented by his lawyer, Ms Brae
Sinclair of the Mental Health Advocacy Service. Also
in attendance were:
Solicitor, Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Counsel for
Attorney General
Psychiatrist
Geriatrician
Psychologist
Clinical Nurse
Site Manager,
Lifestyle Solutions
Psychologist
Lifestyle Solutions
Mr L, Community
Justice Program
Local Community
Health (by telephone)
Solutions (by telephone)
PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES
11. Mr Graham who is aged 59 suffered a severe head injury when he was eight
years of age with subsequent intellectual impairment
and behavioural
disturbance.
12. Psychiatrist B in his report expressed the opinion that Mr Graham’s
primary diagnosis was his significant cognitive disability
which has also been
impacted by the multiple ischaemic strokes which he has suffered and which have
caused vascular dementia and
have left him with some physical disabilities.
Intelligence testing has placed Mr Graham near the lower end of mildly
intellectually
impaired. He is illiterate and has had a long history of alcohol
and other drug abuse. Mr Graham also has a history of emphysema
and experiences
chronic pain in both his legs and feet.
13. Mr Graham was admitted to Prince of Wales Hospital in June 2016 due to
unsteadiness. He underwent a number of investigations but
was determined not to
have a movement disorder. Geriatrician B in her report observed that Mr
Graham’s chronic leg pain was
thought to be neuropathic and was partially
relieved by his medication. Psychiatrist B who also diagnosed Mr Graham as
from dysthymia which was currently in remission, described him as a
frail man who looked older than his stated age.
14. In her report, the Clinical Nurse Consultant, with the Specialised Mental
Health Service for Older People, observed that Mr Graham
had not displayed any
problems with behaviour since the previous MHRT and that he complied with what
was asked of him by both Justice
Health and CS NSW. She said that there had been
no altercations with his peers and no signs of disinhibited, overfamiliar
She noted that Mr Graham’s financial affairs were managed by
the Public Trustee and that a continuation of his guardianship
order was made
for period of 12 months.
15. The proposal of the treating team was that Mr Graham be conditionally
released to accommodation proposed by the Community Justice
Program at XX an
intensive residential service (IRS). The IRS is managed by the organisation,
Lifestyle Solutions. During the three
weeks prior to the hearing Mr Graham had
had three visits from the Lifestyle Solutions team. He had met with the manager,
psychologist.
16. The Community Justice Program report by Mr L, clinical consultant,
described the proposed site as a 25 acre rural location set
amongst a farming
environment. The closest school, park or community centre is approximately 15 km
away. The local hospital and medical
centre are approximately 20 km away. There
are a number of security features at the property which has a capacity for four
who are accommodated in an open plan house with staff present 24 hours
each day. At least two staff are available during day shifts
and one during an
active and awake night shift. The Site Manager told the Tribunal that, including
herself, there could be up to
four staff present during the day. The staff
member on night shift makes regular checks during the night to observe each of
the clients
and check breathing. Staff are equipped with a satellite phone which
can be used to contact emergency services. The front door is
locked all the
time. Other doors are locked at 11pm. The doors are alarmed as are the screens
on the windows. There are external
sensory lights around the house and storage
sheds. During the day clients are regularly monitored and are generally within
due to the layout of the property. The property has two sets of fencing
which were described as “farm house style fencing”.
The first fence
is an approximately 1.2m high metal fence with locking gate enclosing house and
front and back yard areas. The second
1.5 metre high fence encloses the boundary
of the property. During outings from the centre, line of sight supervision is
maintained.
17. In his report, Mr L noted that the site had an established core group of
primary staff who regularly work with clients and have
experience supporting
clients who have a history of sexual offending behaviour. The primary staff
members have all worked at the
site for at least four years and the newest
casual staff member started work at the site over eight months ago.
18. The interim Incident Prevention and Response Plan prepared by a Lifestyle
Solutions clinician, set out an interim management and
support plan for Mr
Graham which would be reviewed when his needs were further assessed if he was
conditionally released to the accommodation.
The plan indicated that staff at
the site would work with Mr Graham to update a behavioural support plan, assist
with his medication
and organise regular health reviews, help him access
recreational and other activities and work with him to help develop his
understanding
of his offence cycle and develop strategies to prevent him
engaging in offending behaviour. They would monitor the release conditions.
19. Mr Graham told the Tribunal that his particular interests were in animals
and gardening. Activities available at the XX IRS catered
RISK ISSUES
20. The significant risk posed by Mr Graham is a risk of re-offending. He had
a previous limiting term imposed on when he was found
to have committed two
offences of sexual intercourse without consent with a person under the age of
16. It was just over one year
after this limiting term expired when he committed
the offences which are the subject of the present limiting term.
21. Mr Graham has denied any involvement in sexual offending or has said that
he has no memory of sexual offending. This, and his
cognitive impairments, have
limited his participation in rehabilitation programs for sexual offenders while
in custody. In his report
Mr L observed that Mr Graham appeared to be unaware of
potentially risky situations for sexual offending due to his lack of awareness
of his offence cycle. Mr L noted that his difficulties in being rehabilitated
and poor insight meant that he continued to pose a
risk of sexual reoffending.
Mr L set out a summary of findings from two risk assessment measures which, he
said, had been shown to
have reliability and predictive validity for offenders
with an intellectual disability. Using the first, the Static-99R, Mr Graham
placed in the moderate to high category for risk of recidivism. The second, the
ARMIDILO-S focused on the manageability of offenders
in the community and thus
on dynamic risk and protective factors. Taking into account the environment,
protective factors and support
which would be available for Mr Graham at the XX
IRS property the ARMIDILO-S risk measures indicated that there would be a low
of re-offending should he reside there. In particular as well as the
support, there would be close monitoring, limited access to
potential victims
and to drugs and alcohol. In his report Mr L expressed the opinion that the
overall risk rating for Mr Graham at
XX IRS was in the low range.
22. In relation to Mr Graham’s own risk arising from his health issues,
Mr L noted that he would not have rapid access to intensive
medical support at
the proposed location but that the staff would be trained in the warning signs
of a CVA and emergence management
of such a situation, including immediately
23. It was the opinion of the Psychologist in her report that the plan
proposed by Lifestyle Solutions was comprehensive and designed
Graham’s individual needs and environmental needs and addressed both
personal risk factors and environmental risk
factors. She observed that the
staff had received training in sexual offending behaviour and would provide
support for Mr Graham.
It was her opinion that the safety of the public would
not be seriously endangered by his release to the proposed site. Mr Graham
‘s guardian told the Tribunal that she had considered the support and risk
behaviour management available at XX IRS and considered
that the site provided
the most appropriate accommodation for Mr Graham.
24. Further evidence at hearing also addressed relevant risk issues. It was
apparent that the isolation of the property was itself
a significant protective
factor given Mr Graham’s mobility problems.
25. Mr Graham arrived at the hearing in a wheelchair and it was explained
that he had difficulty walking long distances. His nurse
told the Tribunal that
he preferred to use a toilet located in the courtyard of his unit but that he
was required to negotiate a
step for access. She said that she observed that he
had a lot of trouble managing the step.
26. A Geriatrician told the Tribunal that because of the physical disability
caused by the strokes, he thought that Mr Graham would
not be able to climb the
fences around the property.
27. The greater risk posed by Mr Graham was likely to be in the community. He
was likely to travel away from the site for medical
consultations, meetings with
his case manager, attendance at programs and for other purposes including
participation in activities
organised for the clients at the property.
28. The Site Manager told the Tribunal that transport would be provided by
the IRS for attendance at these activities including for
medical appointments.
She said that line of sight supervision would be provided whenever Mr Graham was
participating in activities
outside the site and that there would be one staff
member for each client or two staff members for three clients depending on the
nature of the relevant activity.
29. Mr L referred to the ongoing review and risk management at the site which
would be part of the conditional release and the particular
conditions to which
CJP considered Mr Graham be subject to minimise risk. He referred to the close
monitoring at the site, the line
of sight supervision in the community and a
restraint upon Mr Graham from consuming drugs or alcohol with random testing to
compliance with this condition.
30. It was clarified at hearing that if Mr Graham was conditionally released,
his case management would be organised through the local
Community Mental Health
Service. Ms A from the CMHS participated in the hearing and told the Tribunal
that she anticipated that she
and Mr B, CNC at the CMHS, would co-case manage Mr
Graham. Mr B, she said, had experience with sex offenders. Ms A also advised the
Tribunal that Dr R, psychiatrist, who also worked with older people,
participated in a fortnightly clinic ta the CMHS. Ms A said
that she envisaged
that initially Mr Graham would be able to be seen weekly and then on a
fortnightly basis at the CMHS by his case
manager/s. She also anticipated that
initially he would be able to consult with Dr R on a six weekly basis, and later
on a six monthly
basis unless more frequent appointments were required.
31. The Site Manager advised the Tribunal that her work presently involves
the Drug and Alcohol Service in the local area and that
she also has regular
to these services as well as
to random drug and alcohol testing.
32. After evidence had been given at the hearing, Counsel appearing for the
Attorney General told the Tribunal that further consideration
would be given to
the submissions made prior to the hearing. After a short adjournment to allow
further instructions to be taken,
Counsel advised the Tribunal that the Attorney
General no longer opposed conditional release for Mr Graham on the basis that
conditions applied to his supervision and applied to other matters
referred to in the evidence and discussed at hearing.
DETERMINATION
33. The Tribunal considered all of the evidence before it, particularly that
related to Mr Graham’s needs, the risks of re-offending
he posed, the
features of the XX IRS and the management plan for his needs and risks. Having
considered all of these matters the
Tribunal was satisfied pursuant to
that the safety of Mr Graham or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered by Mr Graham’s conditional release
conditions set out in the proposed order. Having regard also to the other
matters to which
sections 43/49
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
refer, the Tribunal determined to make an order
granting Eric Graham, conditional release.
34. Given his limiting term expires on 26 April 2017, there was not an issue
concerning whether he had spent sufficient time in custody.
FITNESS TO STAND TRIAL –
section 47(4)(a)(b)
Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
35. It was the evidence of Psychiatrist B that because of his limited
understanding of court proceedings, Mr Graham remained unfit
to be tried.
36. Geriatrician B in her report had similarly expressed the opinion that Mr
Graham’s cognitive impairments precluded his ability
to understand
evidence, make decisions on any evidence presented and to instruct his legal
representatives. Given this evidence the
Tribunal determines that
Graham is unfit
to be tried.
37. There should be a further review in six months if Mr Graham continues to be
a forensic patient at that time.
Judith Walker
Dated this day: 16 May 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (380 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (88.9 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter