URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Black v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd [2020] NSWWCCPD 69 (30 November 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
NSWWCCPD 69
David Black
RESPONDENT:
Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
Self-insured
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr M Douglas
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
16 July 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
30 November 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Failure to admit late evidence – whether error in the discretionary
Micallef v ICI Australia Operations Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA
Hamod v State of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
applied, alleged
errors of fact –
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v Kerr
39 ALJR 505
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms K Balendra, counsel
Mr P Macken, solicitor
Leigh Virtue & Associates
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
to appeal an interlocutory order is granted pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
appellant’s application to adduce further evidence on the appeal is
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 16 July 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
David Black (the appellant) commenced employment with Inghams Enterprises Pty
Ltd (the respondent) as a process worker and cleaner
on or about 16 November
2016. The appellant alleged that, in a frank incident on the night shift on 25
and 26 March 2019, he suffered
a lumbar spine injury. He ceased work following
the shift and made a claim for weekly compensation and treatment expenses. The
denied liability for the injury.
appellant had previously suffered a non-work related injury to his lumbar spine
appellant filed proceedings in the Commission, alleging that, as a result of the
injury in the early hours of 26 March 2019, and
as a consequence of the heavy
nature of his work, he suffered an aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of his
pre-existing condition. The respondent maintained the
dispute in relation to the frank incident and disputed liability for what was
described as the “nature and conditions” of the appellant’s
employment.
matter proceeded to arbitration on 2 July 2020. At the commencement of the
arbitration, the appellant sought to tender an Application
to Admit Late
Documents (AALD) which enclosed a supplementary statement from the appellant
dated 1 July 2020. The application was
opposed by the respondent and the
Arbitrator declined to admit the document.
Arbitrator issued a Certificate of Determination on 16 July 2020 in which he
found that the appellant had suffered an aggravation
of his pre-existing lumbar
disease as a result of the heavy nature of the appellant’s duties, but
that he was not satisfied
that the appellant’s employment was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, as required by
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act).
appellant appeals the decision of the Arbitrator to refuse admission of the
appellant’s supplementary statement, as well
as the final determination by
the Arbitrator that he was not satisfied that the appellant’s employment
was the main contributing
factor to the aggravation of the appellant’s
lumbar disease.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
appellant is content for the appeal to be determined on the basis of the written
submissions of the parties and the documents
in evidence. The respondent
indicated that if the appellant’s supplementary statement dated 1 July
2020 is admitted into evidence
on the appeal, it would require an oral hearing.
If, however, the document is not admitted, the respondent is content for the
to be determined ‘on the papers.’
the reasons set out below, the appellant’s supplementary statement dated 1
July 2020 is not admitted into evidence. I have
had regard to Practice
Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are before me, and the submissions by
the parties. I am satisfied
that I have sufficient information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any conference or formal hearing and
this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
decision by the Arbitrator to refuse to admit the appellant’s
supplementary statement is an interlocutory decision. There
is no appeal from an
interlocutory decision, unless leave to do so is granted by the Commission. The
Commission is not to grant leave
unless it is of the opinion that a
determination of the appeal is necessary or desirable for the proper and
effective determination
appellant submits that leave should be granted to appeal the decision because it
affects the Arbitrator’s ultimate determination,
which is also the subject
of this appeal. The respondent submits that leave should not be granted to
appeal the interlocutory decision
because the Arbitrator was correct to reject
the application. The respondent points to its submissions as to why the
Arbitrator was
correct, recorded below under Ground One of the appeal.
factor that weighs in favour of the granting of leave to appeal is that the
substantive matter has been finally determined, so that
the appellant would have
no other opportunity to challenge the Arbitrator’s interlocutory decision.
The final determinations
by the Arbitrator that the appellant did not suffer an
injury to the lumbar spine on 26 March 2019 and that he was not satisfied
the heavy nature of the employment was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation are also the subject of this appeal.
The parties are therefore
involved in an appeal from those final determinations in any event. In those
circumstances, and in the
context of the respondent relying on its submissions
in response to this ground of appeal that the Arbitrator’s determination
was correct, I grant leave for the appellant to appeal the Arbitrator’s
decision to reject the AALD containing the appellant’s
supplementary
statement dated 1 July 2020.
Fresh or new evidence
appellant seeks to have admitted his supplementary statement dated 1 July 2020
in this appeal. Section 352(6) of the 1998 Act
“Evidence that is fresh evidence or evidence in
addition to or in substitution for the evidence received in relation to the
decision appealed against may not be given on an appeal to the Commission except
with the leave of the Commission. The Commission
is not to grant leave unless
satisfied that the evidence concerned was not available to the party, and could
not reasonably have
been obtained by the party, before the proceedings concerned
or that failure to grant leave would cause substantial injustice in
CHEP Australia Ltd v
discussed the test to be applied in consideration of whether the failure to
admit late documents would cause a substantial
injustice. At [30]–[31] of
the decision, his Honour said:
“Counsel for the appellant
submitted that the Commission misdirected itself in law in construing the
‘substantial injustice’
criterion in s 352(6). It was submitted that
that criterion may be satisfied in circumstances where it is not possible to say
availability of new evidence would have produced a different result; and
that the criterion will be satisfied if the evidence is
compelling and might
have influenced the outcome even though it cannot be said that it would
certainly have done so.
That construction cannot be accepted. The part of s 352(6) concerning
‘substantial injustice’ does not direct attention
to possibilities
or potential outcomes. The task is to decide whether absence of the evidence
‘would cause’ substantial
injustice in the case. There must
therefore be a decision as to the result that ‘would’ emerge if the
evidence were taken
into account and the result that ‘would’ emerge
if it were not. If the result would be the same on each hypothesis, the
justice cannot be said to have been defeated by exclusion.”
appellant makes no submission as to why the document should be admitted on the
appeal. With due diligence, the evidence could
clearly have reasonably been
obtained by the appellant before the arbitration hearing. The appellant offers
no reason to explain
why it was not. Nor does the appellant satisfactorily
explain how it would suffer a substantial injustice if it were not admitted
the appeal. The only way in which it can be determined whether the appellant
would suffer a “substantial injustice,”
as required by s 352(6)
is to assess whether the Arbitrator erred in the exercise of his discretion by
refusing to admit the document
into the arbitral proceedings, which is the
subject of Ground One of the appeal.
is therefore necessary to give consideration to Ground One of the appeal, which
asserts that the appellant was denied procedural
fairness by refusing the
appellant’s application to rely on the document. I have determined for
reasons below that the Arbitrator’s
failure to admit that evidence does
not amount to error in the exercise of the Arbitrator’s discretion and a
refusal to admit
the document in the appeal could therefore not result in a
substantial injustice to the appellant. As Ground One of the appeal fails,
can be no injustice to the appellant if the document is not admitted into
those reasons, the appellant’s statement dated 1 July 2020 is therefore
not admitted in the appeal.
THE EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statement
appellant provided a statement dated 22 April
He confirmed that he
commenced employment with the respondent as a process worker/cleaner on or about
16 November 2016, following
a pre-employment medical check, which he said he
passed with “flying colours.” He described his duties, which
cleaning, heavy lifting, lifting and stacking pallets as well as other
manual work.
appellant disclosed that he suffered a back injury in about 2001 or 2002, which
resolved following a few physiotherapy sessions
and gave him no further
difficulties until he commenced work with the respondent. He asserted that prior
to commencing the heavy
work with the respondent, he was able to run around and
play with his children.
appellant said that during his employment with the respondent, over time his
back became sore and in September 2018, he had an
x-ray of his whole spine and a
CT scan of his lumbar spine. He said the back pain continued. The appellant
stated that his general
practitioner, Dr Sasikala Balaraman wrote to the
respondent on 6 March 2019 suggesting that the respondent provide suitable
that would not aggravate the appellant’s back pain. The appellant
recalled that he had one day off work at that time and presented
certificate to Mr Mark Ritter, with whom he discussed the possibility of a
different job role. The appellant stated that
he also raised with Mr Ritter that
there was no entry in the first aid book about his back pain, which he had
complained of well
prior to 26 March 2019. He said Mr Ritter replied that he
“had it sorted.” The appellant was told that the respondent
under-staffed, and the respondent therefore could not give him any assistance,
which meant that the appellant was working beyond
his limits.
appellant referred to an incident when, on night shift, he fell backwards off a
ladder, twisting his ankle and hurting his Achilles
tendon. He said he sought
treatment at Wyong Hospital and had two days off work. He said that Mr Ritter
was aware of this incident.
The appellant referred to another incident while
washing and stacking hundreds of pallets. He said he advised his supervisor that
he was experiencing back pain and took one day off work.
appellant described the incident on the night shift commencing on 25 March 2019,
when he was required to clean the “VE room”
without assistance. He
said that each time he had worked in that room, where he was required to climb
in and under the machines to
clean them, he had experienced a sore back and body
aches and pains. He described the difficult aspect of cleaning the machines.
said that during that shift he asked Mr Wayne Kan and Mr Wayne Dicker for
assistance.
appellant stated that on that shift in the early hours of 26 March 2019, he was
on a ladder and bending over a machine when the
ladder pushed away and he felt
instant pain in his lumbar spine, which shot up his back, down his legs and into
his hips. He said
he did not finish his duties and drove himself home in great
appellant said that he sent a message to Mr Ritter at midday on 26 March 2019 to
advise him about his lower back pain and that
he would not be able to work. He
said that Mr Ritter told him he could not return to work until he had a
full clearance from a doctor.
The appellant annexed to his statement copies of
screen shots and text messages that passed between him and Mr Ritter.
appellant advised that he attended his general practitioner, Dr Chi Ming Lau of
the Toukley Family Practice, who issued him with
a medical certificate
certifying him as unfit to work and referred him for an MRI scan and
physiotherapy. The appellant said that
he was experiencing low back pain
travelling into the hips and into his legs.
appellant summarised the treatment thereafter, which included undergoing x-rays
and a bone scan, being reviewed by the Neurosurgical
Registrar of Royal North
Shore Hospital, Dr Shinou Liu, and being referred to the Hunter Pain
Clinic. The appellant said that Dr
Jonathon Ball, neurosurgeon, performed a
spinal fusion of the L4/5 and L5/S1 lumbar discs. The appellant described his
ongoing pain
and difficulties.
appellant referred to statements made by Mr Kan, Mr Dean Baker and Mr Ryan
Yates. He asserted that he had definitely advised Mr
Kan and Mr Dicker prior to
26 March 2019 that he was developing back pain as a result of his work with the
respondent and that he
had asked for help with the cleaning. Further, the
appellant said that the allegation made by Mr Baker that he had not
of back pain was a reference to the back injury the appellant
suffered on the evening shift of 4 and 5 March 2019, which had occurred
Mr Baker had gone home. The appellant denied that he had told Mr Yates that
he was “too tired,” but rather, complained
that he was “too
sore to finish the job” and needed to go home.
Communications annexed to the appellant’s
appellant annexed a series of mobile phone text messages passing between him and
Mr Ritter in relation to starting times for the
appellant’s
On 21 March, presumably in
2019, the appellant advised Mr Ritter he would “have to say no” to
working in the VE room.
undated text message, the appellant notified Mr Ritter that he would not be able
to work because of being “just too sore”
after working on his own in
the VE room.
Ritter responded and advised the appellant that, as it was not a work-related
injury, he would need a medical clearance from his
doctor before returning to
The appellant replied,
advising that his symptoms were the same sore back that he had experienced from
pulling pallets down and that
it should be work related. The appellant added
that he had explained his “other back problem” to Mr Ritter, had
to keep working, and had been “honest with” Mr Ritter
everything.”
Correspondence from the appellant dated 22 April 2019
22 April 2019, the appellant wrote a letter “To whom It may
The appellant
advised that he had suffered many injuries in his employment with the respondent
which he reported to his team leaders
and Mr Ritter. He complained that he was
required to clean the “VE room” and the “red room” on
his own climbing
in and under machines and each time he did so he experienced a
sore back and body aches and became dehydrated.
appellant said that on 25 March 2019, he showed Mr Ritter the medication he was
given by the doctor for his sore upper back. The
appellant also referred to
another incident when he fell backwards off a ladder, twisted his ankle and hurt
his Achilles tendon,
which required medical attention at Wyong Hospital.
appellant complained that he received no assistance from the respondent, but he
had tried to perform the duties because he was
concerned that he would not
otherwise be offered work.
The evidence of Mr Wayne Kan, Mr Dean Baker and Mr Ryan
27 March 2019, Mr Kan, an employee of the respondent, signed a note asserting
that the appellant had not approached him or attended
first aid at the
respondent’s Lisarow branch about hurting his back. Mr Kan indicated that
he had only become aware that the
appellant had a sore back when the appellant
advised him and Mr Dicker at 3 am on Tuesday 26 March 2019 that he needed
to see a specialist
in order to have a spinal
Baker wrote and signed a short note stating that he was the leading hand on 4
and 5 March 2019 and he did not receive any complaint
from the appellant
that he was suffering from a sore back or any other work-related
Yates reported that at 5.55 am on 26 March 2019, the appellant came to see him
and asked Mr Yates to check the VE room. Mr Yates
said that he asked the
appellant if the room was all right and the appellant said that it was but that
he was a “bit tired.”
Mr Yates said he suggested that the appellant
should go home, and he would check the job and do the sanitising for the
Mr Yates denied that the appellant said that he had injured his back
or had any other work-related
Relevant Medical records
The clinical records of the Toukley Family
appellant attended Dr Chi Ming Lau, general practitioner, on 1 March 2019. Dr
Lau recorded the history of the appellant having
gained 30 kilograms in weight
since a back injury following a fall in 2018 and was experiencing continuing
chronic back pain. Dr
Lau referred to a CT scan of the lumbar spine dated 6
September 2018, which showed multilevel lumbar spondylosis and narrowing of
foramina at L5/S1.
appellant again attended Dr Lau on 6 March 2019, complaining of continuing low
back pain since February 2018 with mild lumbosacral
pain at the L4/L5 level. Dr
Lau recommended an MRI scan of the lumbar spine and issued the appellant with a
Centrelink medical
certificate.
26 March 2019, the appellant attended Dr Ben Kostyrka, general practitioner from
the same practice. Dr Kostyrka noted a workplace
injury occurring that day in
which the appellant experienced sudden mid-back pain, radiating to the left of
the back. Dr Kostyrka
“Has had recurrent back pain at
mid and lower back for past 18 months
Previous injury three weeks ago
Lifting [pallets] stacked 10 high
Central mid back
Noted sudden sharp pull
Saw Dr Lau at time
Has had MRI - awaiting report
States pain at T6–8 area
Nil C/T/L spine vertebral tenderness
Some pain on thoracic rotation, left side only
Power 5/5 both upper and lower
appellant returned to consult Dr Lau on 3 April 2019, complaining of ongoing low
back pain radiating into both legs with mild
tenderness over the L4/5 level of
the lumbosacral spine since February
The same complaint was
recorded by Dr Lau at a subsequent consultation on 23 April
Lau referred the appellant to the Hunter Pain Clinic on 15 May 2019. Dr Lau
provided a history of chronic low back pain radiating
to both legs since
February 2018.
The Entrance Medical Centre
appellant attended the Entrance Medical Centre between 8 March 2018 and 25 March
2019 complaining of psychological
On 21 June 2018, the
appellant also complained of chronic pain, which was aggravated by accessing his
fourth floor apartment which
did not have lift
On 5 September 2018, an
unidentified attending doctor from that practice noted that the appellant
suffered from chronic pain in the
chest, both hips and buttocks, right thigh and
right shoulder pain. The doctor recorded reduced range of movement in the
spine and right shoulder and lumbosacral spine, as well as diffuse mild
tenderness from the mid thoracic spine to the sacral spine.
The doctor noted
that the appellant suffered from chronic pain since 2002, which was attributed
to the lumbar discs, and thoracic
pain since a fall in February
The doctor arranged for
the appellant to undergo a CT scan of the lumbosacral spine.
10 September 2018, the appellant attended the practice to discuss the results of
the CT scan, which was reported to disclose thoracic
wedging and multilevel
lumbar spondyloarthritis.
October 2018, the appellant again attended the practice, complaining of ongoing
mid and low back pain and a Centrelink medical
certificate was
The appellant was also
provided with a referral to the Royal North Shore Neurosurgery Unit on 17
October 2018.
appellant presented to the Practice on 22 January 2019, complaining of a
calcaneal spur and chronic back pain. The appellant reported
that he was
experiencing spasms, at times resulting in falls, he could not walk long
distances, and was seeking a mobility parking
On 6 March 2019, the
appellant reported that he had strained his back over the weekend and required
medical certification for suitable
duties. On 25 March 2019, the doctor noted
that the appellant had been admitted to hospital the week before and had
undergone an
The Physiophix physiotherapy records
appellant attended Mr Joshua Hall, physiotherapist, on 24 April 2019. Mr Hall
recorded the following relevant history:
“ongoing low back
issues for many years
always hurt to walk since 18
working at factory on and off for many years, always done manual roles
noticed rapid decline in last 12 months
went to Gosford Hospital - 5 weeks ago
red flags: urinary/faecal incontinence
hands/legs: neural symptoms
loss of power in legs/fallen over when getting
reports nil workers comp input
reports nil specific mode of
Further medical records
report of the CT scan of the lumbar spine undertaken on 6 September 2018 was in
The report recorded a
history of chronic pain since 2002 and thoracic pain since a fall in February
2018. The scan indicated that
there was significant multilevel lumbar
spondylosis present with nerve root involvement and wedging of the thoracic
Sasikala Balaraman, general practitioner, wrote a “To Whom It May
Concern” letter dated 6 March 2019. Dr Balaraman
indicated that the
appellant suffered from lumbar spondylosis causing chronic pain. He advised that
the appellant should not be performing
heavy lifting and recommended minimal
manual handling and no bending from the waist. He further recommended that
suitable work should
Lau issued Centrelink medical certificates dated 6 March 2019 and 3 April 2019.
The diagnosis provided in both certificates was
of lumbar spondylosis with an
onset of symptoms of chronic low back pain radiating into the legs in February
Kostyrka referred the appellant to Physiophix physiotherapy on 26 March 2019. In
the referral letter, he advised that the appellant
had injured his mid-back with
pain at the area of the T6–8, radiating to the
Dr Kostyrka provided a
certificate of capacity on the same date, providing a diagnosis of thoracic back
pain caused by cleaning equipment
at work. Dr Kostyrka advised that the
symptoms were on a background of similar mid-back pain and lower back
Mohammed Iqbal Meeran, general practitioner from the Coastal Health Medical
Centre, who the appellant had consulted since 10 July
2019, also provided
Centrelink medical certificates dated 7 August 2019 and 16 September 2019. Dr
Meeran diagnosed low back pain
and lumbar spondylosis with the onset of symptoms
being on 1 February 2018.
Gosford Hospital Discharge Referral dated 19 March 2019 and completed by Dr
Thomas Stock, medical officer, noted sacral back pain
with a significant history
of trauma after falling down some stairs one year prior to admission. The
symptoms were recorded as intermittent
perineal paraesthesia and numbness,
urinary and faecal incontinence, and bilateral sciatica. An MRI scan of the
lumbar spine was
The forensic medical reports
Dr Peter Bentivoglio, neurosurgeon
Bentivoglio was requested by the appellant’s legal representatives to
examine the appellant and provide a report. Dr Bentivolglio
reported on 28
February 2020.
He took a history
of the appellant having commenced work with the respondent in November 2016 and
having suffered a work-related
injury on 26 March 2019, when the appellant
slipped as he was bending over a machine and developed low back pain. Dr
Bentivoglio
noted that the appellant had a past history of low back pain for
many years, which included a back strain at work three weeks prior
to the injury
on 26 March 2019. Dr Bentivoglio recorded that the appellant complained of
continuing back pain and had been unable
to work since the most recent
Bentivoglio reviewed the CT scan dated 6 September 2018, noting that the scan
was performed before the “designated injury.”
He also referred to an
MRI scan, apparently undertaken on 18 March 2019, which was not made available
to him to review. He summarised
the treatment received by the appellant since
that injury, including the L4/S1 spinal fusion performed by Dr Jonathon Ball,
neurosurgeon,
on 24 November 2019.
Bentivoglio examined the appellant, following which he provided a diagnosis of
back pain secondary to multilevel degenerative disease,
spondylolisthesis at the
L4/5 level and bilateral pars defects at the L4 level. Dr Bentivoglio opined
that the appellant’s
pre-existing back pain was exacerbated by the injury
on 26 March 2019 and that the appellant’s condition undoubtedly related
the work injury, to which the appellant’s employment with the respondent
was a substantial contributing factor. Dr Bentivoglio
also formed the view that
the appellant’s duties with the respondent were a substantial contributing
factor to the underlying
condition at the L4/5 level, so that the work the
appellant was performing for the respondent aggravated the underlying condition.
He added that, given the history of intermittent low back pain for some time,
the appellant undoubtedly suffered a pre-existing degenerative
disease in his
lumbar spine. Dr Bentivoglio reiterated that, undoubtedly, without the work
injury, the appellant would have suffered
from significant problems in his back
because of the degenerative disease. He noted the CT and MRI scans undertaken
prior to the
work injury.
Bentivoglio concluded that the work injury was an aggravation of the
pre-existing disease at the L4/5 level and that the injury
was the main cause of
the aggravation. He expressed the view that the appellant’s prognosis was
guarded in respect of a return
to pre-injury duties. Dr Bentivoglio said
that the appellant would not be able to perform any heavy lifting or repetitive
or twisting.
Dr Vidyasagar Casikar, neurosurgeon
Casikar was qualified by the respondent’s legal representatives to examine
and provide a report with respect to the appellant’s
claim. He provided a
report dated 9 May 2019.
Casikar recorded a history of injury to the low back on 25 March 2019 and that
on the following day, the appellant had increasing
pain in the chest and
mid-back. Dr Casikar noted that the appellant had consulted Dr Lau approximately
two weeks prior to this incident,
complaining of low back pain, following which
an MRI scan was performed. Dr Casikar also noted that the appellant had
experienced
low back pain in 2002 and had slipped and fell, injuring his back,
Casikar reviewed the x-ray and CT scan undertaken on 6 September 2018 and
diagnosed early degenerative disease of the lumbar spine.
Dr Casikar was of the
opinion that the appellant did not appear to have suffered a specific
work-related injury. He conceded that
it was possible that the appellant had
suffered an aggravation of a pre-existing degenerative disease and grade 1
spondylolisthesis
when overreaching in a flexed position. Dr Casikar was of the
view that any aggravation had ceased. Dr Casikar advised that the diagnosis
of mechanical back pain which was consistent with the injury, but that
employment was not a substantial contributing factor to
the injury. Also, in the
context of complaints of back pain two weeks prior to the injury, the
work-related injury was not a main
contributing factor to the appellant’s
present complaints.
Casikar provided a supplementary report dated 1 April 2020 in response to
questions raised by the
respondent.
Dr Casikar advised
that the appellant had a well-established “failed back” syndrome,
his main problem was constitutional
genetically determined degenerative disease
and the indications for surgery were not due to work-related matters. Dr Casikar
his opinion that the kind of aggravation suffered by the appellant
would have settled within six to eight weeks and that the appellant’s
employment was not a substantial contributing factor.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator provided a summary of the procedural background that led to
proceedings being commenced in the Commission. The Arbitrator
did not recount
his reasons for declining to admit the AALD dated 2 July 2020 as his reasons
were recorded in the transcript of the
arbitration proceedings. The Arbitrator
identified the issues that remained in dispute. The Arbitrator provided a
detailed summary
of the evidence contained in the appellant’s statement
dated 22 April 2020, the clinical notes of the Entrance Medical Centre
opinions of the medico-legal experts, Dr Casikar and Dr Bentivoglio.
Arbitrator noted that the appellant’s claim was that he had suffered an
injury in the form of an aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or
deterioration of a disease on 26 March 2019. That is, the alleged injury fell
within the definition of injury within
the meaning of s 4(b)(ii) of the
1987 Act. The Arbitrator further noted that there was no issue that the
appellant suffered from
degenerative disc disease at the L4/5 level of the
lumbar spine.
Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s evidence that the injury occurred
while he was bent over cleaning a machine in the
“VE room” and
experienced instant pain in his lumbar spine, which shot up his back and down
his hips and legs. The Arbitrator
concluded that he did not accept that the
appellant experienced pain in the lumbar spine in that incident. He noted that
the statement
evidence was inconsistent with what the appellant had reported to
Dr Kostyrka that day. Further, it was inconsistent with the text
message sent to
Mr Ritter that day. In that message, the appellant described the pain as the
same symptoms he experienced while washing
and stacking pallets and, in a letter
dated 22 April 2019, the appellant complained that he had hurt his upper back,
rather than
lower back, performing those duties.
Arbitrator observed that caution must be exercised when weighing evidence in the
form of clinical notes from a general practitioner,
particularly where there was
no report or oral evidence from that practitioner. The Arbitrator reasoned,
however, that Dr Kostyrka
noted that the incident triggered mid-back pain,
examined the appellant’s thoracic spine, provided a diagnosis of thoracic
back pain in the certificate of capacity and referred the appellant to a
physiologist for treatment of the thoracic spine. The Arbitrator
considered that
this evidence was corroborated by the text message to Mr Ritter, which was to
the effect that the appellant suffered
upper back pain, and provided compelling
evidence that it was likely that the appellant suffered upper back pain in the
on 26 March 2019, and not lower back pain.
Arbitrator concluded that the incident on 26 March 2019 did not precipitate
symptoms in, or aggravate, the appellant’s lumbar
spine disease. The
Arbitrator said that, as a consequence, the history provided to Dr Bentivoglio
that the incident precipitated
low back pain was incorrect.
Arbitrator considered that Dr Bentivoglio drew a distinction between the
incident on 26 March 2019 and the effect the work the
appellant was
performing for the respondent had on the appellant’s lumbar spine disease.
The Arbitrator noted that Dr Bentivoglio
referred to the incident on 26 March
2019 using the definitive article “the,” which denoted a specific
injury, and when
Dr Bentivoglio referred to the “injuries,” he was
referring to back pain occurring before the incident on 26 March 2019.
Arbitrator noted that Dr Bentivoglio was of the opinion that the
appellant’s employment was a substantial contributing
factor to “the
injuries,” that the appellant’s employment duties were a substantial
contributing factor to the
degeneration of the appellant’s spine, and
thus, the appellant’s employment duties were an aggravation of an
Arbitrator concluded that Dr Bentivoglio’s opinion that the “work
injury,” that is the specific incident on
26 March 2019, was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation of the degenerative lumbar spine
condition was not persuasive
and could not be accepted. The Arbitrator explained
that the appellant suffered mid back or thoracic pain in that incident, rather
than lower back pain.
Arbitrator pointed out that Dr Casikar also obtained an incorrect history that
the lumbar spine was injured in the specific injury,
so that Dr Casikar’s
opinion in that regard was also rejected.
Arbitrator said that the appellant’s evidence in relation to his work
duties made it clear that the work was heavy, arduous
and repetitive, and
involved climbing in and under machines and working in a difficult or awkward
posture. The Arbitrator accepted
that the appellant’s back became sore
when he worked in the VE room and said that it was plausible that this work
made more grave the effect of his lumbar spine disease, thereby
aggravating the disease.
Arbitrator referred to Dr Casikar’s acceptance that it was possible that
by bending over and leaning into a machine in the
VE room, the appellant may
have suffered an aggravation of his lumbar spine disease. The Arbitrator
indicated that this was a particular
activity that the appellant was often
called upon to undertake and was one of the many arduous tasks required of the
appellant. The
Arbitrator took the view that Dr Casikar’s opinion
supported the allegation that this activity aggravated the underlying lumbar
Arbitrator said that Dr Bentivoglio’s evidence was that the
appellant’s employment aggravated the underlying lumbar
condition. The
Arbitrator referred to Dr Bentivoglio’s opinion that the appellant would
not be fit to perform heavy lifting
or repetitive bending or twisting, and that
the prognosis for a return to work was guarded. The Arbitrator inferred from
that opinion
that Dr Bentivoglio was aware of the nature of the
appellant’s duties with the respondent.
Arbitrator concluded that, having regard to:
appellant’s evidence that his back became sore when working in the VE
(b) the opinions of Dr Bentivoglio and Dr Casikar, and
(c) the “To Whom It May Concern” letter written by Dr Balaraman
on 6 March 2019,
he was satisfied and found that the work the appellant did for the respondent
aggravated the appellant’s lumbar spine disease.
Arbitrator proceeded to consider whether the appellant’s employment
between November 2016 and 26 March 2019 was the main
contributing factor to the
aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar disease. The Arbitrator expressed
the view that it was likely
that other factors outside of the appellant’s
employment contributed to the aggravation of the disease,
(a) the appellant’s normal domestic duties, the
contribution from which he considered would be negligible in comparison to the
appellant’s heavy work duties;
(b) the fall down the stairs in February 2018, and
(c) the appellant walking up and down stairs to access his fourth floor
apartment, as reported to the appellant’s general practitioner.
Arbitrator observed that all of those activities played a part in the
development of the appellant’s symptoms. He said,
however, that the
evidence was not sufficient to enable him to evaluate the extent to which those
factors contributed to the aggravation
of the lumbar disease, although they were
significant enough for the appellant to consult his general practitioners.
Arbitrator pointed out that Dr Bentivoglio did not provide an opinion as to
whether those factors made a contribution to the development
of the symptoms in
the lumbar spine or the extent of that contribution. The Arbitrator formed the
view that Dr Bentivoglio’s
evidence did not assist him in respect of the
degree to which those matters contributed to the aggravation.
Arbitrator acknowledged that it is not necessarily fatal to a worker’s
case if there is no medical expert opinion explaining
the role the non-work
related factors contributed to the aggravation of the disease. He said, however,
that in this case, where there
was evidence of a contribution from non-work
related factors, he required guidance from expert medical opinion as to the
those contributions. The Arbitrator said that the fact of all of those
matters having aggravated the appellant’s lumbar spine,
supported by the evidence, was a matter within common knowledge, but the
interplay between contributing factors was not
a matter within the realm of that
common knowledge. The Arbitrator said that it required the evidence of a
cogently reasoned expert
medical opinion.
Arbitrator said that, on the basis of the evidence before him, which was that
there were other matters that were likely to have
significantly contributed to
the aggravation, he was unable to conclude that the work the appellant performed
with the respondent
was the chief, leading or main contributing factor. The
Arbitrator reiterated that Dr Bentivoglio’s opinion was that the event
26 March 2019 was the main contributing factor to the aggravation and did not
explain why that was so. The Arbitrator said that
it was inherent that Dr
Bentivoglio was of the view that other factors contributed to the aggravation
but did not explain what those
factors were. The Arbitrator observed that Dr
Bentivoglio would have had before him the x‑ray and CT scan performed on 6
2018 and the x-ray undertaken in January 2020, but it was not apparent
what other information Dr Bentivoglio had available to him.
The Arbitrator
pointed out that, by having the radiological reports from September 2018,
Dr Bentivoglio would have been aware of
the fall in February 2018 that
resulted in thoracic pain. Further, it was not apparent whether Dr Bentivoglio
had available to him
the general practitioners’ notes. The Arbitrator
observed that, even if Dr Bentivoglio had knowledge of the other factors that
played a role in the aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar disease,
Dr Bentivoglio did not explain the part they played or
why, in those
circumstances, the appellant’s employment was the main contributing factor
to the aggravation of the appellant’s
lumbar disease, if that was Dr
Bentivoglio’s opinion.
Arbitrator concluded that in any event, he was not satisfied that the
appellant’s employment was the main contributing factor
to the aggravation
of his lumbar disease.
Certificate of Determination issued on 16 July 2020
“The Commission determines:
is an award for the respondent with respect to the applicant’s claim for
compensation.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant alleges that the Arbitrator erred on the following
(a) Ground One: error of mixed fact and law in inferring
that the appellant suffered a fall in February 2018 by relying on the histories
in clinical records and denying the appellant procedural fairness by refusing
the appellant’s application to rely on a statement
addressing the
(b) Ground Two: having found the appellant suffered a fall in February 2018,
the Arbitrator erred in fact by determining that the
appellant suffered thoracic
and lumbar symptoms as a result of that fall, and
(c) Ground Three: error of law by the Arbitrator determining that he required
expert opinion in order to determine the extent that
any non-work factors
contributed to the aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar spine.
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1987 Act defines injury as follows:
4 Definition
of ‘injury’
In this Act:
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
, which means:
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the
course of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease, and
(c) does not include (except in the case of a worker employed in or about a
mine) a dust disease, as defined by the
Workers’ Compensation (Dust
Diseases) Act 1942
, or the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of a dust disease, as so defined.”
SUBMISSIONS
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s determination that the appellant
suffered a significant fall on February 2018. The
appellant says that the
evidentiary basis for this determination was that:
(a) the appellant
presented to Gosford Hospital where a significant history was recorded of the
fall a year beforehand, and
(b) the appellant’s general practitioner’s notes recorded the
fall in February 2018, with those histories being recorded
in August and
September 2018 and March, April and August 2019.
appellant points out that, in his reasons, the Arbitrator, relying on
stated that caution
must be exercised when weighing the evidence contained in clinical histories
contained in the course of treatment,
particularly where that doctor has not
provided statement evidence or has not been called to give oral evidence. The
appellant submits
that there were no contemporaneous records of the appellant
having suffered that fall, despite the extensive clinical records in
The appellant says that the only notations were those recorded months and even a
year after the alleged event. The appellant
contends that the existence of the
fall was not a matter raised by either party.
appellant submits that there was an insufficient evidentiary basis for finding
such a fall occurred and by doing so the Arbitrator
committed an error of fact.
The appellant refers to
Elias Bader t/as Genuine Kitchens v Workers
Compensation Nominal
as authority to say
that failing to afford procedural fairness is an error that must be corrected
unless it could not possibly have
affected the outcome. The appellant further
relies on that decision to say that a decision not based on a point raised by
the parties
or the Commission constitutes a denial of procedural fairness and
can be challenged.
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s acknowledgment that the appellant had
attempted to have the supplementary statement
admitted into evidence. The
appellant submits that it was the only evidence which directly addressed the
existence or otherwise of
the fall in February 2018 and that the Arbitrator
denied the appellant procedural fairness by failing to admit the document. The
appellant contends that by making the finding in relation to the fall and
refusing the admission of the document, the Arbitrator
has committed errors of
both fact and law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Arbitrator was correct to reject the
appellant’s supplementary statement. The respondent points
out that the
document as filed and served the day before the arbitration and attempted to
address the fall down the stairs in February
2018, of which there was evidence
contained in the various clinical records annexed to the appellant’s ARD.
The respondent
refers to the Gosford Hospital Discharge Referral which recorded
a significant history of trauma after a fall down stairs a year
previously. The
respondent submits that this evidence formed part of the appellant’s case
and the appellant was clearly aware
on 23 April 2020, if not before that time,
of those entries.
respondent submits that no explanation was given by the appellant as to why the
statement was served at that late stage. The respondent
says the admission was
opposed because of lateness and the prejudice to the respondent that arose
because of the new allegations
made, which would require investigation. The
respondent submits that the Arbitrator fairly exercised his discretion by
weighing the
competing factors on both sides in order to do justice between the
parties. The respondent asserts that the prejudice to it was obvious
not had the opportunity to investigate the fresh allegations contained in the
respondent further submits that it made it clear at the outset of the
arbitration that it intended to rely on the evidence of
the fall in 2018 and the
appellant then had the option to discontinue the proceedings without any
prejudice other than some delay.
The respondent says that the appellant then
made a forensic decision to proceed without the evidence.
respondent submits that this ground of appeal conflates the rejection of the
appellant’s late statement and the Arbitrator’s
assessment of the
evidence of the fall in February 2018. The respondent contends that the
Arbitrator was correct to find that the
appellant injured his lower back in the
fall in February 2018.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that there was no
contemporaneous record of the fall and describes that
submission as
“odd” in circumstances where there were many entries in the clinical
records where the appellant’s
own history was of the fall and the lower
back symptoms that were a consequence of the fall. The respondent submits that
the Gosford
Hospital Discharge Referral was not the only evidence about the fall
and the Arbitrator identified those various entries in the clinical
Further, the respondent says that the Arbitrator was well aware that a
cautionary approach was required when assessing that
respondent submits that there was ample evidence to support the
Arbitrator’s finding in relation to the fall in February
2018 and that
this ground of appeal has failed to demonstrate any error of fact, law or
discretion in respect of the Arbitrator’s
refusal to admit the late
statement and the finding that the lower back was injured in February
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s finding that the appellant suffered a
work-related injury to his thoracic spine on
26 March 2019, a finding which was
based on a clinical note recorded on 26 March 2019 and a mobile phone text
message which, in effect,
said the appellant was suffering from upper back pain.
The appellant contends that the Arbitrator also concluded that the
appellant’s
employment had aggravated the appellant’s lumbar
symptoms, which was supported by the evidence from the forensic medical experts
and a letter written by the appellant’s doctor in March 2019.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator concluded, on the basis of clinical
records in September 2018 and the x-ray undertaken at
that time, that the fall
in February 2018 resulted in a thoracic spine injury. The appellant submits,
however, that the Arbitrator
went on to find the lumbar spine was also injured
in February 2018 on the basis of the evidence recorded a year or more after the
fall. The appellant contends that this conclusion was not open to the Arbitrator
in the absence of a medical opinion as to causation
which supported such a
conclusion and in circumstances where there was no medical evidence addressing
the fall and its consequences.
The appellant submits that the Arbitrator had
already found that the appellant’s employment had aggravated the lumbar
appellant submits that the Arbitrator, having found that there was a
work-related aggravation in March 2019, did not consider
the effect of the
work-related aggravation and instead attributed the lumbar complaints in April
2019 and May 2019 to the fall in
2018. The appellant asserts that the Arbitrator
thereby committed an error of fact.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that there was ample evidence of the appellant having fallen
down stairs in February 2018 and that it was open
to the Arbitrator to find that
the appellant suffered thoracic and lumbar symptoms as a result of that fall.
The respondent asserts
that the Arbitrator considered the evidence in relation
to the lumbar symptoms arising from that incident in great detail. The
points out that the appellant did not disclose the fall in February
2018 in his statement dated 22 April 2020 or to his own forensic
Dr Bentivoglio.
respondent contends that the Arbitrator’s finding that the fall in
February 2018 involved lumbar spine complaints does not
require “medical
evidence requiring an opinion as to causation,” as asserted by the
appellant. The respondent asserts
that the significance of the fall should have
formed part of the history of lower back symptoms and complaints given to the
expert, Dr Bentivoglio, who was required to provide an opinion on
causation of the claimed work-related injuries. The respondent
submits that,
contrary to the appellant’s submissions, the non-work related lower back
problems were required to be considered
by the Arbitrator when weighing up all
the factors, both work and non-work related, in determining whether the
appellant’s
employment with the respondent was the main contributing
factor pursuant to s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act.
Ground Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant points out that the Arbitrator concluded that it was likely that
non-work related factors contributed to the aggravation
of the appellant’s
lumbar disease, in particular the fall in 2018 and the appellant using stairs to
his fourth floor apartment
in August 2018. The appellant also refers to the
Arbitrator’s observations that the evidence did not sufficiently enable
to determine precisely the extent of those contributions and that he
required guidance from an expert medical opinion.
appellant relies on the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Tudor Capital
Australia Pty Limited v
Christensen
to say that the
Commission is required to base its conclusions on probative material so that the
conclusions are not capricious,
arbitrary or without foundation. Further, the
Commission is required to apply logic and common sense in determining which
view is to be preferred and which evidence is to be accepted. The
appellant contends that the Arbitrator declined to determine which
factors was the main contributing factor to the appellant’s injury and in
doing so failed to make the decision he was
tasked to make. The appellant
asserts that, by declining to undertake that exercise, the Arbitrator committed
an error of law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that this ground of appeal is misconceived. It points out
that the only medical expert who provided an opinion
in support of the
“nature and conditions” claim was the appellant’s own expert,
Dr Bentivoglio. The respondent
submits that, in order for the opinion of Dr
Bentivoglio to carry weight in respect of the test of causation, it needed to be
on a proper history of the appellant’s back issues. The respondent
says that the Arbitrator gave a detailed analysis of that
opinion and, based on
sound reasoning, rejected the opinion. The respondent submits that the appellant
has failed to demonstrate
any error of fact by rejecting that evidence.
respondent submits that it disputed both the occurrence of the injury on 26
March 2019 and the nature of the injury, relying on
the observations of Roche DP
Jaffarie v Quality Castings Pty
That is, the injurious
event is the mechanism of injury but the relevant injury for the purpose of s 4
of the 1987 Act is the pathology
(the physiological change) that arose out of or
in the course of employment.
respondent says that the Arbitrator accepted that an incident occurred on 26
March 2019, but found that the evidence did not support
the assertion that the
lumbar spine was injured in that incident. Rather, the appellant suffered a
thoracic spine injury. The respondent
submits that the Arbitrator’s
conclusion was open to him on the evidence, which included:
entry in the clinical note made by Dr Kostyrka on 26 March 2019 that clearly
referred to the mid-back, rather than the lower
(b) the clinical note included multiple references to the
“mid-back,” “central mid back,” “pain at
area” and “some pain on thoracic rotation, left side
(c) the certificate of capacity dated 26 March 2019 recorded a diagnosis of
thoracic back pain.
respondent asserts that the Arbitrator exercised the appropriate caution when
dealing with the clinical records. It submits that
the Arbitrator’s
finding was a finding of fact, was available on the evidence and the appellant
has failed to demonstrate any
error of fact or law in respect of that
respondent refers to the appellant’s claim that the “nature and
conditions” of the appellant’s employment,
including the incident on
26 March 2019, was the main contributing factor to the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration
of the appellant’s
pre-existing lumbar disease condition.
respondent says that the Arbitrator determined that the appellant’s work
may have caused such an aggravation, but noted
that there was a “critical
issue” as to whether the appellant’s employment was the main
contributing factor to
that aggravation, in accordance with s 4(b)(ii) of the
1987 Act. The respondent submits that the appellant carried the onus of proving
what was a factual question. The respondent refers to the decision of in
in which Snell DP
“Where the relevant aggravation involves both
employment and non-employment factors, the evaluative process involves a
consideration
of the causative role of both. An evaluation that involved only
employment factors would leave the provision with no work to do.
This would be
inconsistent with the context of the provision. It would also be inconsistent
with the plain meaning of the words.
There is a general presumption against
surplusage in statutes.
It follows that the test of ‘main contributing factor’ involves
consideration of whether there were competing causal factors
(both work and
non-work related) of the aggravation, and whether on a consideration of relevant
causal factors the employment represented
the main contributing
respondent also refers to Snell DP’s summation of the relevant principles
that followed in that decision, namely that in
determining the question of the
“main contributing factor”:
(a) the test is more
stringent than that of “substantial contributing factor” contained
in s 9A of the 1987 Act;
(b) there can only be one “main contributing factor”;
(c) the test is one of causation requiring consideration of all of the
evidence of both work and non-work related factors, and not
purely the medical
(d) medical evidence addressing the issue is relevant and desirable, but the
absence of such evidence is not necessarily fatal, and
(e) for the purpose of s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act, the employment is required
to be the main contributing factor to the aggravation,
not the underlying
respondent submits that the Arbitrator weighed up all of the relevant factors,
which were the appellant’s work duties, the
fall in February 2018,
ascending and descending the stairs to the appellant’s apartment and the
lower back issues since 2002.
The respondent points out that there was no
evidence from a treating medical practitioner that supported the assertion that
the appellant’s
work duties either aggravated or “triggered”
the appellant’s lumbar back symptoms.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the Arbitrator
declined to determine, on the basis of the evidence
before him, the question of
which of those factors was the main factor. The respondent contends that this
assertion applies the wrong
test and misunderstands the requirement in s
4(b)(ii) and the test of causation. The respondent submits that the Arbitrator
required to determine which factor was the main contributing factor in
circumstances where he was not persuaded on the balance of
probabilities that
the appellant’s employment was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation of the lumbar spine disease.
The respondent asserts that the
Arbitrator’s conclusion was correct.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the Arbitrator’s determination set aside and the
matter remitted to another arbitrator for re-determination.
respondent submits that the appeal should be dismissed.
CONSIDERATION
Ground One: error of mixed fact and law in inferring that the
appellant suffered a fall in February 2018 by relying on the histories
clinical records and denying the appellant procedural fairness by refusing the
appellant’s application to rely on a statement
addressing the
appellant complains that the entries in the clinical records about the fall in
February 2018 were not contemporaneous and were
therefore not reliable in terms
of establishing that the fall occurred, causing injury to the lumbar spine. The
appellant submits
that there was an insufficient evidentiary basis to support
the Arbitrator’s finding.
numerous entries in the clinical notes referring to low back pain with an onset
in February 2018 were recorded by:
(a) Dr Lau of the Toukley Family
Practice on 1 March 2019, 6 March 2019, 3 April 2019 and 23 April 2019;
(b) Dr Meeran of the Coastal Health Medical Centre on 7 August 2019 and
6 September 2019, and
(c) Dr Stock, the medical officer who completed the Gosford Hospital
Discharge Referral dated 19 March 2019.
Centrelink medical certificates dated 6 March 2019 and 3 April 2019, Dr Lau
diagnosed lumbar back symptoms with an onset in February
2018, as did Dr Meeran
on 7 August 2018 and 16 September 2019.
other words, each of these doctors from three different medical facilities
consistently recorded the same history. The evidence
recording these histories
was part of the appellant’s case and no evidence was adduced to challenge
the correctness of those
histories. That is, that the appellant suffered a fall
down stairs in February 2018 which caused lumbar symptoms on the background
previous lumbar complaints. The consistency of the evidence from those three
practitioners makes the evidence of the fall compelling,
particularly in the
light of the appellant’s failure to deny that the event occurred.
the respondent submits, the appellant made a forensic decision to proceed
without the appellant’s supplementary statement,
but in any event, even if
the statement was in evidence, the appellant did not deny the fall, or that the
fall caused lumbar symptoms.
In those circumstances, it was open to the
Arbitrator to conclude that the lumbar spine was injured in that event.
appellant contends that the fall was not a matter raised by either party. The
appellant relies on
Elias Bader Kitchens
to argue that a decision not
based on a point raised by the parties or the Commission constitutes a denial of
procedural fairness
and can be challenged. The point was clearly raised by the
respondent and is recorded in the transcript, where counsel for the respondent,
before the arbitration commenced, advised:
“And just to, so
it’s absolutely clear, and I, so my friend is under no misapprehension,
I will, on the evidence, be making
a great deal of the fact that in those
records there is reference to a significant history of trauma to the lower back
after falling
down stairs one year before this
Arbitrator also drew the appellant’s attention to the relevance of the
fall in February 2018, particularly in terms of whether
there was a “fair
in which to
accept Dr Bentivoglio’s opinion, in the absence of that history being
included in the history to the medical
In addition, the
appellant made submissions about the relevance of the
The Arbitrator did not
deny the appellant procedural fairness in making the finding. The issue was
squarely raised and the appellant
was given the opportunity to make appropriate
submissions.
appellant further submits that the Arbitrator denied the appellant procedural
fairness by failing to admit into evidence the appellant’s
supplementary
statement dated 1 July 2020.
290 of the 1998 Act requires each party to a dispute to provide the other party
with such information and documents as and
Workers Compensation
Commission Rules 2011
(the 2011 Rules) require.
10.3 of the 2011 Rules provides:
10.3 Material to be
lodged in proceedings
(1) For the purposes of section 290 of the 1998 Act, a party to proceedings
must lodge and serve, with the dispute application or
reply, all information and
documents on which the party proposes to rely and that are in the possession or
control of the party,
and that have not been lodged by a party in the current
proceedings and:
(a) where the proceedings are commenced by a worker, a written statement of
the evidence to be given by the worker, signed by the
worker; and
(b) where a party proposes to rely on the oral evidence of a witness, the
party must lodge and serve a document containing:
(i) the name of the witness, and
(ii) a written statement of the evidence to be given by the witness and
signed by the witness; and
(c) where the proceedings include a claim for weekly payments of
compensation, the employer must provide a schedule of all weekly
payments of
compensation paid including the amounts and periods.
(2) Subject to subrules (3)–(4), a party may not introduce evidence
that has not been lodged and served as required by subrule
(1) or has not been
provided to any other party as required by the 1998 Act or any Regulation or
Workers Compensation Guideline made
under that Act.
(3) Where a party wishes to rely on a document not lodged and served in
compliance with section 290 of the 1998 Act and subrule (1),
the party must:
(a) as soon as practicable after becoming aware of the document or obtaining
possession of the document, serve a copy on all other
parties; and
(b) not later than 5 working days prior to a medical assessment or telephone
conference, on one occasion only and by the approved
form, lodge all documents
not previously lodged; and
(c) not later than 5 working days prior to an arbitration hearing, on one
occasion only and by the approved form, lodge all documents
not previously
(4) The Commission may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in
the interests of justice, allow a party to introduce
evidence that the party
would otherwise be prevented from introducing because of the operation of
subrule (2) provided the party
complies with subrule (3) or the Commission gives
the party leave to lodge additional documents.”
Arbitrator’s decision as to whether the documents sought to be relied upon
should have been admitted is a discretionary
exercise. In
Micallef v ICI
Australia Operations Pty
Heydon JA (as his
Honour then was) observed:
“It is necessary to bear in mind
some submissions of the defendants to the effect that a discretionary judgment
can only be
overturned in limited circumstances ...
Any attack on decisions of that character must fail unless it can be
demonstrated that the decision-maker:
(a) made an error of legal principle;
(b) made a material error of fact;
(c) took into account some irrelevant matter,
(d) failed to take into account, or gave insufficient weight to, some
relevant matter, or
(e) arrived at a result so unreasonable or unjust as to suggest that one of
the foregoing categories of error had occurred, even
though the error in
question did not explicitly appear on the face of the
reasoning.”
Hamod v State of New South
Beazley JA (as her
Honour then was) made the following observations (citations
“The court at first instance must be free to
exercise its discretion in matters of practice and procedure as the court
necessary, having regard to the circumstances of the case. However,
discretion so vested in the first instance court is subject at
all times to the primary obligation of ensuring a fair trial to the
the litigation.
The court’s concern with a fair trial is not divorced from the other
considerations that the court has in the administration
of justice. In
particular, the concept of a fair trial is one that has regard to the interests
of all parties to the suit. Nor, in
this State, is it divorced from the
court’s statutory obligation to ensure the just, quick and cheap
resolution of the real
issues in the dispute or proceedings.
For these reasons, before an appellate court will interfere with a
discretionary judgment in a matter of practice and procedure, the
whether injustice flowed from the order appealed from will be a relevant and
necessary consideration.”
Particularly
relevant to matters arising in the Commission, Byron DP in
Coles Myer Limited
set out the
matters that an arbitrator is required to take into account when considering
whether a document ought to have been admitted.
Those matters
(a) whether there was an acceptable explanation for the
(b) whether or not a refusal to admit the evidence would cause substantial
prejudice to the party seeking to tender the evidence;
(c) the prejudice (if any) to the other party;
(d) whether the delay was attributable to the legal representative and not
the party personally;
(e) the nature of the proceedings, and in this case the nature of the
statutory scheme, and
(f) general considerations of fairness and justice between the
is not disputed that the late document, which was a supplementary statement from
the appellant, sought to explain entries in the
general practitioner’s
clinical notes and the notes from Gosford Hospital Emergency Department. Those
documents were attached
to the Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD) and
referred to the appellant having suffered a fall in February 2018.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator should have admitted the document and by
failing to do so denied the appellant procedural
fairness. The appellant says
that it was the only direct evidence that addressed the existence or otherwise
of the fall in February
2018. The appellant refers to relevant evidence in the
records of Gosford Hospital and the general practitioner’s clinical
which were not contemporaneously recorded, but were recorded some months and up
to a year after the alleged event. The appellant
asserts that the existence or
otherwise of the fall “was not a matter that was raised by either
and that by not
allowing the appellant to address the evidence, the Arbitrator denied the
appellant procedural fairness.
respondent contends that the Arbitrator was correct to reject the supplementary
statement because:
(a) the document was filed and served the day
prior to the arbitration;
(b) the statement was an attempt to address histories provided in documents
that were attached the appellant’s ARD;
(c) as the entries in the hospital and clinical notes were part of the
appellant’s case, the appellant was clearly aware of
the entries at and
prior to the time the proceedings were commenced;
(d) no explanation was given by the appellant for the delay in attempting to
file the supplementary statement, and
(e) the document contained a number of new allegations which, if admitted,
the respondent would need to investigate.
respondent submits that the Arbitrator appropriately identified and weighed the
competing factors between the appellant and the
respondent in order to do
justice between the parties. The respondent says that the prejudice to the
respondent was obvious.
Arbitrator delivered oral reasons at the commencement of the arbitration as to
why the late document would not be admitted. He
terms of the statement of Mr Black dated 1 July 2020, I refuse the application
for that to be introduced into evidence
because the respondent would, in my
view, be prejudiced by the introduction of that into evidence. This is a
situation where the
issue of [the] February 2018 fall was squarely raised in the
materials that the applicant put on with its ARD. It is something that
have been explained by the applicant in a statement at that time. Had that been
the case that would have allowed the respondent
the opportunity to check those
matters with its own staff. That is, whether in February 2018 Mr Black, the
applicant, was climbing
up and down ladders at that time. And if I were to allow
that statement to get into evidence then essentially the respondent is denied
that opportunity that would, in my view, work a prejudice to the respondent. The
applicant always has the ability to discontinue
and to represent the case in a
way in which it can ensure the evidence still gets in without that prejudice
being suffered to the
respondent. So, on balance, it seems to me that the
prejudice that is caused to the respondent by allowing the statement in [is]
outweighed by any prejudice that would be caused to the applicant by not
allowing it in because the applicant’s always
got the ability to do it
again properly.
So, just by summary ... I decline the applicant’s application for his
statement of 1 July 2020 to go into
appellant gave no explanation to the Arbitrator as to why the evidence, which
was an attempted response to the hospital and clinical
notes adduced into
evidence by the appellant in his own case, could not have been filed either with
the ARD or within a reasonable
time before the arbitration. The appellant merely
asserted that he would suffer prejudice if the document was not admitted. The
gave cogent reasons as to why the document should not be admitted,
which included the fact that there was no explanation for the
delay and that the
evidence would require it to undertake an investigation of the new circumstances
alleged by the appellant. The
Arbitrator pointed out that any prejudice to the
appellant could be cured by the appellant discontinuing the proceedings and
fresh proceedings. The Arbitrator considered that the prejudice to the
respondent outweighed that of the appellant. In accordance
with the principles
discussed by Beazley JA in
, the Arbitrator’s primary
obligation was to ensure a fair trial to the parties to the litigation, in the
context of delivering
the objectives of the Commission.
appellant has not identified any error of legal principle, material error of
fact or that the Arbitrator had taken into account
an irrelevant matter or
failed to take into account or give sufficient weight to a relevant matter. Nor
has the appellant identified
error on the part of the Arbitrator by arriving at
a result so unreasonable or unjust that it would suggest errors of the kind, as
identified in
, occurred. There is therefore no basis upon which
to disturb the Arbitrator’s decision in respect of refusing to admit the
document which the appellant sought to tender at such a late hour.
the above reasons, it follows that Ground One of the appeal fails.
Ground Two: having found the appellant suffered a fall in
February 2018, the Arbitrator erred in fact by determining that the appellant
suffered thoracic and lumbar symptoms as a result of that fall
appellant submits that the Arbitrator erred, firstly in determining that the
appellant injured his thoracic spine in the fall
in 2018. Whether the thoracic
spine was injured in the fall is not relevant to the issues that were in dispute
before the Arbitrator
and it is not necessary to consider that finding.
appellant also submits that the Arbitrator erred in concluding that the
appellant injured his lumbar spine in the fall in 2018
when the only evidence to
support that conclusion was recorded a year or more after the incident.
have discussed the evidence upon which the Arbitrator concluded that the lumbar
spine was injured in the fall. I have also explained
why that evidence was
compelling. The fact that the entries were recorded a year after the event does
not detract from the fact that
the history was consistently recorded by three
different practitioners from three different facilities. In those circumstances,
was likely to have been the history provided to the doctors by the appellant
himself. The entries clearly refer to the incident as
causing lumbar symptoms.
It was open to the Arbitrator, on that evidence, and in the absence of any
evidence to the contrary, to
arrive at that conclusion, which was a finding of
determining whether the Arbitrator has erred in respect of a finding of fact,
the principles stated by Barwick CJ in
Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v
have been consistently
applied in the Commission. Adopting those principles, in order to disturb the
Arbitrator’s finding,
the appellant must establish that:
other probabilities so outweigh that chosen by the Arbitrator that it can be
said that his conclusion was wrong;
(b) the fact upon which the inference drawn by the Arbitrator is based must
be wrong, or
(c) material facts were overlooked, or given undue or too little weight, or
the available inference in the opposite sense was so
preponderant that the
Arbitrator’s decision is wrong.
appellant has not established that any of those errors have occurred and the
appellant’s submission is rejected.
appellant asserts that the finding was not open to the Arbitrator without
medical opinion to support the causal connection. Again,
there was ample
evidence to support the Arbitrator’s conclusion and there was no evidence
to the contrary. The Arbitrator was
entitled to determine the causal connection
between the fall in 2018 and the lumbar symptoms on the basis of the factual
before him. In the circumstances of this case, it was not necessary for
a medical expert to provide an opinion on the causal connection.
appellant also asserts that the Arbitrator did not consider the work-related
aggravation in March 2019 and instead attributed
the lumbar complaints to the
fall in 2018. The submission cannot be accepted. If the appellant is referring
to the injury on 26 March
2019, the Arbitrator gave a detailed consideration of
the evidence pertinent to that injury. He accepted the incident had occurred
but, in the context of the other contemporaneous evidence, that evidence did not
establish injury to the lumbar spine.
Arbitrator did not simply attribute the lumbar symptoms to the fall in 2018. He
found that the appellant suffered an aggravation
of his degenerative lumbar
disease as a result of the heavy nature of the work performed by the appellant
over the period of his
employment with the respondent.
appellant complains that the Arbitrator “failed to take into consideration
relevant evidence and thereby committed an error
The appellant does
not identify any such relevant evidence that the Arbitrator failed to consider.
In fact, the Arbitrator gave detailed
consideration to all of the available,
relevant evidence. The submission is rejected.
the above reasons, Ground Two of the appeal fails.
Ground Three: error of law by the Arbitrator determining that
he required expert opinion in order to determine the extent that any
factors contributed to the aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar
appellant correctly cites
Tudor Capital
as authority for the proposition
that an arbitrator is required to base his or her conclusions on probative
material to ensure that
the conclusions reached are not capricious, arbitrary or
without foundation. Further, when making a choice between competing expert
evidence, the Arbitrator is required to use logic and common sense in
determining which view is to be preferred.
appellant does not explain how that authority is applicable to this appeal. As
the respondent submits, the only medical opinion
that supported the claim that
the heavy nature of the appellant’s employment with the respondent caused
injury was that of
Dr Bentivoglio. Thus, Dr Bentivoglio was the only medical
expert to express a view as to whether the respondent’s employment
main contributing factor to the aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar
disease. There was no competing medical evidence
for the Arbitrator to consider
preferable. The Arbitrator was, however, required to assess the probative value
of that opinion. As
Dr Bentivoglio did not record a proper history of the
appellant’s lumbar issues, the Arbitrator reached the conclusion that
there was not a fair climate within which to accept Dr Bentivoglio’s
unreasoned opinion that the appellant’s employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation of the appellant’s lumbar disease.
The Arbitrator gave sound reasons for
rejecting Dr Bentivoglio’s opinion
and his conclusion was not capricious, arbitrary or without foundation.
appellant alleges that the Arbitrator erred by “declining” to
undertake the exercise of determining whether the appellant’s
was the main contributing factor to the aggravation of the appellant’s
lumbar disease. The question to be determined
by the Arbitrator was a factual
question and was required to be determined on the basis of the evidence before
him. The Arbitrator
concluded that he did not have any probative evidence before
him that would assist him to make that determination. The appellant
point to any such evidence that the Arbitrator may have overlooked or given too
little weight, or that was so compelling
that the Arbitrator erred by not
accepting it.
onus rests on the appellant to adduce sufficiently probative evidence to support
the assertions made. The Arbitrator considered
that the appellant’s
evidence did not reach the necessary bar so that he was unable to determine
which of the factors that
contributed to the aggravation of the
appellant’s lumbar disease was the main contributing factor. He did not
decline to undertake
the task he was required to determine.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator erred by concluding that he required
guidance from a medical expert as to the extent of
the contribution from the
various factors that played a part in the aggravation of the appellant’s
lumbar disease. It is correct
to say that the absence of medical evidence
addressing the issue is not necessarily fatal, as observed by Snell DP in
. However, in this case, there was no factual evidence sufficient to
indicate that any one of the factors the Arbitrator considered
contributory
constituted the main contributing factor. In the context of the evidence before
him, the Arbitrator was entitled to
form the view that, without medical opinion
addressing the question, he could not arrive at the relevant conclusion.
the above reasons, Ground Three of the appeal also fails.
appeal from a decision of an Arbitrator to a Presidential member is limited to
the identification of error of either fact, law
or discretion and to the
correction of such error.
appellant has failed to establish any relevant error on the part of the
Arbitrator. The Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination
is therefore
to appeal an interlocutory order is granted pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
appellant’s application to adduce further evidence on the appeal is
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 16 July 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
30 November 2020
Section 352(3A) of the 1998
[2013] NSWCA 351
Application to Resolve a Dispute (reply), p
Respondent’s
Application to Admit Documents, pp
[2009] NSWCA
[2018] NSWWCCPD 54
Elias Bader
[2017] NSWCA
[2014] NSWWCCPD
[2020] NSWWCCPD 9
[76]–[77] (footnotes
Transcript of
proceedings (T),
Black v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCC 241, T
John Holland (Constructions) Pty Limited
[1985] HCA 58
T 34.5–35.7; T
39.17–40.27.
[2001] NSWCA
[2011] NSWCA 375
, [134]–[136]
NSWWCCPD 16
Appellant’s submissions,
(1966) 39 ALJR 505.
Appellant’s
submissions, [12].
352(5) of the 1998 Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.79 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter