URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kelsall v Downer EDI Mining Pty Ltd & Ors [2025] NSWDDT 2 (3 June 2025)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Kelsall v Downer EDI Mining Pty Ltd & Ors
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDDT 2
Hearing Date(s):
23 May 2025
Date of Orders:
3 June 2025
Decision Date:
3 June 2025
Judge Russell SC
See pars [33] and [66] below
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – notice of motion for dismissal – amended
pleadings went beyond the bounds of order for amendment –
order must be
understood in the context in which it was made – failure to comply with a
requirement of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) – an irregularity
– proceedings not invalidated
DUST DISEASES – notice of
motion for discovery – only documents relating to a matter in issue are
discoverable –
examination of the pleadings to ascertain matters in issue
– interests of justice – scope of discovery can be limited
cost and delay is to be considered – no evidence as to cost concerning
discovery – documents relate to matters
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), rr 14.28, 21.1, 21.2, 21.4. 21.8, 35.3
Diseases Tribunal Rules 2019
Cases Cited:
Alexander v Fitzpatrick
[1981] Qd R 359
Birmingham v
[1913] UKLawRpKQB 128
[1913] 3 KB 850
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
Goater [2016] NWSC 710
Hunter New England Local Health District v
Munters Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWSC 788
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
103 CLR 341
Palavi v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 264
v General Motors-Holden’s Pty Ltd
[1975] 1 NSWLR 289
Procedural rulings
David James Kelsall (Plaintiff)
Downer EDI Mining Pty Ltd (First
Daracon Pty Ltd (Second Defendant)
Tarrawonga Coal Pty Ltd
(Third Defendant)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos and V Boutas (Plaintiff)
J Sharpe (First
T Rowles (Second Defendant – in the interests of Coal Mines
Insurance Ltd for liability as employer in a NSW coal mine)
J Tryon (Second
Defendant – in the interests of Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer for
liability as a non-coal mine employer)
D Andersen solicitor (Second Defendant
– for liability other than as an employer)
K McMeniman solicitor (Third
Solicitors:
Vbr Lawyers (Plaintiff)
Meridian Lawyers
(First Defendant)
Sparke Helmore (Second Defendant – in the interests
of Coal Mines Insurance Ltd for liability as employer in a NSW coal
Rankin Ellison (Second Defendant – in the interests of Workers
Compensation Nominal Insurer for liability as a non-coal mine
Ebsworth (Second Defendant – for liability other than as an
McCabes Lawyers (Third Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/00451985
Introduction
judgment concerns two Notices of Motion:
(1) A Notice of Motion filed on 6 May 2025 by the plaintiff Mr David Kelsall
seeking verified discovery from all three defendants
(the Discovery Motion).
(2) An Amended Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 2025 by Mr Andersen solicitor
seeking orders that Mr Kelsall’s pleadings against
his client be set aside
or dismissed or struck out or limited, on the bases identified in the Amended
Notice of Motion (the Dismissal
will deal first with Mr Andersen’s Motion.
Kelsall alleges that he suffers from silicosis and from primary lung cancer with
metastatic spread to the liver. A report dated
8 May 2025 puts Mr
Kelsall’s life expectancy at “6 to 12 months subject to ongoing
assessments and response to planned
therapies”.
Background:
Plaintiff’s Allegations
a Further Second Amended Statement of Claim filed on 29 April 2025 Mr Kelsall
seeks provisional damages for primary lung cancer
with metastatic spread to the
liver, silicosis and rheumatoid arthritis. The First Defendant is Downer EDI
Mining Pty Ltd (Downer).
The Second Defendant is Daracon Engineering Pty Ltd
(Daracon). The Third Defendant is Tarrawonga Coal Pty Ltd (Tarrawonga Coal).
Kelsall pleads as follows:
(1) Downer occupied, managed and operated the Boggabri Coal Mine (the Boggabri
(2) Tarrawonga Coal occupied, managed and operated the Tarrawonga Coal
Mine (the Tarrawonga Mine).
(3) From 2006 to 2008 Mr Kelsall was employed by Woodlands Pastoral Contracting
Pty Ltd (Woodlands) as a farm hand and water cart
(4) During the period of employment by Woodlands Mr Kelsall worked as a water
truck driver at the Boggabri Mine for a couple of months
and worked as the
driver of a tip truck on the construction of a residential subdivision called
Mornington Heights in Gunnedah.
(5) During Mr Kelsall’s employment with Woodlands, while working at the
Boggabri Mine and at Mornington Heights, he was exposed
to and inhaled silica
dust and mixed dust.
(6) During Mr Kelsall’s employment with Woodlands, while he was working at
the Boggabri Mine and at Mornington Heights, Daracon
directed, supervised and
controlled his work, and Mr Kelsall reported to Daracon.
(7) From a date in mid-2008 to a date in August 2009 and from a date in April
2010 to a date in November 2010, Mr Kelsall was employed
by Daromin Engineering
Pty Ltd (Daromin) to work at the Boggabri Mine, where he was exposed to and
inhaled silica dust, coal dust
and mixed dust.
(8) From late August 2009 to April 2010, and again from November 2010 to 2022,
Mr Kelsall was employed by Daracon in various roles,
including at the Boggabri
Mine and the Tarrawonga Mine.
(9) In this work, Mr Kelsall was exposed to and inhaled silica dust, coal dust
and mixed dust.
(10) During employment with both Daracon and Daromin, Mr Kelsall also worked at
ten nominated sites (these are pleaded in par 6B
of the Further Second Amended
Statement of Claim), largely in the field of construction (the Ten Sites).
(11) During all of Mr Kelsall’s periods of employment by Daromin, his work
was directed, supervised and controlled by Daracon,
and Mr Kelsall reported to
Kelsall pleads that:
(1) The three defendants owed him a duty of care.
(2) The defendants knew or ought to have known that if Mr Kelsall was exposed to
and inhaled dust including coal dust, silica dust
and mixed dust, there was a
real risk that he could contract lung diseases including silicosis and lung
(3) As a consequence of dust exposure during Mr Kelsall’s employment by
Daracon, Daromin and Woodlands, including at the Boggabri
Mine and the
Tarrawonga Mine, and also at the Ten Sites, Mr Kelsall has contracted lung
diseases, including lung cancer with metastatic
spread to the liver, silicosis
and rheumatoid arthritis.
(4) The cause of those diseases was the negligence of the defendants, as well as
breaches of the contractual and statutory duties
as pleaded in par 11 of the
Further Second Amended Statement of Claim.
Representation of Daracon
Rowles of Counsel instructed by Sparke Helmore appears for Coal Mines Insurance
Limited (CMI) as the insurer covering employment
in New South Wales coal mines.
I will refer to the interests represented by Mr Rowles as “Daracon
Tryon of Counsel instructed by Rankin Ellison appears for the Workers
Compensation Nominal Insurer (WCNI), being the insurer of
Daracon in relation to
its liability as an employer at sites in New South Wales other than coal mines.
I will refer to the interests
represented by Mr Tryon as “Daracon
Andersen solicitor of HWL Ebsworth appears for Daracon, according to the
Appearance filed on 5 May 2025, “limited to the
plaintiff’s alleged
exposure to silica dust, coal dust and mixed dust in work not being work in the
course of the plaintiff’s
employment by Daracon Engineering Pty
Ltd”. Mr Andersen described this, in a shorthand way, as an
occupier’s liability
claim. I will adopt the same shorthand and refer to
the interests represented by Mr Andersen as “Daracon (OL)”.
The Dismissal Motion
Orders Sought
(OL) seeks orders which would effectively remove the claim against it from Mr
Kelsall’s pleadings. Mr Andersen relies
Section 63(3)(a)
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) (the CPA)
seeking to set aside the claim against Daracon (OL).
Section 61(3)(a)
of the CPA seeking a dismissal of that part of the
proceedings against Daracon (OL).
Section 61(3)(b)
of the CPA seeking an order striking out or limiting the
claim against Daracon (OL).
Section 61(3)(d)
of the CPA seeking an order striking out the claim against
Daracon (OL).
Rule 14.28(1)(c)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (the UCPR)
seeking to strike out the claim against Daracon (OL) as an abuse of process.
the first iterations of his pleading, Mr Kelsall sued Daracon in its capacity as
his employer. The defence of the claim was taken
up by Daracon (CMI), but only
in relation to the employment of Mr Kelsall by Daracon in coal mines in NSW.
From the start of the
case, Mr Kelsall had also alleged that he was employed by
Daracon in locations other than coal mines. There is no evidence to explain
Daracon did not engage its workers compensation insurer (WCNI) to defend this
aspect of the claim against Daracon.
matter came before the Tribunal on 14 April 2025 when this lacuna in the
representation of Daracon, and in the Defence filed by
CMI on behalf of Daracon,
was ventilated. On that occasion complaint was made by several of the defendants
that the employment history
put forward by Mr Kelsall had changed from time to
time, and there were discrepancies between his pleadings, a statement made by
Kelsall and served upon the defendants, and particulars provided from time to
time. In order to enable each defendant to know
the case it had to meet, I made
an order on 14 April 2025 for an affidavit to be filed by the plaintiff.
Tzouganatos, counsel for Mr Kelsall, on that occasion also indicated that the
affidavit of the plaintiff would be followed by an
amended pleading, to make
clear to each defendant the case to be run against it. The relevant orders made
on 14 April 2025 were as
(1) Order plaintiff to file and serve an affidavit by the plaintiff by 22 April
(2) Order plaintiff to file and serve a Second Amended Statement of Claim by 24
April 2025.
to this point there had been no claim pleaded against Daracon (OL). The case
against Daracon had been in relation to employment
by Daracon in coal mines and
employment by Daracon at locations other than coal mines. The order for the
filing and serving of an
amended pleading was not an order made in a vacuum, but
an order made to reflect these matters raised with the Tribunal on 14 April
New Claim Pleaded against Daracon (OL)
Andersen complains, quite rightly in my view, that the filing of the amended
pleading (first on 24 April 2025, with a minor amendment
in a later iteration on
29 April 2025) went beyond the bounds of the basis for the proposed amendment.
Tzouganatos was very frank in his submissions as to how this occurred. He
informed the Tribunal that until preparation of the plaintiff’s
the plaintiff had not given instructions that when he worked for other entities
(Woodlands and Daromin), his work was
directed and supervised by Daracon. This
allegation, not raised by earlier pleadings, and not raised before the Tribunal
on 14 April
2025, found its way into the amended pleading filed on 24 April
paragraph 5A referred to the plaintiff being employed from 2006 to 2008 by
Woodlands, during which time Mr Kelsall worked as a
water truck driver at the
Boggabri Mine. New paragraph 5B alleged that in 2008 Mr Kelsall worked while
employed by Woodlands at a
residential subdivision at Mornington Heights in
Gunnedah. It was pleaded that at both locations Mr Kelsall was exposed to dust.
New paragraph 5C pleaded that during Mr Kelsall’s employment with
Woodlands, while he was working at the Boggabri Mine and
at Mornington Heights,
“his work was directed, supervised, controlled, and he reported to,
6A of the 24 April 2025 version of the Statement of Claim was not a new
amendment. It alleged that from 2008 to 2009, and
then from April to November
2010 Mr Kelsall was employed by Daromin at various locations that included
Boggabri Mine, where he was
exposed to dust.
paragraph 6B set out Ten Sites (other than coal mines) where Mr Kelsall was
employed by Daracon and Daromin. New paragraph 6C
pleaded that during employment
by Daromin, at various locations, “his work was directed, supervised,
controlled, and he reported
to, Daracon”.
can be seen that these new paragraphs in the pleading filed on 24 April 2025
made claims for the first time against Daracon (OL).
As previously recited,
those claims were not the subject of a submission to the Tribunal, when an order
was made for amendment of
Mr Kelsall’s pleading.
Andersen wrote to the solicitors for Mr Kelsall pointing these matters out. He
was met with a blunt response, which was that Mr
Kelsall was entitled to so
amend, because of the broad terms of the order for
Consideration
my view, any order for amendment is based either upon evidence or upon
submissions or both. The words of an order cannot be read
in ignorance of the
application which is made for amendment. I accept the submission of Mr Andersen
that, subject to matters discussed
immediately below, the new claims against
Daracon (OL) should not have been pleaded, as they are outside the bounds of the
for amendment made on 14 April 2025, when that order is understood in the
context in which it was made.
Tzouganatos submitted that if orders for strike out or dismissal were made in
relation to the Daracon (OL) claim, then the plaintiff
would be forced to put on
a formal application for leave to amend, and would most likely obtain such
leave. In the alternative, Mr
Tzouganatos submitted that if the Daracon (OL)
claims were struck out, Mr Kelsall would be entitled to file a second Statement
Claim, limited to pleading the Daracon (OL) claims. An application would then
be made to have the two matters heard together, or
more likely,
consolidated.
of the CPA provides as follows:
“63 Directions with respect to procedural irregularities
(cf Act No 52 1970,
; Act No 9 1973,
section 159
; Act No 11 1970,
section 75A)
(1) This section applies to proceedings in connection with which there is, by
reason of anything done or omitted to be done, a failure
to comply with any
requirement of this Act or of rules of court, whether in respect of time, place,
manner, form or content or in
any other respect.
(2) Such a failure--
(a) is to be treated as an irregularity, and
(b) subject to subsection (3), does not invalidate the proceedings, any step
taken in the proceedings or any document, judgment or
order in the
proceedings.
(3) The court may do either or both of the following in respect of
proceedings the subject of a failure referred to in subsection
(a) it may, by order, set aside the proceedings, any step taken in the
proceedings or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings,
either wholly
or in part,
(b) it may exercise its powers to allow amendments and to make orders
dealing with the proceedings generally.
(4) The court may not take action of the kind referred to in subsection (3)
(a) on the application of any party unless the application
is made within a
reasonable time and, in any case, before the party takes any fresh step in the
proceedings after becoming aware
of the failure.”
find that the addition of the Daracon (OL) claims in the further pleadings filed
on 24 April 2025 and 29 April 2025 is an instance
of a failure to comply with a
requirement of the CPA or the rules of court. No application was made on 14
April 2025 to amend to
add a claim (which would be completely new) against
Daracon (OL).
regard to the fact that this case has not been set down for trial, and because
in my view Mr Andersen can be given a sufficient
opportunity to properly
represent Daracon (OL), I will treat the failure to comply with the amendment
provisions as an irregularity
which does not invalidate the proceedings –
of the CPA.
my view I should exercise my powers to allow amendments and make orders dealing
with the proceedings generally, to regularise the
latest version of Mr
Kelsall’s pleadings filed on 29 April 2025. True it is that Mr
Kelsall’s solicitors stated that
they would make no formal application to
bring Daracon (OL) into the proceedings, but Mr Tzouganatos took the Falstaffian
that discretion was the better part of valour, and made such an
application orally on the hearing of the Dismissal Motion
power to amend documents generally is to be found in
of the CPA.
of the CPA requires the court to follow the “dictates of justice”.
Having regard to the stage that the proceedings have
reached, and because Mr
Andersen can be given sufficient time to properly prepare any defence of
Daracon (OL), I propose to make
an order nunc pro tunc under
of the CPA for Mr Kelsall to have leave to amend in accordance with the pleading
already filed on 29 April 2025.
effect of this will be to leave Mr Andersen and his client Daracon (OL) in the
proceedings. Mr Andersen has raised complaint on
several occasions, and in his
affidavits, that having been brought into the proceedings relatively late, and
given that there will
need to be an expedited hearing having regard to the
terminal prognosis of Mr Kelsall, he would not have sufficient time to prepare
the case for Daracon (OL). I note that Mr Andersen has achieved a considerable
amount of progress already, even though he has only
had a short time. The matter
will have to be case managed, and the Tribunal will monitor preparation for the
hearing, including giving
consideration to any indulgence to be granted to Mr
Andersen so that he can properly represent his client.
affidavit by Mr Kelsall dated 22 April 2025 is a very detailed document, and at
the very least Daracon (OL) should soon be in
a position to participate in the
taking of the plaintiff’s evidence. While it may be the case that there
was a prior statement
of Mr Kelsall which is in some respects inconsistent with
the affidavit, and while there may have been earlier pleadings and particulars
which are inconsistent with that affidavit, that is very much a forensic problem
to be faced by Mr Tzouganatos. Such prior inconsistent
statements will
presumably provide fertile ground for cross examination of Mr Kelsall concerning
his employment and general industrial
(WCNI) is in the same position as Mr Andersen’s client having only
recently come into the matter. However, Daracon (CMI)
has been in the matter for
a considerable period of time, and presumably has done some of the work
necessary to prepare the case
for hearing on behalf of Daracon (WCNI) and
Daracon (OL). Similarly, the first and third defendants have been in the case
and they too must have taken some steps to prepare their cases. All
of this material should be made available to the legal representatives
Daracon (WCMI) and Daracon (OL).
there was discussion about the costs of the Dismissal Motion, I propose to make
an order that such costs be reserved. As a preliminary
observation, I say that
given that Mr Andersen’s submissions have been accepted, he would have a
strong argument for costs
in favour of Daracon (OL).
the Dismissal Motion
orders on the Dismissal Motion are:
(1) Grant leave nunc pro tunc to the plaintiff to amend his pleading in
accordance with the Further Second Amended Statement filed
on 29 April 2025.
(2) Reserve the costs of the Amended Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 2025.
(3) Otherwise dismiss the Amended Notice of Motion filed on 20 May 2025.
The Discovery Motion
Discovery Provisions
of documents in the Dust Diseases Tribunal is governed by r 4 of the
Diseases Tribunal Rules 2019
(NSW) (DDT Rules).
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR) applies in the Tribunal, subject to adaptations specified
in r 4 of the DDT Rules.
reference is made below to the terms of a rule in the UCPR, that rule will
be reproduced incorporating the adaptations required
by r 4 of the DDT
21.1 of the UCPR deals with definitions for the purposes of Div 1 of
Part 21, which concerns discovery and inspection of documents.
21.1(2) provides as follows:
“(2) For the purposes of this Division, a document or matter is to be
taken to be relevant to a fact in issue if it could,
or contains material that
could, rationally affect the assessment of the probability of the existence of
that fact (otherwise than
by relating solely to the credibility of a witness),
regardless of whether the document or matter would be admissible in
21.2 of the UCPR provides as follows:
“(1) The court may order that party B must give discovery to party A
(a) documents within a class or classes specified in the order, or
(b) one or more samples (selected in such manner as the court may specify) of
documents within such a class.
(2) A class of documents must not be specified in more general terms than the
court considers to be justified in the circumstances.
(3) Subject to subrule (2), a class of documents may be specified—
(a) by relevance to one or more facts in issue, or
(b) by description of the nature of the documents and the period within which
they were brought into existence, or
(c) in such other manner as the court considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
(4) An order for discovery may not be made in respect of a document unless the
document is relevant to a fact in issue.”
basis for an order for discovery, is that discovery is necessary in the
interests of a fair trial:
Percy v General Motors-Holden’s Pty
[1975] 1 NSWLR 289.
can be seen that r 21.2(3)(a) requires the court to take into account the
definition of “relevant to a fact in issue”
contained in r
21.3 of the UCPR, as amended by r 4 of the DDT Rules, is as follows:
“(1) Party B must comply with an order for discovery by serving on party A
a list of documents that deals with all of the documents
(other than excluded
documents) referred to in the order.
(2) The list of documents—
(a) must be divided into two parts—
(i) Part 1 relating to documents in the possession of party B, and
(ii) Part 2 relating to documents that are not, but that at any
time have been, in the possession of party B, and
(b) must include a brief description (by reference to nature and date or period)
of each document or group of documents and, in the
case of a group, the number
of documents in that group, and
(c) must specify, against the description of each document or group in Part 2 of
the list of documents, the person (if any) who party
B believes to be in
possession of the document or group of documents, and
(d) must identify any document that is claimed to be a privileged document, and
specify the circumstances under which the privilege
is claimed to arise.
(3) Party B must comply with the requirements of subrule (1)—
(a) within 28 days after an order for discovery is made, or
(b) within such other period (whether more or less than 28 days) as the order
may specify.”
21.4 of the UCPR, as amended by r 4 of the DDT Rules, is as
“(1) The list of documents must be accompanied by—
(a) a supporting affidavit, and
(b) if party B has a solicitor, by a solicitor’s certificate of advice.
See rule 35.3 as to who may make such an affidavit.
(2) The affidavit referred to in subrule (1)(a) must state that the
(a) has made reasonable inquiries as to the documents referred to in the order,
(b) believes that there are no documents (other than excluded documents) falling
within any of the classes specified in the order
that are, or that at any
time have been, in the possession of party B (other than those referred to
in Part 1 or 2 of the list of
documents), and
(c) believes that the documents in Part 1 of the list of documents are within
the possession of party B, and
(d) believes that the documents in Part 2 of the list of documents are within
the possession of the persons (if any) respectively
specified in that Part,
(e) as to any document in Part 2 of the list of documents in respect of which no
such person is specified, has no belief as to whose
possession the document is
and must state, in respect of any document that is claimed to be a privileged
document, the facts relied on as establishing the existence
of the privilege.
(3) The solicitor’s certificate of advice referred to in subrule (1)(b)
must state that the solicitor—
(a) has advised party B as to the obligations arising under an order for
discovery (and if party B is a corporation, which officers
of party B have been
so advised), and
(b) is not aware of any documents within any of the classes specified in the
order (other than excluded documents) that are, or that
within the last 6 months
before the commencement of the proceedings have been, in the possession of party
B (other than those referred
to in Part 1 or 2 of the list of documents).”
persons who may make an affidavit are set out in UCPR r 35.3. In the case of a
corporation, the affidavit must be made “by
a member or officer
of the corporation”.
affidavit verifying a list of documents is conclusive and must be accepted by
the parties seeking discovery as being sufficient
Birmingham v
[1913] UKLawRpKQB 128
[1913] 3 KB 850
at 855. Generally, cross-examination on the
affidavit verifying is not permitted.
addition to the affidavit verifying the list, there must be a
solicitor’s certificate of advice which states the matters
required by r
because proceedings in the Tribunal are personal injury claims, the Tribunal
must take into account r 21.8 of the UCPR. As
modified by r 4 of the DDT Rules,
r 21.8 is as follows:
“In any proceedings on a common law claim—
(a) for damages arising out of the death of, or bodily injury to, any person,
(b) for contribution in respect of damages so arising,
an order for discovery may not be made in relation to any document
unless the order is necessary to ensure that the outstanding issues
dispute are properly tried.”
Discovery Principles
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
(1959) 103 CLR 341
Menzies J said
(at p 345):
“I now turn to the pleadings to determine what are the matters at issue
between the parties, because discovery is a procedure
directed towards obtaining
a proper examination and determination of these issues – not towards
assisting a party on a fishing
expedition. Only a document which relates in some
way to a matter in issue is discoverable, but it is sufficient if it would, or
would lead to a train of enquiry which would, either advance a party’s own
case or damage that of his adversary.”
relevant legal principles were summarised by Bellew J in
England Local Health District v Munters Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWSC 788
as follows:
“(1) Discovery cannot be ordered other than in respect of
documents that are relevant to a fact in issue. It is therefore
to demonstrate a connection between the class of documents of which
discovery is sought, and a fact or facts in issue.
Where a class is specified in
some manner other than by relevance to a fact in issue, it must be apparent that
the class so described
will capture only documents that are so
Graphite Energy Pty Ltd v Lloyd Energy Systems Pty
[2014] NSWSC 1326
(2) The facts in issue will be primarily identified by an
examination of the pleadings:
Schlam v WA Trustee Executor & Agency
[1964] WAR 178
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
(3) For the purposes of discovery, a document need not be
admissible, and need not be directly probative of the existence of the
issue, to be relevant. It follows that in a general sense, the test for
discovery under the rule is relatively wide:
Hutchinson v
[1875] UKLawRpKQB 94
(1875) 1 QBD 138
(4) The relevance of a document to a fact in issue is to
be determined by its capacity to rationally affect the assessment of
probability of the existence of the contentious fact:
Financiere et Commerciale du Pacifique v Peruvian Guano Co
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 95
(5) Discovery will be ordered only where it is reasonably
required for the fair disposition of the proceedings, and where its legitimate
purposes include to obtain evidence and to avoid surprise: In the matter
Felan’s Fisheries Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1262
(6) Discovery involves an “inroad”, in the
interests of justice, upon the right of the individual to keep his own
to himself:
Expense Reduction Analysts Group Pty Ltd v
Armstrong Strategic Management and Marketing Pty Ltd
(2013) 250 CLR
[2013] HCA 46
Harman v Home Department State
[1983] 1 AC 280
[1982] 2 WLR 338
(7) The discretion conferred by r 21.2 must be exercised having
regard to the provisions of
Civil Procedure Act
(NSW). In this regard, case management principles become relevant,
although they are not necessarily determinative:
Expense Reduction
Analysts Group Pty Ltd
(8) Although proper compliance with a party’s obligations
of discovery is an important and necessary part of modern litigation,
necessarily has the capacity under the rules to limit discovery, or control the
process of giving discovery, so that it
does not become unduly
Con Ange v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd
(9) There is no entitlement to “chain of enquiry”
discovery. If the process of discovery is abusive, or compliance
with an order
too onerous, the court can (and should) control it:
Palavi v Radio 2UE
Sydney Pty Limited
[2011] NSWCA 264.
cases refer to the following principles:
(1) The scope of discovery may be limited, to avoid the potential for discovery
to give rise to oppressive and disproportionate costs
and to impede
the “overriding purpose” in the CPA
Palavi v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 264.
(2) Courts should be alert to the cost, and associated delay and complexity,
associated with extensive discovery:
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
[2016] NWSC 710 at [31]-[34].
(3) The court may relieve a party from giving discovery where the extent of
discovery would be oppressive:
Alexander v Fitzpatrick
Discovery Sought from Downer
“A” sets out the classes of documents which Mr Kelsall says should
be discovered by Downer. The first five classes,
broadly speaking, concern the
knowledge and means of knowledge of Downer in relation to the risk of exposure
to silica, coal and
mixed dust, and the precautions and measures which could
have been taken to reduce or minimise the risk of injury. Paragraph 5 of
Annexure “A” seeks a list of the publications, journals, articles,
reports and similar documents held by Downer relating
to the risks posed by dust
and the availability of preventative measures.
9 of the Further Second Amended Statement of Claim filed on 29 April 2025 pleads
as follows:
“At all material times the Defendants knew or ought to have known that if
the Plaintiff was exposed to and inhaled dust including
coal dust, silica dust
and mixed dusts that there was a real risk that he could contract lung diseases
including silicosis and lung
cancer as a consequence thereof.”
Defence filed by Downer does not admit par 9. This was reiterated at the hearing
of the Discovery Motion by Mr Sharpe, counsel
for Downer. This means that facts
in issue on the pleadings include whether Downer knew or ought to have known of
the risks of dust,
and the means of guarding against those risks.
these classes of documents go to facts put in issue by Downer, Mr Kelsall is
entitled to a discovery order for those five classes
of documents.
6 of Annexure “A” seeks documents in relation to the inspection and
maintenance of mechanical equipment at the
Boggabri Mine operated by workers
including the plaintiff. One of the particulars of negligence alleged is a
failure to provide exhaust
equipment or adequate ventilation in areas where Mr
Kelsall worked. Another particular of negligence is failure to ensure that the
seals of cabins prevented dust entering the machinery operated by Mr Kelsall.
Downer denies negligence. Thus the state of repair
and maintenance of the
machinery operated by Mr Kelsall is a pleaded fact in issue. Mr Kelsall is
entitled to a discovery order
for the documents in par 6 of Annexure
the class of documents is too broad. It must be limited to the maintenance of
mechanical equipment operated by the plaintiff.
7 and 8 of Annexure “A” seek documents relating to dust monitoring
or dust surveys conducted at the Boggabri
Mine. The solicitors for Downer list
nine pages of the documents which Downer has in these classes – see DX 1.
The existence
of dust monitoring and surveys is also relevant to Downer’s
knowledge of the risks of exposure to dust. Mr Kelsall is entitled
discovery order for all of the documents described in pars 7 and 8 of Annexure
9 of the Annexures “A” and “C” seeks documents relating
to the plaintiff’s presence at and
work upon the Boggabri Mine. This
matter is not admitted by Downer, which goes further and denies that Downer owed
Mr Kelsall a duty
of care as pleaded. The solicitor for Downer has listed some
documents in this class – see DX 1. Mr Kelsall is entitled to
a discovery
order for all of the documents described in par 9 of Annexure “A”.
10 of Annexure “A” seeks documents relating to the engagement,
appointment, occupation, management and operation
by Downer of the Boggabri
Mine. This is an allegation made in par 5 of Mr Kelsall’s pleading, which
is not admitted by Downer.
The solicitor for Downer has listed some but not all
of documents in this class – see DX1. Mr Kelsall is entitled to a
order for all of the documents described in par 10 of Annexure
the reason explained by Mr Tzouganatos in par 10 of MFI 1, the end date for each
class of document should be 31 December 2016,
not 31 December 2014.
Sharpe, counsel for Downer, submitted that Downer was a public company and a
large organisation. The most basic ASIC search shows
that Downer is not a public
company. Mr Sharpe submitted that extensive investigations would have to be
carried out to ascertain
whether Downer had documents in classes 1-5 of Annexure
“A”. There was no evidence of the extent of the enquiries that
have to be made. Nor was there any evidence concerning the cost of those
Sharpe also submitted that rather than seeking discovery, the plaintiff could
serve a Notice to Admit Facts, or a Notice to Produce,
or administer
Interrogatories. There is no compulsion to make admissions on a Notice to Admit
Facts, although failure to make appropriate
admissions may have cost
consequences. There would be little difference in time and expense involved in
complying with a Notice to
Produce, as opposed to complying with discovery.
Finally, and perhaps to take a cynical view, the art of answering
Interrogatories
is to give away as little information as possible. By contrast,
any party ordered to provide discovery has to “put its cards
table”, to use the phrase adopted by Mr Tzouganatos in his oral
submissions. The documents which are in the possession
and control of Downer are
known only to Downer and are not known to Mr Kelsall or his advisors. In my view
discovery is necessary
“to ensure that the outstanding issues in dispute
are properly tried” – r 21.8 of the UCPR as modified by r 4 of
Discovery Sought from Daracon
“B” to the Discovery Motion sets out the classes of documents which
Mr Kelsall says should be discovered by Daracon.
The first five paragraphs are
in very similar terms to those in pars 1-5 of Annexure “A”. In its
Defence (filed for CMI)
Daracon does not admit any of the matters in the
pleadings concerning knowledge or means of knowledge. Mr Kelsall is entitled to
a discovery order for all of the documents described in pars 1-5 of Annexure
reasoning above in relation to Downer also applies to pars 6-9 of Annexure
“B”. These classes of documents all relate
to facts in issue on the
pleadings. Mr Kelsall is entitled to a discovery order for all the documents
described in pars 6-9 of Annexure
Sought from Tarrawonga Coal
“C” sets out the classes of documents which Mr Kelsall says should
be discovered by Tarrawonga Coal. Paragraphs
1-5 are in cognate terms to pars
1-5 of Annexure “A”. On these topics Tarrawonga Coal does not admit
the allegations
in Mr Kelsall’s pleading. Mr Kelsall is entitled to a
discovery order for all of the documents described in pars 1-5 of Annexure
one variation, Tarrawonga Coal concedes that Mr Kelsall is entitled to discovery
of classes 6-9 in Annexure “C” –
see MFI 2. Tarrawonga Coal
proposes that par 6 of Annexure “C” be confined to water trucks
operated by Mr Kelsall, rather
than all equipment operated by all workers. This
limitation is appropriate, as Mr Kelsall says in his affidavit that his work at
the Tarrawonga Mine only ever involved driving the water cart. Mr Kelsall is
entitled to a discovery order for all of the documents
described in pars 6-9 of
list of agreed classes in MFI 2 does not mention par 10 of Annexure
“C”. While in its Defence filed on 2 May 2025
Tarrawonga Coal admits
that it was the operator of the Tarrawonga Mine, it does not admit the
additional allegations made by Mr Kelsall
that Tarrawonga Coal occupied and
managed the Tarrawonga Mine. These allegations are thus facts in issue. Mr
Kelsall is entitled
to a discovery order for all of the documents described in
par 10 of Annexure “C”.
Orders on the Discovery
the various changes discussed above, I make the following orders on the
Discovery Motion:
(1) Order the First Defendant to provide verified discovery of the following
classes of documents:
(a) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Downer EDI
Mining Pty Limited (and its officers, employees and
agents) prior to 31 December
2016, of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed dust.
(b) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Downer EDI
Mining Pty Limited (and its officers, employees and
agents) prior to 31 December
2016, of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed dust to
workers employed in coal
mines including the Boggabri Coal Mine in New South
(c) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2016 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust.
(d) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2016 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust to workers employed in coal mines
including the Boggabri Coal Mine in New
South Wales.
(e) Documents relating to the existence and content prior to 31 December 2016 of
libraries maintained and operated by Downer EDI
Mining Pty Limited including all
publications, books, journals, catalogues, articles, memoranda and reports
relating to:
(i) The risk of injury from the inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust;
(ii) The risk of injury to workers employed in coal mines including the Boggabri
Coal Mine in New South Wales from the inhalation
of silica, coal and mixed
(iii) The availability of measures to minimise or eliminate the generation and
accumulation of silica, coal and mixed dust at the
Boggabri Coal Mine in New
South Wales.
(f) Documents relating to the inspection and maintenance of mechanical equipment
operated by the plaintiff at the Boggabri Coal Mine
in New South Wales in the
period 1 September 2008 to 31 December 2016.
(g) Documents relating to the performance of and results from monitoring and
testing of the atmosphere at the Boggabri Coal Mine
in New South Wales generally
and inside machines including trucks, diggers and dozers at the Boggabri Coal
Mine, for silica, coal
and mixed dust.
(h) Documents including the results of any dust survey(s), relating to the
presence and extent of dust including silica, coal and
mixed dust, at the
Boggabri Coal Mine generally and inside the machines including trucks, diggers
and dozers at the Boggabri Coal
(i) Documents relating to the plaintiff’s presence at and work upon the
Boggabri Coal Mine.
(j) Documents relating to the engagement, appointment, occupation, management
and operation by Downer EDI Mining Pty Limited of the
Boggabri Coal Mine in the
period prior to 31 December 2016.
(2) Order the Second Defendant to provide verified discovery of the following
classes of documents:
(a) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Daracon
Engineering Pty Ltd (and its officers, employees and agents)
prior to 31
December 2021, of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed
(b) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Daracon
Engineering Pty Ltd (and its officers, employees and agents)
prior to 31
December 2021, of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed
dust to workers employed on civil works
and in coal mines including the Boggabri
Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New South Wales.
(c) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2021 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust.
(d) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2021 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust to workers employed on civil works and
in coal mines including the Boggabri
Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in
New South Wales.
(e) Documents relating to the existence and content prior to 31 December 2021 of
libraries maintained and operated by Daracon Engineering
Pty Ltd including all
publications, books, journals, catalogues, articles, memoranda and reports
relating to:
(i) The risk of injury from the inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust;
(ii) The risk of injury to workers employed on civil works and in coal mines
including the Boggabri Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga
Coal Mine in New South Wales
from the inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust;
(iii) The availability of measures to minimise or eliminate the generation and
accumulation of silica, coal and mixed dust during
civil works and at the
Boggabri Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New South Wales.
(f) Documents relating to the inspection and maintenance of mechanical equipment
operated by the plaintiff in the period 1 September
2008 to 31 December 2021.
(g) Documents relating to the performance of and results from monitoring and
testing of the atmosphere at civil works upon which
the plaintiff was employed
and at the Boggabri Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New South Wales
generally and inside machines
including trucks, diggers and dozers, for silica,
coal and mixed dust.
(h) Documents including the results of any dust survey(s), relating to the
presence and extent of dust including silica, coal and
mixed dust, in the
atmosphere at civil works upon which the plaintiff was employed and at the
Boggabri Coal Mine and the Tarrawonga
Coal Mine in New South Wales generally and
inside machines including trucks, diggers and dozers, for silica, coal and mixed
(i) The plaintiff’s employment and personnel records.
(3) Order the Third Defendant to provide verified discovery of the following
classes of documents:
(a) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Tarrawonga
Coal Pty Ltd (and its officers, employees and agents)
prior to 31 December 2021,
of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed dust.
(b) Documents relating to the knowledge and means of knowledge of Tarrawonga
Coal Pty Ltd (and its officers, employees and agents)
prior to 31 December 2021,
of the risk of injury from exposure to silica, coal and mixed dust to workers
employed in coal mines including
the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New South Wales.
(c) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2021 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust.
(d) Documents relating to the availability prior to 31 December 2021 of
precautions and measures to reduce or minimise the risk of
injury from the
inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust to workers employed in coal mines
including the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in
New South Wales.
(e) Documents relating to the existence and content prior to 31 December 2021 of
libraries maintained and operated by Tarrawonga
Coal Pty Ltd including all
publications, books, journals, catalogues, articles, memoranda and reports
relating to:
(i) The risk of injury from the inhalation of silica, coal and mixed dust;
(ii) The risk of injury to workers employed in coal mines including the
Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New South Wales from the inhalation
of silica, coal and
mixed dust;
(iii) The availability of measures to minimise or eliminate the generation and
accumulation of silica, coal and mixed dust at the
Tarrawonga Coal Mine in New
South Wales.
(f) Documents relating to the inspection and maintenance of water trucks
operated by the plaintiff at the Tarrawonga Coal Mine in
New South Wales in the
period 1 May 2019 to 31 December 2021.
(g) Documents relating to the performance of and results from monitoring and
testing of the atmosphere at the Tarrawonga Coal Mine
in New South Wales
generally and inside machines including trucks, diggers and dozers at the
Tarrawonga Coal Mine, for silica, coal
and mixed dust.
(h) Documents including the results of any dust survey(s), relating to the
presence and extent of dust including silica, coal and
mixed dust, at the
Tarrawonga Coal Mine generally and inside the machines including trucks, diggers
and dozers at the Tarrawonga
(i) Documents relating to the plaintiff’s presence at and work upon the
Tarrawonga Coal Mine.
(j) Documents relating to the engagement, appointment, occupation, management
and operation by Tarrawonga Coal Pty Ltd of the Tarrawonga
Coal Mine in the
period prior to 31 December 2021.
(4) Reserve the costs of the Notice of Motion filed on 6 May 2025.
(5) I will hear the parties in relation to the length of time required to comply
with discovery orders, and as to the further directions
necessary to list this
matter for hearing, noting that the plaintiff alleges a significant claim for
future loss of earnings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter