URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JOVIC v CHIROPRACTORS REGISTRATION BOARD [2010] NSWCHT 3 (1 June 2010)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
MATTER NUMBER: CH04/2009
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CP
DANICA JOVIC
REASONS FOR
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: Jovic v Chiropractors Registration Board
[2010] NSWCHT 2
PARTIES: DANICA JOVIC (Appellant) represented by Mr T Williams, Solicitor.
Chiropractors Registration Board (Respondent) represented by Mr S Benson,
Barrister instructed by Mr Boyd Solicitor, Crown Solicitors
FILE NUMBER: CH4/2009
TRIBUNAL: Cedric Vass
(Chairperson)
Roger Engel (Chiropractor Member)
Peter Bull (Chiropractor Member)
James Prior (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 28 January & 1 February 2010
DATE OF ORDER: 1 February 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 1 June 2010
CATCHWORDS:
Chiropractors Tribunal – refusal by Board to grant
registration – person convicted of an offence – person rendered
unfit in public interest to practise chiropractic
LEGISLATION CITED:
Chiropractors Act 2001
Drugs Misuse Act 1986
(Queensland)
and Regulations Schedule 1 and
LIST OF CASES:
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales (1957)97 CLR 279.
A Solicitor v Council of New South Wales Law Society
Clyne v NSW Bar Association (1960) 104 CLR 18
Blair v Curran
[1939] HCA 23
(1939) 62 CLR 464
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Foreman v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[1994] NSWCA 69
34 NSW LR 408.
Health Care Complaints commission v Martin
(2009) NSW NMT 3
Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
(2007) NSW CA 267.
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) NSW SC 297
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wingate
(2007) NSW CA 326.
Health Care Complaints Commission v McKay
(2007) NSW MT 5.
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of N.S.W. (2009) NSW
September 2009)
Lyons (NMT No.003 of 2006)
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal Decided
Tribunal was satisfied that, even though the Appellant (Danica Jovic) was on the
March, 2008 convicted for one count of possession
of a dangerous drug (cocaine), the circumstances of the offence did not render
her unfit in the public interest to practise chiropractic.
February 2010 this Tribunal ordered that the
decision of the Registration Board made on the 25
August, 2009 to refuse the registration of the Appellant be revoked and that the
Appellant be registered as a Chiropractor upon the
production of evidence as to
the successful completion of her parole.
Appellant’s application for costs was reserved.
The Conviction
March 2008, the Appellant was convicted after a
Trial in Queensland and sentenced to 4 years imprisonment for one count of
of a dangerous drug (cocaine) under
Drugs Misuse Act,
The Appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal Supreme Court of
Queensland and on 12
September, 2008 an Appeal
against conviction was refused but the sentence was reduced to 2 years and a
parole release date of the
March 2009 was fixed.
The Appellant was incarcerated for one year.
Appellant’s Background
Appellant had a number of jobs from the age of 9 up to the age of 17 while at
school. At the age of 17 she completed a security
guard course and for 2 years
worked as a security guard to fund payment of her University fees.
graduated in 1995 with a Masters Degree in Chiropractic
travelled to, Italy, Germany, Switzerland, England, Austria and Hungary, the war
area of Bosnia and a number of cities in the
US. On these trips she worked in
practices to gain experience.
In September, 1995 she was selected to work in Zimbabwe at the
All African Games to treat contestants.
1996 she started her own Chiropractic business. The business expanded to the
point where she employed five full time staff.
2005 she commenced her own event management business and sold that business in
The Appellant formed a relationship with Mr Cele Markovski in February, 2000. Mr
Markovski had business interests in Queensland.
Mr Markovski re-located to
Queensland in March 2001. The Appellant followed Mr Markovski to Queensland in
July, 2001 and between
July 2001 and November, 2003, she travelled to Sydney
monthly to treat her regular patients. She sold her chiropractic business
March, 2004 Mr Markovski was charged with two counts of Trafficking in dangerous
drugs and one count of possession under
Drugs Misuse Act
(Qld). The Appellant was also charged with possession.
Prior to the Appellant’s arrest, physical surveillance and telephone
intercepts had been conducted in relation to Markovski’s
actitivies. As a
result of this the police had reason to believe that he would meet a person at a
particular service station on
the Gold Coast in connection with drug dealings.
Two police offices, Sgt Frick and Const Keys, followed the suspect vehicle to
the service station, and intercepted it as it entered the driveway. Markovski
was the driver. The Appellant was in the back with
her son who was born on the
March, 2002. Sgt Frick asked the occupants to get
out of the vehicle and to leave everything behind so the police could
a look”. Much of what happened subsequently was recorded on
a field tape activated by Sgt. Frick. In relation to the tape
indecipherable passages and also the tape ceased to record during the course of
the conversation between the appellant
and the Sgt. The conversation was an
extremely important element in the appellant’s trial. The Appellant told
Sgt Frick that
she had to change the baby’s nappy and asked him if there
were toilets. Sgt Frick, according to the evidence, told the Appellant
the bag behind. She responded that the bag had baby’s nappies and wipes
in it. Sgt. Frick asked the appellant if
she had anything in the bag she
shouldn’t have. She responded only nappies and baby wipes. The Sgt then
and found a tin marked caustic soda. The Sgt asked her was it
caustic soda and her response was “I don’t know my partner
it in. We bought it and he put it in the bag.
know, my partner brought it in. We bought it and he put it in the bag”.
Mr Justice Mackenzie in his
Judgement in the Court of Appeal stated that “
it would have been open to the jury to treat this as evidence that she knew,
least, that the container was in the bag”
Later on the same day the Appellant engaged in a record of interview. In
that interview Sgt Frick said to her “alright, I
think at the time you
told me that Cele gave it to you .....?” She responded “No I said
Cele must have put it in the
bag because I hadn’t seen it, I don’t
know – I didn’t know what it was. I don’t know if he bought
it or I don’t know. I don’t even know if he did buy it. I just
opened it and it was there. Okay? Or you opened
it, sorry, and it was
there” Mr Justice Mackenzie states that “it was open to the jury
to treat this as contradictory
of what she had said previously.”
The Judgment of the Court of Appeal was that, it was open to the jury to
conclude that her initial statement was a statement against
interest showing
pre-existing knowledge of the container being put in her bag and that the
subsequent explanations were lies told
by her for the purpose of nullifying its
Can the Tribunal look behind the facts that a Chiropractor was
convicted by a Jury of possession of a drug and sentenced to a Term
imprisonment.
Williams for the Appellant referred this Tribunal to the matter of Ziems and the
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales. Mr Ziems a Barrister who
had been a practising member of the new South Wales Bar, was convicted of
manslaughter and was sentenced
to imprisonment for 2 years with hard labour.
Thereafter the prothonotary called upon Mr Ziems to show cause why his name
not be removed from the roll of Barristers. On the return of the rule the
Full Court of the Supreme Court made an Order directing
that the name of Mr
Ziems be removed from the Roll. The Full Court appears to have taken the view
that if a member of the bar is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment no matter
what the offence, it necessarily follows that the name of that member should be
from the roll. The decision was the subject of an Appeal to the High
Court and the High Court allowed the Appeal and found that
the conviction was
not such as to call for the removal of his name from the Roll.
Mr Justice Fullager in his Judgment stated “ .........at what
facts is it proper
To look in order to see whether that conclusion is established? The answer
must surely be that we must look at every fact which can
throw any light on that
The question was whether Mr Ziems was a fit and proper person to be permitted
to practise at the Bar. His Honour went on to state
“The conviction is not irrelevant, it is admissible prima facie
evidence bearing on the ultimate issue, and may be regarded
as carrying a degree
of disgrace itself. But in the first place, its weight may be seriously
affected by circumstances attending
it, and it must be permissible to look at
the conduct of the Trial. And in the second place, it is on what the man did,
case must ultimately be decided, and we are bound to ascertain, so far
as we can on the material available, the real facts of the
Later in his Judgment he states,
“There is another point (though I attach much less importance to it)
on which I find myself unable to agree without qualification
with the view of
the Supreme Court. It is said that: the personal and professional sides of his
life cannot be dissociated”
If this is read literally, it goes, in my
opinion, much too far. Personal misconduct, as distinct from professional
misconduct,
may no doubt, be a ground for disbarring, because it may show that
the person guilty of it is not a fit and proper person to practise
barrister. But the whole approach of a Court to a case of personal misconduct
must surely be very different from its approach
to a case of professional
misconduct. Generally speaking the latter must have a much more direct bearing
on the question of a man’s
fitness to practise than the former.”
Tribunal therefore considered itself entitled to examine the circumstances of
the case and in carrying out that examination a
number of things appeared.
The Appellant gave evidence that she wanted to give evidence at her
Trial. Her Counsel at the Trial was a Mr De Carlo and he employed
as a research
assistant Miss Tracey Thorpe who is a Solicitor. Tracey Thorpe assisted the
Appellant with the preparation of her
brief for the Trial. Tracey Thorpe told
this Tribunal in answer to a question as to whether the Appellant was
“actively engaged
in the preparation of her defence”.
“Well she was putting her material together and yeah she had a lot of
trouble getting in contact with Mr. De Carlo, I think,
during the Trial which
was one of the reasons that she never ended up giving evidence. He was supposed
to meet her, I think, over
the weekend. The case was to be closed from memory
on the Monday morning the decision was to be made – and I know that she
had trouble with him. He just didn’t show up”.
16. Tribunal member Mr Prior asked Miss Thorpe to amplify what effect the
failure by Mr De Carlo to keep an appointment had on the
conduct of the Trial.
Her response was that the Appellant and Mr De Carlo were to meet on the weekend
to discuss whether she should
give evidence or not. She stated that on the
Monday morning Mr De Carlo was to advise the Trial Judge as to whether the
would give evidence or not. On the Monday morning Miss Thorpe says
that Mr De Carlo sent her back to Chambers to ask another Barrister
as to whether the Appellant should give evidence. She states she obtained
advice that the Appellant should certainly
give evidence, and when she returned
to the Court she found that Mr De Carlo had informed the Court that the
Appellant would not
be giving evidence.
the opinion of this Tribunal the failure by Counsel to give the Appellant the
opportunity to give evidence takes on particular
significance because of
(1 ( C ) ) of the Drugs Misuse Act 1986 (21d) which is a evidentiary provision.
That Section provided that in relation to a charge
(c) proof that a dangerous drug was at all material time in or on
a place which that person was the occupier or concerned in the
management or
control of is conclusive evidence that the drug was then in the person’s
possession unless the person shows that
he or she then neither knew nor had
reason to suspect that the drug was in or on that place”
It is clear to this Tribunal that the Appellant bore the onus of proving that
she did not know the drug container was in the nappy
bag and at the Trial she
did not offer any explanation.
Appellant and Mr Markovski were tried together Mr Markovski was charged with
trafficking in cocaine and ecstasy and possession.
These were very serious
charges and this Tribunal will never know whether the jury in their minds
attributed a greater degree of
connection with Mr Markovski’s drug
dealings when reaching their decision in relation to the Appellant. The Court of
however found that the Trial Judge fell into that error when sentencing
the Appellant. At paragraph 68 of the Judgment of Mackenzie
A.J.A it is
“ In addition, in the particular circumstances of the case,
and without stating the proposition any more widely than that,
Judge’s attribution to the Applicant of a greater degree of connection
with Markovski’s drug offending than
that upon which the Crown’s
case was based was erroneous and requires the Applicant to be re-sentenced as
Benson for the Respondent submitted that the following matters should be taken
into the equation
The Appellant sent an email to the Respondent on the
August, 2009.With that email was an undated letter
to the Respondent supporting her Application for re-registration. Mr Benson
the Appellant massaged the truth where she makes reference to
“fleeting possession” to mitigate the seriousness of the
asserts that there was no knowledge of the type of substance located nor the
Mr Benson submitted that the Appellant lied to the police at the time that Mr
Markovski was apprehended at the service station and
an hour later when she was
interviewed by the police.
The Tribunal rejects these submissions. There is no evidence deriving from
the particular conviction that the Appellant lied to
the police. There is no
evidence that the Appellant knew what substance was in the container. Also the
Tribunal considers that
in the circumstances that the Appellant’s
reference to “fleeting possession” is an understandable
characterisation.
important matter to be considered by the Tribunal is to be satisfied that the
Appellant who is seeking registration fully understands
the seriousness of the
crime for which she has been convicted and shows remorse and contrition. Mr
Williams told the Tribunal that
he had put this matter squarely to the Appellant
from the very first day he met her. Accordingly she was well aware that to show
contrition was important. When the question was put to her in the witness box
she responded that she could not show remorse for
something she did not do.
Taking into account the circumstances surrounding the interview at the service
station, the later interview
and her Trial the Tribunal accepts her
explanation.
Tribunal heard evidence from two testimonial witnesses Tracey Eliza Thorpe a
Solicitor and Mr David Cassaniti an Accountant.
Miss Thorpe as stated earlier
was involved in the Appellant’s Trial and Mr Cassaniti currently employs
the Appellant as his
personal assistant. Miss Thorpe agreed that her involvement
with the Appellant was more Professional than personal. Miss Thorpe
the Appellant always did what was required of her in the preparation of her case
punctually and was always polite. She
also said that “I have doubts as
to whether she was actually guilty. Importantly, Miss Thorpe said that when
she comes down
to Sydney she would like to keep in contact with the Appellant.
Mr Cassaniti when giving evidence was very vigorous in his support
of the Appellant. He stated that he had a family member who was
a drug addict
and he had a hatred of drugs and drug dealers. He said in relation to the
Appellant after asking her many questions
“I believe in my heart this
woman is an innocent woman who has done nothing wrong except married to a drug
The Appellant currently works part time for Mr Cassaniti. The Appellant came
to Mr Cassaniti as a client. Mr Cassaniti noted that
the Appellant ran the
sound audio visual business in Queensland and he said “she had fantastic
systems; very very good simple
procedures and systems.” At that time Mr
Cassaniti needed an assistant and so he employed the Appellant. He further
that he knows a lot of people who are part of the Serbian and that the
Appellant is well known, well thought of and enjoyed a good
reputation as a
Chiropractor when she practised in the Liverpool area.
The purpose of the jurisdiction which is exercised by this Tribunal is not
for punishment or further punishment of the Appellant.
Instead, the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is for the protection of the public which deals
with Chiropractors on the basis that
they are members of an honourable
profession who can be expected without reservation to conduct the affairs of
their patients with
honour and in whom the patients can place unbounded
confidence. (Lyons NMT003/2006.
After considering all the evidence the Tribunal was satisfied to the relevant
standard that the Appellant be registered as a Chiropractor
and made Orders
accordingly.
Dated: 1 June 2010
Cedric Vass
Chairperson
Roger Engel
Chiropractor Member
Chiropractor Member
James Prior
RESPONDENTS LIST OF DOCUMENTS
No Document Date
Printout of Registration History
Letter from Board to Jovic 10.7,06
Application for Re-registration
as a Chiropractor
Letter from Board to Jovic 23.8.07
Application for Registration as
Chiropractor(character references
Application for Re-registration as a
Chiropractor
Letter to Ms Jovic from Registrar-
Chiropractors
Registration Board 2.7.09
Email from Ms Jovic to Registraton
Board and the
following attached
Appellant’s Submission against
Conviction to Court of Appeal
Queensland CA 77 of 2009
Applicant’s Submissions on
On sentence in Court of Appeal
Queensland CA77 of
2008 3.6.08
Transcript Court of Appeal
Queensland CA 77 of 2008 12.6.08
Judgment R v Jovic (2008)
QCA 278 12.9.08
Letter to Registration Board undated
Letter from Chiropractor’s Board to Ms
Jovic refusing
re-Registration 26.8.09
Letter, T.A. Williams, Solicitor,, to
Chiropractor’s
Registration board 15.9.09
Letter, T.A.Williams, Solicitor, to
Chiropractor’s
Registration Board
Notifying appeal
Letter from Board to Williams 30.9.09
Certificate of Indictment.
APPELLANT’S LIST OF DOCUMENTS
No. Document
Application for Registration
Letter dated 26
August,2009 from
Chiropractors Registration Board
To Danica Jovic
Letter dated 18
September,2009
T.A.Williams to Chiropractor’s
Registration Board 3
Letter dated 15
September,2009
T.A.Williams to Chiropractor’s
Registration Board 4
Letter from Chiropractor’s Registration
Board of NSW to T.A.Williams dated
September,2009
Affidavit of Danica Jovic dated
December,2009
Affidavit of David Salvatore
Cassaniti dated
December, 2009 7
Affidavit of Tracey Eliza Thorpe sworn
December, 2009
Letter to Chiropractor’s Registration
Board attaching documents from
Danica Jovic
Application for Leave to Appeal against
Sentence Applicant’s Submissions on
Appellant’s Submissions against
Conviction 11
Transcript of Proceedings dated
Judgment of Supreme Court of
Queensland in R
v Jovic (2008)QCA 278
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter