URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Carl (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 25; (6 November 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Carl (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 25
Hearing Date(s):
6 November 2024
Date of Orders:
6 November 2024
Decision Date:
6 November 2024
Guardianship Division
L Davidson, Senior Member (Legal)
Dr M A Martin, Senior Member
(Professional)
Dr M A Smith OAM, General Member (Community)
Guardianship Application
Christina is joined as
HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited had standing to
bring the application to the Tribunal.
1. A guardianship order is
made for Carl.
2. The Public Guardian is appointed as the
3. This is a continuing guardianship order for a period
of 12 months from 6 November 2024.
4. This is a limited
guardianship order giving the guardian custody of Carl to the extent necessary
to carry out the functions below.
guardian has the following functions:
Accommodation
To decide where Carl may reside.
Health care
To decide what health care Carl may
c) Medical/Dental consent
To make substitute
decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment, where Carl
is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to
6. The condition of this order
a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role, the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Carl to an understanding of
the issues and to obtain
and consider his views before making significant
Financial Management
Application
Christina is joined as Party.
HammondCare
Health and Hospitals Limited had standing to bring the application to the
1. The estate of Carl is subject to management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
2. Christina, of [Address
removed for publication], is appointed as the financial manager of the
NOTE: The financial manager is not authorised to deal with
the estate (other than to protect the assets) until he/she has obtained
necessary authorities from the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – guardianship application – financial management
application – where the applicant for a guardianship
order is a public
company and a registered charity – where the applicant seeking a financial
management order is a public company
and registered charity – whether the
applicant has standing to bring a guardianship application under s 9(1) of the
Guardianship
Act – whether the applicant is a “person” within
the meaning of the Guardianship Act – whether the applicant
has a genuine
concern for the welfare of the person – the applicant deemed to have
standing– public guardian appointed
– private financial manager
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
; cl 7(1), Sch
Corporations Act 2021 (Cth), s 119
Health Services Act 1997
Interpretation Act 1987
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
[2017] NSWCATGD
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
[2013] NSWSC 1495
[2011] NSWSC 257
NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2017] NSWCATGD 20
[2003] NSWSC 1170
[2019] NSWCATAP 64
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
003: Guardianship Application
Carl (the person)
Hammondcare
Health and Hospitals Limited (applicant)
Edward (enduring
Christina (joined party)
Public Guardian
004: Financial
Management Application
Carl (the person)
Hammondcare Health and
Hospitals Limited (applicant)
Melanie (attorney)
Christina (joined
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00386805
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
30 October 2024, the Tribunal received applications seeking the appointment of a
guardian and financial manager for Carl. The applicant
was HammondCare Health
and Hospitals Limited. Updated versions of the applications were sent to the
Tribunal on 5 November 2024.
the time of the hearing, Carl was 68 years old, and he was an inpatient at
Greenwich Hospital, in the Older Persons Mental Health
Unit. Before his
admission to hospital, Carl lived alone in his home in a suburb on the Lower
North Shore of Sydney.
is reported to have a cognitive impairment secondary to major neurocognitive
disorder, and depression, as well as several physical
health conditions.
21 February 2023, Carl appointed his friend, Edward, as his enduring guardian.
Edward signed his acceptance of that appointment
the same day.
on 21 February 2023, Carl signed an enduring power of attorney appointing his
neighbour and family friend, Melanie. Melanie signed
her acceptance of that
appointment the same day.
Standing of HammondCare Health and
Hospitals Limited
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (the Act) provides that an
application for a guardianship order for a person may be made to the Tribunal by
any other person
who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a genuine concern for
the welfare of the person.
25I(1)(b) of the Act similarly provides that an application for a financial
management order may be made to the Tribunal by
any person who, in the opinion
of the Tribunal, has a genuine concern for the welfare of the person who is
subject of the application.
30 October 2024, the Tribunal ordered HammondCare Health and Hospitals to make
written submissions on its standing to bring the
applications, focusing on the
questions of whether it is “a person” within the meaning of the Act,
and its genuine concern
for the welfare of Carl. Those submissions were prepared
by Ms Wendy Andrews, Head of Legal at HammondCare, and received by the Tribunal
on 5 November 2024.
Is HammondCare a person within the meaning of
Guardianship Act
Andrews submits that HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited is a legal person,
as defined in
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW). This provision
(which is now contained in Sch 4 of the
Interpretations Act
) states that
a person includes “an individual, a corporation and a body corporate or
politic”. Ms Andrews cites the case
[2017] NSWCATGD 20
which the Tribunal agreed that there is nothing in the Act indicating that the
word “person” in ss 9(1)(d) and 25I(1)(b)
of that Act should take a
meaning other than that provided in the
Interpretation Act
Andrews submits that HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited is a company
limited by guarantee, established under s 119 of the
Corporations Act
(Cth). It is also a registered charity with the Australian Charities
and Not for Profits Commission. Ms Andrews therefore submits
that it is a person
for the purposes of ss 9(1)(d) and 25I(1)(b) of the Act.
to the submissions from Ms Andrews is a copy of the
Constitution
of HammondCare
Health and Hospitals Limited, dated 11 December 2015. Also attached is a copy of
an Australian Securities and Investments
Commission (ASIC) organisation extract
showing that HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited is a registered Australian
public limited
company and registered charity. In addition, the submissions
attach a copy of a certificate from the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits
Commission, dated 3 December 2012, confirming HammondCare’s
registration as a charity.
the hearing, there was no suggestion made that HammondCare Health and Hospitals
Limited is not a person within the meaning of the
on the documents provided by Ms Andrews with her submissions, we were satisfied
that HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited
is a legal person, and is
therefore a person within the meaning of ss 9(1)(d) and 25I(1)(b) of the
Does HammondCare have a genuine concern for Carl’s
her submissions, Ms Andrews refers to the finding of the Tribunal in
[2017] NSWCATGD 6
that St Vincent’s Hospital Sydney
Limited had standing to make applications under the Act in respect of a patient
in its care.
She observes that the Tribunal agreed that the term “genuine
concern” should be given its natural and ordinary meaning,
and found that
the purpose and role of St Vincent’s as an affiliated health organisation
demonstrates that it would have a
genuine concern for the welfare of any person
who they are providing services to.
Andrews states that HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited is also an
affiliated health organisation under Ch 5 of the
Health Services Act 1997
(NSW) in respect of its recognised establishments, including
Greenwich Hospital. As a recognised establishment, Greenwich Hospital
part of the public health system in NSW. Ms Andrews states that Carl is an
inpatient of Greenwich Hospital and is receiving services
Andrews refers to and attaches a copy of the
Constitution
of HammondCare Health
and Hospitals Limited, which sets out its objects as including: 2.1(a) to
provide healthcare services including
hospital, palliative, rehabilitation,
dementia and psychogeriatric care. She states that these objects and its purpose
as an affiliated
health organisation, together demonstrate that HammondCare
Health and Hospitals Limited is a person with a genuine concern for Carl’s
social worker at Greenwich Hospital provided a written statement indicating that
Carl was transferred to the hospital on 1 July
2024 from the Royal North Shore
Hospital. He was admitted initially on an involuntary basis and later on a
voluntary basis for assessment
and treatment of depression with suicidal
ideation. Carl remained an inpatient at Greenwich Hospital, receiving health
services from
HammondCare Health and Hospitals Limited, at the time of the
the hearing, there was no suggestion made that HammondCare Health and Hospitals
Limited does not have a genuine concern for Carl’s
on the submissions provided by Ms Andrews and the evidence that Carl is
receiving health services from HammondCare Health and
Hospitals Limited since
July 2024, we were satisfied that it has a genuine concern for his welfare and
has standing to make guardianship
and financial management applications in
relation to Carl.
Request for Joinder of a Party
to the hearing, Christina, who is Carl’s third cousin, requested to be
joined as a party to both applications. Christina
explains that she has known
Carl since childhood and her mother was very close to him and his parents. She
says that she is concerned
for Carl’s health and well-being, and wishes to
Tribunal may order that a person be joined as a party to proceedings if the
Tribunal considers that the person should be joined:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
For proceedings in the Guardianship
Division of the Tribunal, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the person should
be joined (whether
because of the person’s concern for the welfare of the
person the subject of proceedings or for any other reason):
Administrative Tribunal Act
, cl 7(1), Sch 6.
told us that she had been informed about the hearing by the hospital social
worker, who had also provided her with the written
material supporting the
guardianship and financial management applications and advised her to request to
be joined as a party. Christina
reiterated that she wishes to support and assist
Carl and to be considered for appointment as his guardian and financial
light of the submissions made by Christina, we were satisfied that she is
concerned for Carl’s welfare, and we decided to
join her as a party to the
proceedings.
GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
Is Carl someone
for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability which
prevents him from being able to make important
life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Carl someone for whom the Tribunal
could make an order because he has a disability which prevents him from being
able to make important
life decisions?
14 of the Act
provides that the Tribunal may make a guardianship order
for a person if it is satisfied that he or she is “a person in need
guardian”. A person in need of a guardian is “a person who because
of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing his or her
person”: s 3(1) of the Act. A person with a disability is a person who
(a) intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced age;
(c) a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise disabled;
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one or more major life activities
to such an extent that he or she requires supervision
or social habilitation:
s 3(2) of the Act.
noted above, we received a copy of a social work report concerning Carl from the
hospital social worker, dated 1 November 2024.
The hospital social worker
describes the circumstances of Carl’s admission to the mental health unit
at Greenwich Hospital
in July 2024. The hospital social worker states that the
clinical team at the unit have conducted comprehensive cognitive and functional
assessments of Carl and have diagnosed him with “a major multi-factorial
Neurocognitive Disorder”. She says that, despite
psychiatric treatment,
Carl’s cognitive impairment and capacity have shown no improvement, and he
continues to demonstrate
significant apathy. The hospital social worker also
states that Carl requires prompting and support for all self-care tasks.
hospital social worker states that, prior to his admission to hospital, Carl was
living in a house in Sydney’s Lower North
Shore which previously belonged
to his mother, who he cared for until she passed away. The hospital social
worker says that Carl’s
maintained, with signs of hoarding. She says Carl has limited social supports
other than his neighbour Melanie and her husband, and his friend and former
employer Edward.
also received a copy of a report concerning Carl from a psychiatry registrar.
The psychiatry registrar also participated in the
hearing. In his report, the
psychiatry registrar sets out Carl’s social background and the
circumstances of his admission to
hospital. He notes that Carl had a motor
vehicle accident due to driving while intoxicated in late 2023, and refers to
his history
of heavy alcohol consumption. He also refers to Carl’s social
isolation and his previous expressions of suicidal ideation.
psychiatry registrar states that Carl has “multifactorial cognitive
impairment grading into dementia” as well as depression.
He describes Carl
as “a highly vulnerable individual with his behaviours and cognition
placing him at significant and chronic
risk of harm”. The psychiatry
registrar also expresses the view that Carl’s cognitive abilities are
unlikely to improve,
but states that his decline may slow if Carl abstains from
alcohol, takes his medications, and engages in social activities and
addition, we received a copy of a neuropsychological assessment report
concerning Carl, dated 25 September 2024, prepared by a
clinical psychologist.
The clinical psychologist observes that Carl had significant problems completing
the tests administered as
part of the assessment. He states that Carl showed
significant cognitive impairments across most of the domains tested. He
demonstrated
very limited capacity to hold information and manipulate it. The
clinical psychologist attributes Carl’s cognitive impairment
to cerebral
atrophy, subcortical infarcts and white matter changes due to factors such as
prior alcohol abuse.
also received a copy of an occupational therapy report concerning Carl dated 24
September 2024. In addition to assessing Carl in
hospital, the occupational
therapist conducted a home visit and assessment in August 2024 and also spoke to
Melanie and Edward about
him. The occupational therapist states that Carl was
not coping well at home before his hospital admission, and was neglecting his
self-care activities.
the hearing Edward told us that he does not believe that Carl is in a position
to make important decisions for himself any longer.
Melanie agreed with this,
saying she has known Carl his whole life and noticed a significant decline in
his functioning since his
car accident in 2023. Melanie said that, since then,
she and other neighbours tried to help Carl as much as they could, but he was
spending all his time in bed and appeared to be very depressed.
on the reports provided about his cognitive impairment, and the evidence from
the hospital social worker, Edward and Melanie,
we were satisfied that Carl has
a disability within the meaning set out in s 3(1) of the Act, which
restricts his ability to make
important life decisions and that he needs some
assistance to do so. He is therefore a person for whom the Tribunal could make a
guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order
and what order should be made?
Tribunal must consider all of the following matters set out in s 14(2) of the
Act before exercising its discretion to make a guardianship
(a) the views (if any) of:
(i) the person, and
(ii) the person’s spouse, and
(iii) the person’s carer and
(b) the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships, and
(c) the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments, and
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for the making of such an order.
matters have no hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration.
However, the Tribunal must undertake a balancing
exercise for its consideration
of the matters in s 14(2) of the Act. When undertaking this task, the Tribunal
may be guided by the
principles that are set out in s 4 of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
told us that he believes he needs help with decision-making, asking that his
cousin, Christina, be appointed as his guardian.
hospital social worker told us that Carl has not yet been discharged from
hospital, but he has been released to his home on a
trial basis. She said that
Edward has done significant work to clean up and repair Carl’s house, so
it is fit for habitation,
and there are also now home care services in place for
him. The hospital social worker expressed concern that Carl might cancel his
services at any time, but she said that it seems to be going quite well so far.
The hospital social worker also said that Carl has
had an Aged Care Assessment
Team (ACAT) assessment and is on a waiting list for a Level 4 package. The
hospital social worker said
she does not believe Carl yet needs 24/7 care in a
residential aged care facility, but that this is something that might be needed
hospital social worker also said that, as Carl has sufficient resources to do
so, they are in the process of hiring a nurse to
visit him at home once a week,
to check up on his health, assist him with medication, and determine if he needs
to see a doctor.
She explained that when Carl is discharged from hospital, he
will also be monitored by the community social worker from the Royal
North Shore
hospital social worker said Carl needs a guardian to make decisions about his
services, given his fluctuating willingness to receive
services at home. She
also said Carl requires someone who can make decisions about his health care and
medical treatment, in light
of his significant health problems and previous lack
of engagement with health services. The psychiatry registrar agreed with
noting that Carl has multiple co-morbidities, and he is at serious risk of
medical complications if he does not receive appropriate
health care and
said that there are ongoing decisions to be made about Carl’s health and
services, and if he is not able to remain living
at home, there will also be
decisions to be made about his accommodation. Edward said he has made some
decisions for Carl since he
has been in hospital, as his enduring guardian, but
he is no longer in a position to fulfil that role and believes a guardian needs
to be appointed in his place.
also said she believes Carl needs a guardian, noting that Edward has done a
great job so far. She agreed that there are ongoing
decisions to be made about
Carl’s care and services.
said she lives further away from Carl, but has remained in contact with him over
the years. She agreed that it is important
for Carl to have a decision-maker who
can make decisions about his services and health care.
community social worker, who has been involved in Carl’s care for some
time, expressed the view that it is important for him
to have a guardian who can
also make accommodation decisions. While noting that there are no immediate
accommodation decisions to
be made, the community social worker cautioned that
Carl has only been trialled living at home with services for a few days, and
while things are going well so far, there has not yet been time for a proper
assessment to be done. The community social worker noted
that Carl has
previously been resistant to care in the community, and his health is
deteriorating. She said she believes it would
be best for him to have a guardian
with the authority to make decisions about where he lives, should the current
arrangements prove
inadequate.
then said he agreed with the community social worker about the importance of
there being a guardian who can make decisions
concerning Carl’s
accommodation. He expressed concern about Carl’s deteriorating health,
saying that his home may not
be suitable for him in the foreseeable future.
was no indication that a guardianship order would negatively affect Carl’s
existing family relationships or his particular
cultural and linguistic
environments.
principles set out in s 4 of the Act are to the effect that Carl’s freedom
of decision and freedom of action should be limited
as little as possible.
Appointing a substitute decision-maker does restrict those freedoms. However, s
4 also requires us to prioritise
Carl’s welfare and interests.
the basis of the evidence from the hospital social worker, the psychiatry
registrar, and Edward, as well as the health reports
provided, we were satisfied
that decisions from a substitute decision-maker about Carl’s services are
required to ensure his
health and welfare. We were also satisfied that a
guardian should be appointed to make decisions concerning his health care needs
and to provide consent to any recommended medical and dental treatment. We
further considered that having a guardian with power to
make decisions about his
accommodation, should he not be able to manage at home following discharge from
hospital, is in Carl’s
best interests.
Who should be the
proposed that she be appointed as Carl’s guardian, saying she wishes to
support him and ensure his care needs are
met. To appoint Christina, we must be
satisfied that she meets the requirements of s 17(1) of the Act. She must:
(1) (a) have a personality generally compatible with the
personality of Carl,
(2) (b) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly
financial) with Carl, and
(3) (c) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, we must
consider whether the proposed guardian is able, having
regard to the
circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles set
out in s 4 of the Act:
[2019] NSWCATAP 64
[2011] NSWSC 257
the Supreme Court noted the importance of
the proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight and explain plans for
as guardian objectively and without conflict of interest.
Public Guardian cannot be appointed as a person’s guardian if there is an
individual who can be appointed: s 15(3) of the
Act. Commenting on that
provision, in
[2003] NSWSC 1170
the Supreme Court
“[T]he proper meaning to be given to the section is to read it as saying
that the Public Guardian should not be appointed in
circumstances in which an
order can properly be made in favour of another person. That requires not only
that the person be willing,
reliable and responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations and principles set forth in the Act
given effect.”
told us she is willing and able to be Carl’s guardian, saying that despite
not living close to him, they remain in
for him in his best interests. Christina said she does not believe she has any
conflicts of
interest with Carl.
said he would like Christina to be his decision-maker as he is sure she would
always do the right thing for him.
community social worker, however, expressed concern that Carl’s
relationship with Christina would be negatively affected
if she is appointed as
his guardian. The community social worker said that based on her observation of
Carl over a number of years,
she knows he can become frustrated when people make
decisions which he is not happy about. The community social worker said she
it would be better if Carl has an independent person as his guardian,
to preserve his family relationships.
then said he agreed with the views expressed by the community social worker,
noting that he has seen Carl’s frustrations
at times. Edward said he
thinks an independent guardian, with time and expertise, would be better for
Carl. Melanie also agreed,
noting that Carl has previously not wanted to have
care at home, and she is worried that his relationship with Christina may suffer
if she makes decisions for him about his services and accommodation which he is
not happy with.
then told us that she hoped her relationship with Carl would not be put in
jeopardy if she was his guardian.
making decisions about the appointment of a guardian, the Tribunal is required
to consider the importance of preserving family
relationships: the Act, s 4(e).
While Carl indicated at the hearing that he was happy for Christina to be
appointed as his guardian,
the evidence from the community social worker and
others was that this view could easily change.
Christina may meet the requirements to be appointed as Carl’s guardian, we
were concerned by the consistent evidence
from three of the people who know him
well to the effect that there is a risk his important relationship with
Christina would suffer
if she was appointed. We therefore decided to appoint the
Public Guardian as Carl’s guardian.
How long should the
order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it was made. We made the order for
12 months as we were of the
view that it will take some time to make and implement decisions regarding
Carl’s health care and
services and to determine whether there is an
ongoing need for the appointment of a guardian.
MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions to be considered by the Tribunal were:
incapable of managing his affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Carl’s affairs and is it in his best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing his affairs?
test for determining a person's capability to manage his or her affairs has been
described as being whether a person is “reasonably
able to manage his or
her own affairs in a reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of a
[financial manager] charged
with a duty to protect his or her welfare and
interests”. This involves the person being able to deal with their own
affairs in a reasonable, rational and orderly way with regard to their
current and future wants and needs, “without undue risk
of neglect, abuse
or exploitation” (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[307]-[308]).
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense, it is
relevant to consider their history, the supports they
have in place and their
vulnerability to exploitation or abuse.
told us that he previously worked as a sound engineer, but is now retired. He
said he has no money coming in at the moment, as
he has used it all up. Carl
said he does not need anyone to manage his money.
her social work report, the hospital social worker states that Carl is a
self-funded retiree, with substantial financial means.
She states that he
inherited two properties in Sydney’s Lower North Shore, one of which was
recently sold for over $4.5 million.
The hospital social worker also states that
Carl has a share portfolio. The hospital social worker says that Carl does not
his financial status and believes he cannot afford small things. The
hospital social worker notes that Melanie has been assisting
Carl for the past
year with the management of his financial affairs, under her power of
told us that, even before she was formally appointed as Carl’s attorney,
she was helping him informally to pay his bills
and manage his finances. She
said this started after his accident in 2023. Melanie said she does not believe
Carl would be able to
manage his finances himself at this stage.
his report, the psychiatry registrar says that Carl’s cognitive impairment
affects his capacity to make informed decisions
also expressed by the clinical psychologist in his report, who says that
Carl’s cognitive
impairment, lack of insight, apathy and recent history
suggest that he is at risk of financial abuse. Similarly, the occupational
therapist states that Carl had difficulty managing a basic shopping task when
she assessed his functional capacity, and he would
likely have difficulty
managing more demanding money management tasks, due to his cognitive
impairment.
the basis of this evidence, we were satisfied that Carl cannot deal with his own
financial affairs in a reasonable, rational and
orderly way with regard to his
wants and needs, and that he is vulnerable to financial exploitation. We
therefore found that he is
incapable of managing his own
Is there a need for a financial management order and is
it in Carl’s best interests that a financial management order be
provided a written statement to us, dated 10 October 2024, saying that she has
been exercising her functions as Carl’s
attorney since his
hospitalisation. She explains that she has been involved in finalising the sale
of one of his two properties in
Sydney’s Lower North Shore, with his
solicitor. Melanie indicates that she would like to relinquish her role as
attorney, in light of her age and other responsibilities.
the hearing, Melanie told us that she has been managing all of Carl’s
finances since he has been in hospital, with assistance
from one of Carl’s
friends, who came down from Queensland. She explained that she has identified
that Carl has several bank
accounts, all in Sydney’s Lower North Shore.
Melanie said she has also been paying all of Carl’s household bills, such
as council rates and utilities, from his bank accounts.
explained that the proceeds of the sale of Carl’s one house in
Sydney’s Lower North Shore have been put into a
savings account for him.
She said some of his liabilities and expenses have been paid out of that
account. Melanie also said she
believes Carl is still receiving $500 a fortnight
from his superannuation, into one of his bank accounts. She said she thinks it
is important for Carl to have a financial manager who can take over
responsibility from her for the management of his affairs.
husband told us that he has also known Carl since he was a child. Her husband
said Carl’s money must be carefully
managed, so that he has the supports
he needs for the rest of his life. He also said he believes Carl has not filed a
for many years, and may have significant tax liabilities, so it is
important for someone with the requisite expertise to assist him
in relation to
her social work report, the hospital social worker says that Carl needs a
financial manager due to Melanie’s resignation
as his attorney, noting
that he has substantial assets and is vulnerable to financial exploitation. The
hospital social worker also
says that Carl has the means to pay for services to
assist him at home, but he needs someone who can make the necessary
arrangements.
on this evidence, particularly concerning the need for Carl’s moneys to be
protected and to be used for his ongoing care
needs, we were satisfied that he
requires a financial manager and that it is in his best interests for a
financial manager to be
Who should be appointed as
financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under
the Act, the Tribunal must act with the interests of the person
as the paramount consideration and in accordance with the other principles set
out in s 4 of the Act.
25M of the Act provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial management
order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage
the person’s estate or
may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
then Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of
The NSW Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective
Commissioner.
the side of the then Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest
independence of the statutory office, the advantages of
a dispassionate and
neutral approach in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the
best interests of the person, expertise
and experience in managing estates, an
impeccable reputation and the security provided to an estate against loss or
advantages of the appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (that is, freedom from fees)
and a greater familiarity with
assets and liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a
disability to interact
with the manager so as to exercise a greater influence
over the broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection
for and knowledge of the protected person and concern for his or her quality of
life, and particular qualities or qualifications
enabling family members to act
as managers.
Court considered that interrelated property interests in a family situation,
where a conflict of interest and duty may be “more
apparent than
real,” should not necessarily present an absolute bar to appointment of a
family member who is otherwise appropriate.
However, when appointing a family
member, a decision-maker must be satisfied that the estate, income and capital
assets, will be
utilised to advance the interests and quality of life of a
protected person rather than to eventually increase the assets of the
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
Hallen AsJ stated:
“[34] It would be unwise to attempt any definition of
the matters that may legitimately be enquired into to determine whether
applicant is suitable. Each case must depend on its own circumstances. Needless
to say, however, the Court must consider, at
least, the proposed manager’s
character, honesty and ability to manage, diligently, the managed person’s
property in
the managed person’s best interests.”
matters or “guidelines” that should be considered when determining
who to appoint as financial manager, as established
Holt & Anor v
Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, are discussed and expanded upon
by Lindsay J in
[2013] NSWSC 1495
told us that she is prepared to take on the role of financial manager for Carl,
again saying that her concern is to ensure
his well-being now and into the
future. Christina said she understands that she would be supervised by the NSW
Trustee and Guardian
and would be able to fulfil their requirements. Christina
said she believes financial management is an area of strength for her,
her professional experience in reporting to financial regulators and running
businesses. Christina said she does not believe
she has any financial conflict
of interest with Carl, although she is one of the beneficiaries of his
we asked Carl, he told us that he would trust Christina to manage his finances
hospital social worker said she did not have any concerns about the appointment
of Christina as Carl’s financial manager,
under the supervision of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian. Melanie expressed some ambivalence, saying she does not
know Christina and
simply wants to make sure that Carl’s affairs are
looked after properly, and he has everything he needs now and in the future.
husband said he believes that the NSW Trustee and Guardian should be appointed
as Carl’s financial manager,
given its level of expertise. He noted that
there is some complexity to ensuring that Carl’s affairs are managed in a
will ensure he has sufficient funds for his care needs on a long-term
basis, and this requires someone who is sufficiently independent
experienced in financial management.
note that the appointment of the NSW Trustee and Guardian as Carl’s
financial manager would incur considerable fees, due
to the size of his estate.
This consideration has to be balanced with the importance of Carl’s
affairs being managed carefully,
by someone with the skills and experience to
ensure that he has sufficient income for his current and future needs.
light of Christina’s evidence that she has the necessary skills and
experience to do so, and Carl’s expression of trust
in her, we were
satisfied that Christina is a suitable person to be appointed as financial
manager for Carl subject to the authorities
and directions of the NSW Trustee
and Guardian.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (302 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter