URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Leslie [2013] NSWMT 1 (22 February 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Leslie
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 1
Hearing Date(s):
11 and 12/02/2013
Decision Date:
22 February 2013
Levy SC DCJ
Dr E Kertesz
Dr R Gordon
See paragraphs [48] - [50] for orders.
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise
orders, a judgment or order is taken to be entered when it is recorded in the
Court's computerised
court record system. Setting aside and variation of
judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
Parties should in particular note the time limit of fourteen days in
Catchwords:
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER - unsatisfactory professional conduct - professional
misconduct - practice of inappropriate prescription of restricted
Schedule 4D
and Schedule 8 drugs without required authority - adequacy of records kept by
practitioner - protective orders and practice
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a, cl 7 Sch 5D, s
139B, s 139E, s 163(1)(a)
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales)
Regulation 2010, Pt 4 & Sch 2
Medical Practice Act 1992
Cases Cited:
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Reddall Leslie
(Respondent)
Representation
Mr W Hunt (Applicant)
Mr M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
The proceedings
Non-publication order
The complaints
Events leading to the complaints
Complainant's evidence
[10] - [13]
Respondent's evidence
[14] - [15]
Dr Leslie's responses to the complaints
[16] - [19]
Factual background
[20] - [34]
Consideration
[35] - [41]
[42] - [47]
Protective orders
Practice Conditions
Medical Records Audit
The proceedings
Tribunal was convened to inquire into two inter-related complaints by the Health
Care Complaints Commission ["HCCC"] relating
to Dr Reddall Leslie, a general
practitioner practising in Orange, NSW. The complaints relate to various
prescriptions issued over
time by Dr Leslie for opiates, narcotics and
benzodiazepines to 23 of his patients for pain relief, in the period between 23
2004 and 12 December 2008. The complaints also relate to the adequacy of
Dr Leslie's medical records for those patients in that period.
The proceedings
are governed by the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a
["the National Law (NSW)"].
Non-publication order
documents tendered in these proceedings, the patients were referred to by the
de-identifying alphabetical letter codes "A" to "W".
At the commencement of the
hearing on 11 February 2013, an order was made pursuant to cl 7 Sch 5D of the
National Law (NSW) prohibiting
the publication or disclosure of the names,
addresses, or any other evidence and information that might tend to, or lead to,
identification of those patients.
The complaints
initial form of complaint was filed by the HCCC on 1 February 2011. It was
amended on 8 November 2011 and 17 April 2012, and then
further amended on the
first day of the hearing on 11 February 2013.
first limb of complaint alleges that Dr Leslie engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of s 139B of
the National Law (NSW).
That complaint variously concerns the inappropriate prescription of Schedule 4D
and Schedule 8 drugs of addiction
to drug dependent persons, without the
required authority, outside of therapeutic guidelines, and in circumstances of
record keeping.
second limb of complaint alleges that Dr Leslie engaged in professional
misconduct within the meaning of s 139E of the National
Law (NSW) in that, on an
acceptance of the factual basis of the first complaint, the circumstances are of
a sufficiently serious
nature to justify consideration of the suspension or
cancellation of his registration pursuant to that Law.
clinical and prescription records which base the complaints are compendious. The
relevant dates and prescription quantities are
summarised as
Number of prescriptions
30.12.2006 - 08.05.2008
23.04.2004 - 06.12.2008
12.10.2004 - 21.11.2008
14.09.2007 - 04.11.2008
08.05.2007 - 14.11.2008
13.10.2004 - 21.11.2008
08.05.2007 - 14.11.2008
30.07.2004 - 31.10.2008
20.05.2004 - 08.12.2008
08.05.2007 - 05.12.2008
02.05.2007 - 05.12.2008
04.06.2004 - 04.12.2008
Benzodiazepines
05.07.2004 - 05.12.2008
13.01.2005 - 21.11.2008
20.05.2004 - 18.11.2008
Benzodiazepines
18.05.2004 - 12.12.2008
20.05.2004 - 05.12.2008
19.05.2007 - 06.11.2008
25.02.2008 - 21.11.2008
Benzodiazepines
19.05.2004 - 08.12.2008
17.05.2004 - 19.11.2008
10.09.2007 - 04.12.2008
03.05.2007 - 04.12.2008
Total prescriptions
Events leading to the complaints
5 occasions between 1991 and 2009, Dr Leslie had received oral and written
advice and counselling by the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch of the NSW Health
Department ["PSB"] because of concerns over his prescribing conduct regarding
Schedule 4D and Schedule 8
drugs. In 2009 a hearing under s 66 of the former
Medical Practice Act
was conducted on behalf of the formerly
constituted NSW Medical Board ["the Board"] at which time Dr Leslie's patient
records and
prescribing conduct were examined.
hearing, Dr Leslie expressed resistance to suggestions that there had
been shortcomings concerning his management of the above patients.
identified shortcomings have been particularised in these proceedings.
hearing, the PSB and the Board made adverse findings against Dr Leslie.
At that time protective conditions were placed on Dr Leslie's
practice. This had
the effect of withdrawing his rights to prescribe Schedule 4D and Schedule 8
drugs. On 25 June 2009 the Board
forwarded a complaint to the HCCC arising out
of the events in question. The present proceedings were then instituted by the
Complainant's evidence
evidence tendered by the HCCC in the proceedings comprised 9 volumes (Exhibit
"A"). The products of the hearing under
of the National Law (NSW) were
incorporated within Exhibit "A". Also included was correspondence with Dr Leslie
and a lengthy record
of interview of Dr Leslie conducted on behalf of the
HCCC commissioned a peer review report from Dr Ian Chung concerning Dr Leslie's
management of the patients in question. In his
first report dated 27 November
2009, Dr Chung expressed the unchallenged opinion that Dr Leslie's consultation
notes and prescribing
records for the patients in question in the period under
consideration departed significantly from the mandatory statutory requirements
for such records. Dr Chung expressed the opinion that such conduct attracted the
very strong disapproval of peers of an equivalent
level of training, or
experience reasonably expected of a practitioner such as Dr Leslie, at the time
of the conduct under critical
Chung identified what he described as an inadequate standard of clinical
practice that contributed to the perpetuation of his patients'
dependence on
Schedule 4D and Schedule 8 drugs. Dr Chung was also critical of the failure to
change the prescribing conduct over
an extended period despite earlier guidance
and counselling by the PSB, describing this as consistently poor standards of
and clinical judgment.
Subsequently,
Dr Chung was provided with some further materials and provided a supplementary
report dated 20 November 2011. In that
additional commentary he did not
significantly change his earlier views.
Respondent's evidence
evidence tendered on behalf of Dr Leslie comprised 6 volumes (Exhibit "1").
Incorporated into Exhibit "1", at Tab 1 was a 40 page
statement prepared by Dr
Leslie in which he explained and summarised his clinical management of each of
the patients "A" to "W".
Exhibit "1" also included other material which will be
referred to in the consideration of the matters calling for
support of his position Dr Leslie tendered some peer testimonials, a certificate
of completion of a Monash University course on
11 July 2012 concerning pain
management, and a certificate of attendance at a webinar on 21 November 2012
intended to assist general
practitioners to care for patients with chronic pain
and mental health issues. A report dated 28 January 2013 from Dr Murray Wright,
a consultant psychiatrist, was also tendered.
Dr Leslie's responses to the complaints
these proceedings Dr Leslie was well represented. In contradistinction to the
position he took at the
hearing, at the commencement of this hearing, in a
written outline of submissions made on his behalf, the particulars of the
complaint were all admitted: MFI "5", para [1]. Those admissions
followed a series of concessions Dr Leslie made in his written statement
25 October 2012: Exhibit "1", Tab [1].
his concessions to the Tribunal, Dr Leslie has admitted that he has been guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct as well
as professional misconduct, as
particularised. The Tribunal has had the advantage of reviewing the combined 15
volumes of tendered
material and is comfortably satisfied that the proffered
admissions were properly made by Dr Leslie.
a consequence, the scheduled lengthy hearing was substantially shortened. In the
light of the concessions made by Dr Leslie, apart
from the need to state formal
findings, it is no longer necessary to canvass the detail of his management of
the 23 patients who
are the subject of the present proceedings.
those circumstances, and with the consent of the parties, the Tribunal proceeded
to hear explanatory factual evidence from Dr Leslie,
including the tender of
mitigatory evidence, in order to determine the appropriate protective orders
without the need for a separate
hearing, which would otherwise have been
necessary if the stated concessions had not been made:
King v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353.
Factual background
Leslie is presently aged 62 years. He is employed in a General Practice in
Orange. He graduated with the degrees MB BS from the
University of NSW in 1975.
He was granted registration in the general category as a medical practitioner on
7 December 1975. After
completing his residency at Auburn District Hospital he
was employed as a Medical Officer in the Royal Australian Navy and worked
on-shore and at-sea postings. After leaving the Navy he obtained a diploma in
Obstetrics from the RANZCOG and then obtained further
qualifications to enable
him to work in General Practice.
1987 he joined the General Practice in Orange where he presently works. Over
time he obtained visiting rights to Orange Base Hospital
and also to Bloomfield
Psychiatric Hospital in Orange. He has remained in that practice as an employee
after it was sold to a corporate
the early years of his practice Dr Leslie began seeing psychiatric patients from
the community. He developed a special interest
in patients with psychological
issues and pain management issues. As a result of an emergent need in his local
community, he obtained
an authority to prescribe methadone as Opioid Treatment
Program Prescriber. The local methadone clinic had a significant patient
As a result, patients in need of that service experienced delays in obtaining
the required treatment and Dr Leslie saw a number
of these patients in his
private practice.
was ultimately conceded by Dr Leslie, in hindsight, he became known as "
" for patients seeking prescriptions for pain relieving
medication. His professional interest in dealing with psychiatric patients
patients with chronic pain, led to him attracting a significant patient base of
persons presenting with difficult challenges
for clinical management. His
practice involving such patients developed through word of mouth as well as from
referrals by other
practitioners. He estimated that these challenging patients
represented approximately 1 - 2 per cent of the patient base of the practice
Leslie acknowledged that his personality style was non-confrontational and, in
hindsight, he conceded he had been insufficiently
assertive in his assessment
and management of that category of patients.
was in those circumstances that Dr Leslie's prescribing practices for Schedule
4D and Schedule 8 drugs as summarised at paragraph
[6] above came to the adverse
attention of the PSB, now the Pharmaceutical Services Unit
to his past prescribing practices concerning Schedule 4D and Schedule 8 drugs,
Dr Leslie acknowledged that his clinical attitude
towards his patients who were
drug dependent had been misguided. In that regard, he explained that he thought
the patients in question
were in genuine pain at the time he saw them, and as
such, they were not to be regarded as being dependent on the restricted drugs
for recreational use. In that setting, he considered himself able to write the
subject prescriptions for such patients without having
first obtained the
required authority to do so.
the time, Dr Leslie naively believed that if such patients had been started on
Schedule 8 drugs, he did not require a further authority
for such drugs after 2
months, in circumstances where he believed that the patients were not to be
classed as being drug dependent:
T13.25. In that regard he naively considered
that if the patient was in what he considered to be in genuine pain, then they
not to be classified as drug dependent: T12.30.
misguided views were brought to light in the investigation undertaken by the PSB
inquiry. It is now conceded by Dr Leslie that as a result of his
prescribing conduct he had placed his vulnerable patients in danger
and at risk
of harm from perpetuating drug dependency. Fortunately for the patients, there
is no actual evidence of significant long
term harm having
to his record keeping, Dr Leslie conceded that prior to the end of 2008, his
patient record keeping had been quite poor, and in
a lot of the cases in
question, not compliant with the required statutory obligations. After a
performance assessment review undertaken
at the direction of the Medical Council
of NSW, the successor of the Board ("the Council") he resolved to improve his
performance
in that regard, and he in fact did so when his practice moved from
paper based records to a computerised electronic records system.
the findings of the PSB and the findings of the
hearing by the Board, Dr
Leslie's prescribing rights for Schedule 4D and Schedule 8 drugs were withdrawn.
He was permitted to continue
practise with a number of conditions, pending the
finalisation of these proceedings.
hearing, Dr Leslie undertook steps to address the circumstances that
predisposed him to the present complaints. We are satisfied
that subsequently,
Dr Leslie has undertaken appropriate education and has employed appropriate
clinical strategies concerning the
proper use of Schedule 4D and Schedule 8
drugs, and how they are to be prescribed and managed. This included a course
conducted by
Monash University in 2011 concerning prescribing in general
findings were made by the Board, Dr Leslie has taken steps to develop
his armamentarium of clinical and interpersonal skills to better
equip him to
deal with challenging patients in the clinical setting. Dr Leslie has undertaken
counselling and therapy to assist him
in recognising the professional
shortcomings that have led to the present proceedings.
Leslie was clearly embarrassed by the matters that have come to light in these
proceedings. We consider that he is genuinely embarrassed
at his former
professional shortcomings. We are of the view that Dr Leslie has learnt the
essential lessons that have emerged from
the described circumstances that are
the subject of these proceedings. He gave his evidence openly, he was unreserved
in his admissions
and self-criticisms, and we accept that he has shown genuine
contrition over the events.
have been no other complaints made concerning Dr Leslie's professional conduct
apart from the events which are the subject of
proceedings.
Consideration
his written statement, and in his oral evidence, Dr Leslie has unreservedly
acknowledged that as has been particularised by the
HCCC, there had been
shortcomings in his clinical management, prescribing conduct and recordkeeping
in respect of the patients who
were the subject of the
complaints.
our consideration of the issues calling for decision, we have placed significant
weight upon the opinion of Dr Wright in his report
dated 28 January 2013. Dr
Wright had seen Dr Leslie in a series of 4 consultations in 2011 and 2012. We
are satisfied that following
treatment sessions with Dr Wright, and following
other consultations Dr Leslie has attended with a clinical psychologist for
behavioural therapy, he has taken appropriate steps to better equip
himself to deal with the clinical challenges he had previously
encountered in
dealing with patients consulting him to seek prescriptions for pain relieving
medication. We accept that by these
means he has developed an ability to be
appropriately more assertive in the face of challenges presented by such
categories of patients.
it is true that since Dr Leslie's prescribing rights for Schedule 4D and
Schedule 8 drugs have been withdrawn for some time,
thereby removing the
clinical stressor of dealing with the demands of such patients, and therefore Dr
Leslie's newly acquired skills
remain unconsolidated by testing in the clinical
setting, the Tribunal is nevertheless satisfied, on its acceptance of the
unchallenged
evidence of Dr Wright, that Dr Leslie has gained and continues to
gain considerable insight into his own vulnerability in dealing
category of difficult and complex patients which have been at the centre of the
complaints. Such insights have extended
to Dr Leslie improving his level of
understanding of protocols and acceptable practice standards with regard to the
prescribing of
opiates and benzodiazepines.
Wright has stated, and we accept, that Dr Leslie has regarded the subject matter
of the present complaints with the utmost seriousness
and has taken all
appropriate action in terms of further education and personal psychological
treatment, to fully address the matters
at issue in these proceedings. In that
context, Dr Wright saw no reason why Dr Leslie was not fit to continue to
practise medicine.
We accept that opinion.
therefore do not see this as an appropriate case for cancellation of
registration or suspension from practice.
giving full force to Dr Wright's unchallenged views, nevertheless, in the public
interest, the question of protective orders necessarily
2009, Dr Leslie has not had the right to prescribe the Schedule 4D and Schedule
8 drugs that have led to the circumstances under
present review. Pending
consolidation and reinforcement of the described personal and professional
gains, acumen and skills gained
by Dr Leslie since the matters in question came
to light, and pending further peer review that will inevitably follow if Dr
wishes to seek a variation in the Tribunal's orders at any future time,
we are of the opinion that with some necessary variations,
the restrictions
imposed on Dr Leslie following the
hearing should continue for a further
period of 18 (eighteen) months before any further consideration is given to
lifting or varying
those restrictions.
Tribunal accepts the admissions Dr Leslie has made concerning the particulars of
each of the complaints brought by the HCCC. It
therefore follows that he must be
found to have engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct within
the respective meanings of s 139B and s 139E of the National
Law (NSW), and we so find.
considered the evidence we are satisfied that Dr Leslie has ultimately and
appropriately addressed his acknowledged former
practice shortcomings. There is
no evidence that the conduct in question was actuated by turpitude on the part
of Dr Leslie. Similarly,
there is no evidence that the identified shortcomings
in practice standards are continuing. We therefore find that this is not an
appropriate case for suspension or cancellation of Dr Leslie's
registration.
Nevertheless,
Dr Leslie's prescribing conduct needlessly exposed his patients to the risk of
harm. Dr Leslie conceded this was reckless
on his part. Therefore his
prescribing conduct requires censure. Balanced against that consideration, we
are of the opinion that
Dr Leslie has undergone a salutary and embarrassing
experience in having to address the present complaints. In the circumstances,
consider the appropriate deterrent order is a reprimand without further censure.
In the absence of evidence of turpitude on the
part of Dr Leslie, a fine is
inappropriate.
framing the required protective orders, we accept the HCCC submission that there
should be provision for the future audit of Dr
Leslie's patient medical records
in order to monitor his compliance with the standards required for maintaining
medical records:
Health Practitioner Regulation (NSW) Regulation 2010, Sch 2.
Initially the first audit should be within 6 months of the date of this
decision, and thereafter at 12 monthly intervals. We leave it to the discretion
of the Council to determine how many such audits
are required following the
initial audits.
protective orders that we proposed to make will include a provision for a
preclusion period of 18 months before Dr Leslie can
apply for a review of the
practice and audit conditions imposed by this decision.
coming to these views we have not overlooked the fact that from time to time,
according to roster arrangements within his practice,
Dr Leslie's palliative
care and nursing home patients may well be in need of prescriptions for Schedule
4D and Schedule 8 drugs.
In balancing that need against the public interest
mandating the protective orders we propose to make, we note that the present
arrangements
for such patients in Dr Leslie's practice are such that, if
required, prescriptions for such medications may be obtained by Dr Leslie
the appropriate arrangements with another practitioner in the practice. On the
evidence, this seems to be a satisfactory and
workable arrangement for the
period covered by the orders we propose to make.
Protective orders
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The Practitioner is reprimanded;
(2) The Practitioner is subject to conditions on his registration as set out in
paragraph [49] below under the heading
(3) The Practitioner shall not make an application for variation in
(1), (2), (3) and (4) to the PSU or the Council before the expiry
of 18 months;
(4) The Practitioner must submit his practice to medical records audit as set
out in paragraph [50] below under the heading
Medical Records
(5) If the Practitioner resides anywhere else in Australia other than New South
Wales, sections 125 to 127 inclusive of the National
law (NSW) are to apply, so
that a review of these conditions may be conducted by the Medical Board of
(6) The Practitioner is to pay the complainant's costs in the
proceedings.
Practice Conditions
practice conditions referred to in paragraph [48)] above are as
(1) The Practitioner is not to possess, prescribe, supply administer or dispense
Schedule 4 Appendix D drugs. His Schedule 4 Appendix
D drug authority is to
remain withdrawn by the Pharmaceutical Services Unit, NSW Ministry of Health
["PSU"] formerly known as Pharmaceutical
Services Branch, Department of Health
(2) The Practitioner is not to possess, prescribe, supply, administer or
dispense Schedule 8 drugs of addiction. His Schedule 8 drug
authority is to
remain withdrawn by the PSU;
(3) If practising in general practice, the Practitioner is to work only in a
group practice. (Group is defined as 2 or more medical
practitioners excluding
Dr Leslie);
(4) If practising in general practice, the Practitioner is to notify the owner/s
and principal of the practice, and any other practitioner
(including future
practitioners) who may be working on site with him of these conditions and to
forward to the Council, within 7
days, a copy of these Conditions signed by each
one of these practitioners;
(5) Any subsequent change in the Practitioner's Schedule 8 and/or Schedule 4D
prescribing status must be in accordance with the Council's
protocol. Prior to
the submission of any variation application to the PSU, pursuant to s 163(1)(a)
of the National Law (NSW), the
Practitioner must seek and obtain approval of the
Council to the lifting of conditions (1), (2), (3) and (4) above, and to the
re-instatement
of any prescribing authority;
(6) The Practitioner is to obtain Council approval prior to changing the nature
or place of his practice;
(7) The Practitioner is to authorise the exchange of information between
Medicare Australia, the PSU, Department of Health, NSW and
the Council in order
to facilitate compliance with these conditions;
Medical Records Audit
Medical Records Audit referred to in paragraph [48] above is as
(1) The Practitioner is to submit to an audit at his premises, of a random
selection of his medical records by a person or persons
nominated by the Council
to assess his compliance with the relevant provisions of the Health Practitioner
Regulation (New South Wales)
Regulation 2010 (Pt 4 and Sch 2) and the RACGP
Standards for General Practices (3rd edition), in particular Standard 1.7
of Patient Health Records' with particular attention to his assessment
of patients, treatment plans and prescribing of medication.
(2) The audit is to occur within 6 (six) months from the Date of the Decision
and subsequently at 12 (twelve) monthly intervals,
or as required by the
Council. The practitioner is to authorise the Auditor/s to provide the Council
with a report on their findings.
The practitioner is to meet all costs
associated with the audit/s and any subsequent reports.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter