URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/185.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LG v R [2025] NSWCCA 185 (12 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 185
Hearing Date(s):
20 August 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Harrison CJ at CL at [1];
Lonergan J at [2];
McGuire J at [3].
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Allow the appeal.
(3) Quash the
sentence imposed in the District Court on 29 May 2023.
(4) In lieu, sentence
the applicant after discounts of 25% for the guilty
(i) in respect of Sequence 3, to a control order for
a period of 1 year and 3 months commencing on 14 October 2021 and expiring
January 2023;
(ii) in respect of Sequence 9, to a control
order for a period of 1 year and 6 months commencing on 14 April 2022 and
expiring on
13 October 2023; and
(iii) in respect of Count
1, to imprisonment for a period of 3 years and 6 months commencing on 14 April
2022 and expiring on 13
October 2025, with a non-parole period of 1 year and 9
months commencing on 14 April 2022 and expiring on 13 January 2024.
Catchwords:
CRIME – appeals – appeal against sentence – offence of
wound person with intent to resist or prevent arrest –
related offences on
s 31 certificate – police pursuit, not stop and drive dangerously –
robbery armed with offensive
weapon – whether sentencing judge erred by
sentencing the applicant ‘at law’ for the related offences –
the sentencing judge erred by sentencing the applicant to a sentence
that was more than jurisdictionally available – whether
the sentence was
manifestly excessive as a result of the asserted error – leave to appeal
allowed – applicant resentenced
Legislation Cited:
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Crimes Act 1900
ss 33(2)(a)
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
ss 21A(2)(j)
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Supreme Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
Cases Cited:
[2010] NSWCCA 159
(2010) 201 A Crim R 379
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
[2014] NSWCCA 162
Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA
DJ v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 319
DL v The Queen
(2018) 265 CLR 215
[2018] HCA 32
[2014] NSWCCA 297
(2014) 246 A Crim R 528
The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
[2013] NSWCCA 260
v Henry (1999) 46 NSWLR 346;
[1999] NSWCCA 111
Principal judgment
LG (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
T Hennessy (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Aboriginal Legal Service (NSW/ACT)
(Applicant)
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2021/292555
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
publication of the applicant’s name or anything which may tend to identify
him is prohibited.
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
29 May 2023
Robinson DCJ
File Number(s):
2021/292555
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, LG, pleaded guilty in the Children’s Court at Dubbo to
an offence of wounding a person with intent to resist
or prevent arrest, an
offence of police pursuit, not stop and drive dangerously and an offence of
robbery armed with an offensive
weapon. The offence of wounding a person with
intent to resist or prevent arrest was committed for sentence to the District
with the remaining two offences placed on a certificate pursuant to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW). Robinson DCJ
sentenced the applicant to an aggregate sentence of imprisonment for 4 years and
6 months with a non-parole period
of 2 years and 3 months. The sentencing judge
indicated indicative sentences of imprisonment for each of the offences.
The applicant sought leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon him
pursuant to
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW). The appeal was
filed out of time, and as such the applicant required leave pursuant to r 3.5 of
Supreme Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
(NSW). The applicant sought to
appeal on the following grounds:
(1) The learned Judge erred in sentencing the applicant “at law”
to the offences on the
certificate;
(2) The learned Judge erred in sentencing the applicant on Sequence 9 to more
than was jurisdictionally available; and
(3) That as a result, the overall sentence was manifestly excessive.
The Court held
(McGuire J, Harrison CJ at CL and Lonergan J agreeing)
allowing the appeal:
As to ground 1:
The sentencing judge erred by dealing with the offences on the
certificate “at law” as the jurisdiction of the sentencing court was
constrained by the operation of
Children (Criminal Proceedings
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). The effect of those provisions is that the District Court has the
same functions and is subject to the same restrictions and
procedures as the
Children’s Court when imposing a sentence for offences on a
certificate. It was not open for the sentencing judge to impose a period of
imprisonment with respect to the offences on the
certificate as it is not
an available penalty within the jurisdiction of the Children’s Court: [51]
As to ground 2:
The indicative sentence for sequence 9 would have exceeded the jurisdictional
penalty of the sentencing court if it was imposed as
a separate sentence. No
operative sentence was imposed in relation to sequence 9 however, as an
aggregate sentence was imposed in
relation to all three sequences. Accordingly,
ground 2 was not made out: [56] - [59].
As to ground 3:
Because ground 1 was established, the sentencing discretion miscarried. It
was therefore unnecessary to resolve ground 3 in circumstances
where the Court
was required to resentence the applicant in any event: [63].
As to resentence:
After a 25% discount was applied to each sentence for the applicant’s
early guilty pleas, the Court sentenced the applicant
to a control order for a
period of 1 year and 6 months in respect of Sequence 3 on the
certificate,
to a control order for a period of 1 year and 6 months in respect of Sequence 9
certificate and to a term of imprisonment of 3 years and 6 months
with a non-parole period of 1 year and 9 months in respect of Count
sentence in respect of Sequence 3 commenced on 14 October 2021. The sentences in
respect of Sequence 9 and Count 1 both commenced
on 14 April 2022. The applicant
became eligible for parole on 13 January 2024: [81] – [82].
I agree with McGuire J and with the orders he proposes.
I agree with McGuire J.
The applicant, LG, seeks leave to appeal against the aggregate sentence
imposed upon him by her Honour Judge Robinson in the District
Court at Dubbo on
29 May 2023. The applicant is not identified in this judgment as he was under
the age of 18 years at the time of
the offences: s 15A
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act 1987
applicant was sentenced for an offence of wounding a person with intent to
resist or prevent arrest, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (Count 1), which carries a maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment.
He was also sentenced for two related offences on a certificate
pursuant to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
being an offence of police
pursuit, not stop and drive dangerously contrary to
(Sequence 3), which at law carries a maximum penalty of 3 years imprisonment
and an offence of robbery armed with an offensive weapon
contrary to
(Sequence 9), which at law carries a maximum penalty of 20
years imprisonment. Each of the related offences on the
certificate carries
a jurisdictional maximum penalty of a 2 year period of control when sentenced in
the jurisdiction of the Children’s
11 August 2022 at the Dubbo Children’s Court the applicant pleaded guilty
to each of the three offences and was committed
for sentence to the District
discounts of 25% for the guilty pleas her Honour indicated the following
indicative sentences:
(1) Count 1: 3 years and 6 months imprisonment;
(2) Sequence 3: 15 months imprisonment; and
(3) Sequence 9: 2 years and 3 months imprisonment.
Honour imposed an aggregate sentence of 4 years and 6 months commencing 14
October 2021 and expiring 13 April 2026, with a non-parole
period of 2 years and
3 months expiring on 13 January 2024.
applicant now seeks leave pursuant to
Criminal Appeal Act
(NSW) to appeal on the following grounds:
“(1) The learned Judge erred in sentencing the applicant “at
law” to the offences on the s 31 certificate;
(2) The learned Judge erred in sentencing the applicant on Sequence 9 to more
than was jurisdictionally available; and
(3) That as a result, the overall sentence was manifestly excessive.”
the remarks on sentence the sentencing judge found facts consistent with an
agreed facts document signed by the applicant and his
solicitor. Those facts may
be summarised as follows.
mid-morning on 14 October 2021, when the applicant was 17 years of age, he
entered a residence in Wellington, in the Central
Western Slopes region of New
South Wales. The sole occupant of the premises, Mr Singh, woke to find the
applicant standing in the
entrance of his bedroom holding a silver-coloured
object in his right hand and pointing it at Mr Singh. Mr Singh assumed that the
object was a knife. Whilst standing next to Mr Singh’s bed, the applicant
threatened him with the knife, demanded money and
said “Lie down there,
otherwise I will stab you”.
applicant then went into the kitchen and obtained a large knife. Mr Singh stayed
in bed because he was too afraid to get up. The
applicant returned to the
bedroom with the kitchen knife and threatened Mr Singh. Whilst pointing the
knife at Mr Singh, the applicant
told him to give him his telephone and bag. He
directed Mr Singh to open his backpack and took from it three sets of keys to Mr
motor vehicle. Mr Singh pleaded with the applicant not to take his
still pointing the knife at Mr Singh, the applicant directed him to go to the
front of the house. Mr Singh was scared and did
as he was told. He was led to a
bathroom, where he remained for approximately 25 minutes until he could no
longer hear any movement
inside the house. When Mr Singh attempted to open the
bathroom door he was initially unsuccessful because the applicant had tied
piece of cloth to the door handle. Mr Singh then untied the cloth, opened the
bathroom door and walked to the front door. He noticed
that his motor vehicle
was missing and the front gates were damaged. He then noticed that his mobile
telephone and wallet were also
missing and he telephoned the police.
applicant drove Mr Singh’s motor vehicle towards Dubbo, which is about 49
kilometres north west of Wellington. He stopped
and picked up his uncle on the
vehicle matching the description of the stolen vehicle was observed by police
travelling on the Mitchell Highway, overtaking a B-double
articulated truck and
driving into oncoming traffic. A police pursuit was initiated with the police
activating their lights and sirens.
During the pursuit, the stolen vehicle was
observed overtaking a number of vehicles by driving into oncoming traffic and
almost colliding
with another vehicle. The stolen vehicle then exited the
highway continuing at speeds of up to 100 kilometres per hour, made multiple
sharp turns, crossed onto the wrong side of the road multiple times and failed
to stop at a stop sign.
police observed that several other vehicles had to pull off the road in order to
avoid colliding with the stolen vehicle. Due
to the manner of driving, the
police terminated the pursuit. A short time later, on the Newell Highway the
stolen vehicle collided
with the rear driver’s side of another vehicle
which was occupied by a driver and her three children who were then aged 22
years, 14 years and 10 years. As a result of the collision the other vehicle
spun off the road and crashed into a telegraph pole
and the stolen vehicle
crashed into a fence.
Count 1 (Sequence 7)
applicant and his uncle then attempted to flee the scene of the collision on
foot. A member of the public, Mr Ricky Rushby, who
had been travelling on the
Newell Highway at the time, heard the collision and saw the occupants run from
one of the vehicles. Mr
Rushby exited his car and ran after the applicant,
calling out for him to stop. He caught the applicant who then punched Mr Rushby
in the back and ran towards a railway line. Mr Rushby chased after the
applicant, again caught him and tackled him to the ground.
A wrestle ensued. The
applicant then got up and ran towards a fence. Mr Rushby again chased after him,
caught him and pulled him
off the fence. The applicant then tried to crawl
through a hole in the fence. Undeterred, Mr Rushby pulled him from the hole in
applicant lunged at Mr Rushby, causing him to fall and sustain bruising to his
leg and grazing to his back, and then picked up
a rock and hit Mr Rushby with it
multiple times to the head, causing a laceration which later required surgical
stapling to close
the wound. The police then arrived and placed the applicant
under arrest.
applicant admitted that he had stolen the vehicle from someone’s house by
taking the keys, that he had been the driver,
that he had failed to stop during
the police pursuit and that he had crashed the car on the highway.
The sentence proceedings
sentence hearing took place in the District Court at Dubbo before her Honour
Judge Robinson on 24 February 2023, 24 March 2023
and 29 May 2023. Both parties
provided written submissions and made oral submissions. The applicant did not
give evidence on sentence.
the sentence hearing counsel for the Crown and the applicant both submitted that
DJ v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 319
) was authority for the Court
having a discretion to sentence the applicant to terms of imprisonment for the
offences on the s 31
certificate. That authority, which related to sentencing
for offences on a s 166 certificate, held that the District Court was able
hear matters on a s 166 certificate and deal with those according to law.
However, the parties did not inform the sentencing judge
was decided, amendments were made to the
Children (Criminal Proceedings Act)
by the enactment of the
Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Remarks on sentence
sentencing judge found the objective seriousness of the Count 1 offence of
wounding with intent to be below the mid-range but
not towards the lower end,
taking into account that the offending was not planned, the significant violence
surrounding the attack,
the nature of the attack and the resulting injuries.
Honour found the objective seriousness of the Sequence 9 offence of robbery
armed with an offensive weapon to be below the mid-range.
That finding was
reached having regard to the factors identified in the guideline judgment of
(1999) 46 NSWLR 346;
[1999] NSWCCA 111
and that the offending
occurred in the victim’s home, involved the use of two knives to threaten
the victim, involved tying
material to a door to prevent the victim’s
escape, involved a real threat of violence but no actual violence, there was no
attempt to conceal the applicant’s identity, the offending was relatively
unsophisticated, the victim’s house was not
specifically targeted, the
property taken was not insignificant and the victim did not fall into a class of
vulnerability identified
in the guideline judgment.
Honour found that the objective seriousness of the Sequence 3 offence of failing
to stop and driving dangerously during a police
pursuit was within the mid-range
for offences of that type. The factors taken into account in reaching that
finding were that the
incident did not last for a significant period of time,
the driving was on a major highway and residential streets, the erratic nature
of the driving, the driving was at speeds of up to 100 kilometres per hour, the
risk to other road users, the offending coming to
an end by collision with
another vehicle carrying a driver and four passengers including young children,
the apparent lack of physical
injury to the occupants of the vehicle and the
driving occurring in a recently stolen vehicle with which the applicant had no
experience.
sentencing judge found that the offending was aggravated pursuant to
s 21A(2)(j)
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) by the fact that the
applicant was subject to conditional liberty. At the time he committed these
offences on 14 October 2021
he was on parole, he was the subject of two
concurrent probation orders and he was also on bail for offences alleged to have
committed whilst in detention on remand. Her Honour found this aggravating
factor to be significant due to the nature and extent
of the conditional liberty
orders breached and elevated the need for specific deterrence, adequate
punishment and protection of the
community. Her Honour also found this relevant
to an assessment of the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation and risk
re-offending. In relation to the applicant’s criminal history her
Honour said that it showed an escalation of offending and
found that it
disentitled him to leniency and elevated the relevance of specific deterrence.
sentencing judge took into account the applicant’s subjective
circumstances, evidenced in a psychological report, a Justice
Health mental
health report, a Justice Health psychiatric report, a Sentencing Assessment
Report, a Youth Justice background report,
custodial records and documents
produced under subpoena by the Department of Communities and Justice, stating
that the material “triggers
a number of considerations warranting leniency
or otherwise mitigating the sentence to be imposed”.
applicant was 18 years old at the time of sentencing. The tendered reports
indicated that he had experienced deprivation, neglect
and exposure to illicit
substance use in childhood. The applicant’s mother was incarcerated when
he was seven months old and
spent periods of time in custody while he was
growing up. The applicant’s parents had difficulty maintaining stable
accommodation
and providing him with food and clothing. He was exposed to his
parents’ substance use from an early age. The applicant spent
significant period of time in Juvenile Justice facilities and completed most of
his education in these facilities. When out of
custody he did not enjoy school,
regularly truanted and was disciplined for behavioural problems. A report by Dr
Gordon Elliot, Justice
Health Psychiatrist, dated 22 May 2023 noted that
clinical notes from the Liverpool Hospital in May 2019 record that the applicant
had been expelled from all New South Wales schools for stabbing a teacher.
applicant began using cannabis in early adolescence, and by the time he was 16
years old he was using heroin and methylamphetamine.
Health records indicated that the applicant had been diagnosed with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder
and generalised anxiety
disorder. In her report dated 10 October 2022 Dr Jenna Bollinger, psychologist,
reported diagnoses of oppositional
defiance disorder, stimulant use disorder,
cannabis use disorder and conduct disorder and noted that the applicant would
have previously
met the criteria for major depressive disorder. The sentencing
judge noted that the reports indicated that the applicant’s
intellectual
functioning had not been tested but a recommendation had been made for this to
occur. Dr Elliot opined that the applicant’s
intellectual functioning
would likely fall within the borderline or mildly impaired range.
sentencing judge found that the following features applied in mitigation. The
applicant’s subjective case was found to be
such that greater weight
should be given to rehabilitation than to deterrence and retribution, taking
into account also that as a
juvenile more weight was to be given to
rehabilitation. Her Honour considered that in the context of his deprived
background, underlying
conditions and history of incarceration the offending
represented immaturity and reduced capacity to control his impulsive behaviour.
Her Honour gave full weight to the applicant’s background of deprivation
in accordance with the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR
[2013] HCA 37.
Her Honour found that the applicant’s
background was such that it impacted his capacity to learn from experience and
that general
deterrence and denunciation had a lesser role to play in the
sentencing exercise. Her Honour took into account the applicant’s
from a young age, which she considered did not develop as a result of his
personal choice. The applicant’s mental
health was found to moderate the
weight given to general deterrence consistent with the principles in
of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA
Her Honour found that there was a high risk of the applicant reoffending,
and that the Court would be cautious in considering his
prospects of
rehabilitation.
finding of special circumstances was made due to the applicant’s need for
significant support to reintegrate into the community
as he was at risk of
institutionalisation.
Honour found that the
threshold had been crossed. In considering totality,
her Honour found that the distinct criminality of the offences, each having
separate victim, should be recognised by some notional accumulation within an
aggregate sentence.
Submissions on appeal
Applicant’s submissions
applicant does not challenge any of the sentencing judge’s findings of
fact, findings of objective seriousness, findings
relating to subjective
circumstances or application of aggravating and mitigating factors.
to ground 1, the applicant submits that her Honour erred by dealing with the
certificate sequences “according to law”. The applicant submits
that her Honour ought to have dealt with those sequences
by exercising the
them as she ultimately did.
for the applicant submitted that the sentencing judge was led into error when
the legal representatives for the Crown and
the accused both submitted that
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
applied and that the Court had
a discretion to sentence the applicant to terms of imprisonment for the
certificate matters. The sentencing judge was not informed of amendments to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
, in particular the addition of
which excluded the operation of
and instead required the
application of
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Accordingly, the sentencing court had no discretion to deal with the
matters “at law” and should have instead exercised the jurisdiction
of the Children’s Court when dealing with Sequences
relation to ground 2, the applicant submitted that the combined operation of
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
Criminal Procedure Act
restricted the sentencing court to exercise
the functions, restrictions and procedures of the Children’s Court. The
single offence is a control order for a period not exceeding
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
indicative sentence, after application of the discount for the guilty plea, was
a term of imprisonment for 2 years and 3 months.
The applicant submitted that a
sentence of imprisonment was not available and that a term in excess of 2 years
exceeded the maximum
relation to ground 3, the applicant submitted that the aggregate sentence
imposed was wrong at law and was manifestly excessive
because of the errors
relating to grounds 1 and 2.
Crown submissions
Crown submitted that it was open for this Court to conclude that the sentencing
judge erred by sentencing the applicant according
to law for Sequences 3 and 9
and that instead, because those matters were related offences transferred to the
District Court pursuant
certificate, the sentencing judge was required
to deal with them in accordance with the jurisdictional limitations of the
was conceded by the Crown that the sentencing judge’s errors were made in
circumstances where both parties at first instance
incorrectly submitted that
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
applied permitting the
court to deal with the offences on a
certificate according to law and
failed to inform her Honour of relevant amendments made after the decision in
Accordingly,
the Crown conceded that grounds 1 and 2 of the appeal had both been made out and
that the applicant should be resentenced.
Crown did not oppose the application for leave to appeal out of time being
Consideration
, Division 4 of the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
applies to a
person who has been found guilty or convicted of an indictable offence by a
court other than the Children’s Court
and who was a child when the offence
was committed and was under the age of 21 when charged:
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
, which is in
Division 4,
A person to whom this Division applies shall, in relation to an indictable
offence other than a serious children’s indictable
offence, be dealt with:
(a) according to law, or
(b) in accordance with Division 4 of
contains the penalties applicable to Children’s Court matters.
The penalties available to the Children’s Court, which
are set out in
, include control orders but do not include terms of imprisonment.
a person is charged before the Children’s Court with an offence other than
a serious children’s indictable offence,
which is defined in
include an offence punishable by imprisonment for life or for 25 years, the
proceedings are to be heard summarily:
made to the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
in 2017 included the
addition of
provides the mechanism by which related matters can be committed to
another court. That section provides:
Notwithstanding subsection (1), when the Children's Court commits to another
court for trial or sentence a person who is charged
with an indictable offence
or a serious children’s indictable offence (the “principal
indictable offence”):
(a) the prosecutor must, if the person has been charged with any back up or
related offence to the principal indictable offence,
produce to the Children's
Court a certificate specifying the back up or related offence, and
(b) the Children's Court may transfer to the other court proceedings for any
such back up or related offence.
stipulates the jurisdiction to be applied by another court when dealing
with related or backup matters transferred pursuant to
Section 31(7)
If a back up or related offence is transferred to another court under subsection
(6), the proceedings for such an offence are to
be dealt with in accordance with
sections 167
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
. For that purpose,
a reference in those sections to the Local Court is to be construed as a
reference to the Children's Court.
Court’s decision in
, which was relied on by the parties at first
instance, concerned a 16 year old applicant who was committed from the Dubbo
Court to the District Court for sentence on an offence of
discharging a shortened firearm with intent to cause grievous bodily harm
is a serious children’s indictable offence) and two related offences on a
certificate under
Criminal Procedure Act
. The sentencing
judge imposed a term of imprisonment for the indictable offence and fixed terms
of imprisonment for each of the
related offences. On appeal, this Court
held that the sentencing judge had not erred in imposing sentences according to
law for the
related offences and that sentencing for those offences was not
confined only to those penalties available in the
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act
but such matters could be dealt with according to law.
decision in
is inconsistent with
which states that when
dealing with related or back up matters
Procedure Act
apply, with references in those sections to the Local Court
construed as references to the Children's Court.
Section 168(3)
Criminal Procedure Act
In sentencing or otherwise dealing with a person for a back up offence or
related offence, the court has the same functions, and
is subject to the same
restrictions and procedures, as the Local Court.
combined effect of
Criminal Procedure Act
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
, and replacing the reference to
the Local Court with a reference to the Children’s Court, is that when
dealing with back up
or related offences the District Court has the same
functions, and is subject to the same restrictions and procedures, as the
Court. Relevantly the Children’s Court is restricted to
imposing only those sentences which are available under
Division 4 of the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
and is expressly restricted from
imposing sentences of imprisonment by the unambiguous terms of
Notwithstanding any other Act or law to the contrary, the Children's Court shall
not sentence a person to imprisonment.
is unnecessary to decide whether
was plainly wrong or that there are
compelling reasons to depart from it because the sentence which was the subject
of that appeal
was imposed on 13 December 2016, before the amendments which
came into effect on 14 August 2017.
permits the District Court to deal with an indictable offence other than a
serious children’s indictable offence according
to law, it does not extend
to sentencing for back up or related offences transferred on a
certificate.
Sections 168(3) and
(7) require such offences to be dealt with in accordance
with the Children's Court’s functions and subject to its restrictions
procedures, not according to law.
Accordingly,
it was not open to the sentencing judge to sentence the applicant to a term of
imprisonment for either of the related
offences on the
certificate,
Sequences 3 and 9.
1 is made out. Accordingly, the applicant will have to be resentenced.
relation to ground 2, the maximum jurisdictional penalty available to the
Children’s Court for a single offence is a control
order for a period not
exceeding 2 years:
s 33(1)(g).
A sentence of imprisonment was unavailable when
sentencing for the Sequence 9 related offence. The indicative sentence for that
of imprisonment for 2 years and 3 months, after discount for the guilty
plea, exceeded the maximum jurisdictional penalty available
Children’s Court for a single offence which is a control order for a
period not exceeding 2 years:
s 33(1)(g).
sentencing judge did not impose a separate sentence for Sequence 9. Rather, her
Honour indicated an indicative sentence for that
sequence which would have
exceeded the maximum jurisdictional penalty available if it had been imposed as
a separate sentence. When
an aggregate sentence is imposed under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
the only operative sentence imposed is
the aggregate sentence; the indicative sentences are not operative and are not
of themselves
amenable to appeal: e.g.
[2013] NSWCCA 260
[2014] NSWCCA 162
indicative sentences may act as a guide as to whether error is established in
relation to the aggregate sentence by showing
that the sentencing discretion
miscarried because the judge acted upon a wrong principle and failed to take
into account some material
consideration – here the maximum jurisdictional
penalty available for the relevant individual offence – in considering
what aggregate sentence to impose:
[2014] NSWCCA 297
(2014) 246 A
and authority there cited.
2 is not formulated as an error in imposing the aggregate sentence. Rather, it
suggests an error in imposing a sentence for
Sequence 9. However, no operative
sentence was imposed for that sequence. Accordingly, ground 2 has not been made
relation to ground 3, because ground 1 has been established, the sentencing
discretion miscarried and this Court is required to
exercise the discretion
afresh by resentencing the applicant:
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR
[2014] HCA 37
and [42]. Even if an indicative sentence is assessed
as being excessive, that does not necessarily mean that the aggregate sentence
is excessive. A principal focus of determination of a ground alleging manifest
excess will be whether the aggregate sentence reflects
the totality of the
criminality involved.
submissions made on behalf of the applicant indicate that the real complaint is
that the form of the sentence, being an aggregate
sentence of imprisonment, was
wrong at law. During the hearing of the application counsel for the applicant
submitted “Our
third ground is because of the errors made in respect to
the related offences that the overall sentence was excessive but in fact
better way of wording it would be that the aggregate sentence was not available
at law ... because the court cannot include control
orders in an aggregate term
of imprisonment ...” [T 4.2 - 4.6].
for the applicant also submitted that upon resentencing, it would be open to the
Court to impose a sentence of imprisonment
for Count 1 and control orders for
Sequences 3 and 9 which would result in an overall term which “would not
differ that much”
from the overall head sentence imposed by her Honour
which expires in April 2026.
do not consider it necessary to resolve ground 3 given the manner in which the
ground was argued and because it is necessary in
any event for this Court to
resentence the applicant afresh.
Leave to appeal –
applicant required leave to appeal out of time under
rule 3.5(5)
Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
(NSW). In support of the application an
affidavit by Roisin McCarthy, a solicitor advocate at the Aboriginal Legal
Service, affirmed
on 23 February 2024 was read without objection. The respondent
did not oppose the granting of leave.
am satisfied that the affidavit provides a proper explanation for the delay in
instituting the appeal. Accordingly, the requisite
leave ought to be
Re-sentence
is necessary to re-sentence the applicant given the finding of error in ground
for the applicant did not challenge any of the sentencing judge’s findings
of fact, objective seriousness or subjective
circumstances and did not challenge
her Honour’s application of aggravating or mitigating factors. I propose
to resentence
the applicant on the basis of the unchallenged factual findings
made by the sentencing judge:
DL v The Queen
(2018) 265 CLR 215
. I also take into account a number of additional matters relevant
to resentence which were raised by the parties.
the event of resentence, the applicant relied on two affidavits by James
Clifford, a solicitor employed by the Aboriginal Legal
Service, which were
affirmed on 23 July 2025 and 19 August 2025. The respondent relied on an
affidavit by Adam Wilczek, a solicitor
employed by the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW), sworn on 11 August 2025. No objections were taken to
those affidavits.
affidavit material relied upon by the applicant details that whilst in custody
he has experienced periods of segregation and had
to deal with the deaths of his
mother, brother, grandmother and a close friend. The material also establishes
that the applicant
has assistance from the National Disability Insurance Scheme
as a result of his severe ADHD and related memory and concentration
cognitive assessment file review records that the applicant has significant
difficulty responding appropriately in social
situations and building
appropriate social relationships and that his impulsivity and emotional
dysregulation and anxiety can manifest
as aggression. The review also notes that
the applicant needs substantial assistance with learning and engaging in new
and that his memory and concentration remain poor even with
aggressive pharmacological treatment of his ADHD symptoms.
material also establishes that whilst in custody the applicant has undertaken
and completed a number of courses including CONNECT
Aboriginal Cultural
Strengthening, EQUIPS Foundation and EQUIPS Addiction. Documents from the New
South Wales Department of Health
indicate that the applicant had previously
sustained injury to his right lower limb in March 2024 when a truck he was
driving collided
with a power pole and that in April 2024 he had engaged in acts
of self-harm.
Clifford’s second affidavit relates to a sentence for unrelated offending
imposed on the applicant by the Local Court at
Dubbo of an aggregate fixed term
of imprisonment of 10 months and 21 days to expire on 15 May 2026.
affidavit relied on by the respondent relates to the applicant's parole and his
updated criminal and custodial histories.
to Count 1, the offence of wounding with intent, her Honour assessed that
offence as being below the mid-range but not towards
the lower end of the range.
That offence carries a maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment.
3, the offence of police pursuit, not stopping and driving dangerously, was
assessed by her Honour as being within the mid-range
for offences of that type.
That offence carries a jurisdictional maximum penalty of a 2 year period of
control when sentenced in
the jurisdiction of the Children's Court.
9, an offence of robbery armed with an offensive weapon, was assessed by her
Honour as being below the mid-range of objective
seriousness. The jurisdictional
maximum penalty for that offence is a 2 year period of control when sentenced in
the jurisdiction
of the Children's Court.
am satisfied that each of those findings of objective seriousness was
appropriate in the circumstances of this case.
applicant’s youth and his other subjective circumstances require that
greater weight should be given to rehabilitation and
lesser weight given to
considerations of deterrence and retribution. Although the offending is serious,
it cannot be said that significant
planning was involved, or that his conduct
displayed signs of mature decision-making. Rather, the circumstances of the
suggest that emotional immaturity and less than fully developed
capacity to control impulses were likely to be contributing factors.
circumstances I am satisfied that his youth, emotional immaturity and reduced
capacity to control impulsive behaviour mitigate
his culpability and reduce
considerations of retribution and deterrence:
[2010] NSWCCA 159
(2010) 201 A Crim R 379
– [6]. I give full weight to the
applicant's background of deprivation as required by
Bugmy v The Queen
and I am satisfied that that background moderates considerations of general
deterrence and denunciation in the sentencing exercise.
The applicant's mental
health requires there to be moderation to the weight given to general deterrence
consistent with the principles
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De
applicant presents as a significant risk of reoffending in the future. His
prospects of rehabilitation could be regarded, at best,
as guarded. In light of
his youth and other subjective circumstances and the need to avoid
institutionalisation, a finding of special
circumstances is appropriate to
provide the applicant with an opportunity to have a greater period on
conditional liberty in the
community with access to support services to assist
him to reintegrate.
the principle of totality, there should be some concurrency in the sentences
imposed. Because of the distinct criminality
involved in each offence there must
also be a degree of accumulation in the sentences.
operation of
s 25A(1)(b)
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
because the applicant was under the age of 18 years at the time he committed
the offence, no automatic quantified discount applies
for the guilty plea to
Count 1. In relation to Sequences 3 and 9,
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act
applies and requires the Court to take into account both
the fact that the applicant has pleaded guilty and when the pleas were entered
or indicated and provides that the court may accordingly reduce the order that
would otherwise have been made. Here the applicant
entered guilty pleas to
Sequences 3 and 9 in the Dubbo Children’s Court on 11 August 2022 and at
the same time indicated an
intention to plead guilty to Count 1. He formally
entered a guilty plea to Count 1 when arraigned in the District Court on 26
2022. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the pleas were entered or
indicated at the earliest opportunity. Although the statutory regime
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
does not strictly apply, I am
satisfied that the applicant is entitled to a 25% discount on the sentences
which would otherwise be
imposed to account for the utilitarian value of the
pleas. I note that the respondent conceded at first instance that such an
was appropriate and that no submission to the contrary was made in this
Accordingly,
I propose the following orders:
(1) grant leave to appeal;
(2) allow the appeal;
(3) quash the sentence imposed in the District Court on 29 May 2023;
(4) in lieu, sentence the applicant after discounts of 25% for the guilty pleas:
(i) in respect of Sequence 3, to a control order for a period of 1 year and 3
months commencing on 14 October 2021 and expiring on
13 January 2023;
(ii) in respect of Sequence 9, to a control order for a period of 1 year and 6
months commencing on 14 April 2022 and expiring on
13 October 2023; and
(iii) in respect of Count 1, to imprisonment for a period of 3 years and 6
months commencing on 14 April 2022 and expiring on 13
October 2025, with a
non-parole period of 1 year and 9 months commencing on 14 April 2022 and
expiring on 13 January 2024.
earliest date upon which the applicant would have become eligible for release on
parole was 13 January 2024. However, I note that
the applicant is serving a
fixed term of imprisonment, imposed in respect of unrelated offending, which
does not expire until 15
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (321 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter