URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/649.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Raymont v North Coast Community Housing (Tenancy) [2013] NSWCTTT 649 (17 December 2013)
Raymont v North Coast Community Housing (Tenancy)
[2013] NSWCTTT 649
December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Tenancy Division
APPLICATION NO:
RT 13/33954
Elizabeth Raymont (landlord)
RESPONDENTS:
North Coast Community Housing (“NCCH”) (tenant)
APPLICATION:
Order for payment of $9,494.43
Lismore 17 September 2013 at 9.15 part heard; 29 October 2013 at
APPEARANCES:
Ms Gosling for the applicant;
Ms Wicks for the respondent
See paragraph 5 below
LEGISLATION:
Section 187
Residential Tenancies Act 2013
Social housing, compensation
or before 11 January 2014, the respondent is to pay the applicant the sum of
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
application was lodged on 25 June 2013.
17 July 2013 the matter was adjourned for hearing and the usual orders made in
relation to documents.
was a residential tenancy lease between the parties. NCCH is a social housing
provider. The claim was for less than the jurisdictional
limit of the Tribunal
of $15,000.00.
section 187(c) of the Act, the Tribunal may make an order for the payment of an
amount of money. The Tribunal has jurisdiction
to hear the
first issue in this matter was whether the owner of the premises was responsible
for repairs to the property during, and, at the
end of the tenancy or was it the
social housing provider respondent. The second issue is what amount, if any, is
payable between
the parties.
APPLICANT’S
landlord applied for the following:
(a) cleaning $800.00;
(b) replace carpet / vinyl $3,649.00. It was conceded that at the time of
vacation the carpet/vinyl was seven years old;
(c) replace 14 missing light bulbs $194.33;
(d) replace broken taps, kitchen and laundry $187.61;
(e) handymen repairs $363.00;
(f) replace missing curtains $709.00;
(g) replace damaged kitchen bench tops, missing doors and handles $2,579.00;
(h) locksmith $67.50;
(i) fumigation / pest $150.00;
(j) replacement upright stove $780.00.
applicant relied on the following documents:
(a) entry condition report;
(b) photos of the premises in 2006;
(c) photos of the property at the end of the tenancy;
(d) exit condition report;
(e) various invoices in support of the claim for
compensation;
(f) various invoices showing work done at the premises in
(g) 4 routine inspection reports;
(h) letter from landlord to NCCH.
representative of the landlord gave oral evidence at hearings. She said the
tenant vacated the premises on 28 May 2013. The premises
were handed back in a
filthy, damaged and unsatisfactory condition. The property was provided in new
condition at the commencement
of the tenancy in 2006 as supported by photos and
the entry report. The tenant was a social housing provider and, in turn, the
would sub-tenant the premises to its own clients. The landlord's
representative said that it was the responsibility of the respondent
good the property.
getting the keys on 28 May 2013, the landlord's agent indicated that she
attended the property with Ms Wicks for the respondent.
There was no agreement
as to the condition of the property. The exit report and photos were relied on
as evidence of its condition.
Invoices were supplied as evidence of the losses
written report from a builder indicated kitchen drawers, doors and fronts had
been misused and “maliciously damaged”.
The quote for carpet
replacement stated its poor condition was a “reflection of misuse”.
the first hearing, the landlord's agent disputed that the photos relied on by Ms
Wicks had been taken by her during the exit report
on 28 May. At the final
hearing, Ms Wicks handed up time and date stamped photos to prove they were
taken on that day.
property manager who also attended the exit meeting on 28 May gave oral
evidence. He saw damage to kitchen cupboards. Curtains
were missing from tracks.
The premises were unclean. There were stains on the carpet, including burn
marks. There was damage to the
doors in a bedroom. He confirmed Miss Gosling
took photos and did an exit report. When shown the photos of the stove relied on
NCCH, he said he looked inside it and saw racks missing and that it was
buckled. He said he was told by an electrician that this
damage must have been
caused by the elements being left on and the door left open. He conceded the
stove was clean. He said the buckling
was not easy to observe.
her closing statement Ms Gosling said that at the time of hearing the premises
were still vacant due to outgoing repairs that needed
to be done. The landlord
was struggling financially and could not do them. The landlord was disappointed
the premises were left in
the condition they were. The landlord kept the rent
below market value so the landlord could assist the
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
relied upon the following documents that were not already in the landlord's
(a) documents regarding payments and maintenance carried out by respondent since
(b) ingoing condition report given to a sub tenant for tenancy commencing 2
August 2008;
(c) various emails between the parties and an electrical
contractor;
(d) copies of requests for maintenance sent to the respondent and carried out on
13 May 2009;
(e) Real Estate Institute of New South Wales (“REINSW”) Code of
(f) 11 photographs taken on the morning of 28 May 2013 before the agent arrived
at the property.
Wicks said she attended the property alone on 28 May before the landlord's agent
arrived. When she got to the sliding door to the
property the lock was not
working. She called a locksmith. The locks were replaced and enabled her to gain
entry. She alleged the
tenant had to tear the fly screen to be able to enter and
exit the premises.
took photos but did not show these to the agent.
supplied evidence of prior complaints regarding the condition of the property in
requests for maintenance to the landlord's agent.
On 20 August 2008, the tenant
complained that the oven was not working and had not been replaced. On 13 May
2009, the landlord was
told smoke alarms were not working and there were leaks
and problems with the pergola. The respondent said the smoke alarm did not
for 4 years. On 12 August 2010, taps leaking in the sink, en-suite and upstairs
toilet. On 1 September 2010, there were problems
with water leaks in light
bulbs, mould and paint peeling. A routine inspection report from the landlord
dated 25 September 2012 indicated
all electrical faults had been repaired at the
landlord's cost except the stove. The landlord's agent indicated in an email
the stove had been damaged by the tenant.
electrician who attended the property on behalf of NCCH on 6 June 2013 (after
vacation) checked the lights and stove. He found
the oven element was blown. He
said only a replacement element was needed. He found that the leaks in the roof
meant bulbs would
blow regularly. The applicant stated they had installed a new
oven in September 2008. Ms Wicks informed the landlord's agent that
only needed a new element in an email to her on 30 May 2013. She also informed
her of the finding regarding the leaks and
consequent problem with bulbs.
Wicks also provided Work Orders raised by NCCH during the tenancy and carried
out by its own repairer. On 29 July 2008, door knobs
were fitted in the bathroom
vanity and a robe in the lounge. A toilet roll holder and towel rail were
repaired. On 29 July 2008,
ceiling mould was treated. On 31 January 2013,
leaking kitchen taps were removed and reinstalled as part of a repair. The
stated that taps were worn and would not be
“able to be
serviced again”.
On 4 February 2013, there was a further need to
repair the kitchen taps. On 22 May 2013, the carpets were steam cleaned. On 29
2013, the front glass door was re-keyed.
an email from the landlord’s agent to Ms Wicks, the agent said the cleaner
stated she could clean the walls without them
needing to be repainted. Ms Wicks
said the problems arose from mould issues that had not been addressed during the
tenancy. Ms Wicks
instructed the agent to have that clean done for a sum of
an email of 28 May, Ms Wicks said the last sub-tenant reported that cupboard
doors came off the hinges due to age and breaking.
The photos of Ms Wicks
indicated some doors has been reinstated and drawers put back in place. She
further stated that any blinds
would have been more than 7 years old.
Wicks said that on vacation of the property carpets were steam-cleaned and
deodorised. She also indicated that the invoice for
cleaning of the landlord
showed that cleaning at the property was not done until 25 June 2013, nearly a
month after the tenancy ended.
to the REINSW Code of Practice, Ms Wicks stated the tenant was not treated
fairly because:
(a) there was no working stove for 12 months;
(b) there was no working smoke alarm;
(c) there was no repair to light bulbs.
her closing statement Ms Wicks indicated that the landlord benefited from seven
years of rent which had always been on time and
in advance. Much of the damage
claim was fair wear and tear over a seven year period. The landlord had failed
to maintain the property
over the period. She said if the property had been
empty for five months that was because the landlord was doing extensive
renovations.
It was not because that she was carrying out repairs for which NCCH
was liable.
accept that both sets of photos supplied by the parties were taken on 28 May
during the exit report. They reflect very differently
on the condition of the
premises. As a result, I give little weight to those photos in my findings and
rely on other evidence.
matters not that the respondent was a social housing provider. As such a
provider, the respondent has an obligation to see its
own sub-tenants leave the
premises in the same condition as they found them save as to fair wear and tear.
In this case, the evidence
shows that regular reports were made to the landlord
of the need for repairs. It remains the obligation of the landlord to carry
those repairs in a timely manner. It follows that if repairs were reported and
the landlord did not carry them out, and those
repairs are sought in this
compensation claim, then the tenant should not be responsible. Those repairs are
more probably a refurbishment
or improvement by the landlord after a long
tenancy. As it was a long tenancy, fair wear and tear will be as significant
APPLICATION OF RELEVANT LAW
51 of the Act set out the obligations of the tenant in respect of the condition
of premises at the end of a tenancy.
Use of premises by tenant
(3) On giving vacant possession of the residential premises, the tenant
must do the following:
(a) remove all the tenant’s goods from the residential
(b) leave the residential premises as nearly as possible in the same condition,
fair wear and tear excepted, and, if there is a condition
report, as set out in
the condition report applicable to the premises when the agreement was entered
(c) leave the residential premises in a reasonable state of cleanliness, having
regard to the condition of the premises at the commencement
(d) remove or arrange for the removal from the residential premises of all
rubbish, having regard to the condition of the premises
at the commencement of
the tenancy,
(e) return to the landlord all keys, and other opening devices or
similar devices, provided by the landlord to the
CONCLUSIONS
refer to each of the landlord's claims in turn.
cleaning was not done until almost a month after vacation of the tenancy. It is
probable much of the need for cleaning arose in
that period. However, the sworn
oral evidence of the property manager indicated that the premises were unclean
when he attended the
inspection. Despite this, there were regular indications
that the premises were mouldy and nothing was done by the landlord to rectify
that mould. NCCH did attend to it in their work orders. The cleaner engaged by
the landlord opined that the premises could be cleaned
by scrubbing. In the
circumstances of the case, I allow the sum of $600.00 conceded by Ms Wicks for
cleaning in her communications.
entry condition report indicated
“brand new carport
throughout”.
I accept that it was stained and had some burns. These
even appear in the photos of Ms Wicks. The claim for carpet is reduced by
tax depreciated life of 7 years out of 10 and $1,094.70 is
landlord did have the electricals repaired in 2012, save as to the stove which
was in dispute even then. However, I accept the
report of the electrician for
NCCH who said that on his inspection after vacation there were still problems
due to leaks. The claim
for replacement of 14 missing light bulbs is not
regular maintenance requests from NCCH do not mention any issue with broken taps
in the kitchen and laundry. The comments in the
Work Orders of NCCH indicate the
kitchen taps were worn and could not be repaired. It is more probable than not
that this also applied
to those in the laundry. This claim for $187.61 is not
costs of $363.00 are allowed for general repairs;
entry report indicated curtains and blinds were new. The tax deprecation life of
curtains is 6 years and blinds is 10 years. Of
the $709.00 claimed, $329.00 was
for blinds. Three-tenths of that amount is allowed in the sum of $98.70. No
amount is allowed for
curtains as they had passed their depreciation life.
NCCH maintenance request indicated it replaced some door knobs but this work was
minor. The entry report indicates the bench top
was clean and undamaged and had
“two doors missing”.
As to cupboards and drawers, it said
“4 * new doors & cupboard under sink, other doors are chipped
– on bottoms”.
There are no repairs sought to cupboards or
drawers in work orders of NCCH. I allow half claim for replacement of damaged
bench tops, missing doors and handles, being $1,289.50.
that Ms Wicks said she had this work done, I do not allow the claim for a
the allowance of part of the claim for carpet replacement, I do not allow the
claim for fumigation / pest.
Wicks disputed that a new stove had been installed in 2008 as claimed by the
landlord's agent. There was also significant difference
between the evidence of
the property manager and the evidence of the electrician for NCCH as to whether
it was necessary to replace
the oven. It was also suggested by NCCH that the
problem of a faulty element was wear and tear. It is the onus of the applicant
prove their case on the balance of probabilities. I cannot accept the
evidence of the property manager over that of the NCCH electrician.
that when I cannot distinguish the evidence to accept one account over another,
the applicant fails to discharge their
onus to prove that point. The claim for
repair of the oven is not made out.
respondent is to pay the applicant
application was made for costs.
Consumer, Trader
and Tenancy Tribunal
17 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter