URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/276.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pellatt v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 276; (31 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Pellatt v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 276
Hearing Date(s):
13 October 2025
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Appeal Panel
D Robertson, Principal Member
D Goldstein, Senior Member
(1) Leave to appeal is
(2) The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW – Enforcement and remedies – The requirement for
the appellant to establish that he was a ‘consumer’
as defined in
Fair Trading Act 1987
for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction –
The requirement for a ‘supplier’ as defined in
section 79D
Fair Trading Act 1987
to have supplied goods or services to the appellant for
him to be a ‘consumer’ as defined in
section 79D
Fair Trading
- Meaning of ‘direct supplier’ in
section 79E(2)
Fair Trading Act 1987
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Leach v Toyota
[2022] NSWCATCD
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusamano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
David James Pellatt: appellant
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd:
Representation:
Appellant (Self represented)
Respondent (Self represented)
File Number(s):
2025/00261444
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
12 June 2025
S Sutherland. General Member
File Number(s):
2024/00327269
REASONS FOR DECISION
appellant instituted proceedings against the respondent in September 2024 in the
Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal
seeking an order for the supply
of a replacement vehicle because of an alleged breach of the respondent’s
express 5 year manufacturer’s
warranty in respect of a Ford Ranger motor
vehicle acquired by the appellant in 2020.
the proceedings at first instance the appellant relied on
Australian Consumer Law
hearing of the application occurred on 11 March 2025. The proceedings were
adjourned part heard to 3 June 2025 and finalised by
a written decision with
reasons on 12 June 2025. The Tribunal Member dismissed the application on the
basis that the Tribunal had
no jurisdiction.
appellant has appealed that decision. His appeal has been lodged within the 28
day period allowed for filing appeals from a decision
in the Consumer and
Commercial Division of the Tribunal.
appellant’s Grounds of Appeal are:
(1) The Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider that he was a
“consumer” under
of the Australian Consumer Law (ACL)
which defines “consumer” more broadly than the
Fair Trading
(2) The Tribunal incorrectly relied solely on the FTA
) to assess
of the FTA. The
appellant states that his claim arose under ACL
(express warranties) and s
271 (actions against manufacturers), not solely under
of the FTA;
(3) The Tribunal misapplied
Leach v Toyota
[2022] NSWCATCD 92
involved a gifted vehicle and lacked an express warranty claim. The appellant
states that in his case Ford issued and publicly
promoted a 5-year express
warranty, which applied at the time the defect was reported. The Tribunal failed
to give proper weight
to the fact that Ford, as manufacturer, supplied the goods
in trade or commerce, and had acknowledged the warranty through multiple
inspections - satisfying ACL requirements for a valid express warranty claim.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act)
sets out the basis upon which appeals from decisions of the Tribunal may be
brought. That section states that an
appeal may be made as of right on any
question of law, or with the leave of the Appeal Panel on any other grounds
appellant’s Notice of Appeal also seeks Leave to Appeal on the grounds
(a) the decision of the Tribunal:
(i) was not fair and equitable, and
(ii) was against the weight of evidence; and
(b) significant new evidence was now available that was not reasonably available
at the time of the hearing.
appellant conceded at the hearing that there was no significant new
The relevant facts
factual background is uncomplicated and was described in the Tribunal decision
as being that in 2020 the appellant purchased a
Ford Ranger vehicle, first
registered in May 2018, from a doctor in Nowra by private sale. There was no
dispute that at all relevant
times a Ford manufacturer’s warranty applied
to the vehicle. Before commencing proceedings, the appellant notified the
of an internal leak into a passenger footwell. The respondent was
unable to locate the source of the leak and on that basis it has
not provided a
repair or remedy under its manufacturer’s warranty.
Tribunal decision
reciting the facts, the Tribunal Member stated the respondent’s position
‘The respondent Ford Company of Australia claims that as the purchase of
the vehicle was a private sale that the Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction in
accordance (sic) the principles in Leach v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
[2022] NSWCATCD 92.
Tribunal found that it had jurisdiction for consumer claims pursuant to section
79J of the FTA. In addition, the Tribunal found
that it had the jurisdiction to
Australia Consumer Law
matters pursuant to
of the FTA. The
Tribunal found that, in order to enliven its jurisdiction, the applicant was
required to be a consumer and his claim
was required to be a consumer claim
within the meaning of
of the FTA.
Tribunal Member referred to and set out the definitions of a ‘consumer
claim’, a ‘consumer’, a ‘supplier’
‘supply’ as contained in ss 79E, 79D and 79G of the FTA
respectively.
Tribunal Member then referred to [11] and [12] of
Leach v Toyota
’11 As can be seen from the definitions set out above, an
essential part of being a “consumer” and there being
a “consumer claim” is that there has been a supply by
a “supplier” to the putative consumer. There will not
relevant supply unless the entity supplying the goods to the
putative consumer does so “in the course of carrying on (or
purporting to carry on) a business”.
12 Here, the supply to the applicant was by her father in
law and it was not in the course of carrying on a business.’
[12] of the decision, the Tribunal Member concluded by stating:
‘The supply of the vehicle was through a private sale between two
individuals. The ‘supplier’ was not a business
‘supply’ was not in the course of caring on a business in accordance
Section 79D
Fair Trading Act, 1987
and Leach v Toyota. Motor
Corporation Australia Limited
[2022] NSWCATCD 92.
Therefore the applicant is not
a consumer and the claim is not a consumer claim. For these reasons, the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
to hear the claim and the application is
dismissed.’
The appellant’s submissions
written submissions and at the hearing the appellant submitted that the
definition of consumer in
Australian Consumer Law
the definition of consumer in the FTA
appellant also relied on
of the FTA in order to submit that the section
allowed claims against a manufacturer who was not a direct supplier. That
sub-section
‘For the avoidance of doubt, a reference in this Part to a consumer claim
includes a reference to a claim by a consumer against
a supplier (for example, a
manufacturer or wholesaler) who is not the direct supplier of goods or services
to the consumer if the
claim arises from or in connection with the supply of
those goods or services by the direct supplier to the consumer.’
submission was not developed by the appellant. Presumably the submission is that
allows his claim against the respondent as a manufacturer, albeit
without analysis of who was or would be a direct supplier for the
purposes of
the section.
appellant also referred to the fact that after he purchased the Ford Ranger the
respondent carried out work on it under the manufacturer’s
warranty, which
confirms that his claim in connection with water ingress to the passenger
footwell was a valid consumer claim under
of the FTA.
Appellant sought to distinguish
Leach v Toyota
on the basis that the
facts of that decision related to a vehicle that had been gifted to the
applicant, not purchased and there was
no manufacturer’s warranty. He
submitted that the case appeared irrelevant.
The Reply to the
respondent submitted that:
(1) the appellant had not raised a question of law;
(2) the appellant’s argument was misconceived because the FTA was the
‘jurisdictional gateway’ to empower the Tribunal
to hear and
determine consumer claims, including claims under the
Australian Consumer
(3) the appellant’s application for leave repeated his arguments relating
to errors of law; and
(4) the appellant received a fair hearing.
conclusion the respondent sought orders that the appeal be
Determination of the appeal on a question of
appeal involves a consideration of whether the Tribunal correctly interpreted
the FTA and the
Australian Consumer Law
in order to determine whether it
possessed the jurisdiction to hear the appellant’s claim as a consumer
under the FTA
. The appeal raises questions whether the
construction of a statute arrived at by the Tribunal at first instance was wrong
identified way and therefore raises a question of law: Unique Commercial
Group Pty Ltd v Cusamano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
of the FTA:
‘Any consumer may apply to the Tribunal for determination of a consumer
order for the appellant to bring a ‘consumer claim’ in the Tribunal,
which may include a claim under the
it was necessary for him to
establish that he was a ‘consumer’ as that term is defined in
of the FTA. This is required by
Critically,
a consumer is defined to be one of the individuals or bodies referred to in
-(h) of the FTA to whom a supplier has supplied, or agreed to supply,
goods or services.
requires consideration of the definition of the word ‘supplier’ in
of the FTA which is:
‘a person who, in the course of carrying on (or purporting to carry on) a
business, supplies goods or services.’
agree with the Tribunal Member at first instance that the supply of the Ford
Ranger to the applicant through a private sale lacked
the necessary ingredient
of being a supply by person who, in the course of carrying on (or purporting to
carry on) a business, supplies
goods, which would include a motor vehicle. We
also agree that, because that element was not present in these proceedings, the
was not a consumer as defined in the FTA and therefore the Tribunal
did not have the jurisdiction to determine his claim against
the respondent
. It follows from those conclusions that we reject the
appellant’s submission that the decision in
Leach v Toyota
Whether the applicant obtained the vehicle by a gift from a
relative or by purchase from a private seller, the supply did not have
necessary element of being a supply by a person who, in the course of carrying
on or purporting to carry on a business, supplies
follows from the above conclusion that we reject the appellant’s
submission that
overrides the provisions of the FTA so far
as the definition of a consumer is concerned. The definition of
in the ACL has a function in relation to the operation of
the ACL, it does not have any relevance to the determination of the question
whether a person is a ‘consumer’ for the purposes of the FTA.
appellant also submitted that
of the FTA applied to permit his claims
against the respondent as the manufacturer of the vehicle that he purchased. We
reject this
submission. We agree that
expands the definition of a
consumer claim to include a claim by a consumer against a manufacturer. However
the section does not
affect the definition of ‘consumer’ or
‘supplier’ as referred to above. The section does not operate so
a ‘direct supplier’ includes a person who does not supply goods
or services in the course of carrying on a business.
In our view the words
‘direct supplier’ in
means the supplier (as defined in the
FTA) who, as opposed to the manufacturer, directly supplies the goods to the
consumer. The
result is that. provided there is a direct supply by a
‘supplier’ to a ‘consumer’, as those words are defined
in the FTA, the definition of ‘consumer claim’ in the FTA will
include a claim by a consumer against the manufacturer
without the direct
supplier being a party to the proceedings.
Application for leave
12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act governs the grant of leave to appeal against
decisions of the Consumer and Commercial Division
of the Tribunal. It
Limitations on internal appeals against Division
(1) An Appeal Panel may grant leave under section 80 (2) (b) of
this Act for an internal appeal against a Division decision only
if the Appeal
Panel is satisfied the appellant may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of
justice because:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and
equitable, or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the weight
of evidence, or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not
reasonably available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
the Appeal Panel stated, at
’76 ... [I]t should be accepted that a substantial
miscarriage of justice may have been suffered because of any of the
circumstances
referred to in cl 12(1)(a), (b) or (c) where there was a
significant possibility
chance which was fairly
" that a different and more favourable result would have been achieved
for the appellant had the relevant circumstance in para (a)
or (b) not occurred
or if the fresh evidence under para (c) had been before the Tribunal at first
77 As to the particular grounds in cl 12(1)(a) and (b), without
seeking to be exhaustive in any way, the authorities establish
(1) If there has been a denial of procedural fairness the
decision under appeal can be said to have been "
not fair and equitable
Hutchings v CTTT
[2008] NSWSC 717
[2011] NSWCA 194
(2) The decision under appeal can be said to be "
against the
weight of evidence
" (which is an expression also used to describe a ground
upon which a jury verdict can be set aside) where the evidence in its totality
preponderates so strongly against the conclusion found by the tribunal at first
instance that it can be said that the conclusion
was not one that a reasonable
tribunal member could reach -
Calin v The Greater Union Organisation Pty
[1991] HCA 23
(1991) 173 CLR 33
Mainteck Services Pty Limited v
Stein Heurtey SA
[2013] NSWSC 266
78 If in either of those circumstances the appellant may have
been deprived of a "
significant possibility
chance which
was fairly open
" that a different and more favourable result would have
been achieved, then the Appeal Panel may be satisfied that the appellant
have suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice because the decision was not
fair and equitable or because the decision was
against the weight of the
if an appellant from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division has
satisfied the requirements of cl 12(1) of Sch 4,
the Appeal Panel must still
consider whether it should exercise its discretion to grant leave to appeal
under s 80(2)(b).
Collins v Urban
, the Appeal Panel stated at [84] that ordinarily it is
appropriate to grant leave to appeal only in matters that involve:
“(a) issues of principle;
(b) questions of public importance or matters of administration or policy which
might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of going beyond merely
what is arguable, or an error that is plain and readily
apparent which is
central to the Tribunal's decision and not merely peripheral, so that it would
be unjust to allow the finding to
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and clearly mistaken; or
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact finding process in such an
unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to produce
result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
that section of the Notice of Appeal dealing with his Application for Leave to
Appeal, the appellant stated:
‘I respectfully request leave to appeal on the basis that the Tribunal
made an error of law by failing to apply the Australian
Consumer Law which was
the primary legal framework under which my original claim was brought. The
Tribunal relied solely on part
6A of the NSW
Fair Trading Act 1987
to determine
whether I was a “consumer” ignoring the broader and overriding
definition in
of the ACL which applies to private purchases.’
appellant also made other comments which concerned the nature of his claim in
the first instance proceedings and the Tribunal
decision appealed against. The
appellant also stated that his appeal raised:
‘a significant question of law affecting the rights of second-hand
purchasers across NSW’
‘important legal issues that affect many second-hand vehicle owners across
NSW and Australia’
section 6B of the Notice of Appeal where the appellant was required to describe
in detail why the decision was not fair and equitable,
he stated as
‘The Tribunal failed to assess the actual claim under ACL provisions and
restricted its analysis to NSW definitions, excluding
the broader statutory
rights available to consumers under a federal law. This denied me access to a
fair hearing of my warranty rights
as a second - hand buyer.’
agree with the respondent’s position that the appellant’s
application for leave repeated his arguments relating to
errors of law.
decline leave to appeal based on the appellant’s statement of why the
decision was not fair and equitable. The Tribunal Member
correctly applied the
provisions of the FTA to reach a decision which we have found was correct. The
fact that the effect of that
decision was that the appellant was unable to
proceed with his case under the Ford warranty in the Tribunal, because the
did not have the necessary jurisdiction, does not in our view mean that
the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing.
Decision of the
Tribunal against the weight of evidence
appellant referred to the evidence which he filed, which he stated showed that
the respondent inspected the vehicle five times
and confirmed a defect (water
ingress) yet refused to repair it. The appellant also stated under this
‘The Tribunal should have given more weight to the evidence that Ford
Australia acknowledged and acted upon the express warranty
by inspecting the
vehicle five times in response to my warranty claim. These inspections confirm
that Ford accepted the warranty
was valid and applicable to me as the current
the Tribunal at first instance lacked the jurisdiction to hear the
appellant’s claim because he was not a consumer as defined
FTA, the Tribunal Member did not, and could not, consider whether the evidence
filed by the parties was sufficient to establish
the appellant’s claim. In
those circumstances leave should not be granted on the ground that the decision
of the Tribunal was
against the weight of the evidence. The decision of the
Tribunal was that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appellant’s
claim. That decision was founded upon the fact, which the appellant does not
contest, that the appellant acquired the vehicle by
private sale. The
Tribunal’s decision that it had no jurisdiction to determine the
appellant’s claim meant that the Tribunal
did not consider whether the
appellant’s claim was established on the evidence filed by the
appellant has stated that the respondent in effect acknowledged its warranty
because it had carried out multiple inspections of
the vehicle and confirmed the
existence of the defect the subject of his application. Even if that were
correct, and it was not denied
by the respondent, that conduct is not sufficient
to give the Tribunal jurisdiction where none existed.
appellant may have been entitled to enforce the express warranty against the
respondent manufacturer in another jurisdiction.
The fact that the respondent
may have acknowledged the existence of the warranty does not confer jurisdiction
upon the Tribunal to
enforce the warranty.
refuse leave to appeal.
orders are:
(1) Leave to appeal is refused.
(2) The appeal is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter