URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/152.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
York v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales [2025] NSWCATOD 152; (11 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
York v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 152
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Occupational Division
Seiden SC DCJ, Deputy President
(1) The Tribunal dispenses with a hearing pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(2) The application is dismissed for want of
(3) The directions hearing on 12 November 2025
is vacated.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS – Legal practitioners – administrative review
application from Australian lawyer for review of decision of
the Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales relating to a practising certificate –
statutory condition requiring two
years of supervised legal practice –
and review rights under s 100 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
– designated tribunal – NCAT not designated tribunal
for application
made – application dismissed for want of jurisdiction
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Profession Uniform General Rules 2015
Cases Cited:
Eberstaller v Poulos
(2014) 87 NSWLR 394
[2014] NSWCA
Forest v Suzanne
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
Hazeldell Ltd v
The Commonwealth
(1924) 34 CLR 442
[1924] HCA 36
Jali Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Anderson
[2025] NSWCATOD 57
John Fairfax & Sons Pty
Ltd v Police Tribunal
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax Publications
Pty Ltd v Ryde
Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
Shapkin v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCATOD 66
Procedural rulings
Stephen York (Applicant)
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
(Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Applicant (Self-Represented)
Council of the Law Society
of New South Wales, Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00359352
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
York (the applicant) applied to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT
or the Tribunal) for administrative review of a
decision made by the Council of
the Law Society of New South Wales (the Council or the respondent) on 18 August
2025 (the 18 August
decision) to, in the applicant’s words, “refuse
to grant or renew a practising certificate” (the application).
applicant also describes the 18 August decision as a “refusal to
grant the certificate sought”. The Council contends
that no such decision
was made and that the applicant is referring to a “purported
decision”; which NCAT has no jurisdiction
to review. The Council,
therefore, applies for summary dismissal of the application.
is a tribunal’s first duty to ensure that it has authority to decide a
Hazeldell Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1924] HCA 36
(1924) 34 CLR 442
Eberstaller v Poulos
(2014) 87 NSWLR 394
[2014] NSWCA 211
NCAT has jurisdiction to review certain decisions of the Council, including, in
some cases, decisions to refuse to grant or
renew a practising certificate, the
18 August decision is not such a decision. Neither in substance nor form has the
Council refused
to grant or renew the applicant’s practicing certificate
under the provision relied upon by the applicant, or otherwise. Further,
August decision was not made under a provision of an Act that enlivens
NCAT’s administrative review jurisdiction: it
is not a decision that is
reviewable by NCAT. The reasons for reaching this conclusion are set out below.
has no authority to determine the application.
The nature of the
18 August decision and the conundrum facing the applicant
2018, the applicant was admitted to the Supreme Court of New South Wales as a
solicitor. Since admission, he has held a practising
certificate, subject to
conditions. Condition 2 provides that the applicant must engage in supervised
legal practice only; until
he has completed two years of supervised legal
practice, or is exempted from the supervision requirement or the period is
on the grounds of previous legal practice. This requirement derives from
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) (Uniform Law) and r 14 of
Legal Profession Uniform General Rules 2015
(NSW) (Uniform Rules).
Whilst there are other conditions attached to the applicant’s practising
certificate, those conditions
are not the subject of these proceedings.
conundrum that the applicant faces, so it is contended, is that given his age,
he cannot obtain supervised legal employment in
the present legal market and is,
accordingly, unable to ever get to a position where Condition 2 may be removed.
Condition 2 is said
to be “indefinite”. This has been the position
for the last seven years and the applicant contends there is no reason
the position will change. The imposition of Condition 2, so it is contended, has
the practical effect of negating the applicant’s
practising certificate.
proceedings are brought on the premise that in refusing to grant the applicant a
practising certificate without Condition 2,
the Council refused to grant or
renew a practising certificate. The applicant submits that that decision was
of the Uniform Law. This is said to enliven NCAT’s review
s 100(1)(b)
of the Uniform Law.
derives administrative review jurisdiction
recently outlined in
Shapkin v Council of the Law Society of New South
[2025] NSWCATOD 66
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act)
provides that “the Tribunal has such jurisdiction and functions as may be
conferred or imposed on it by or
under this Act or any other legislation.”
This includes in relation to NCAT’s administrative review jurisdiction: s
of the NCAT Act. By s 30 of the NCAT Act, NCAT’s administrative
review jurisdiction is provided for by the
Administrative Decisions Review
(NSW) (the ADR Act). Subsection 9(1) of the ADR Act provides that
NCAT has “administrative review jurisdiction over a decision
(or class of
decisions) of an administrator if enabling legislation provides that
applications may be made to the Tribunal for an
administrative review under this
the Uniform Law, read with the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act
(NSW) (the Application Act), may enliven NCAT’s jurisdiction, it
is necessary to have close regard to the decision sought to
be reviewed, to
ensure that NCAT’s jurisdiction is indeed enlivened.
100(1) of the Uniform Law provides an applicant with appeal or review rights in
relation to, relevantly, decisions to refuse
to grant or renew a practising
certificate (s 100(1)(a)) or decisions to vary a practising certificate or
impose a condition (s 100(1)(b)).
However, it is only where the
“designated tribunal” is prescribed to be NCAT, that NCAT has
the appeal or review.
to s 11(3) of the Application Act, NCAT is the designated tribunal in relation
to decisions under ss 89 or 92 of the Uniform
Law. Each of ss 89 and 92 of the
Uniform Law concern actions of the designated local regulatory authority (here,
the Council, pursuant
to s 11(1) of the Application Act and s 44 of the
Uniform Law) in relation to show cause events. Section 89 of the Uniform Law
action of the designated local authority in connection with an
automatic show cause event, while s 92 of the Uniform Law concerns
action of the
designated local authority in connection with a designated show cause event.
This is further explained below.
Additionally,
though not relevant to this application, s 127 of the Application Act
identifies that administrative review by NCAT
may be provided by
regulation. There is nothing contained in “local regulations” that
would enable NCAT to decide the
application lodged by the applicant:
“local regulations” is defined in ss 3(1) and 166 of
the Application Act.
Does NCAT have jurisdiction
applicant expressly relies on ss 89 (concerning automatic show cause events) and
100(1)(b) of the Uniform Law (concerning decisions
to “vary, suspend, or
cancel...or, ... to impose a condition on, the Australian practising
certificate”). However, the
applicant has also stated that the decision he
seeks to review is a decision “to refuse to grant or renew” the
certificate sought. As s 100(1)(a) of the Uniform Law is concerned
with renewals and grants of certificates, not s 100(1)(b), I have
this provision. Further, as s 92 of the Uniform Law (concerning designated show
cause events), which also enlivens NCAT’s
by the respondent and is referenced in the filed material, I have considered
that provision too.
central issues, therefore, are whether:
(1) the 18 August decision is a decision under ss 89 or 92 of the Uniform Law to
refuse to grant or renew a practising certificate;
(2) the 18 August decision is a decision under ss 89 or 92 to vary or impose a
condition on the applicant’s practising certificate.
The 18 August decision
detailing the 18 August decision, it is necessary to identify the circumstances
leading up to that decision.
apparent from the letter dated 18 July 2025 from the Director of Legal
Regulation, Professional Standards, the Law Society of New
South Wales to the
applicant, on 5 May 2025, the applicant made a “renewal application
for the grant of a practising certificate
for the 2025/2026 practice
year”. In assessing that application, the Council considered whether to
grant the practising certificate,
having regard to its obligations under ss 44
and 45 of the Uniform Law. In considering that application, the Council
identified that
the applicant had engaged in legal practice outside the
“terms of a condition” of his practising certificate by engaging
legal practice unsupervised and without professional indemnity insurance, in
breach of the Uniform Law (specifically, ss 49, 54
Council concluded that these breaches may constitute designated show cause
events under s 90 of the Uniform Law. The Council stated
that pursuant to s 92
of the Uniform Law, “regarding designated show cause events, Council may
vary, suspend, cancel or may
refuse to renew a practising certificate.”
However, given the applicant’s submissions and the subsequent steps taken
by the applicant, the Council resolved “that no further action be taken in
respect of the alleged contraventions of ss 49,
54 and 211 the Uniform
Law.” The letter concludes as follows:
“The matter is therefore finalised and the file will be closed.”
Nevertheless,
in assessing the application to renew the applicant’s practising
certificate, the Council considered the breaches
of the Uniform Law arising from
the applicant’s failure to comply with conditions attached to his
practising certificate; and
proposed the addition of discretionary
considerations, by consent. It is apparent from the 18 August decision that the
consented to those discretionary conditions.
the applicant’s consent to those conditions, the Council clarified that it
was not possible to relieve the applicant
of Condition 2, which arises in
accordance with s 49 of the Uniform Law and r 14 of the Uniform Rules.
the letter of 18 July 2025, the Council determined to approve the renewal of the
practising certificate with Condition 2.
18 August decision itself is set out in a letter of the same date, which
responds to correspondence from the applicant dated 1
August 2025 consenting to
certain discretionary conditions and requesting a practising certificate.
that letter, the Director of Legal Regulation, Professional Standards, the Law
Society of New South Wales relevantly states, in
(1) The applicant is fit and proper to hold a practising certificate and the
respondent has approved the renewal of the applicant’s
certificate under s 45(4) of the Uniform Law.
(2) The statutory requirements mean that the applicant must engage in supervised
legal practice for a period of two years under s
49 of the Uniform Law and r 14
of the Uniform Rules.
(3) The respondent “does not consider that s 45(4) of the Uniform Law can
remedy the statutory obligations detailed in s 49
of the Uniform Law and r 14 of
the Uniform Rules”.
(4) Rather, s 49(4) provides the basis for granting an exemption from the
requirement to undertake two years of supervised legal
practice. The applicant
has provided no evidence of prior legal practice which would warrant the grant
of an exemption.
(5) As there is no basis for the exercise of discretion by the Council under
s 45 of the Uniform Law to exempt the applicant from
the requirement to
undertake supervised legal practice for a period of two years, the
applicant’s practising certificate is
renewed subject to that condition
(i.e., Condition 2).
applicant submits that the 18 August decision, ultimately, amounts to
constructive refusal to grant him a practising certificate.
This is for the
following reasons:
(1) The applicant applied under ss 43 and 44 of the Uniform Law for a practising
certificate without Condition 2.
(2) The Council renewed his practising certificate subject to Condition 2.
(3) The applicant was, therefore, not granted the practising certificate that he
(4) Further, given his age, the applicant is unable to ever satisfy
Condition 2.
(5) Accordingly, the 18 August decision was a decision to “refuse to grant
an Australian practising certificate”; being
a refusal to grant the
practising certificate sought.
the applicant contends that the decision to refuse to grant the certificate was
a decision under s 89 of the Uniform Law.
respondent submits that the application for review does not seek to review a
decision of the respondent made under either ss 89
or 92 of the Uniform Law, and
as these are the only provisions that could enliven NCAT’s jurisdiction,
NCAT’s jurisdiction
is not enlivened.
Whether the 18 August
Decision was a decision under sections 89 or 92 of the Uniform Law
the applicant submits that the 18 August decision was made under s 89 of the
Uniform Law, it is helpful to set out the relevant
legislation.
89 of the Uniform Law provides:
89 Automatic show cause events—action by local regulatory
(1) If the applicant or holder gives a statement required by this Subdivision,
the designated local regulatory authority must determine
whether the person
concerned is a fit and proper person to hold a certificate.
(2) The designated local regulatory authority may vary, suspend or cancel, or
may refuse to renew, a certificate if the applicant
(a) fails to provide a statement as required by this Subdivision; or
(b) has provided a statement in accordance with this Subdivision but the
designated local regulatory authority does not consider
that the applicant or
holder has shown in the statement that, despite the show cause event, he or she
is a fit and proper person
to hold a certificate (or can be considered such a
fit and proper person if the designated local regulatory authority is satisfied
that doing so is warranted in the circumstances); or
(c) has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement under
Chapter 7 made in connection with an investigation of
the show cause event
concerned or has committed an offence under that Chapter in connection with any
such investigation.
(3) If the designated local regulatory authority determines that the applicant
or holder is such a fit and proper person (or can
be considered such a fit and
proper person if the designated local regulatory authority is satisfied that
doing so is warranted in
the circumstances), it—
(a) must take no further action in relation to the show cause event; but
(b) may impose a discretionary condition that it considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
(4) In determining a matter under this section, the designated local regulatory
(a) may, but need not, conduct an investigation into the matter; and
(b) is not limited to making its determination, or conducting any such
investigation, on the basis of just the automatic show cause
event concerned;
(c) may have regard to the facts and circumstances that surround, arise in
connection with, relate to or give rise to the automatic
show cause event
89 prescribes the action that must be taken by the Council towards an applicant
or holder where an automatic show cause event
has occurred in relation to that
applicant or holder.
86 of the Uniform Law sets out what constitutes an automatic show cause event.
86 Nature of automatic show cause events
automatic show cause event
is any of the following in relation
to a person who is an applicant for or the holder of a certificate—
(a) a bankruptcy-related event;
(b) his or her conviction for a serious offence or a tax offence, whether or
(i) the offence was committed while he or she was engaging in legal practice as
an Australian legal practitioner or was practising
foreign law as an
Australian-registered foreign lawyer; or
(ii) other persons are prohibited from disclosing the identity of the offender;
(c) an event of a kind specified in the Uniform Rules for the purposes of this
Uniform Rules do not specify an event that would, in addition to those specified
in s 86 of the Uniform Law, constitute an automatic
show cause event.
applicant has not provided evidence to support the proposition that there was
the occurrence of an automatic show cause event
in relation to him.
the contrary, as detailed above, the history of the matter indicates that the
Council considered that there had been the occurrence
of designated show cause
events, because of the applicant’s undertaking of unsupervised legal
practice and his failing to hold
professional indemnity insurance. Designated
show cause events are the purview of s 92 of the Uniform Law.
92 provides:
92 Designated show cause events—action by local
regulatory authority
(1) If the holder provides a statement required by this Subdivision, the
designated local regulatory authority must determine whether
concerned is a fit and proper person to hold a certificate.
(2) The designated local regulatory authority may vary, suspend or cancel,
or may refuse to renew, a certificate if the holder—
(a) fails to provide a statement as required by this Subdivision;
(b) has provided a statement in accordance with this Subdivision but
the designated local regulatory authority does not consider
that the holder has
shown in the statement that, despite the show cause event, he or she is a fit
and proper person to hold a certificate
(or can be considered such a fit and
proper person if the designated local regulatory authority is satisfied that
doing so is warranted
in the circumstances); or
(c) has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement
under Chapter 7 made in connection with an investigation of
the show cause event
concerned or has committed an offence under that Chapter in connection with any
such investigation.
(3) If the designated local regulatory authority determines that the
person is such a fit and proper person (or can be considered
such a fit and
proper person if the designated local regulatory authority is satisfied that
doing so is warranted in the circumstances),
it must take no further action in
relation to the show cause event but may impose a discretionary condition that
it considers appropriate
in the circumstances.
(4) If the designated local regulatory authority determines that the
person is not such a fit and proper person (or cannot be so
considered such a
fit and proper person), it may take the action specified in the notice referred
to in section 90 or take less onerous
action that the designated local
regulatory authority considers appropriate.
(5) In determining a matter under this section, the designated local
regulatory authority—
(a) may, but need not, conduct an investigation into the matter;
(b) is not limited to making its determination, or conducting any
such investigation, on the basis of just the designated show cause
concerned; and
(c) may have regard to the facts and circumstances that surround,
arise in connection with, relate to or give rise to the designated
event concerned.
(6) The designated local regulatory authority is not to deal with a matter
under this section if the matter has previously been
the subject of
investigation or determination under this Law unless the designated local
regulatory authority is satisfied there
are exceptional circumstances for doing
90 provides:
90 Nature of designated show cause events
designated show cause event
is the service of a notice
on a holder of a certificate—
(a) alleging—
(i) in the case of a holder of an Australian practising
certificate—that the holder has engaged in legal practice outside
terms of a condition restricting his or her practising entitlements; or
(ii) in the case of a holder of an Australian registration
certificate—that the holder has provided legal services not permitted
or under this Law; or
(iii) in the case of a holder of an Australian practising certificate
who is required to have professional indemnity insurance—that
does not have, or no longer has, professional indemnity insurance that complies
with this Law in relation to the certificate;
(iv) a matter of a kind specified in the Uniform Rules for the
purposes of this section; and
(b) requiring the holder to provide a statement showing cause why the
designated local regulatory authority should not take action,
specified in the
notice, to vary, suspend or cancel the certificate.
the history of the matter indicates a reference to s 92 of the Uniform law, the
Council resolved not to take action under s
Ultimately,
there is no decision of the Council under either ss 89 or 92 of the Uniform Law
that could be subject to review in NCAT.
would be a sufficient basis to dismiss the application for want of jurisdiction.
However, in light of the applicant’s submissions
concerning the
Council’s constructive refusal to grant the practising certificate sought,
I turn to consider that next.
18 August decision was not a
decision to refuse to grant the practising certificate
applicant contends that the 18 August decision is a decision by the respondent
to refuse to grant a practising certificate to
him. However, I find that the 18
August decision was neither in form nor substance, a decision to refuse to renew
the applicant’s
practising certificate; even if, in the applicant’s
particular circumstances, he is unable to practise.
applicant’s difficulties in his ability to engage in legal practice are
not because of a lack of a practising certificate.
Even accepting that he is
unable, as a matter of practical reality, because of Condition 2, to practise,
this does not negate the
proposition that he has a valid and effective
practising certificate.
Viewing the 18 August decision as a
decision to impose a condition
the applicant relied on s 100(1)(b) of the Uniform law, which concerns,
relevantly, a decision to vary or impose conditions, I
turn next to consider
that provision.
18 August decision maintained a condition on the applicant’s practising
certificate (Condition 2), that is to say, the condition
that the applicant be
required to engage in supervised legal practice only, until he has completed two
years of supervised legal
practice. Even assuming this was the
“imposition” of a condition, the Council was obliged to impose this
condition on
the applicant’s practising certificate under s 49(1)(b) of
the Uniform Law.
does not assist the applicant for at least two reasons. First, he has not sought
to challenge the decision to impose Condition
2. Even though the applicant
submits that the imposition of Condition 2 had the effect of negating the
practising certificate, the
applicant challenges the constructive
“refusal” to grant or renew the certificate, not the imposition of
Condition 2
per se. Second, this is not a decision under either ss 89 or 92.
Accordingly, NCAT is not the designated tribunal for a review or
appeal under s
100(1)(b) of the Uniform Law.
the 18 August decision as a decision to impose a condition, therefore, does not
alter the result.
Dispensing with a hearing
parties consented to the dismissal application being determined without a
hearing, and both parties have provided written submissions.
The applicant has
provided the materials on which he wishes to rely, whilst the respondent has had
an opportunity to submit materials
they may have wished to rely on.
considering whether a hearing is required for the dismissal application, I
consider the following factors which weigh against dispensing
(1) The Objects of NCAT include “to ensure that the Tribunal is
accountable and has processes that are open and transparent;
and to promote
public confidence in tribunal decision-making in the State and in the conduct of
tribunal members”: ss 3(f)
and (g) of the NCAT Act.
(2) The importance of open justice:
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd
v Police Tribunal
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR
[2005] NSWCA 101
(3) The principles of open justice apply to the Tribunal:
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
(4) The starting position is that a hearing is required (unless it falls into
one of the specified exceptions) and that hearings
are open to the public
(unless otherwise ordered): ss 50 and 49 NCAT Act. In relation to legal
disciplinary proceedings, hearings
into allegations of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct for the purposes of the Uniform
Law are to be
open to the public, unless the Tribunal orders otherwise: Uniform
Law, s 301(2); NCAT Act, Sch 5, Div 4, cl 22(1).
contradistinction to the above factors, I am mindful of the following factors in
favour of dispensing with a hearing:
(1) There is no requirement that a hearing must occur in a matter such as this.
(2) This decision concerns an application for dismissal for want of
a small range of
agreed documents.
(3) The parties provided written submissions.
(4) There has been no suggestion by either party of a need for oral evidence or
cross-examination.
(5) This decision will be published and will expose the Tribunal’s
reasoning and the submissions.
(6) There is a public interest in conserving the Tribunal’s resources and
the costs to the parties in cases where, as here,
the hearing would likely
simply amount to a recitation of the written submissions.
have considered the factors above in accordance with the relevant considerations
to dispensing with a hearing outlined in
Jali Local Aboriginal Land Council v
[2025] NSWCATOD 57.
factors in favour of dispensing with a hearing outweigh the factors against
dispensing with a hearing, and I am satisfied that
I can adequately determine
the issue on the basis of the written materials. Accordingly, a hearing is
dispensed with under s 50(2)
of the NCAT Act, noting the requirements of
s 50(3) have been met.
Constitution
of the Tribunal
summary dismissal application, concerning whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to deal with a matter, is an ancillary decision
under s 4(1) NCAT Act, and
accordingly Sch 5, Div 5, cl 18(2) of the NCAT Act is applicable to these
proceedings. This application
can be decided by a member with a “judicial
qualification”, as defined in Sch 5, Div 4, cl 17(2) of the NCAT Act,
a panel. It is therefore appropriate that I determine this matter alone.
I note this process was followed in
18 August decision is not a decision to refuse to grant or renew a practising
certificate. In any event, as described above, the
action taken by the Council
in the 18 August decision did not follow either an automatic show cause event
under s 89, nor a designated
show cause event under s 92 of the Uniform Law.
Accordingly, even if it is a reviewable decision, the designated tribunal for
appeal or review of the 18 August decision is the NSW Supreme Court, not
NCAT: s 11(3) of the Application Act.
has no authority to review the 18 August decision.
(1) The Tribunal dispenses with a hearing pursuant to
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(2) The application is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
(3) The directions hearing on 12 November 2025 is vacated.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (287 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter