URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
James (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 1 (12 March 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
James (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 1
Hearing Date(s):
12 March 2025
Date of Orders:
12 March 2025
Decision Date:
12 March 2025
Guardianship Division
EM Connor, Senior Member (Legal)
Dr B McPhee, Senior Member
(Professional)
M Watson, General Member (Community)
The guardianship order for James made on 10 October 2024 has been
reviewed. The order now is as follows:
1. The Public Guardian is
appointed as the guardian.
2. This is a continuing guardianship
order for a period of two years from 12 March 2025.
3. This is a
limited guardianship order giving the guardian(s) custody of James to the extent
necessary to carry out the functions
4. The guardian has the following
a) Accommodation
To decide where James may
b) The guardian may authorise others including members of
NSW Police and the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
i) take James to a
place approved by the guardian.
ii) keep him at that
iii) return him to that place should he leave
c) Health care
To decide what health care James
may receive.
d) Medical/Dental consent
substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment,
where James is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to
f) Restrictive Practices
To give or withhold
consent to restrictive practices used to influence James’s
g) Other Function
Surveillance: To decide
whether video or other monitoring equipment should be used at James’
residence for his safety and welfare
if he is refusing to allow support workers
to remain on the premises.
Legal function re forensic sample
request: To access legal advice and respond on James’ behalf regarding the
request from NSW
Police for him to provide a DNA
5. The guardian has the following
a) Authority to override objections to medical
i) The guardian may override the objection of James to
major or minor medical treatment.
CONDITIONS:
conditions of this order are:
a) Standard Condition
exercising this role, the guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring
James to an understanding of the issues and to obtain
and consider his views
before making significant decisions.
b) NDIS Restrictive Practices
The guardian(s) may only consent to the use of
restrictive practices to influence James’s behaviour:
a last resort to prevent James harming himself or others; and
in accordance with a behaviour support plan which has been developed by a
behaviour support practitioner after having conducted
a functional behavioural
assessment upon James, and which is reviewed regularly (and no less than every
12 months) and/or reviewed
as soon as practicable if there is a change in
circumstances which requires the plan to be amended.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – 54-year-old subject person with acquired brain
injuries – subject to guardianship and financial management
orders since
2013 – forensic sample request made by NSW Police - request for review of
guardianship orders – subject
person remains a person for whom a
guardianship order could be made – confirmation of functions included in
previous order
– whether subject person is an ‘incapable
person’ for the purposes of
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act
(NSW) – professional assessment may be necessary – order varied
to include a legal function relating to forensic sample
restrictive practices – order varied to include a restrictive practices
function – not satisfied that
installation of monitoring equipment
constitutes a restrictive practice – monitoring equipment is an invasion
of privacy –
order varied to authorise determination of whether monitoring
equipment should be used – Public Guardian reappointed –
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
(Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Restrictive Practices and Behaviour
Support) Rules 2018 (Cth), r 6
Cases Cited:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
016: Requested Review of Guardianship Order
Bianca (applicant for review)
Public Guardian (appointed
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2013/00391652
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a 54-year-old man who lives in his own home in regional NSW and receives
services from a healthcare service provider. He
sustained an acquired brain
injury in 1983 as a child when he was hit by a motor vehicle while riding a
bicycle and a further brain
injury from a fall in 2013 as an adult. James
required a right arm amputation after an inadvertent intra-arterial injection
gangrene. He is a participant in the National Disability Insurance Scheme
mother died in 2013, and he has no other known relatives. He has a history of
incarceration after assaulting a police
officer and another person, and reported
behaviours of concern, including aggression.
has been known to the Tribunal since 2013. Management of his estate was first
committed to the NSW Trustee and Guardian on 22
July 2013 when a guardianship
order was also made appointing the Public Guardian for 12 months.
a hearing on 14 July 2014, the Tribunal revoked both the guardianship and
financial management orders for James. Further applications
guardianship and financial management were made in 2017 and dismissed. An
application for guardianship made in 2020 was
also dismissed.
19 October 2023, the Tribunal made a guardianship order for James appointing the
Public Guardian for 12 months. At that time, he
was an inpatient at a public
hospital following a fall from stairs at his home resulting in a long lie. The
hearing of a financial
management application was adjourned until 3 November
2023, when it was dismissed.
4 January 2024, following a further application for financial management, the
Tribunal committed management of James’ finances
to the NSW Trustee and
Guardian and ordered a review within 12 months.
10 October 2024, the Tribunal reviewed both the guardianship and financial
management orders. The Public Guardian was reappointed
as James’ guardian
with the functions of accommodation with the authority to ‘authorise
others’, health care, medical
and dental consents, and services. The order
provides authority under
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship Act
) for the guardian to override James’
objections to medical and dental treatment. The Tribunal confirmed the financial
order made on 4 January 2024, and did not order a further review of
that order.
20 January 2025, James’ NDIS support coordinator, Ms Bianca, requested a
review of the guardianship order with a view to
a ‘forensic and legal
services function’ being added.
The hearing
the end of these Reasons for Decision are lists of the parties to the review and
the witnesses who attended the hearing. [Appendix
removed for
publication.]
STATUTORY REVIEW OF GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
reviewing the current guardianship order the Tribunal may renew, renew and vary
the order or determine that the order is to lapse.
questions to be considered by the Tribunal are:
Is James someone
for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he continues to have a
disability that prevents him from being
able to make important life
Tribunal make a further guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is James someone for whom the Tribunal
could make a further order because he continues to have a disability that
prevents him from
being able to make important life decisions?
Guardianship Act
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he or she is “a
person in need
of a guardian”. A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who, because of a disability, is totally or partially incapable
managing his or her person”:
Guardianship Act
with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced age;
(c) a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(d) otherwise disabled;
and, by virtue of that fact, is restricted in one or more major life
activities to such an extent that he or she requires supervision
habilitation:
Guardianship Act
the most recent guardianship order was made on 10 October 2024, the Tribunal was
satisfied that James has disabilities arising
from his traumatic brain injuries
and is a person for whom a guardianship order could be made. There is no
evidence before the Tribunal
to refute this and we were satisfied James remains
a person for whom a further guardianship order could be made.
Should the Tribunal make a further guardianship order and if so,
what order should be made?
Tribunal must consider all of the following matters set out in
Guardianship Act
before exercising its discretion to make a further
guardianship order:
(a) the views (if any) of:
(i) the person;
(ii) the person’s spouse;
(iii) the person’s carer; and
(b) the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships;
(c) the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments; and
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for the making of such an order.
matters have no hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration.
However, the Tribunal must undertake a balancing
exercise for its consideration
of the matters in
Guardianship Act
. When undertaking this
task, the Tribunal may be guided by the principles that are set out in
Guardianship Act
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
the application for review lodged by Ms Bianca on 20 January 2025, it is stated
“DNA test required for police matter due to [James'] previous forensic
history. Police project requiring updated forensic details
on previous offenders
and require this from [James]. The public guardian is currently unable to make
any consent decisions as they
do not have these functions and [James] is unable
to provide informed consent himself.”
copy of a letter dated 16 October 2024 from a Senior Constable of a regional NSW
police station to James was provided to the Tribunal.
It states that James
“...been identified as an Untested Former Offender under the
(Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Section 75A.
It appears that your DNA profile is not contained on the Offenders Index of the
DNA database System.
As a result of this situation, we are requesting that you consent to a non
intimate forensic procedure by way of a self-administered
buccal swab or
alternatively, the taking of a hair sample.
If you do not consent, an application for a court order will be made and failure
to comply with that order is an offence for which
you may be arrested and
charged. Further failure to comply may lead to an application for an arrest
warrant to allow the procedure
to be undertaken.”
a letter dated 12 December 2024, Mr Andrew, senior behaviour support
practitioner, states that:
“...I am requesting the following be added to his guardianship orders:
(1) Forensic decisions —This is warranted to ensure
James receives proper support in navigating the legal system. It ensures
his rights are protected, decisions are made in his best interest, particularly
because he has little insight and understanding
in legal proceedings.
(2) Legal decisions —This is warranted due to the
complexity of the legal process, which can be difficult to navigate. Without
appropriate support, the complexity of the legal process could lead to James not
being adequately represented and treated unfairly
within the legal system.
(3) Restrictive practice authorisation — This is
warranted to ensure the use of restrictive practices are necessary,
proportionate,
and in his best interest.”
Tribunal received a second letter from Mr Andrew, dated 7 March 2025, in which
he requests the addition of a restrictive practices
function to the guardianship
order because he is seeking to implement environmental restraints and seclusion
for James. Mr Andrew
states that the restrictive practices that he would like to
implement are: the locking of the front door and a perimeter gate;
‘monitoring
at a distance’, which he submits constitute
environmental restraint; and, ‘staff locking themselves in office’
which he submits constitutes seclusion.
the hearing, Mr Andrew told the Tribunal that James has declined to provide a
DNA sample as requested by NSW Police. Mr Andrew
asked the Tribunal to provide
the Public Guardian with authority to decide whether a DNA sample should be
provided by James.
relation to the addition of a restrictive practices function to the guardianship
order, Mr Andrew told the Tribunal that James
lives in a property that he owns
but it is deemed to be unliveable. Consideration is being given to James moving
into supported independent
living (SIL) accommodation. There are serious
concerns about his safety while he remains in his current accommodation, and it
proposed that the top storey of the property be boarded off to prevent him
accessing it. Mr Andrew noted that James is required to
sit behind the front
passenger seat of a vehicle when being transported. He is not required to wear a
harness, and a belt buckle
guard is not used.
Sarah is an occupational therapist who has assessed James. She informed the
Tribunal that the NDIS has declined additional funding
for specialist disability
accommodation for James because he owns his own property, notwithstanding that
it is considered unliveable.
This decision is being appealed but there are
immediate concerns about James’ risk of falling and injuries, and it is
proposed that the stairs to the top storey of his house be blocked
off. If James is relocated to SIL accommodation, there will be
a need for him to
be subject to environmental restraints, such as locked doors to contain him.
Sarah stated that James refuses to allow overnight support staff to remain
inside his house, despite often needing assistance.
A variation of the
guardianship order to allow surveillance equipment to be installed in his
residence is sought. This would enable
staff to monitor James from a vehicle
outside his residence and enter to assist him if
Confirmation of functions included in the order made on
10 October 2024
10 October 2024, the Tribunal made a guardianship order with the following
functions: accommodation with the authority to ‘authorise
health care; medical and dental consents; and services. The order provided
authority under
Guardianship Act
for the guardian to
override James’ objections to medical and dental treatment.
were satisfied that it remains in James’ best interest for the
Public Guardian to continue to make decisions about these
areas of his life
for the reasons set out in the Reasons for Decision from the hearing on
10 October 2024.
Decision regarding request for DNA
letter from NSW Police states that the request for a DNA sample is made under
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes (FP)
). This section is within Pt 7A of the
Crimes (FP) Act
also provides at s 75G of that Act that:
75G Police officer may request untested former offender to consent to
forensic procedure
A police officer may request an untested former offender (other than a child or
an incapable person) to consent to a forensic procedure
to which this Part
applies being carried out on the former offender.
Crimes (FP) Act
defines ‘incapable person’ in s 3 as an adult
3 Interpretation
(a) is incapable of understanding the general nature and
effect of a
(b) is incapable of indicating whether he or she consents or
does not consent to a
carried out.
Crimes (FP) Act
states that authority for forensic procedures in
relation to an incapable person is by order of a Magistrate or an authorised
under Pt 5 of that Act. Authorised officers are defined as registrars of
the Local Court and authorised employees of the Attorney
Department, in addition to Magistrates and Children’s Magistrates.
he is subject to a guardianship order, it is unclear to the Tribunal whether
James is an ‘incapable person’ as
defined above. He stated very
clearly during the hearing that: ‘I am not a criminal’ and does not
want to provide a DNA
sample. Whether he understands the consequences of
complying or not with the request was not clear.
may be necessary for the Public Guardian to arrange an assessment of whether
James is incapable of ‘understanding the general
nature and effect of a
forensic procedure’ from a suitable health professional. The Public
Guardian has authority to consent
to such an assessment on James’ behalf
under functions previously granted.
James is deemed to be an incapable person who cannot be asked to consent to the
procedure to which Pt 7A of the
Crimes (FP) Act
applies, then logically,
the Public Guardian, as a substitute decision-maker, cannot consent to something
that cannot be asked for.
Authority would need to be sought by NSW Police by
order of a Magistrate or authorised officer under Pt 5 of the
James is not deemed to be an incapable person and continues to refuse to provide
a DNA sample, presumably NSW Police may then decide
to seek a court order under
s 75L of the
Crimes (FP) Act
decided to vary the guardianship order made on 10 October 2024 to include a
legal function relating to the forensic sample request
so that the issues
outlined above can be resolved.
Public Guardian is authorised to access legal advice and respond on James’
behalf to the request from NSW Police regarding
the DNA sample. As noted above,
the Public Guardian has authority under functions previously granted to arrange
an assessment of
James’ understanding of ‘the general nature and
effect of a forensic procedure’ to determine whether he is an incapable
person or not.
Decision regarding restrictive practices and video
monitoring equipment
1 July 2018, registered NDIS providers in NSW are regulated by the NDIS Quality
and Safeguarding Commission (NDIS Commission)
and are responsible for ensuring
that consent and authorisation is obtained for the use of all restrictive
NDIS providers and behavioural support practitioners must comply with the
requirements set by the NDIS Commission, including
those outlined in the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Restrictive Practices and Behaviour
Support) Rules 2018 (Cth) (
) which commenced on 1 July
2018. The Rules state that a restrictive practice is a regulated restrictive
practice if it is, or involves,
any of the following (r 6):
(a) Seclusion, which is the sole confinement of a person with a disability in a
room or a physical space at any hour of the day or
night where voluntary exit is
prevented, or not facilitated, or it is implied that voluntary exit is not
(b) Chemical restraint, which is the use of medication or chemical substance for
the primary purpose of influencing a person’s
behaviour. It does not
include the use of medication prescribed by a medical practitioner for the
treatment of, or to enable treatment
of, a diagnosed mental disorder, a physical
illness or a physical condition.
(c) Mechanical restraint, which is the use of a device to prevent, restrict, or
subdue a person’s movement for the primary
purpose of influencing a
person’s behaviour, but does not include the use of devices for
therapeutic or non-behavioural purposes.
(d) Physical restraint, which is the use of action of physical force to prevent,
restrict or subdue movement of a person’s
body, or part of their body, for
the primary purpose of influencing their behaviour. Physical restraint does not
include the use
of a hands-on technique in a reflexive way to guide or redirect
a person away from potential harm/injury, consistent with what could
be considered the exercise of care towards a person.
(e) Environmental restraint, which restricts a person’s free access to
parts of their environment, including items or activities.
considering the evidence, we were satisfied that the locking of the door and
gates at James’ residence, and staff locking
themselves in the office away
from James, constitute restrictive practices for which the consent of a guardian
is required. We varied
the guardianship order to include a restrictive practices
were not satisfied that the installation of monitoring equipment constitutes a
restrictive practice. The installation of monitoring
equipment is, however, an
invasion of James’ privacy and should not take place unless it is overseen
by a guardian charged
with ensuring it is the least restrictive alternative and
in James’ best interest. We therefore included an additional function
the guardianship order authorising the Public Guardian to determine whether
video or other monitoring equipment should be used
at James’ residence for
his safety and welfare if he is refusing to allow support workers to remain on
the premises.
Who should be appointed as the guardian?
Public Guardian was appointed as James’ guardian on the last occasion. As
there is no private person available to be appointed
as guardian, we reappointed
the Public Guardian.
How long should the order last?
review, a guardianship order can be renewed for a period of up to three years
from the date on which it was made.
decided to make an order for two years because James has complex needs and there
was evidence that participating in hearings is
stressful for
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (273 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter