URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2007/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moleta [2007] NSWPB 2 (12 September 2007)
[2007] NSWPB 2
12 September 2007
Kym Ayscough v Dellisse Moleta
The pharmacist was the sole proprietor of a small community pharmacy,
which she operated with the occasional assistance of her sick
and elderly
mother. Health Department employees had visited the pharmacy on two occasions.
The complaint was based on the Health
Department investigation
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged that in a 14 month period
from 1 July 2002 to 26 September 2003 the pharmacist had
supplied excessively
large quantities of single ingredient and combination pseudoephedrine products
to the public. Those supplies
were made in circumstances where the pharmacist
knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is an active ingredient of such
products and that it is the primary precursor substance in the illicit
manufacture of amphetamines. The complaint also alleged that
the pharmacist knew
or ought to have known that during the relevant period that community pharmacies
were being targeted as a source
of pseudoephedrine for the illicit manufacture
of amphetamines. It was alleged that the pharmacist could not be satisfied in
to each supply that it was in a quantity or for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards. There were also allegation
the failure to record single ingredient pseudoephedrine products in accordance
with Clauses 23 and 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
well as Pandadeine Forte tablets and Normison capsules in accordance with clause
54 of the Regulation. It was alleged that the
pharmacist had failed to maintain
adequate staffing for this pharmacy and adequate systems for receiving scheduled
poisons and for
the storage and supply of scheduled poisons.
There was no appearance by or on behalf of the pharmacist at the Inquiry
and no witnesses were required to give evidence. The pharmacist
had made written
submissions, through her solicitor, in response to Notices issued under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
, which were included in the
complainant’s documents. Before the hearing, the pharmacist’s name
had been removed from
the register of pharmacists in January 2004 for the
non-payment of registration fees. The pharmacist had previously sold her
in or about November 2003.
During the relevant period the
pharmacist supplied almost 9,000 packets of single ingredient pseudoephedrine
products and almost 49,000
packets of compound pseudoephedrine products. This
averages to about 127 packets of pseudoephedrine tablets sold per day, or 900
packets week or 3,500 packets a month.
On the basis of the large
quantity of pseudoephedrine tablets supplied, the staffing and location of the
pharmacy, the Board finds
that it would not have been possible for the
pharmacist to have satisfied herself in relation to each supply that is was in a
or for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
The pharmacist recorded fewer
than 20% of the supplies of single ingredient pseudoephedrine products as
required by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
If a pharmacist does not give
evidence, the Board is entitled to draw an unfavourable evidentiary inference
Bowen-James v Walton unreported,
(Court of Appeal 5 August 1991). The Board
draws that inference in this case.
Each of the particulars of
the complaint have been proven and having regard to the standard applied in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw 60
CLR 366, the Board finds the pharmacist guilty of
professional misconduct within the meaning of section 19A of the Pharmacy
The pharmacist is not fit in
the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist. The pharmacist
demonstrated a reckless attitude
to the practice of pharmacy and her conduct
posed a serious danger to the public. The name of the pharmacist is to be
removed from
the register. The Board is of the view that, except by direction
of the Board or by order of a court, the pharmacist’s name
should not be
restored to the register of pharmacists. The Board also makes a prohibition
order pursuant to section 20(2)(a) of the
Act prohibiting the pharmacist from
providing health services.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on Tuesday, 21 February 2006 into a
complaint of professional misconduct made under the provisions
section 19D
Pharmacy Act,
"), by Kym Ayscough, Nominal
Complainant and Registrar of the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales, against
Delisse Moleta ("
the Respondent
") formerly of Mayfield Drive-In Chemist,
386 Maitland Road, Mayfield West in the State of New South Wales ("
"), whilst being a pharmacist registered in New South Wales under
THE COMPLAINT
In the Complaint dated 19 October 2005 ("
the Complaint
Complainant alleges that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of
Section 19A
of the Act in that she engaged in conduct
Demonstrates a lack of adequate skill,
judgment or care in the practice of pharmacy pursuant to
section 19A(a)
Act; and/or
Engaged in other improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy pursuant to
section 19A(g)
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The particulars of the Complaint are that:
At all material times the Respondent was
a registered pharmacist, the pharmacist in charge and the sole proprietor of the
In the period from 1 July 2002 to 26
September 2003 ("
the relevant period
"), the Respondent ordered from and
was supplied by pharmaceutical wholesalers Australian Pharmaceutical Industries
"), Faulding Health Care Pty Ltd (including Mayne Health)
") and Chemists’ Own Pty Ltd ("
with the quantities of Schedule 3 recordable and Schedule 2
pseudoephedrine products as set out in Schedule 2 of the Complaint
pseudoephedrine products, including Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant
tablets, Chemists’
Own Sinus Relief tablets, Logicin Sinus tablets and
Demazin Sinus tablets, each pack size containing 30 tablets.
compound products of various pack sizes, including Actifed tablets, Telfast
Decongestant tablets,
Zyrtec Plus tablets and Demazin 6 hour
As at 26 September 2003, the Respondent
had in stock at the Pharmacy the following pseudoephedrine
50 packets of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal
Decongestant tablets 30’s;
Between 11 and 72 packets of Logicin
Sinus tablets 30’s;
Between 13 and 432 packets of Actifed
tablets 30’s;
No packets of Actifed tablets
1 packet of Demazin 6 hour tablets
Between 26 and 408 of Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablet 10’s;
Between 10 and 40 packets of Telfast
Decongestant tablets 10’s;
Between 33 and 67 packets Chemists’
Own Sinus Relief 30’s; and
No packets of Demazin Sinus packets
Supply of the quantities referred to in
paragraph 2 of the Particulars, less the quantities referred to in paragraph 3
of the Particulars,
to the public, occurred in circumstances
The Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is the sole active ingredient or an active ingredient
in the tablets
referred to in paragraph 2 a. and b. above.
The Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is the primary precursor substance in the illicit
manufacture of amphetamines.
The Respondent knew or ought to have
known that during the relevant period that community pharmacies were being
targeted as a source
of pseudoephedrine (whether in single ingredient or
compound products) for the purpose set out in subparagraph b.
The Respondent could not be satisfied
that in relation to each supply that the supply was in a quantity or for a
purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards, contrary to clause
22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
period from 1 September 2002 to 26 September 2003.
During the period September 2002 to
September 2003 the Respondent did not record, in a manner approved by the
Director-General, the
supply of all pseudoephedrine products, namely, Sudafed
Sinus and Nasal Decongestant tablets, Logicin Sinus tablets, Demazin Sinus
tablets and Chemists’ Own Sinus Relief tablets in accordance with clauses
23 and 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
During the period September 2002 to
September 2003 the Respondent did not record, in a manner approved by the
Director-General, the
supply of all:
Panadeine Forte tablets
Normison 10mg 25
in accordance with clause 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation,
During the relevant period, the
Respondent failed to maintain an adequate system, including adequate staffing,
receipt of scheduled
storage of scheduled poisons;
supply to the public of scheduled
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales in
1986, having obtained her pharmacy qualifications from the
University of
Adelaide in 1983.
The Respondent owned and operated the Pharmacy during the period 2000 to
November 2003. During the relevant period, the Pharmacy operated
7 days a week
between 8.00 am and 7.00 pm. The Respondent was the sole proprietor of the
Pharmacy which she operated with the occasional
assistance of her sick and
elderly mother. The Respondent did not have any sales or pharmacy
assistants.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE BOARD
The following documents were tendered in evidence on behalf of the
Complainant:
Exhibit 1: Five volumes of tabulated documents:
Complaint dated 19 October
Certificate under
Section 37(a)
Pharmacy Act,
Statement of Mr M J Power, Pharmaceutical
Advisor, Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB) dated 29 July
Statement of Mr B Battye, Principal
Pharmaceutical Advisor, (PSB) dated 29 July 2004
Stock check of various medications
conducted by Mr B Battye on 26 September 2003 at Mayfield Drive-In
Notices dated 20 October 2003 issued
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Zyrtec Plus Decongestant tablets, all pack sizes
Telfast Decongestant tablets, all pack sizes
Pseudoephedrine single ingredient 60 mg tablets, all pack sizes
Demazin tablets, all pack sizes
Actifed tablets, all pack sizes
Panadeine Forte tablets, all pack sizes and
Temazepam 10 mg capsules, all brands, all pack sizes
Response dated 17 November 2003 for and
on behalf of Ms Moleta under cover of letter from Oliver Campbell, Lawyers in
answer to the
Notices under
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Act 1966
Letter dated 18 May 2004 from PSB, NSW
Health to Ms Louise Heslop, Oliver Campbell, Lawyers
Letter dated 27 July 2004 from Oliver
Campbell, Lawyers to PSB
Tabulated purchase invoices and credit
notes for pseudoephedrine products of Mayfield Drive-In Chemist listed by
product (36 pages)
Individual invoices and credit notes for
PSE products referred to in the table behind tab 10
Statement of John Michael Davis, State
Operations Manager, Faulding Health Care Pty Limited dated 18 May
Briefing letter dated 6 December 2005
from the Legal Officer to Mr A Regoli, Pharmacist Peer
Peer report of M Regoli dated 9 January
2006, including attachments and curriculum vitae
NSW Health – approved systems for
recording prescriptions
Dispensing computers in NSW 2001 –
standard prepared by Pharmacy Board of NSW
Professional literature concerning the
illicit diversion of PSE products including:
NSW Pharmacy Board Bulletin August 1998
– Storage and Sale of Pseudoephedrine Tablets
NSW Pharmacy Board letter dated 20
December 1999 Matters of Public Importance (2 pages)
Pharmacy Guild Bulletin Article
January 2000 – Professional Misconduct Complaints Over Inappropriate
Pseudoephedrine Supply
Pharmacy Guild Bulletin Article August
NSW Pharmacy Board Bulletin June 2001
– Pseudoephedrine update
Guild Bulletin July 2001 Article
– Sale of Pseudoephedrine Tablets Continues to be of
Guild Bulletin September 2001 Article
– Compound Cold Tablets
NSW Pharmacy Board and NSW Health
letter dated 27 October 2001 – Compound Pseudoephedrine
NSW Pharmacist March 2003 –
Should this be PSE?PSD Update
Statement of Mr P J Freeman, Deputy
Registrar, Pharmacy Board of NSW dated 17 October 2006
Statement of Detective Sergeant Nicholas
Iorfino dated 3 May 2005
Popular press articles concerning
illicit PSE tablet diversion including:
Sydney Morning Herald (SMH) 24 June 1996
– "Legal Drug Tops List for Speed Merchants"
Pharmacy Trade June 1996 – "Speed
Dealers Hit Pharmacies"
SMH 23 July 1999 – "Drug
Manufacturer to put Should this be "... brakes on makers ..."?Breaks of Makers
SMH 22 October 1999 – "Five
Charged in Flu Tablet Raids"
Daily Telegraph 24 October 1999 –
"A Drug Business All in the Family"
SMH 5 June 2000 – "Garage Sale
Boom: It’s a bust"
Exhibit 2: Bundle of documents in relation to dealings with the respondent,
Affidavit of Service sworn 8 November 2005
Letter from Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers to the Pharmacy Board of NSW
dated 19 October 2005
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 25 January 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 6 February 2006
Letter from Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers, to Christine Campbell of the
Pharmacy Board of NSW dated 17 February 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 8 March 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 2 August 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 20 July 2006
Letter from Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers to Christine Campbell, Legal
Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW dated 2 August 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 10 August 2006
Letter from Christine Campbell, Legal Officer, Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Watsons, Solicitors and Barristers dated 20 November 2006
Exhibit 3: Documents in relation to Panadeine Forte
Exhibit 4: Documents in relation to Temazepam 10 mg capsules 25’s
Exhibit 5: Colour photographs of the Pharmacy premises referred to in
paragraph 38 of the statement of Bruce Lindsay Battye dated
Counsel for the Complainant confirmed at the hearing that all of the
documents tendered on behalf of the Complainant had been provided
Respondent.
The Respondent did not attend the hearing and no other witnesses were called
to give evidence at the hearing.
Documents and submissions provided on behalf of the Respondent formed part of
the Complainant’s tender bundle at Exhibit 1 Tab
EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT THE COMPLAINT
Particular 2
Invoices and credit notes relevant to the Pseudoephedrine products set out in
Annexure A to the Complaint can be found at pages 1
to 1,163 of Exhibit 1.
At Tab 12 of Exhibit 1 is a statement from the State Operations Managers for
Faulding in which he states the circumstances in which
the tax invoices and
credit notes were provided and states that there are no monies owing to Faulding
for the goods supplied to the
Respondent’s pharmacy.
At Tab 10 of Exhibit 1 is a spreadsheet that has been compiled by the
Complainant which sets out the relevant corresponding page number
of Exhibit 1
(containing the invoices and credit notes referred to above), the invoice date,
the invoice quantity, in terms of packets,
the credit reference where
appropriate, the wholesaler and the corresponding documents or amounts referred
to by the Respondent in
her response to a
Notice seeking details of
her ordering and receipt of the goods.
From that spreadsheet and the supporting invoices it can be seen that 57,502
packets of Pseudoephedrine based products were supplied
to the Respondent.
Particular 3
Martin John Power and Bruce Lindsay Battye are representatives of the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the New South Wales Department
According to their statements dated 29 July 2004 (Exhibit 1, Tabs 3 and 4,
respectively), they visited the Respondent’s
pharmacy on 3 September 2003
and at that time a stock take was conducted by them. At Tab 5 of Exhibit 1 the
products located by Mr
Power and Mr Battye during that stocktake are
The Respondent had a further stock take undertaken on 1 October 2003 by her
accountants, Crosbie Warren and Sinclair, and has provided
the results (Exhibit
The amounts referred to in particular 3 of the Complaint reflect both stock
takes undertaken. While there is significant variation
between some of the
amounts, for example in relation to the Actifed tablets and the Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablets, it was submitted
by the Complainant and accepted by the
Board that on the basis of the extremely large number of Pseudoephedrine
products supplied
to the Respondent’s pharmacy overall, that such
variation does not ultimately affect the seriousness of the conduct complained
Particular 4
The evidence tendered by the Complainant indicates that pharmacists in New
South Wales would have been in receipt of Bulletins dated
August 1998 and June
2001, as well as a notice from the Registrar dated 20 December 1999, published
by the Pharmacy Board of New
South Wales, raising concerns about Pseudoephedrine
tablets being purchased for the illicit manufacture of amphetamines (Exhibit
Tab 17). Other publications also formed part of the evidence tendered by the
Complainant such as Guild Bulletins dated January
2000, August 2000, July 2001
and September 2001 and Pharmaceutical Services NSW Health dated March 2003.
However, there is no evidence
that the Respondent was a member of the Guild or
would have received or read such publications.
In addition to those publications, it was the Complainant’s contention,
based upon the peer report of Albert Regoli (Exhibit
1, Tab 14) that such
knowledge should have been in the possession of the Respondent as a result of
her university studies.
As to particular 4(d) of the Complaint, Mr Battye described the size of the
Pharmacy premises in his statement as follows:
7. ...I noted the pharmacy premises to be relatively small. From the
outside the interior of the pharmacy was dark. Metal bars were
installed on the
exterior of the front windows of the pharmacy.
8. On entering the pharmacy I observed that there were extremely small
stockholdings of the front of shop stock. I noted that there
was some stock
pushed to the front of the pharmacy shelves in quantities of one only. I was
unable to locate cough and cold medicines
in the front area of the shop so as to
be able to self-select this type of product.
Mr Battye also took colour photographs of the Pharmacy premises. The
photographs were tendered in evidence by the Complainant (Exhibit
photographs supported Mr Battye’s evidence in relation to the small size
of the Pharmacy and small stockholdings
of the front of shop stock.
In addition, the submissions made by the Respondent indicate that she had no
assistance other than the occasional support of her sick
and elderly mother.
It was the Complainant’s contention and accepted by the Board that the
Respondent could not have been satisfied given the amount
supplied, the size of
the pharmacy and the fact that she was the sole person serving, as to quantity
and/or purpose.
It is clear from the peer report and the Board publications behind Tab 17 of
Exhibit 1 that Pseudoephedrine based products should
only have been provided in
small quantities. Thus, if they were supplied in a quantity or for a purpose in
accordance with the recognised
therapeutic standards it is hard to imagine that
the Respondent would have had time to serve customers requiring anything other
pseudoephedrine based products.
In particular, the Board notes on page 9 of the peer report the opinion
expressed by Mr Regoli that:
57,507 packets of pseudoephedrine-containing products were purchased in 15
The quantities purchased by Ms Moleta suggest that she was treating
approximately 130 patients per day with upper respiratory tract
problems, each
day of the year.
I do not believe the supply of this quantity of product is plausible for
this pharmacy under the therapeutic standards outlined, with
the staffing
formula used by Ms Moleta.
Assuming the Respondent was working 11 hours per day and was treating 130
patients per day as referred to above, on average she would
have been treating
11 or 12 patients every hour, or 1 patient every 5 minutes with a respiratory
tract infection.
Particular 5
Clause 23 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
provides that details of the supply of pseudoephedrine products, which are
Schedule 3 substances, must be recorded in accordance
with clause 54. Clause 54
provides that, among other matters, the date on which the substance was supplied
and the name of the person
by whom the substance was supplied is to be
It is evident from the spreadsheet under Tab 10 of Exhibit 1 that the
Respondent recorded fewer than 20 percent of the supplies of
pseudoephedrine
products as required by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
In written submissions provided on behalf of the Respondent (Exhibit 1 Tab 7)
the following explanations were given for the Respondent’s
8. Ms Moleta has also
Is there a word missing here?
she endured a
high level of thefts. The shop was broken into on 29 September 2002, 18 October
2000, 18 April 2001 and 2 July 2001.
There is also a high level of thefts from
the shop floor whilst the store is open, including one in 2002, when the cash
was stolen. Ms Moleta no longer reports thefts to the police as
she has been told on more than one occasion that there is nothing
they can do to
assist her" and that on occasions stock has been stolen before reaching the
storage space behind the service counter.
Her delivery system is imperfect and
while she is not confident that all the suppliers’ invoices accurately
record the total
quantity of stock supplied, she cannot prove discrepancies.
The Pharmacy does not have a computerised point of sale system and there
sales records for non-prescription and non-Schedule 3 restricted drugs.
9. As a matter of course, drug items are stored behind the service
counter. However, Ms Moleta feels that there have been occasions
when stock has
been stolen before reaching the storage space behind the service
10. Ms Moleta is not confident that all of the suppliers’ invoices
accurately record the total quantity of stock supplied. There
occasions when she has questioned suppliers to check that all stock referred to
on the invoices was actually delivered.
Her delivery system is imperfect because
she has no assistance therefore she is not in a position to prove the
discrepancies in delivery
11. Ms Moleta relies on the pharmacy PDE purchase order system, and keeps
no separate purchase order records. She states that at times
orders would not
turn up so she would reorder items, or order them from an alternative
12. The pharmacy does not have a computerised point of sale system. The
cash register only reports on the basic groups of prescription
non-prescription, and GST, and non-GST items. There are therefore no sales
records for non-prescription and non-schedule 3 restricted
13. Ms Moleta and Crosbie Warren Sinclair, Certified Practising
Accountants, perform
a stock-take on 1 October 2003. Medicines
missed in the count by Mr Battye, conducted on 26 September 2003...were
discovered in the
rear storage area, and are the subject of this stock
14. In reply to the NSW Health Department Notices, Ms Moleta commenced
printing records from the pharmacy computer, which held the
supply of records of
the prescription and Schedule 3 restricted medication. She printed a number of
records, but the computer had
an error and ceased working. It
attended to by Dell computing...The error meant that no further data was
retrievable. The computer was purchased by Ms Moleta in
2002. It proved to be "a
lemon" and Ms Moleta required technicians to attend to it numerous times during
2002, and then continued
to have problems in 2003. The back-up system did not
work properly, the back-up discs were corrupted and accordingly Ms Moleta
not hold any retrievable data on back-up discs.
15. Ms Moleta asserts that she has never sold inappropriate amounts of any
medication to any customer. Although, at times, her customers
can be difficult
and abusive, she is always mindful of her duties as a pharmacist and will only
supply customers with appropriate
medication, supplied with the required
16. Ms Moleta has searched for all relevant invoices and other records and
everything contained herein is all that can be found. Ms
Moleta believes that
there may be other relevant medication, but this is all that can be
The Respondent has chosen not to appear before the Board and as a result the
Board has not had the opportunity of hearing from her
on oath or by legal
representatives as to the circumstances briefly set out in her submissions.
However, providing some support to the Respondent was the evidence found in
Mr Power’s and Mr Battye’s statements in relation
to their "test"
purchases at the Respondent’s pharmacy.
Mr Power stated:
4. At 1.07 pm on 3 September 2003 I alone entered Mayfield Drive-In
Chemist, 386 Maitland Road, Mayfield West. I walked to a serving
counter towards
the end of the shop and in front of the dispensary. A woman behind the counter
finished serving a customer, then
said to me ‘Yes?’
I said: ‘Can I get six packets of Actifed tablets?’
She said: ‘No, you can have one. What do you want six
I said: ‘Sinus. Can I get six Demazin?’
She said: ‘I don’t have it.’
I said: ‘Six Telfast D?’
5. She turned to a cough and cold product display behind her and she
picked up one packet of Telfast D.
She said: ‘You can have one.’
I said: ‘Zyrtec Plus. Six Zyrtec Plus?’
She said: ‘One.’
I said: ‘That’s ok.’
She said: ‘Why do you want six?’
I said: ‘Sinus. I’ll leave it. Thanks anyway.’
6. As I turned away she said, ‘Can we get your name?’
I said: ‘No.’
7. As I walked down the shop, she said, ‘Are you from the
I said: ‘No. I just want tablets.’
Mr Battye stated:
6. ....I noted the time to be 1.20 pm.
10. I said: ‘Could I have some Logicin tablets?’
[Ms Moleta]
said: ‘Logicin Sinus?’
12. I said: ‘Yes’
13. She said: ‘The one with pseudoephedrine?’
14. I said: ‘Yes’
15. Ms Moleta walked to the dispensary area and said to me: ‘Do you
have any identification?’
16. I said: ‘No.’
17. She said: ‘Could I have your name and address – You
don’t know who you are?’
18. I said: ‘Bruce Battye’
19. She said: ‘I have to get your name and address. I wouldn’t
have to worry if it was the long acting one, but I’m
out of stock of
20. Again approaching me at the counter, giving me a piece of white paper,
she said: ‘Write your name and address down for me.’
21. I wrote on the piece of paper, ‘BRUCE BATTYE, VICTORIA RD,
GLADESVILLE’ and gave the paper to Ms Moleta, who then
took the paper to a
computer terminal to my right in the dispensary area.
22. She said: ‘What’s the number on Victoria
23. I said: ‘191, I think’
She then returned to where I
was standing at the counter and gave me a packet of Logicin Sinus tablets and
said: ‘Eighteen dollars.’
I gave her a $20 note. She
gave me a $2 coin and I left the premises.
I observed that a white, blue
and red sticker had been placed on the side of the packet of Logicin Tablets I
had been given. The packet
was given to me directly and was not placed in any
wrapping paper. I was not offered a receipt for the $18 purchase. During the
I was present in the pharmacy, no other person appeared to be present in
the pharmacy, other than Dellisse Moleta.
The "test" purchase evidence indicates that the Respondent, at least when
serving Mr Power and Mr Battye, attempted to record their
names and addresses.
Mr Power’s evidence also indicated that the Respondent would not sell him
more than one packet of any
one of Actifed tablets, Telfast D or Zyrtec Plus. On
the other hand, it seems that the Respondent was at least alive to the
possibility
that Mr Power was making some sort of "test" purchase (paragraph 7
of Mr Power’s statement). As Ms Moleta did not give evidence
hearing, it was not possible to explore this matter further.
Particular 6
Under Tab 7 of Exhibit 1, the Respondent states she purchased 1,564 packets
of Panadeine Forte and supplied 2,679 packets.
From invoices obtained by the Complainant, 4,576 packets were supplied to the
Respondent. After stock in hand is taken into account,
the Respondent supplied
to the public 4,442 packets, leaving 1,763 packets for which she has no
Under Tab 7, the Respondent states she purchased 167 packets of Normison and
supplied to the public 88 packets.
From invoices obtained by the Complainant, 665 packets were supplied to the
Respondent. After stock in hand is taken into account,
the Respondent supplied
to the public 586 packets, leaving 498 packets for which the Respondent has no
Particular 7
The Complainant contends that in the event the Board is satisfied in relation
to particulars 4 and 5 and based on the admissions made
by the Respondent, it
would be satisfied that the Respondent failed to maintain an adequate system
including adequate staffing for
the receipt, storage and supply to the public of
scheduled poisons.
In addition, it is submitted by the Complainant that the Respondent failed to
comply with the relevant standards set out in the "
Approved Systems for
Recording Prescriptions
", NSW Health Pharmaceutical Services Branch, March
2003 (Tab 15 of Exhibit 1) and "
Dispensary Computers in New South Wales -
Standard Records, Output and Security
", Pharmacy Board of New South Wales, 1
January 2002 (Tab 16 Exhibit 1).
SUBMISSIONS MADE ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
The only submissions made on behalf of the Respondent in relation to the
Complaint are the written submissions prepared by the Respondent’s
solicitors, Oliver Campbell Lawyers, dated 7 November 2003 (Tab 7 Exhibit 1),
already referred to herein.
NON ATTENDANCE BY THE PHARMACIST
The Respondent was served by the Complainant with the substantive material
before the Board under cover of letter dated 8 March 2006,
which was couriered
to the office the Respondent’s solicitors.
By letter dated 2 August 2006, the Respondent’s solicitors informed the
Complainant that the Respondent did not wish to take
part in any hearing. The
Respondent’s solicitors also confirmed that the Respondent, without
admissions, consents to orders
in respect of the cancellation of her
registration as a pharmacist.
By letter dated 10 August 2006, the Complainant advised the
Respondent’s solicitors of the hearing date on 21 November
Under cover of letter dated 20 November 2006 (being the day prior to the
hearing), which was couriered to the Respondent’s solicitors,
Complainant served some additional documentation and an updated index of
No further correspondence was received from the Respondent or her
solicitors.
If a pharmacist does not give evidence, the Board is entitled to draw an
unfavourable evidentiary inference (Bowen-James v Walton
unreported, Court of
Appeal, 5 August 1991). The Board draws such inference.
SCOPE OF THE BOARD’S JURISDICTION TO MAKE ORDERS AGAINST
NON-REGISTERED PHARMACIST
The Pharmacist’s name was removed from the register of Pharmacists for
the non-payment of registration fees in January 2004.
This time period was the
next registration period following the conclusion of the investigation by the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch.
The Pharmacist disposed of her interest in the pharmacy in or about November
of the Act provides that:
19 Roll fee
(1) Every pharmacist shall, on or before the thirty-first day of October
in each year (which day is in this section referred to as
"prescribed
) pay to the registrar a roll fee fixed by the Board for the year
commencing on the first day of January next following the prescribed
(2) Together with the roll fee, the pharmacist shall furnish particulars
of the pharmacist’s address for entry in the register
and such other
particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) If a pharmacist does not pay the roll fee referred to in subsection
(1) on or before the prescribed day in any year, the Board
shall forthwith
notify the pharmacist by letter addressed to the pharmacist at the
pharmacist’s address as appearing in the
register, that if the fee be not
paid before the thirty-first day of December next following the prescribed day
the pharmacist’s
name will be removed from the register. If any pharmacist
who has been so notified fails to pay such fee before the said thirty-first
of December, the Board shall remove the pharmacist’s name from the
(4) If the name of any pharmacist is or has been removed from the register
under this section or section 8 of the Pharmacy Act 1897–1957
, the Board
shall upon application in writing and if it is satisfied that the pharmacist is
of good character restore the pharmacist’s
name to the register upon
payment of the fee fixed by the Board. The regulations may provide for the
waiver of such part of such
fee as the Board may in any particular case deem
Accordingly, it is available to the pharmacist to seek to have her name
restored. The criteria the Board must then apply to that application
satisfied that the pharmacist is of good character and on obtaining that
satisfaction restore her name.
Section 19B provides that a complaint can be made against a person who was
not a pharmacist when the complaint was made to or lodged
with the Health Care
Complaints Commission or Registrar but was registered as a pharmacist not more
than five years before that time.
A reference to a pharmacist in the Act refers
to a pharmacist against whom a complaint has been made pursuant to this
The complaint was made to the Health Care Complaints Commission on 18 October
2004 by the Pharmaceutical Services Branch. The Pharmacist
was not registered
at that time, but was registered not more than five years before that time.
Section 20 of the Act provides the consequences of the Board making a finding
that the subject matter of a complaint of misconduct
is proved. The Complainant
in this matter seeks an order that the Respondent’s name be removed from
the register (section 20(1)(i)).
Section 22A of the Act provides that where the name of the pharmacist has
been removed from the Register under the Act the pharmacist
shall be deemed not
to be registered as a pharmacist under that Act.
Pursuant to section 24 where the name of a person has been removed from the
Register otherwise than under section 19 the name
not be restored
except by direction of the Board.
Pharmacy Act, 1964
clearly contemplates that the process by which
restoration to the Register will be obtained, differs according to the reason
the name has been removed.
Accordingly, in cases where there has been an administrative removal of a
person’s name the Board needs to be satisfied as to
good character before
restoring the name and where a persons name has been removed for other reasons,
including a finding of misconduct,
the direction of the Board is the
precondition to being registered.
Counsel for the Complainant submitted that because the Pharmacist was not
registered at the time the complaint was made but had been
registered not more
than five years before that time, the provisions of Part 4 of the Act apply to
her and therefore the powers of
the Board under section 20 also apply. The Board
agrees with this submission.
The events, the subject of the Complaint, predominantly concern the supply by
the Respondent over a 15 month period in 2002 and 2003
of single ingredient and
compound products containing Pseudoephedrine.
The Board finds that each of the particulars of the Complaint have been
established.
The Board finds that during the relevant period the Respondent supplied
almost 9000 packets of single ingredient Pseudoephedrine products
49,000 packets of compound Pseudoephedrine products.
The Board finds that the Respondent made those supplies with the knowledge,
or that she should have had the knowledge, that Pseudoephedrine
is the primary
precursor substance in the illicit manufacture of amphetamines and during that
period community pharmacies were being
targeted as a source of Pseudoephedrine.
In this regard, the Board published a number of bulletins warning of these
matters during
the relevant period.
In addition, the Board finds that it could not be satisfied that in relation
to each supply that it was in a quantity or for a purpose
in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards. In this regard, the Board makes this finding
on the basis that the Respondent
supplied so large a quantity of the product
that it would not have been possible for her to have attained the requisite
satisfaction.
Averaging the sales the Respondent made, the amounts reflect the supply of
900 a week and over
3,500 a month. Given the size, staffing and location of the Pharmacy, the
Respondent could not have been satisfied
as required by the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, 2002 when supplying those products to the
In addition, the Board finds that the Respondent did not record the supply of
all Pseudoephedrine products in accordance with the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
, 2002 nor did she fully record the supply of other
substances namely Panadeine Forte caplets and Normison capsules. Further, she
failed to maintain an adequate system, including adequate staffing, for the
receipt, storage and supply to the public of scheduled
Accordingly, having had regard to the standard applied in
Briginshaw v
60 CLR 366, the Board finds that the Respondent is guilty of
professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 19A
The Board has noted that Dellisse Moleta failed to renew her registration in
January 2004 following which her name was removed from
the register of
pharmacists in New South Wales for non-payment of her renewal fees.
However, having regard to the Board’s findings as set out above, the
Board is of the opinion that Dellisse Moleta is not fit
in the public interest
to be registered as a pharmacist. In particular, the Board considers that
Dellisse Moleta has demonstrated
a reckless attitude to the practice of pharmacy
and her conduct has posed a serious danger to the public. Accordingly, the Board
is of the view that Dellisse Moleta’s name should not be restored to the
register of pharmacists in New South Wales except
by direction of the Board or
by order of a court of competent jurisdiction and therefore orders that the name
Dellisse Moleta be
removed from the register of pharmacists in New South Wales
pursuant to section 20(1)i) of the Act.
Further, having made an order pursuant to section 20(1)(i) of the Act and
being satisfied that Dellisse Moleta poses a substantial
risk to the health of
members of the public, the Board makes a prohibition order pursuant to section
20(2A)(a) of the Act prohibiting
Dellisse Moleta from providing health
The Board directs that a copy of these findings and orders is to be retained
in the registration file of the Respondent to which reference
will be made in
the event that Dellisse Moleta should make application for the restoration of
her name to the register of pharmacists
in New South Wales in the future.
The Board’s orders become effective one month from the date on which
Dellisse Moleta is notified by registered post at her address
as it appears on
the register of pharmacists in New South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter