URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Bull [2015] NSWNMPSC 1 (19 March 2015)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
FRANCES MAREE BULL
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001200424, NMW0001200423 (NSW)
STATEMENT OF DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
CITATION: PARTIES:
HCCC v Bull
[2015] NSWNMPSC 1
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant) represented by Judith
Sweeney, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Frances Maree Bull (Respondent) - represented by Katherine Doust, NSW Nurses and
Midwives' Association.
TRIBUNAL: Mark Paul Deirdre Sinclair Kathryn Crews
Dr Catherine Berglund
(Chairperson)
(Nurse Midwife Member) (Nurse Midwife Member) (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: 29 and 30 January 2015
DATE OF DECISION: 19 March 2015
DATE OF ORDERS: 19 March 2015
ORDERS (in summary): The Practitioner is cautioned and reprimanded.
CATCHWORDS: Midwifery - unsatisfactory professional conduct -midwife in
maternity ward of district hospital assisting with care -
failure to assess and
interpret Electronic Fetal Heart Rate Patterns
Cardiotocography - failure to escalate care - administration of Morphine and
intravenous fluids without medical officer's order
or prescription.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
No86a (National Law) - s139 B, s171(2), clause 7 of Schedule 50.
Thursday and Friday, 29 and 30 January 2015 this Professional Standards
Committee ('Committee') inquired into a complaint made
by the Health Care
Complaints Commission ('HCCC') concerning Frances Maree Bull, a registered nurse
and midwife ('Complaint').
Complaint, dated 11 September 2014, is of unsatisfactory professional conduct as
provided by section 139B(1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
('National Law'), and relates to the care provided by Registered
Midwife Bull to a mother in labour ('Patient') at the Maternity Ward
Hospital in the early hours of 16 December 2012. Midwife, RM Ridley, was
assigned as the primary carer of the Patient.
RM Bull's role was in providing
remote support as required by RM Ridley who had been registered as a midwife for
approximately 6
months. At the time, and again in the course of giving her
evidence, RM Bull readily accepted responsibility for her part in the
of care to the Patient.
HCCC alleged that RM Bull was guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct on
two occasions in wrongly assessing and interpreting
the fetal heart rate pattern
as measured by means of Cardiotocography ('CTG') as 'suspicious' instead of
'pathological'. It is
also alleged that on two occasions RM Bull failed to
appropriately escalate care for the Patient. Further, that RM Bull authorised,
co-signed, and witnessed the administration of Morphine (a Schedule 8 drug)
without a medical officer's order or prescription, and
also authorised and
checked the administration of intravenous fluids without a medication
than in respect of her assessment and interpretation of the fetal heart rate
pattern on the first occasion, the Committee finds
it proved that the conduct of
RM Bull overall and in particular amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The Committee cautions
RM Bull with respect to her first failure to
escalate care. The Committee reprimands RM Bull in respect of: her assessment
and interpretation
of the fetal heart rate pattern on the second occasion; her
failure to escalate care on the second occasion; the administration of
Morphine without authority; and the administration of intravenous fluids without
The scope of the hearing
Judith Sweeney presented the case for the HCCC as the Complainant. RM Bull was
represented by Ms Katherine Doust of the NSW Nurses
and Midwives' Association.
The Committee was greatly assisted by the efficient presentation of the relevant
material, and with the
willingness of both representatives to identify matters
on which they agreed and to focus on the factual matters in dispute.
particular RM Bull, by her written statement, admitted significant aspects of
the subject-matter of the Complaint. On the documentary
material presented the
Committee was satisfied to accept those submissions. Accordingly, the Committee
did not need to inquire into
those matters (section 171(2) of the National Law).
Even so, the Committee received evidence of all the events of the morning of
December 2012 in order to understand the nature of RM Bull's
all the evidence was received and in light of RM Bull's admissions, the parties
proposed and the Committee accepted, that there
was no need for the Committee to
first make findings as to unsatisfactory professional conduct before the parties
made submissions
as to whether and what action the Committee might take under
section 146B of the National Law.
Suppression orders
29 January 2015 the Chairperson of the Committee made a suppression order in
relation to the name of the Patient and that of her
baby in accordance with the
provisions of clause 7 of Schedule 5 to the
National Law.
The names of
the Patient and her baby and any information that may identify them are not to
be published. The names of the Patient
and her baby are recorded in the
Schedule to these reasons for decision. Annexure A will only be attached to the
original reasons
for decision held by the Registry and must not be
reproduced.
Chairperson now makes a suppression order in relation to the names of all of the
Patients appearing in the document headed Ward
Register of Drugs of Addiction
which appears at tab 45 of Exhibit HCCC1. The names of those Patients and any
information that may
identify them are not to be
Evidence before the Committee
support of the Complaint the HCCC tendered two folders which contained a number
of tabbed documents: the complaint with particulars;
details of RM Bull's
registration; a letter of complaint from the Patient; information from
witnesses; clinical notes and reports;
correspondence concerning the events; the
HCCC's investigation materials and investigation report; materials from Western
Health District; various policies; and, an expert report from Robyn
Rudner. The two folders were marked HCCC 1.
HCCC helpfully supplemented the contemporaneous Partogram and Cardiotocographies
at Tab 11, with clearer copies, and these were
added as Tab 11A.
the course of the hearing the Committee was told about a recently created
adhesive label which assists in the interpretation
of CTG fetal heart rate
patterns. This reflects the 'Between the Flags' concept because of its yellow
and red colouring. A copy was
provided by the HCCC, and was tendered and marked
adhesive label had not been developed and was not in use at the time, although
an earlier version of it formed part of the electronic
fetal heart monitoring
records of 16 December 2012 included in the Tab 11A documents. To the Committee
the new guide was clearer
and easier to read than the version in use at the
time. The new guide corrected some typographical errors: 'or' for 'for' under
VARIABILITY column; and 'is' for 'in' under the ACCELERATIONS column. It was
not suggested that the errors in particular words or
the related phrases had any
bearing on RM Bull's decisions. Another change was moving the term 'Early
decelerations' from the category
of non­ reassuring to category of
re-assuring within the matrix. That change reflected RM Bull's practice and
understanding
at the time.
behalf of RM Bull Ms Doust tendered a folder containing: a statement of RM Bull
of 19 December 2014; her curriculum vitae, to which
was added an updated list of
RM Bull's training; correspondence with Jenny Soar and Danielle Syme, both
professional work colleagues
of RM Bull providing a reference; and a Performance
Appraisal and Performance Plan recording a 12 month workplace program that RM
Bull had undertaken following the events of 16 December 2012 - marked
Respondent1.
Rudner, RM Bull and Ms Soar each gave evidence under oath on 29 January 2015,
and on 30 January the Committee heard submissions
on behalf of the HCCC and RM
The Complaint
Complaint is that RM Bull is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct of
the kind described by section 139B(1)(a) being that
engaged in conduct that demonstrated the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of midwifery
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
HCCC particularised the unsatisfactory professional conduct as follows:
16 December 2012, the Practitioner inaccurately assessed and interpreted the
Cardiotocography ('CTG] performed between the hours
of 0340 and 0425 as
'suspicious'.
16 December 2012 between the hours of 0340 and 0425, the Practitioner failed to
appropriately escalate care for Patient A in circumstances
CTG performed between the hours of 0340 and 0425 indicated a reduced
variability, the presence of decelerations and a lack of
accelerations;
Ridley had documented the CTG performed between the hours of 0340 and 0425 as
showing a decreased variability.
16 December 2012, the Practitioner inaccurately assessed and interpreted the CTG
performed between the hours of 0510 and 0530 as
'suspicious'.
16 December 2012, between the hours of 0510 and 0530, the Practitioner failed to
appropriately escalate care for Patient A in circumstances
CTG performed between the hours of 0510 and 0530 indicated a reduced
variability, the presence of decelerations and a lack of
accelerations;
Ridley had documented the CTG performed between the hours of 0510 and 0530 in
the CTG assessment and in
Patient A's progress notes as "difficult to determine baseline at
5. On 16 December 2012, at 0225 the Practitioner authorised, co
signed and witnessed the use of the intramuscular administration of
Morphine, a
Schedule 8 Drug, to Patient A without a medical officer's order or
prescription.
16 December 2012, between the hours of 0400 and 0530 the Practitioner authorised
and checked the administration of intravenous
fluids to Patient A without
medication order.
criticism made in particulars 1 and 3 is that instead of assessing the fetal
heart rate pattern as suspicious RM Bull should have
assessed the fetal heart
rate pattern as pathological. Although not contained in the particulars it was
the position of the HCCC,
and understood by RM Bull, that the appropriate
escalation of care was that RM Bull should have contacted the on-call obstetric
or at least a medical practitioner.
19. Whilst the particulars arise out of a common series of events they can be
understood as being six distinct aspects of RM Bull's
conduct that morning, even
if particulars 1 and 2 are related, as are particulars 3 and 4.
previously mentioned RM Bull admitted much of the subject-matter of the
Complaint Material, being particulars 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
(paragraphs 47 to 53 of
her statement). RM Bull did not admit the first particular, being the
allegation relating to the assessment
of the CTG undertaken between the hours of
03:40 and 04:25.
21. Given the admissions made much of the attention of the Committee was
directed towards whether the admitted matters, and the first
particular if
proved, amounted in whole or in part to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
phrases 'CTG' or 'CTG traces' were commonly used in these proceedings as a
shorthand term for 'the fetal heart rate pattern'.
However, the CTG is a
machine that allows the fetal heart rate to be electronically recorded and
measured, and then printed on a
chart, which in turn can then be used as an
assessment of fetal well-being.
CTG machine produces a charted paper print out that is a continuous time­
stamped record of the fetal heart rate over a period
of time. The chart also
indicates maternal contractions and contains other information. The lines on the
chart can be read so as
to make an assessment of the fetal baseline heartbeat,
whether there is variability of the baseline, and whether there are
decelerations
and accelerations. Each of these measures can be assessed as
reassuring, non-reassuring or abnormal. A midwife can then use the
measures and
the assessments of the fetal heart rate to make a judgment as to the appropriate
treatment to be provided to the mother
and the baby during labour.
assist in that process a form is attached to the chart. The form includes a
matrix of different descriptive features of the fetal
heart rate, combined with
various quantitative and qualitative measures of the fetal heart rate. By making
notes within the matrix
of the different assessments the midwife is led to an
overall assessment of whether the fetal heart rate patterns is to be categorised
as normal or suspicious or pathological. A suspicious or pathological assessment
prompts escalation of care. The form includes a
section for recording the
'ACTION TAKEN'.
a continuous electronic fetal heart rate pattern is in progress assessments are
recorded in the Patient's clinical notes by way
of a printed adhesive sticker
that requires the recording of very similar, but not identical information to
that recorded in the
form and matrix attached to the CTG
particulars of the complaint do not tell the story of what happened. In light
of RM Bulls' admissions it is not necessary to
traverse the events in detail.
It is sufficient to record that the Patient attended the Maternity Ward of
Orange Hospital at about
9am on 12 December 2012. RM Bull assessed the Patient
and recorded the fetal heart rate pattern by CTG. The Patient was not then
labour, and after further review she was advised to return for a clinic
appointment due on 17 December, or earlier if she had
Patient again visited the Maternity Ward at 08:30 on 15 December, was seen by
another midwife, and then went home. At 00:30 on
16 December the Patient
returned to the Maternity Ward in labour. RM Ridley, then a registered midwife
for about six months, was
assigned to provide care for the Patient in the
Delivery Suite. RM Bull was on general duty in the Maternity ward and was
after 17 Patients, mostly mothers and babies. RM Bull was also
available to assist and provide advice to RM Ridley as required.
RM Bull had
over 30 years experience as a nurse, and had been awarded a Graduate Diploma in
Midwifery in 1995. RM Bull said she
was busy and was kept occupied throughout
the night. She also offered several times to relieve another senior
nurse/midwife rostered
on in the special care nursery area, but this was not
needed on this shift. RM Bull did not claim that her conduct concerning the
Complaint was affected by her workload.
Ridley commenced an electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording from about the
time the Patient arrived, and that recording was
continued until about 01:05
when it was discontinued so that the Patient could use the toilet. RM Ridley
assessed the electronic
fetal heart rate pattern recording as 'normal', which
was confirmed by RM Bull. This pattern was recommenced and continued throughout
the night until the morning - RM Ridley interpreted the electronic fetal heart
rate pattern recording, completed the form and matrix,
and then made an
assessment if the fetal heart rate was normal/suspicious/pathological. RM Bull
would then review the electronic
fetal heart rate pattern recording read RM
Ridley's notes on the form and matrix, and make her own assessment of whether
heart rate was normal/suspicious/pathological and co-sign the
02:30 the Patient was becoming distressed during contractions and requested
morphine. Although it was RM Ridley who administered
the morphine, RM Bull
participated in the administration of the morphine in that she checked out
witnessed and co-signed the use
of the Morphine, a Schedule 8 drug.
Ridley re-commenced the continuous fetal heart rate pattern recording at about
03:40. Tab 11A of HCCC1 contains a copy of that
continuous fetal heart rate
patterns from 03:40 until about 06:25. At about 04:00 in the early morning RM
Ridley assessed the fetal
heart rate pattern as suspicious and called RM Bull
who attended the Delivery Suite. RM Bull agreed the fetal heart rate pattern
was suspicious, and in doing so did not therefore assess it as pathological. RM
Bull inserted a cannula and with RM Bull's approval
RM Ridley administered
intravenous fluids to the Patient. RM Bull noticed signs of improvement in the
fetal heart rate pattern from
soon after 04:25 which to her suggested the fetal
heart rate pattern was no longer suspicious and was now normal
rate pattern recording had recorded a single prolonged
deceleration in the fetal
heart rate. RM Ridley then assessed the electronic fetal heart rate pattern
recording suspicious and noted
that it was difficult to determine the baseline
at times. About that time or perhaps later on in the
evidence it is not clear when) RM Bull also made an assessment of that reading
of the electronic fetal heart rate pattern
recording as suspicious, and thus in
doing so did not assess it as pathological.
Ridley rang the assistance call bell at 06:30 and RM Bull responded immediately.
Both midwives then provided care to the Patient
that is not the subject of this
Complaint. Sadly, shortly before seven o'clock that morning the child was
the circumstances, did the conduct of RM Bull, at any particular time or
overall, amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
Evidence of Ms Robyn Rudner
Rudner was called by the HCCC as an expert. There was no objection to the
Committee accepting Ms Rudner as an expert able to provide
an opinion of RM
Bull's conduct, and the Committee received her evidence on that basis. Ms Rudner
provided a report of 23 February
2014, which she updated on 27 February 2014.
In her oral evidence Ms Rudner explained the minor change in her views from the
report to the second.
was Ms Rudner's view that RM Bull's conduct in assessing the electronic fetal
heart rate pattern recording performed between the
hours of 03:40 and 04:25 as
suspicious rather than pathological fell below the standard reasonably expected
of a midwife with RM
Bull's training and experience. It is this allegation that
RM Bull disputes.
Rudner said that RM Bull failed to note from the fetal heart rate pattern the
reduced variability in fetal heart rate, and the
presence of decelerations and
the absence of accelerations. When questioned Ms Rudner agreed that reading an
electronic fetal heart
rate pattern recording was not an exact science, and that
interpretations of the data could be made within a range. It was important
interpret the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording accurately including
reduced variability but also take into account
the entire clinical picture prior
to making a judgment.
accordance with the NSW Health Maternity Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring policy
PD2010_040 (Ex HCCC1, Tab 26, page 11 as numbered in
the exhibit, but page 6 in
the document) the presence of 'typical variable decelerations' combined with the
'absence of accelerations'
were two non-reassuring features that required an
assessment of the fetal heart rate pattern being pathological, and thus
an escalation of care. Ms Rudner expressed the opinion that given her
training and experience RM Bull should have been able to interpret
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording and reach that conclusion.
PD2010_040 provides that the absence of decelerations
or early decelerations is
reassuring, whereas variable or prolonged decelerations are non-reassuring.
asked about the administration of the Morphine an hour or so earlier Ms Rudner
agreed the effect of the Morphine could have altered
the electronic fetal heart
rate pattern recording but expressed the view that the possible effect of the
Morphine was not a reason
to be cautious about making an assessment between
suspicious and pathological, but rather a reason to escalate care to a medical
practitioner and advise the practitioner of the administration of Morphine.
her report and in her evidence Ms Rudner agreed that the care which RM Bull
provided at that time, changing maternal position and
initiating intravenous
fluids, demonstrated good clinical decision-making. Change of maternal position
and intravenous fluids is
also supported by the Local Health District's policy
Maternity - Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring,
WN_PD2011_ 146 and the reference
to the Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Clinical Practice Algorithm.
However Ms Rudner
was strongly critical of RM Bull's failure to consult and
obtain the approval of the on-call obstetric registrar or another medical
practitioner for the administration of the intravenous fluids.
was Ms Rudner's view that in each of the particulars RM Bull's conduct fell
significantly below what could reasonably be expected
of RM Bull given her level
of training and experience. She was critical of RM Bull's conduct with respect
to the interpretation
of the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording and
strongly critical of her conduct in administering the Morphine and the
intravenous
fluids without approval of a medical practitioner.
Committee was reminded, and the Committee accepts, that it is not bound to
accept Ms Rudner's opinions. The Committee may have
regard to its own general
expert knowledge and experience regarding the standard of conduct to be expected
of a midwife with the
experience and training of RM Bull. Although greatly
assisted by the opinions of Ms Rudner, it is for the Committee to make its
assessment. See, for example
Kalil v Bray
[1977] 1NSWLR256 at 262,
Slezak, Dr Peter
[2011] NSWMPSC (14 September 2011) paragraphs 98-99, and
HCCC v Phung (No.1)
[2012] NSWDT 1
(10 July 2013).
the Committee should not simply take RM Bull's admissions of significant aspects
of the subject-matter of the Complaint
as sufficient in and of themselves to
make findings of unsatisfactory professional misconduct. In order to make
findings the Committee
must be satisfied that the conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Evidence of RM Bull
Bull provided a statement to the Committee of 19 December 2014 in which she
admitted much of the subject matter of the Complaint
and it is not necessary to
review all of her evidence.
is salutary that RM Bull accepts the criticisms of her performance on that night
and acknowledges that, in some aspects, her conduct
fell below expectations. She
said her failure to escalate care was a gross error of judgment.
Bull could offer no particular explanation for not seeking the approval of a
medical practitioner before the administration of
the Morphine or intravenous
fluids. In her statement she said that she had often given a different S8 drug
under a standing order,
but there was no such order for Morphine; it was not
something she had done before. She also said in her statement that in the
of a medical officer on site, over time, it had become what she termed
'a cultural practice in Maternity' to give intravenous fluids.
However, when
giving evidence she said, "I don't know why I didn't call." She said it (not
calling) was not something she would do
again. The Committee accepts her
evidence that she would not do so again, but would always seek approval in
accordance with any protocols
or requirements.
Bull also gave evidence of her ongoing employment with Orange Health Service.
She is now a Clinical Midwife Specialist in the Orange
Midwifery Group Practice.
Following the events her employer arranged for her to undertake a lengthy formal
supervised Performance
Appraisal and Performance Plan, which she successfully
completed. The plan was supported by further discussions with her supervisor.
She has undertaken routine and additional training in the last two years, and
both on-line and periodic assessments in the clinical
environment.
responding to the Complaint RM Bull had reviewed the electronic fetal heart rate
pattern recordings. The evidence she gave in acknowledging
demonstrated she now had an improved understanding and appreciation of the
electronic fetal heart rate pattern interpretation,
and was also clearer about
the correct classification of fetal heart rate, and the circumstances where
escalation of care was required.
Bull now sees that her original reading of the electronic fetal heart rate
pattern recording was poor. She assessed the variability
as greater than or
equal to 5bpm (beats per minute) and had marked the matrix accordingly but
without making assessment of the change
since admission. RM Ridley had recorded
in the clinical notes a decrease in variability since admission and RM Bull said
read the notes. However her assessment was made on her point in time
reading of the CTG rather than also taking into account the
changes since
admission. RM Bull now sees the error in that approach.
Bull also said that she thought the Morphine could be having an effect on the
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording. Also,
intravenous fluids had just
been administered and RM Bull said she then observed from the electronic fetal
heart rate pattern recording
that variability had increased. RM Ridley recorded
in the clinical notes that at 04:50 there was good variability. RM Bull appears
to have not been concerned about any absence of accelerations because, as she
said, the fetal heart rate pattern was otherwise normal
in that the base line
was 11Obpm, variability was 5 bpm, and any decelerations were early
decelerations. In making this assessment
RM Bull did not explicitly make any
observation about accelerations being present or not. RM Bull says she assessed
the fetal heart
rate pattern as suspicious because the baseline was difficult to
determine, as recorded in the clinical notes.
observations do not accord with the entries made on the CTG matrix or on the
related sticker in the clinical notes. The matrix
records 'Variable
decelerations' and accelerations being present. The sticker records 'Nil'
decelerations and accelerations being
back RM Bull says she should have escalated care. On review of the fetal heart
rate pattern she says there were no accelerations.
That information combined
with the reduction in variability from admission should have prompted her to
escalate care. A reduction
of variability in beats per minute over a period of
time does not appear as an item on the printed matrix but it is mentioned in
notes to Table 2 in paragraph 3.3 of PD2010_040 as a factor to be considered.
In giving this evidence of the importance of also
considering the reduction in
variability RM Bull showed she understood the importance of considering not just
the score on the CTG
matrix, but also the changing condition of the Patient and
Bull agreed that from about 05:10 the fetal heart rate pattern showed a single
prolonged deceleration in fetal heart rate, longer
than three minutes. That
deceleration in itself was abnormal and should have been assessed by her as
pathological. There was no matrix
completed for this portion of the fetal heart
rate pattern. However a sticker with the time stamp 05:30 and containing similar
information
appears in the clinical notes. The position of the sticker in the
clinical notes is out of chronological order, and comes after an
20:00hrs, in the evening of 16 December 2012.
sticker is signed by RM Bull, but she was unclear in her evidence as to when she
saw the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording
to which the sticker
relates or at what time she signed the sticker. The overall assessment was
recorded as suspicious. The sticker
does not contain any record of an assessment
of decelerations even though there is a field to record that information. RM
not explain the records, but did agree that the fetal heart rate
pattern was pathological and she should have escalated care.
Bull agreed that there was nothing in what was required of her on 16 December
2012 that was not within her level of training and
experience.
the course of the evidence the Committee was handed an updated schedule of
training and development undertaken in the last
few years. RM Bull has
continued with the usual and expected learning and development, and she has also
undertaken additional study,
particularly related to reading and interpreting
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recordings.
Bull said she continues to be employed and practice as a midwife. She has the
support of her employer. Two colleagues, Danielle
Syme and Jennifer Soar,
provided written references on her behalf. Ms Soar gave
Evidence of Jennifer Soar
Soar is a midwife and has known RM Bull since 2007, initially as a colleague,
and from November 2012 until June 2014 as her line
manager. Since June 2014 they
have worked together in clinical practice in the Orange Midwifery Practice
Soar gave evidence of RM Bull's deep understanding, regret and acceptance of her
role in the events of 16 December 2012. RM Bull
has willingly taken on every
task required of her by way of practice improvement, increased supervision,
performance improvement,
professional updating, and learning and development to
ensure her practice and care has improved.
Soar says her work, although always excellent, is now of the highest standard.
Her view of RM Bull's interpretation of fetal heart
rate patterns was that it
was now 'absolutely meticulous'. She saw no need for RM Bull to be supervised
in her work in any way other
than usual. Ms Soar was of the view that RM Bull
could be held out to Patients and the ·Community as a person worthy of
confidence.
Findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct
Particular 1
criticism contained in particular 1 is that of assessing the fetal heart rate
pattern as suspicious rather than pathological.
The use of these terms or labels
derives from PD2010_040 and is reflected in the CTG matrix form. The terms are
an important means
of standardising communication and avoiding uncertainty.
path to the use of the terms follows from the classification of the different
assessments of the electronic fetal heart rate pattern
recording as reassuring,
non-reassuring or abnormal. Just one non-reassuring feature of any kind is
considered suspicious. And two
or more non-reassuring assessments or just one
abnormal assessment is considered pathological. If all other features are
normal then the absence of accelerations is to be treated as
reassuring. But if one other factor is non-reassuring then the absence
accelerations is also to be considered non-reassuring, and accordingly the
overall assessment is pathological (because there are
two or more non­
reassuring factors).
Rudner says the first electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording was
pathological because it showed reduced variability, the
presence of
decelerations, and lack of accelerations. Implicit in that view was that a
reduction in variability is non-reassuring.
But even aside from that assessment
the presence of decelerations and lack of accelerations were two non­
reassuring features
and hence the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording
was pathological.
Bull accepted that the reduced variability was a factor that should have
prompted escalation of care, but it was also the factor
that led her to assess
the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording as suspicious. But reduced
variability aside, from RM
Bull's evidence it seems she would have assessed the
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording as normal on the basis that the
baseline was 110bpm, variability was 5 bpm, and any decelerations were early
decelerations. On the sticker RM Bull confirmed 'Nil'
decelerations, but on the
matrix it is the phrase 'Variable decelerations' that has been
circled.Nevertheless her evidence was that
the electronic fetal heart rate
pattern recording showed that the decelerations were early decelerations.
Committee is of the view that the decelerations recorded in the fetal heart rate
pattern recording at that stage could fairly
be judged as either early
decelerations or as variable decelerations. Although on the matrix early
decelerations are placed in the
non-reassuring category, in both PD2010_040 and
the new colour coded fetal heart rate pattern interpretation stickers which
with the Between the Flags concept, early decelerations are placed in
the reassuring category. On this basis the absence of accelerations
have been of concern provided the other factors were reassuring.
if RM Bull was wrong in her assessment of the decelerations or made an error,
the Committee does not believe that her conduct
in that regard fell
significantly below the standard expected. The reading of the electronic fetal
heart rate pattern recording is
not purely mechanical and there remains the need
for the midwife to exercise a judgment as to what the electronic fetal heart
pattern recording indicates. Although RM Bull's assessment of the
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording for the period 03:40
and 04:25 may
have been wrong the Committee does not find that her conduct, in this regard,
was not significantly below the standard
reasonably expected and therefore was
not unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined by the National
Particular 2
Ms Rudner and RM Bull held the view, with which the Committee agrees, that a
decision to escalate care should take into account
more than just the electronic
fetal heart rate pattern recording matrix assessment. In this case there had
been a decrease in variability
in the fetal heart rate since admission even
though it was still not below 5 beats per minute and therefore remained
reassuring.
Had the variability been below 5 bpm it would have been assessed
as non-reassuring. But the decrease in variability to 5 bpm
was an additional
piece of information that warranted escalation of care. The Committee is of the
view that the escalation required
was consultation with the on call obstetric
registrar or another medical practitioner, and both Ms Rudner and RM Bull
Rudner referred to the Australian College of Midwives National Midwifery
Guidelines for Consultation and Referral 2009 point 8.1.13
which recommends
consultation. Also the policy PD2010_040, at paragraph 3.5, requires a call for
assistance and notification to a
medical practitioner. In failing to escalate
care following her assessment of the fetal heart rate pattern for the period
to 04:25 the Committee finds RM Bull's conduct fell significantly below
the standard reasonably expected.
though she did not escalate care, the treatment which RM Bull afforded the
Patient demonstrated good clinical decision-making
- the change of maternal
position and administration of intravenous fluids. Ms Rudner agreed. The care
that RM Bull provided at this
time is relevant to the Committee's consideration
of what action under section 146B of the National Law might be appropriate upon
the finding of unsatisfactory professional misconduct.
Particular 3
Committee finds that exercise of judgment by RM Bull in assessing the fetal
heart rate pattern taken between 05: 10 and 05:30
as suspicious rather than
pathological fell significantly below the standard that could be reasonably
expected of RM Bull given her
level of training and experience. RM Bull
admitted her failing, and gave evidence that had she properly assessed the
fetal heart rate pattern recording she would have seen the prolonged
deceleration, and would then have made the assessment of pathological.
was critical of RM Bull's exercise of judgment, and the Committee agrees with
that criticism.
Committee has concerns as to when it was that RM Bull made her assessment of the
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording
and what she took into account.
The clinical notes do not provide an adequate record of what happened, or when
things happened.
RM Bull signed the sticker in the clinical notes but without
marking her assessment of decelerations, even though the sticker has
for recording decelerations. Had she seen the prolonged deceleration, her
overall assessment would have been pathological.
aside the prolonged deceleration, in the Committee's view RM Bull should have
assessed the electronic fetal heart rate pattern
recording as pathological
because the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording showed typical
variable (even if not prolonged)
decelerations, which are non-reassuring,
combined with an absence of accelerations. The absence of accelerations becomes
non-reassuring
if occurring with another non-reassuring feature. The presence of
two non-reassuring features should have prompted an overall assessment
pathological.
Particular 4
the circumstances of the electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording being
pathological there is no doubt that RM Bull should
have escalated care by
the electronic fetal heart rate
pattern recording as suspicious should have led
to an escalation of care. Any considerations thought to militate against
(the possible effects of the Morphine on the electronic fetal heart
rate pattern recording and the improvement in variability following
intravenous fluids) had passed. At this point the decrease in variability, the
difficulty of identifying the baseline
and the passage of time should have
alerted RM Bull of the urgent need to escalate care.
failing to escalate care the Committee finds that RM Bull failed to exercise
care in a way that was significantly below the standard
Particular 5
Bull could offer no explanation for her failure to follow required procedures
before the administration of the Morphine; she should
have sought approval from
a medical practitioner. Patients and the public generally are entitled to
expect that a midwife will not
be involved in the administration of a drug,
especially an SS drug such as Morphine, except in accordance with a standing
RM Bull failed to do so. The Committee finds that RM Bull's conduct was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected.
Particular 6
RM Bull fell below the expected standard in the administration of the
intravenous fluids in her failure to seek medical
authorisation. Yes, the
administration of the intravenous fluids may have demonstrated good clinical
decision-making, but had she
sought medical approval the subsequent course of
events may have been otherwise.
Findings and exercise of powers of the Committee
Committee finds that the subject matter of the Complaint as encompassed by
particulars 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 to have been proved. This
finding follows from the
evidence, and also that RM Bull admitted these components of the subject matter
of the Complaint.
Committee is to give paramount consideration to the health and safety of the
public, but it also has a role in maintaining public
confidence in the
profession of midwifery and maintaining the reputation of the profession:
v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630. The decision of the
Committee will have a general deterrent effect for other members of the
profession and also
demonstrate to the public that it can have confidence in the
standard of care provided by midwives.
HCCC submitted that RM Bull should at least be reprimanded, as a reprimand would
demonstrate to the public that the conduct was
below the standard expected. And
further that the public can be confident that departures from expected standards
will have the consequence
of a sanction.
Doust submitted that in light of RM Bull's admissions, the demonstration of her
better understanding of electronic fetal heart
rate pattern interpretation her
subsequent training, and the continuing support of her employer and colleagues
no further action
was required to protect the public, although a caution may be
of benefit.
Committee considers that there is no utility in the making of orders in addition
to the caution and reprimand, and no particular
benefit for the protection of
the public in doing so. The events of 16 December 2012 aside, Ms Bull continues
to be a midwife of
good standing, she has the respect of her colleagues and she
possesses the necessary experience and training to safely practice
Committee considers that RM Bull's conduct as summarised in particulars 3, 4, 5,
and 6 of the Complaint warrants reprimand. In
her provision of care to the
Patient RM Bull's conduct fell significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner
of her equivalent level of training and experience.
RM Bull now sees and understands the errors she made at the time. Whilst she
unable to explain why she made the mistakes that she did, the Committee is
confident that the flaws in her conduct identified
by the Complaint have been by
RM Bull through her efforts at self-improvement, her willing participation in
the Performance Improvement
process, and the additional training she has
undertaken.
Bull has corrected her weaknesses in interpreting the electronic fetal heart
rate patterns she is now clear about when to escalate
care and the importance of
doing so, and said under oath she will always seek the required approvals for
any medical treatment.
The evidence of RM Bull's practice and training since
the events of 16 December 2012 supports the conclusion that her level of care
now of the standard reasonably expected of a midwife with her level of training
and experience.
conduct as summarised in particular 2 of the Complaint fell significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of her equivalent level of
training or experience; the appropriate response is a caution. In issuing a
caution the Committee wishes
to draw to RM Bull's attention the importance of
considering all aspects of the Patient's history in deciding to escalate care.
completion of the matrix and the sticker is not just an exercise in checking
the observations of another midwife or confirming the
record, but the
opportunity to make an independent, contemporaneous judgment of the electronic
fetal heart rate pattern recording
and any changes over time and then decide on
appropriate care.
Committee has concerns about the quality of RM Bull's recording of her
electronic fetal heart rate pattern recording observations
in the CTG matrix and
the lack of clarity about when she reviewed the electronic fetal heart rate
pattern recording and when she
completed the matrix and the sticker. Instead
of considering all the available contemporaneous information it is likely RM
relied too much on just her personal assessment in making her decision not
to escalate care. RM Bull is cautioned to keep in mind
that an electronic fetal
heart rate pattern recording and the related CTG matrix and sticker are more
than matters of procedure but
are valuable tools to assist her in determining
the best clinical care.
statement of decision will be given to the HCCC, RM Bull and the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW. As the Council will be
making the Committee's
statement of decision publicly available there is no need for the Committee to
give the statement of decision
to any other person, see 171E(3) of the National
Action pursuant to section 1468 of the National
accordance with sec 1468 of the National Law the Committee cautions RM Bull with
respect to her conduct, as described in particular
2, in failing to
appropriately escalate care of the Patient.
accordance with sec 1468 of the National Law the Committee reprimands RM Bull
with respect to her conduct, as described in particular
3, 4, 5 and 6,
Inaccurately
assessing and interpreting the electronic fetal heart rate pattern
to appropriately escalate care;
Authorising
the use of Morphine without approval; and
Authorising
the use of intravenous fluids without approval.
Mark Paul Chairperson
Date: 19 March 2015
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (720 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (2.81 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (44 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter