URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nicol v Trazmet & Waterways & State Transit [2003] NSWCC 4 (12 February 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Nicol v Trazmet &
Waterways & State Transit
[2003] NSWCC 4
Trazmet (NSW) Pty Ltd
Waterways Construction Pty Ltd
CASE NUMBER: 56794 of 2000 of 2003.00
WORDS: Assessment of Compensation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Geraghty J
DATES OF HEARING:
13/11/02,12/02/03
EX TEMPORE DATE: 12/02/2003
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr A D Campbell instructed by Taylor
FOR RESPONDENT:
Mr J W Dodd instructed by Hunt & Hunt -
1st Respondent
Mr G R Wilson instructed by Landers & Rogers - 2nd
Mr I S Judd instructed by Tress Cocks & Maddox - 3rd
1. Adam Nicol claims weekly benefits from 8 November 2000 to date and
continuing, lump sum compensation for back impairment and loss
of use of the
left and right legs at or above the knees, payment of medical expenses, and an
award of interest, presumably only
on the accrued weekly benefits.
2. His claim is based, as against the first respondent, Trazmet (NSW) Pty
Ltd, on an incident in October 1999 and on the nature and
conditions of his
employment as a formwork carpenter in or about October 1999. He was employed by
the first respondent from 26 August
to 8 November 1999.
3. His claim, as against the second respondent, is based on an incident which
occurred, he claimed, on 19 June 2000. He was employed
by the second respondent
as a bridge and wharf construction worker for the period from 9 February to 7
August 2000.
4. His claim, as against the third respondent, is based on the nature and
conditions of employment as a ferry wharf hand, working
at Circular Quay from 14
August to 7 November 2000.
5. His claim is also based on the disease provisions of the Act, in s 15 and
alternatively, s 16.
6. The issues for determination are: firstly and principally, whether any
injury occurred while employed by the second respondent
on 19 June 2000, and
more generally, whether Nicol was injured in the employ of any one of the
respondents, though his claim as
against the first respondent was discontinued
by agreement, with no order as to costs, after he had given evidence in-chief
it seemed that his evidence did not implicate the first
respondent.
7. It is true that when the applicant gave his evidence, the first respondent
seemed not to be implicated, though on closer examination
of the medical
reports, this did not seem to be as clear.
8. The other issues for determination are: the question of nexus with any, or
all of the various respondents; the extent of any incapacity
arising from injury
received; the quantification of impairment and losses; the provisions of s 68A,
or s 68B, depending on whether
I find the applicant has suffered from a disease
to which his employment with any of the respondents made some contribution.
9. To begin with, I should observe that the applicant was a very difficult
witness. He was slow and hesitant, vague and uncertain.
He seemed to make
clear statements about certain incidences or treatment, then to qualify them or
to demonstrate some uncertainty.
He was a poor historian.
10. It appeared from Exhibits 9 and 10 that for some years, the applicant has
suffered a very serious psychiatric problem which obviously
continues to be a
heavy burden to bear, for which he has, from time to time, sought treatment and
against which he has struggled.
He has been diagnosed as having a schizophrenic
condition with some delusional components. Nevertheless, it seemed to me that
was a simple, truthful man despite his vagueness and uncertainty. He was
described by his employers as a good worker. Despite his
serious psychiatric
problems, he has been employed consistently, mostly in carpentry work, up until
his termination with the third
respondent in November 2000.
11. It was important to observe the applicant over a period of some days,
since one could easily gain the wrong impression from reading
the transcript of
evidence. He seemed a hesitant young man, very reluctant to assert himself. He
delayed making complaint about
any accident in which he was involved, to avoid
earning a reputation as a workers compensation claimant. He seemed reluctant to
complain, inclined to wish, to believe that his condition would improve. He was
afraid of becoming stigmatised as a claimant. This,
to my mind, explains why it
might be that he did not tell doctors of incidents, why he did not make a claim
for some weeks after
the incident occurred.
12. Nicol was born in August 1965. He remains single, without any
dependants, and has completed a carpentry apprentice programme
began in 1982.
Before his employment with the first respondent, he said, he was physically fit,
involved in running and surfing,
and had no back problems, though he did have
occasional physiotherapy treatment which he thought might have been for his
said he had had no time off and that he could work without
restrictions. He was then employed as a formwork carpenter for the first
respondent and on 8 November 1999 (the last day of his employment), he was
stripping timber under stairs. He said that it was raining
and, it would seem
because of the position he was working in, that his back became stiff. He said
that nothing had really occurred
but that he had felt the need to protect his
back. He said he was frightened of hurting it, though he did not experience any
He only had a feeling of vulnerability. He said he continued to move,
but slowly, and kept working.
13. He mentioned this experience to his treating general practitioner, Dr
Devlin, in January 2000. It was on the basis of this evidence
that the claim
against the first respondent was, by agreement, dismissed, though some doctors
have been of the opinion that the incident
in November 1999 (or, as they say,
October 1999) was the cause of his present condition.
14. The applicant was then employed as a formwork carpenter by W G E in
November and December 1999, and by Christy’s People
Pty Ltd from December
1999 to February 2000. He said that during this time he had had no symptoms, no
pain or restriction in the
back and that nothing had stopped him working.
15. On 9 February 2000, he began employment with the second respondent,
carrying out bridge and wharf construction. He said that
when he had begun this
employment, he had had no problems lifting or twisting, in fact that he could
lift anything. This seems in
some way contradictory to the evidence of Michael
Vanroosmalen who said that the applicant in fact had said that he had a niggly
back and was doing light duties for the respondent. However, the applicant said
that on 19 June 2000, he was assisting approximately
eight other people to lift
a beam in a factory at Walsh Bay; that he was lifting one end to the height of
afterwards, almost immediately, he felt pain in the right
leg, on the outside and the back of the calf; that he continued working,
his leg felt funny; and that he did not remember reporting the incident at work
on the day.
16. Some days later, in fact on 23 June, he was admitted to hospital, for
surgery on his right knee. This had been arranged some
time before 19 June. He
had been off work for a few days before the surgery on 23 June. He said he had
had sinus problems and felt
tired, that he had a bad pain in his leg and the
operation on his right knee was on the horizon. In any event, he sought
at Arncliffe Physiotherapy Treatment at Arncliffe on 20 June, which is
recorded in Exhibit 16, though there is no record of any history
of an incident
the day before.
17. On 21 June or thereabouts, the applicant said, he spoke to Peter Yabsley
and said words to the effect that he had had
. He said that he told Yabsley that he felt pretty bad and thought
that he had hurt his back. In evidence-in-chief he said that
this conversation
had occurred before his knee surgery which, he said, had taken place on
Saturday. The applicant then said that
he returned to work on the Monday or
Tuesday (it would seem the Monday was a public holiday) and that he returned to
normal duties.
He said that he had pain in the right leg, from the right hip
down the leg, but no pain elsewhere. This leg pain continued. He
performing his duties which were sometimes really heavy. This evidence was
confirmed by his supervisor, Michael Vanroosmalen.
18. On 10 July 2000, Nicol consulted Dr Meakin who referred him for a back
x-ray. The CAT scan was exposed on 12 July. The doctor
did not record any
history of an incident the previous month, though Nicol sought physiotherapy
treatment on that same day and gave
the physiotherapist a history of what had
occurred on 19 June. These facts are puzzling. Why would Nicol provide a
history of an
incident on 19 June to the physiotherapist and not to Dr Meakin?
Perhaps he did provide the history to Dr Meakin and the doctor
did not take a
note of it. I cannot, and do not assume this to be the case. In any event, the
observations I have made as to the
applicant’s presentation before me
would, in some part, explain why it might be that he did not provide a history
19. The applicant worked on for the second respondent until 7 August 2000.
He said that he left because he could not cope with the
work. Then on 14 August
(until 7 November) he worked for the third respondent, doing general duties on
ferry wharves. He collected
tickets, he tied up the boats, he moved the
gangplank around and other general duties. He said that the work there was so
much easier
than the building industry work he had been doing before, but it was
still aggravating his back. Moving the gangplanks around, even
though they were
on a lever system, seemed to aggravate his back. Exhibit 12 is an injury report
completed in September 2000 which
seemed to indicate that doing very light
ordinary work with a gangplank, sliding it sideways, seemed to aggravate his
20. He said that there was one particular incident during the Olympic Games
period in September when he had to lie down because he
crook in the
. He was not feeling very well and had constant discomfort in the
right leg. He said that he lay down because he had a bad stomach,
and his head
. He does not remember having any time off and he continued to
perform his normal duties for the third respondent.
21. His supervisor, Anthony Michael Hayman gave evidence. He told the Court
attendant mainly, though
also some wharf work. He said that on 3 November 2000, he had had a
conversation with Nicol about being
rostered at Manly, and Nicol had told him
that he had a sore back. Hayman told Nicol that his position required him to
work in all
areas. Nicol said that he could not work on the wharves and, as a
result, he was advised by Hayman to resign, which he did by letter
November (Exhibit 8).
22. The applicant has not worked since November. He said he has been looking
for work, and his applications are recorded in Exhibit
A. He has made
applications for parking patrol officer duties, a temporary ranger, a customer
service operator, a supervisor for
Bankstown Council, for a position at Taronga
Park, a controlling officer in State Transit. There is a long list of
applications
the applicant made for positions which he thought might be within
his capability.
23. When Nicol gave evidence before me in November 2002, he said that he was
not receiving any treatment, though he saw Dr Meakin
from time to time. He said
he was swimming four or five times a week, and receiving some physiotherapy
relief from time to time,
basis. He said that he did
not have constant pain in the leg and that he felt quite a lot better, though he
could not lift or twist.
He said that while he had no pain in his right leg, he
did experience some numbness in the foot, and this feeling varied from time
time. Sometimes his right leg did ache. He said he was unable to do any
surfing, that he did not do any running or lifting.
He felt unable to do
formwork because it was too physical and could not work for the third
respondent, or do that kind of work again,
because it required manipulating the
gangplank, which again was too physical.
24. When he gave further evidence in February this year, he again said that
he had experienced a gradual improvement, even since November
of last year. He
thought he was slowly getting better, though he still needed to be careful and
still had numbness in his right
foot. He attributed feeling an improvement, in
part at least, to the warmer weather. He said that in January this year, he had
been employed for 5 days at the Mollymook Club and had earned about $480. He
was working there as a kitchen-hand. This work was
too heavy, however. It was
much too physical; there was too much lifting and twisting; and he had to give
25. Then in February this year, he started to be trained on the cash register
at the Club, and to deliver a few meals to patrons.
He said that he was
doubtful whether he was able to continue this work because he thought he might
be too slow and had kept people
waiting. Again, he felt, I think, under
26. Nicol was closely questioned in cross-examination about the alleged
incident on 19 June 2000; about his complaints and lack of
them; about his
failure to provide a history to various doctors, or at least, the doctors’
failure to record any history -
always with a view to the second respondent
asserting that the incident had not occurred.
27. The second respondent called Michael Vanroosmalen to give evidence. He
was the supervisor and leading hand who was working with
the applicant at Walsh
Bay in or around 19 June 2000. Nicol was responsible to him during this period
of work. Vanroosmalen said
that they had had a conversation about the
applicant’s knee operation. This conversation had occurred 2 or 3 months
the surgery and Vanroosmalen had told Nicol to remind him closer to the
event as he was likely to forget. Vanroosmalen also said
there had been a
conversation during which Nicol had mentioned that he had had a sore back, that
it was playing up, that he had had
a previous injury and it was niggling him a
little. As a result of this conversation, Vanroosmalen said he had put him on
duties, sweeping and not doing heavy lifting.
28. This conversation was never put to the applicant by counsel for the
second respondent, though when the conversation was being
led from Vanroosmalen,
no objection was taken by counsel for the applicant. No submissions were made
as to the weight I should put
on this conversation. In fact this evidence was
completely ignored.
29. Vanroosmalen said that, a couple of days before the surgery, Nicol did
not come to work, though he telephoned him the day before
surgery to tell him
that he was going to hospital the next day. This was in answer to the request
some months before that he should
be reminded closer to the event. Vanroosmalen
said that Nicol had said on the telephone that
You told me to tell you about
the knee surgery
30. Vanroosmalen said that in this telephone conversation, he had said to
Where have you been?
and that Nicol had replied that he had just
been generally
. Vanroosmalen had concluded the conversation by
I’ll see you when you come back to work
conversation was never put to the applicant by counsel for the second
respondent. When the evidence was being lead from Vanroosmalen
conversation, no objection was taken by counsel for the applicant. No
submissions were made as to the weight that I should
put on this conversation.
It was again, completely ignored.
31. Vanroosmalen had filled out a leave application for Nicol. It is dated
22 June 2000. (Exhibit 11). He said that he filled out
this form on the day he
had had the conversation with Nicol and that when Nicol had returned to work, he
signed it. He said that
on 22 June 2000, when having a conversation with Nicol,
Nicol had made no mention of his back, and that on 26 June he returned to
to perform normal duties which, in any event, Vanroosmalen said were light
duties because he had told him he had an injured
32. Vanroosmalen said that Nicol had not been involved in moving heavy beams
because at the time, he was on light duties, doing spotter
work. He said
(always talking in the subjunctive mood)
I would have been involved,
though he also said, he did not remember moving the beams. In any event, he
said that the work the employees were doing for the
second respondent had been
physically demanding work. He described it as heavy and awkward. They were
moving heavy hardwood beams,
some of them about 1 ton in weight. I asked Mr
Vanroosmalen whether he knew the various employees identified by Nicol in his
claim for compensation form
(Exhibit 1). He knew the man identified as
the witness to whom Nicol said he had spoken, namely Peter Yabsley. He also
Hitchcock, Warren Henderson, Don Dixon and Clayton Stringer, all of
whom are identified by Mr Nicol in his form (Exhibit 1) dated
2 August 2000, as
people who had witnessed the accident. None of these people were called to give
33. Peter Yabsley is the person identified as the one who received the notice
of injury on 22 June 2000. He was not called to give
evidence and his absence
was left unexplained. That is, I was not informed by any of the witnesses that
Peter Yabsley was no longer
available, that attempts had been made to find him
and that these were unsuccessful. None of these people were called to give
to assert that Nicol had not been involved in the manoeuvre in which he
alleged he was injured, and Vanroosmalen could only say that
as far as he was
concerned, Nicol would not have been involved in the said manoeuvre. He did not
say he was not, and could not have
said that because he was not a witness to the
incident, or could remember it.
34. The second respondent submitted that the applicant had given no history
of any incident on 19 June until he had consulted the
physiotherapist on 10
July. He had made no claim for compensation until 2 August 2000. He had
consulted Dr Meakin on 10 July 2000
and the doctor had not recorded any history
of an incident. The applicant had sought physiotherapy treatment the day after
(Exhibit 16) and the physiotherapist did not record in her notes any
history of an incident.
35. Vanroosmalen said that he had spoken with the applicant on 22 June, and
again there was no mention of any back incident. Furthermore,
the applicant had
undergone right knee surgery on 23 June 2000. He had taken time off several
days beforehand, and had said that
he was not feeling well, that he was
suffering from sinus. Then he returned to work on Tuesday 26 June, to normal
36. Vanroosmalen said that as far as he was concerned, the applicant had had
a bad back before he came to work for the second respondent;
that he was
involved in light duties for the second respondent; and that he knew of no
incident. The second respondent pressed strongly
that this evidence should
result in a finding that no incident had occurred.
37. However, in addition to the observations I have made about the
applicant’s personality and his ability to give clear answers,
beyond doubt that he was a good worker; that he received treatment on 20 June
2000 from the physiotherapist; that he nominated
in his injury form a number of
witnesses none of whom have been called to give evidence; and identified Peter
Yabsley as the person
to whom notice of injury had been given on 22 June.
38. Exhibit D is an employer report of injury form which again nominates
Peter Yabsley as the person who received the notice of injury
on 22 June, and
Waterways Construction were never informed of any incident whereby Adam
injured his back. Adam mentioned to his supervisor (Peter
Yabsley) in June 2000
that his back was sore. No mention was given as to how he aggravated his
previous back injury.
39. If this were true, as a proper history of complaint to Peter Yabsley, he
should have been called to confirm it, because he was
identified as someone to
whom notice of injury had been given. In his compensation claim (Exhibit 1)
Nicol alleged that he was
lifting structural steel with six other people,
seemed to take more weight as I was lifting onto handrail
. When asked who
was responsible for the accident, he wrote
I was responsible because I was
. The description the applicant gave of the incident on 19 June was
confirmed as a manoeuvre which was being carried out by the workers
in and about
that time. When I asked Vanroosmalen whether the description rang a bell, he
said that this was the type of thing they
were doing. I am persuaded on balance
that an incident occurred on 19 June; that the applicant, while working for the
second respondent,
injured his back, or rather aggravated a back which was
already significantly vulnerable; and that the injury resulted in some symptoms
in the applicant’s right leg. The applicant sustained an injury in June
2000, though he already had a significant pre-existing
40. When Nicol was employed by the third respondent, it seemed to me that
from time to time he used to aggravate his back, but only
temporarily. He
already said that his back had improved significantly by November last year, and
then in February this year, improved
even further. It seems that the effect of
the work the applicant was performing when working for the third respondent had
effect. No incapacity resulted from the work for the third
respondent. It seems to me that any incapacity resulted from working
second respondent. He sustained no increase of loss or impairment resulting
from work with the third respondent.
41. The applicant had already a significantly diseased back when he had begun
work for the second respondent. He aggravated this
disease in an incident on 19
June 2000. This aggravation has continued until today, though it has gradually
ameliorated.
42. The assessments of the various medical practitioners are as follows: the
general practitioner considers the applicant has 20
per cent back impairment;
Dr Meakin (also treating doctor) considers he has 15 per cent back impairment,
and a 5 per cent loss of
use of the right leg, though he attributes two-thirds
of the assessments to a pre-existing condition, and furthermore, thought that
the balance of the impairment was the result of an incident in October 1999; Dr
Weisz considers that the applicant has a 20 per cent
back impairment and a 5 per
cent loss of each leg.
43. He said that these figures reflect the impairment and loss resulting from
work and that therefore no deduction should be made
pursuant to s 68A]; Dr Lyons
considers the applicant had an 18 per cent back impairment and a 5 per cent
right leg loss and that
a deduction of two-thirds should be made, pursuant to s
68A. Dr Nash assessed a 12 per cent back impairment, with one-third resulting
from an injury, he thought, in October 1999, and two-third traceable to a
pre-existing constitutional condition.
44. Exhibits E and 20 are CAT scan reports of the lumbar spine carried out in
July 2000. The scan disclosed a right centro-lateral
disc bulge at the L4/5
level. There was some mild apophyseal joint disease at all levels, and quite
prominent apophyseal joint disease
at the level of L5-S1. There was bilateral
exit foraminal narrowing at the L5-S1 level.
45. Dr Timothy Devlin’s report is Exhibit B. He first examined the
applicant for his current complaints in January 2000, some
5 or 6 months before
the incident on the 19th. Nicol presented complaining of right leg pain which
he described as a dull ache down
the back of his leg to the foot, which had been
present for some time (he could not remember how long) and which was constant
exacerbated by activities. When he saw the applicant again on 20 December
2000, he was still complaining of the same problem. He
saw the applicant on
numerous occasions over the 12 months before July 2001, reviewing him finally on
19 June 2001. He said that
Nicol had a right L4/5 disc prolapse
been slowly resolving
46. Dr Meakin’s reports are Exhibits F and 19. He first saw the
applicant in March 2000 to treat his right knee condition.
He said that at a
consultation on 10 July 2000, Nicol informed him for the first time that he had
been having some low back discomfort
since an injury at his work in October
. One can see how complicated this history becomes. He told Dr Meakin
that he had daily low back discomfort of a moderate nature,
with radiation in
the postero-lateral aspect of the right buttock and right thigh. Nicol also
told him that before October 1999,
he had had no history of back discomfort or
back injury. This history seems contrary to the evidence in-chief, namely, that
effect of any problem Nicol had with the first respondent in November 1999
simply put him on notice that he had a vulnerable back,
but without any
47. Dr Meakin concluded that the applicant had long-standing degenerative
changes at the lower three levels of the lumbar spine, particularly
at the L5-S1
level. He concluded that the incident in October 1999 had
symptomatic aggravation of this pre-existing pathology
. It seems to me, on
the applicant’s evidence, that what had caused the symptomatic aggravation
had not occurred in October
1999 (as far as the applicant was concerned when he
gave evidence before me), but was the result of what had taken place on 19 June
48. In a report of 1 May 2002, Dr Meakin said that Nicol had returned to
discuss medical matters relating to his low back and right
leg. He reported
minimal back disorder, with only minimal symptomatology in the right lower leg
in the form of a very slight paraesthesia
of the lateral border of the right
foot. It is clear from what the applicant said, that he was improving.
49. The report of Dr Weisz is Exhibit C and resulted from an examination in
May 2001. Nicol told Dr Weisz that some 2 years before
his accident in 2000, he
had experienced low back pain at the end of a hard day, but that he had had no
time off. He then gave a
history of an incident on 19 June 2000, stating that
he was off work for a month (this does not seem to have been the case, at least
according to the applicant’s evidence before me). Dr Weisz records that
the radiological investigation showed advanced long-standing
degenerative disc
disease at the L4-S1 lumbosacral junction, with scoliosis and osteophyte
formation. He said the CT scan detected
no disc protrusion, only degenerative
disc and facet joint disease. The degenerative condition, he said, could be
classified as occupational
disease of such a nature as to be contracted by
gradual process which was
plausibly made symptomatic by the accident in June
50. Dr Lyons’ reports are Exhibit 13. They followed an examination on
7 February 2001. The doctor said he considered the worker’s
was due to very long-standing degenerative changes, probably partly
constitutional in aetiology, and possibly related
to long-standing major injury.
He recorded a detailed history of the applicant’s work conditions, both
with the second and
the third respondents. He said that theoretically, the
applicant was on light duties with the second respondent, but that no such
duties were available in the construction injury. The applicant told him that
he could not continue with the second respondent
because of severe right leg
pain and intermittent back pain. He told Dr Lyons that while working for the
third respondent, he was
collecting tickets, flagging the ferries and planking
them when they berthed. He described the work as not heavy, and overall, he
said, the work was quite light. But despite this lighter work, he continued to
have symptoms in the back and particularly in his
51. Curiously, Nicol denied any back pain before the incident in June 2000,
though later he noted that he used to get a few backaches
and consulted doctors
from time to time. The histories provided by Nicol were confusing. Dr Lyons
said that if the incident of
20 June 2000 had occurred, it may have caused some
aggravation of the gross, underlying pre-existing pathology at the lumbosacral
level. He thought it was extremely difficult to avoid the conclusion that he
had had considerable symptoms, probably over many years.
He thought that the
incident on 20 June 2000 had been a simple straining incident, causing some
aggravation of long-standing pre-existing
degenerative changes and that such an
aggravation could be expected to settle over a period of weeks, or perhaps 3
52. Dr Lyons thought that he could not relate the symptoms to any work with
the State Transit Authority, and certainly on no occasion,
Dr Lyons observed,
did Nicol suffer any incident of injury while employed by it. That may be so,
though there is, in Exhibit 12,
some record of an aggravation. However, I
concluded that the work the applicant was doing with the third respondent was
that the applicant had already had a long-standing problem which had
been, I think, permanently aggravated by an incident of 19 June.
53. The report of Dr Millons is Exhibit 14. He examined Nicol in April 2002
and concluded that there had possibly been an episode
in June 2000 following
which he had had more pain in his right leg. Dr Millons considered the
applicant was only suited to light
work. On the history provided, he thought
that Nicol’s condition could be considered to be a disease of gradual
occasioned by his work, but possibly
temporarily aggravated
the incident at Trazmet.
54. On the history that I obtained, his problems seem to stem more from the
incident in June 2000 when he was lifting the piece of
55. On 4 September 2000, the applicant was examined by Dr Pillemer (Exhibit
17). He too thought that Nicol had had long-standing
problems in his low back.
He was of the opinion that any incident of 19 June 2000 would simply have been
an aggravating factor,
This would seem to be supported by the fact that he did not report the
incident at that stage but simply took himself off for physiotherapy.
as if this was a regular approach by him previously.
56. Dr Pillemer thought he was not fit for work in the construction industry.
He examined him again on 25 October 2002 and reported
that in his opinion, the
particularly incident on 19 June 2000 would not have left him with any permanent
back impairment.
57. Finally, Dr Nash examined the worker in November 2001. His reports are
Exhibit 18:
In my opinion, the injury he described to me today as occurring some time
in June/July 2000 was essentially an aggravation of pre-existing
degenerative
changes. In my opinion, such aggravation would be expected to last 10 to 12
weeks and his back would return to its
previous status.
58. He did not consider that any permanent disability had resulted from the
incident of June 2000.
59. It seems to me that an incident did occur on 19 June and that, as a
result of this incident, the applicant sustained some permanent
aggravation to
an already significantly vulnerable back. I have concluded that the
pre-existing condition should be reflected in
a deduction of two-thirds. The
applicant sought treatment in January 2000 from his general practitioner, Dr
Devlin. He sensed some
problem on the last day of his employment with the first
respondent which reflected at least a vulnerable back. He was doing light
for the second respondent, as far as Vanroosmalen was concerned. While one
doctor observed there was not too much light work
in the construction industry,
doctors seem to be generally agreed that the pre-existing condition amounted to
two-thirds of the problem.
60. Exhibit H is a wage schedule which annexes wage records. The applicant
alleges that but for the injury, he would have been earning
$1,041 per week.
This figure is based upon the average wage earnings between 25 May and 25 July
2000. I have concluded the worker
would be able to work, doing full-time work
as a light cleaner or a light handyman, or in some of the positions reflected in
exhibit which sets out the employment applications made (Exhibit A). He
would be able to earn approximately $480 per week.
61. The respondents sought to persuade me that I should exercise my
discretion to diminish the mathematical difference between what
the applicant
would have earned but for the injury, and what he is now able to earn. I do not
believe however, there is any basis
for the exercise of this discretion. It is
true the applicant has a serious psychiatric condition, against which he has
for some years. But it appears that this has not affected his work in
the past. He is qualified and has always performed outdoor
work, work of a
physical nature. The demons against which he struggles do not seem to affect
this kind of work. I do not propose
to exercise my discretion to diminish any
mathematical difference.
62. I make the following findings and awards.
63. (1) The applicant was injured at work on 19 June 2000, in the employ of
the second respondent, when he sustained an injury to
the back and right leg by
way of an aggravation of a pre-existing condition.
64. (2) The applicant did not sustain any
injury in the
employ of the third respondent.
65. (3) In the circumstances, there is no basis on which to apply the
provisions of s 15 or s 16, since, although the applicant has
suffered from a
disease to his back, the disease condition was permanently aggravated by an
incident on 19 June 2000.
66. (4) The applicant has not sustained an injury due to the nature and
conditions of employment with the third respondent.
67. (5) The applicant is partially incapacitated for work, and has been since
8 November 2000.
68. (6) The probable weekly earning but for the injury, had he continued to
be employed in the same or some comparable employment,
I assess at $1,041 per
69. (7) I assess the sum of $480 a week as the average amount he is able to
earn in some suitable employment, that is, in the general
labour market
reasonably accessible to him.
70. (8) There is no basis on which to exercise the discretion to reduce the
mathematical difference.
71. I make an award against the second respondent in favour of the applicant,
in the sum of $237.20 per week, as adjusted, from 8
November 2000 to date and
continuing.
72. I order interest to accrue, at the rate of 4 per cent, on the accrued
weekly benefits from a date to be determined, that is, from
the date on which
the claim was made.
73. (9) As a result of the injury, the applicant has suffered a permanent
back impairment which, having regard to the severity of
the matter, bears to a
most extreme case the proportion of 15 per cent. I agree with the assessment of
Dr Meakin. He also has suffered
a permanent loss of efficient use of his right
leg, at or above the knee, of 5 per cent. Again, I agree with Dr Meakin, the
74. (10) For reasons already stated, I propose to deduct two-thirds from the
impairment and loss, to reflect the applicant’s
serious pre-existing
75. I make an award against the second respondent pursuant to s 66, in the
sum of $4,250.
76. I order that the second respondent pay the applicant’s medical
expenses and costs.
77. I enter an award for the third respondent.
78. I direct that counsel fees may include a second conference in the sum of
Mr A D Campbell instructed by Taylor & Scott.appeared for the
Mr J W Dodd instructed by.Hunt & Hunt.appeared for 1st
Mr G R Wilson instructed by.Landers & Rogers Lawyers.appeared
for 2nd respondent
Mr I S Judd instructed by.Tress Cocks &
Maddox.appeared for 3rd respondent
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (42.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter