URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shahmiri v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2021] NSWPICMRP 2; (9 August 2021)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Shahmiri v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2021] NSWPICMRP
Owjan Shahmiri
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Katherine Ruschen
Brett Williams
Terence O’Riain
DATE OF DECISION:
9 August 2021
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS- statutory benefits; pre-accident weekly earnings; earner;
earnings; earnings as an earner; panel review; majority
decision; minority
reasons; PIC Rule 128(6); Covid 19;
Transports Accident Act 1986
Workers Compensation; Regulated Costs;
merit review decision is
confirmed; claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Accident Injuries Act 2017
Majority Reasons
1. The Claimant was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 24 October 2020
(the accident). The other vehicle involved in the accident
was at fault, having
crossed over to the wrong side of the road and collided with the Claimant who
was travelling on his scooter.
The Claimant subsequently lodged a claim for
statutory benefits with the Insurer of the at-fault driver (the Insurer).
2. On 1 December 2020, when assessing the Claimant’s entitlement to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under Division 3.3
of the MAI Act, the
Insurer determined that the Claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE)
were $473.44.
3. The Claimant sought an internal review of the Insurer’s decision in
relation to his weekly payments. On 17 December 2020
the internal reviewer set
aside the Insurer’s earlier decision and determined the Claimant’s
entitlement to weekly payments
on the basis that his PAWE were $462.73 (the IR
4. On 21 December 2020 the Claimant lodged a merit review application with
the Dispute Resolution Service seeking a review of the
IR decision in relation
to his PAWE. On 26 February 2021 the merit reviewer set aside the internal
review decision and determined
that the Claimant’s PAWE were $829.72 (the
merit decision).
5. On 23 March 2021 the Insurer applied to the Commission for a review of the
merit decision (the application). On 13 May 2021, having
found that there was
reasonable cause to suspect that the merit decision was incorrect in a material
respect, the President’s
delegate accepted the application and referred it
to a merit review panel (the Panel). Together with merit reviewer Ruschen the
application
has been referred to us to review the merit decision in accordance
with s 7.15 of the MAI Act.
6. Having considered the subject matter of the dispute, the submissions and
documents relied on by the parties together with
Personal Injury
Commission Act 2020
and Procedural Direction PIC2 we find that the
proceedings can be determined on the papers. We are satisfied that sufficient
information
is available in connection with the proceedings to allow us to
determine the dispute without holding any formal hearing. The parties
advised that the Panel proposed to take this course. No objection was raised by
either party.
7. We have had the benefit of reading in draft the decision of merit reviewer
Ruschen, who has determined that the merit decision
should be set aside and that
a decision in substitution for that decision should be made. We have arrived at
a different conclusion.
In our view the merit decision should be confirmed. In
accordance with Rule 128(6) of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules
decision, representing a determination of the majority of Panel members, is
taken to be the determination of the Panel.
Submissions
8. The Claimant argues that as he was an ‘earner’ from 23 October
2019 – 10 May 2020, a period of 29 weeks, his
PAWE should be calculated on
the basis of his gross earnings during the 12 months immediately before the
accident divided by 29,
representing the number of weeks he was actually an
earner in this 12 month period.
9. In short, the Insurer argues that the Claimant’s PAWE should be
calculated by dividing the gross earnings received by the
Claimant during the 12
months immediately before the accident by 52, representing the number of weeks
in a 12 month period. We will
engage more fully with the Insurer’s
submissions in the reasons that follow.
10. Although the Claimant was unemployed when the accident occurred, he had
been employed for 29 weeks during the 12 months immediately
before the date of
accident. Accordingly, he fell within the definition of
entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits for the first two entitlement
11. Schedule1 clause 4 of the
is central to these proceedings.
The clause is in the following terms:
“4 Meaning of “pre-accident weekly
earnings”—general
(1) Pre-accident weekly earnings
, in relation to an earner who
is injured as a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average of the
gross earnings received
by the earner as an earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor accident occurred, unless
(2) applies.
(2) In the following cases,
pre-accident weekly earnings
in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident,
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning
continuously, but had not been earning continuously for at least
months—the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as
an earner during the period from when the earner
started to earn continuously to
immediately before the day of the motor accident,
(a1) if the earner was employed or self-employed during a period or
periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of the
pre-accident
period, but was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during
the pre-accident period—the average
weekly gross earnings received by the
earner as an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) if subclause (3) applies—the weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the period
from when the change of
circumstance referred to in that subclause occurred to immediately before the
day of the motor accident,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an
arrangement with an employer or other person to undertake employment
commence business as a self-employed person—the average weekly gross
earnings that the earner could reasonably have been
expected to earn, but for
the injury, in employment under that arrangement.
pre-accident period
, in relation to a motor
accident, is the period of 2 years immediately preceding the motor accident.
(3) This subclause applies if, during the 12 months immediately before the
day of the motor accident, there was, as a result of any
action taken by the
earner, a significant change in his or her earnings circumstances that resulted
in the earner regularly earning,
or becoming entitled to earn, more on a weekly
basis than he or she was earning before the change occurred.
Examples of a change of circumstances to which this subclause would apply
include a change of job, a promotion, a move from part-time
to full-time
employment, or a pay increase arising from the achievement of performance
(4) For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if
he or she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on
the day of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6
months to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the
basis on which the earnings were being provided as at that day.”
12. The parties agree that the Claimant’s PAWE is to be determined in
accordance with Schedule 1 cl. 4(1). The critical issue
for determination by the
Panel is the proper construction of that provision.
Project Blue Sky v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
the High Court held that:
“The primary object of statutory construction is to construe the
relevant provision so that it is consistent with the language
and purpose of all
the provisions of the statute [45]. The meaning of the provision must be
determined "by reference to the language
of the instrument viewed as a
whole"[46]. In Commissioner for
Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
Dixon CJ pointed out that "the context, the general purpose and policy of a
provision and its consistency and fairness are surer guides
to its meaning than
the logic with which it is constructed". Thus, the process of construction must
always begin by examining the
context of the provision that is being
construed.”
14. As recorded above, the merit reviewer accepted the approach contended for
by the Claimant and determined his PAWE accordingly.
15. The Insurer argues that if the merit reviewer’s interpretation were
to be adopted by all insurers, earners could be entitled
to statutory benefits
correlating with, for example, earnings that they had earnt once off, even if
they had only worked for one
week over the preceding 12 month period, as opposed
to those earnings being averaged over 52 weeks. Such an outcome, the Insurer
argues, could hardly have been the legislature’s intention.
16. In our view, this submission seems to ignore the exceptions found in Sch
1 cl. 4(2), the application of which may result in an
outcome the Insurer argues
is contrary to the legislature’s intentions. For example, cl. 4(2)(a)
would allow PAWE to be determined
by reference to a period of less than 12
months and, subject to cl. 4(4), in some cases a much shorter period, including
17. Further, sub-cl. 4(2)(c) allows PAWE to be determined by reference to
earnings that were never actually received by an injured
person. That provision
allows PAWE to be determined on the basis of the average weekly gross earnings
that an earner could reasonably
have been expected to earn, but for the injury,
in employment under an arrangement with an employer or other person to undertake
employment or to commence business as a self-employed person. That provision
applies to an injured person who is an ‘earner’
as a result of Sch 1
cl. 2(b), namely a person who, before a motor accident, had entered into an
arrangement (whether or not an enforceable
contract) with an employer or other
person to undertake employment, or to commence business as a self-employed
person, at a particular
time and place.
18. At paragraph 17 of its’ submissions, the Insurer argues that:
“As is objectively evident upon a reading of clause 4, ... [the merit
reviewer] should only subsequently have, after determining
that no exceptions
applied, simply calculated the weekly average of the gross earnings received by
the earner as an earner during
the 12 months immediately before the day on which
the motor accident occurred (subclause 4(1)). That is, divided the total gross
earnings for the 12 month period by 52 weeks...”
19. By reference to the exceptions to sub-cl. 4(1) that are found in sub-cl.
4(2), the Insurer poses the following question in its
submissions: What would be
the point of having exceptions if they were not required because the principle
to which they pertain could
be manipulated without them? In the Insurer’s
submission, the exceptions in cl. 4(2) exist because 4(1) is fixed. There is
force to this submission. However, it does not in our view account for the words
as an earner
’ in sub-cl. 4(1) or the construction of
sub-cl.4(1) that we prefer, matters to which we will return.
20. The Insurer submits that:
“... if anything cl. 4(2)(a) confirms that 4(1) requires the earner to
have been earning continuously for 12 months, namely,
for the whole of the 12
months. The Insurer submits that is because 4(2)(a) provides for an alternative
situation, that being where
the earner ‘had not been earning continuously
for at least 12 months’, this would indicate that the converse is required
pursuant to subclause 4(1) (i.e., that the earner had been earning continuously
for 12 months)”.
21. But sub-cl.4(1) does not require an earner to have been earning
continuously for 12 months. That is not what the sub-clause says.
While the term
‘earning continuously’ is used in sub-cl. 4(2)(a), it is not found
in sub-cl. 4(1). Further, the Insurer’s
submission is not consistent with
sub-cl. 4(4), which states that:
“For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if he
or she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on the
day of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6
months to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the
basis on which the earnings were being provided as at that day”.
22. In our view, critical to the resolution of the dispute is the work done
in sub-cl. 4(1) by the term ‘
as an earner
23. It is arguable that the term ‘
as an earner
qualification on the earnings to be taken into account and not a qualification
of the period fixed by sub-cl. 4(1). This
argument proceeds on the basis that,
as there is no definition of ‘earnings’ in the MAI Act, if the
qualification on
earnings ‘as an earner’ were not included in
sub-cl. 4(1) the gross earnings for the purpose of sub-cl. 4(1) might include
earnings from both employment or self-employment and from other sources such as
earnings from investments. In this way, it may be
argued, the term ‘as an
earner’ in sub-cl. 4(1) has work to do as a qualification or limitation on
the type of earnings
that can be included in the calculation required by the
24. While persuasive, this argument does not appear to take into
consideration Sch.1 cl.3, which is in the following terms:
Meaning of “loss of
(1) Loss of earnings
means a loss incurred or likely to be
incurred in a person’s income from personal exertion.
(2) A person’s
income from personal
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of
earnings, salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
allowances and retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the
capacity of employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either
alone or in partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
(3) A person’s
income from personal
does not include—
(a) interest, unless the person’s principal business
consists of the lending of money, or unless the interest is received
of a debt due to the person for goods supplied or services rendered by the
person in the course of the person’s
business, or
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick or other leave
entitlement.”
25. Although cl. 3 defines the term ‘loss of earnings’, as
opposed to ‘earnings’, so as to construe Division
3.3 and Schedule 1
in a cohesive way, it is appropriate to proceed on the basis that, as
‘loss of earnings’ means ‘a
loss incurred or likely to be
incurred in a person’s income from personal exertion’,
‘earnings’ should be
taken to mean ‘a person’s income
from personal exertion’. ‘A person’s income from personal
is income of the type referred to in Sch 1 sub-cl. 3(2) and
excludes income of the type referred to in Sch 1 sub-cl. 3(3). In our
approach results in a construction of ‘earnings’ that is cohesive
and consistent with the language and purpose
of the statute.
26. That being the case, the term ‘earnings’ used in sub-cl. 4(1)
does not require qualification and the term ‘as
an earner’ must be
included in the provision for a different purpose.
27. We have concluded that the work done by the term ‘as an
earner’ in sub-cl. 4(1) is to define the period over which
earnings received by an earner, during the 12 months immediately before the day
on which the accident occurred, are to
be averaged by reference to the number of
weeks the earner was actually earning income from personal exertion during that
28. In our view, the words ‘during the 12 months immediately before the
day on which the motor accident occurred’ in sub-cl.
4(1) establish the
period during which gross earnings received by an earner are to be quantified,
as opposed to defining the period
over which the weekly average of the gross
earnings received by an earner is to be calculated.
29. In summary, we have concluded that, for the purposes of sub-cl.4(1), PAWE
is calculated by:
(a) determining the earner’s gross earnings received during the 12
months immediately before the day on which the motor accident
(b) determining the number of weeks during the 12 months immediately before
the day on which the motor accident occurred that the
earner was earning as an
earner, and
(c) averaging the sum arrived at in answer to (a) by the number of weeks
arrived at in answer to (b).
30. During the 12 months immediately before the day on which the accident
occurred the Claimant received earnings as an earner from
23 October 2019
– 10 May 2020, a period of 29 weeks. From 11 May 2020 – 23 October
2020 he was not receiving earnings
as an earner as he was unemployed. His gross
earnings were $24,062. Accordingly, his PAWE were $24,062/29 = $829.72.
31. Having regard to the other provisions in cl. 4, and Schedule 1 more
broadly, the construction of sub-cl. 4(1) that we prefer is
compatible with both
when construed as a whole.
32. We consider that the construction of sub-cl. 4(1) that we prefer is
consistent with the overall scheme of Part 3 Division 3.3
and the objects of the
MAI Act, which include providing early and ongoing financial support for people
injured in motor accidents.
33. This construction does not offend the other objects of the MAI Act found
in s 1.3. As recorded earlier in these reasons, there
are other sub-clauses in
cl. 4 that would result in the same, or similar, outcomes.
34. Finally, we note that our decision results in an outcome that is
consistent with the decision under review and a number of other
merit review
decisions that address the construction of Sch 1 cl. 4(1) and the basis upon
which PAWE is to be determined in accordance
with that provision. In this
regard, see for example
ACT v AAI Ltd t/as GIO
[2018] NSWSIRADRS 72
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 220
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 260
AAD v AAI Ltd t/as AAMI
[2021] NSWPICMR 2.
35. In light of the conclusions we have reached in relation to the
construction of sub-cl. 4(1) we find that the merit decision should
36. The Claimant’s legal representatives seek the maximum regulated
costs in connection with this application. Sch 1 cl. 1(3)
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation 2017
allows for the payment of costs for legal services
provided in connection with a review of any merit review decision by a review
panel. We find that the Claimant’s reasonable and necessary legal costs in
connection with the review are $1,660 plus GST.
Brett Williams Terence O’Riain
Reviewer Merit Reviewer
Personal Injury
Minority Reasons
1. I have read the majority decision of merit reviewers Williams and
O’Riain and disagree with that decision for the reasons
set out below.
2. This Panel Review concerns the claimant’s entitlement to weekly
benefits for the first 78 weeks after the motor accident.
3. Sections 3.6 and 3.7 of the MAI Act make provision for weekly payments of
statutory benefits during the first 78 weeks to an earner
who is injured as a
result of a motor
accident and suffers a total or partial loss
of earnings as a result of the injury.
during the first 78 weeks under sections 3.6 and 3.7 are based on the
difference between the person's pre-accident
weekly earnings
(PAWE) and the person's post-accident
earning capacity (if any). A percentage reduction is then applied,
which varies depending on
whether payments fall under section 3.6 or 3.7.
4. In order to calculate the amount of weekly benefits to be paid under
section 3.6 or 3.7 Mr Shahmiri’s PAWE must first be
calculated.
5. Mr Shahmiri was involved in a motor accident on 24 October 2020. The
insurer calculated pre-accident weekly earnings in the sum
of $462.73 per week
by taking the gross earnings of the claimant over the 12 month period preceding
the date of the accident and
dividing that figure by 52 weeks. This calculation
does not take into account that Mr Shahmiri’s gross earnings were received
during the first 29 weeks of the 52 week period. For the remainder of the 52
weeks Mr Shahmiri did not receive any earnings as an
earner because of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
6. The issue for consideration is whether Schedule 1, clause 4(1) of the Act
requires the earnings of an injured person received during
the relevant 12 month
period to be averaged over the whole of that 12 month period, or whether any
period in which no earnings were
received should be excluded such that the
average is taken over only the number of weeks in which earnings as an earner
were received
(in Mr Shahmiri’s case, 29 weeks).
7. A fundamental principle of statutory interpretation is that the Act is to
be construed as a whole. As the High Court said in
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
“The primary object of statutory construction is to construe the
relevant provision so that it is consistent with the language
and purpose of all
the provisions of the statute[45]. The meaning of the provision must be
determined "by reference to the language
of the instrument viewed as a
whole"[46]. In Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos [47], Dixon CJ
pointed out that "the context,
the general purpose and policy of a provision and
its consistency and fairness are surer guides to its meaning than the logic with
which it is constructed". Thus, the process of construction must always begin
by examining the context of the provision that is
being construed.”
8. In other words, you cannot construe the meaning of a specific provision in
an Act without considering the sections which surround
it, and the structure and
meaning of the Act as a whole. The Act should be construed so as to operate
coherently, consistently, and
harmoniously, as a whole.
9. With the above in mind, the provisions set out and discussed below are
relevant and informative in so far as clause 4(1) is concerned.
Meaning of “earner”
10. There is no dispute that the claimant is an earner under clause 2(a).
Clause 2(a) defines “earner” as:
2 Meaning of ‘earner’
A person who is injured as a result of a motor
accident is an
"earner" if the person is at least 15 years of
age and who--
employed or self-employed
(whether or not full-time)--
(i) at any time during the 8 weeks immediately preceding the motor
accident, or
(ii) during a period or periods equal to at least 13 weeks during the year
immediately preceding the motor
accident, or
(iii) during a period or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the 2
years immediately preceding the motor
and, at the date of the
had not retired permanently from all
employment...
(emphasis added)”
11. Clearly, clause 2(a) provides that a person is still considered an
“earner” for the purpose of weekly benefits and
the Act generally,
even if they did not generate income for the whole of the relevant 12 month
period. The threshold is a minimum
of 13 weeks to be an “earner” for
the purpose of weekly benefits.
12. It is also implicit in the inclusion of the words “and, at the date
of the motor accident, had not retired permanently from
all employment”
that a person may not be receiving income as at the date of the accident (and
income may have ceased up to
39 weeks prior, having regard to the 13 week
threshold) but is still an “earner” on the date of the accident and
material times for the purpose of the Act.
13. This is reinforced in sections 3.6 and 3.7 which both state the
“Note : Only a person who
was an earner when injured
is entitled
to statutory benefits under this section--see Schedule 1.”
emphasis added
14. As noted, under clause 2(a) a person does not need to be in receipt of
earnings from employment or self-employment at the time
of the accident to meet
the definition of “earner”. However, they “must be an earner
when injured to be entitled
to statutory benefits”. It follows from this
that once a person meets the definition of “earner” under clause
they are then an “earner” at all material times under the Act,
including for each and every week of the relevant 12 month
period under clause
4(1), including any period within the 12 months where there were no earnings.
15. To say an injured person is an “earner” only at those times
when they actually receive earnings from employment or
self-employment when they
have not retired permanently from all employment is inconsistent with the
definition of “earner”
in clause 2(a) and the wording of sections
3.6 and 3.7. A person’s status as an “earner” under the Act is
not intermittent
such that it stops when earnings cease and starts when earnings
begin again and so on. A person’s status as an “earner”
the Act clearly does not wax and wane as and when income is received in the
relevant period. Once an injured person meets the
definition of
“earner” under the Act their status as an “earner” is
fixed in every practical sense and for
all material times for the purpose of the
16. The fixed status of “earner” is apparent when one considers
the use of the word “earner” in sections 3.6
and 3.7. If an
“earner” is only an “earner” at a point in time when
they are actually in receipt of earnings
a literal reading of sections 3.6 and
3.7, which require Mr Shahmiri to be an earner on the date of the accident,
would result in
Mr Shahmiri, who was not working on the date of the accident,
having no entitlement to weekly benefits under section 3.6 or 3.7
17. Accordingly, once Mr Shahmiri establishes he is an earner under clause
2(a) he continues to be an “earner” at all
material times during the
pre-accident period for the purpose of clause 4(1), even if there are periods
within the pre-accident period
when he did not earn. To say otherwise would
require that “earner” be given two different meanings:
(a) one for the purpose of clause 4(1) that is, a definition that says a
person is only an “earner” at the times or during
the periods they
are actually in receipt of earnings from employment or self-employment; and
(b) another for the purpose of sections 3.6 and 3.7 that is, that a person is
an earner on the date of the accident, even if they
are not in receipt of
earnings from employment or self-employment as at that date, provided they have
not retired permanently.
18. The definition required to give the intended effect to sections 3.6 and
3.7 is the definition that exists in the Act at clause
2(a) and is the only
definition, which must be applied uniformly to all provisions of the Act.
19. To say, for the purpose of sections 3.6 and 3.7, that Mr Shahmiri is an
“earner” as at the date of the accident despite
his unemployment
status at that time but is not an “earner” at any time he was
unemployed for the purpose of clause 4(1)
of the Act is, in my view, a false
premise which is not maintainable under the Act.
Clause 4(1) – “earnings as an earner during the 12
20. Schedule 1, Clause 4(1) of the Act provides that the meaning of
“pre-accident weekly earnings” is:
4 Meaning of "pre-accident weekly earnings"--general
Pre-accident weekly earnings
" , in relation to an earner who
is injured as a result of a motor
accident, means the weekly average of the gross earnings received
the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor
accident occurred, unless subclause (2) applies.”
(emphasis added)
21. It follows from the reasoning above in relation to the definition of
“earner” that the words in clause 4(1) “earnings
earner” do not prescribe that the period over which the weekly average is
to be calculated is the total sum of the number
of weeks in which the earner
actually earned. As discussed above, to do so would be inconsistent with the
definition of “earner”
in clause 2(a) and the wording and intention
of sections 3.6 and 3.7.
22. The qualification in clause 4(1) that it be the average of earnings
“as an earner” can only be a qualification on
the nature of earnings
to be taken into account and not a qualification in relation to the period fixed
by clause 4(1). A person
is an “earner” under clause 2(a) by reason
of “employment or self-employment”. Accordingly, their
as an earner
” for the purpose of clause 4(1) are
their earnings from “employment or self-employment” (clause 2(a))
and not from
any other source such as investments.
23. There is no definition of “earnings” in the Act. Accordingly,
if the qualification on earnings “as an earner”
were not made in
clause 4(1) the gross earnings for the purpose of clause 4(1) might include
earnings from both employment or self-employment
and from other sources such as
earnings from investments. In this sense the wording “as an earner”
in clause 4(1) has
work to do as a qualification or limitation on the type of
earnings that can be included in the calculation required by the clause.
24. Whilst it is tempting to take the definition of “loss of
earnings” in schedule 1 as also a definition of “earnings”
position remains that if clause 4(1) is given the effect desired by Mr Shahmiri
the definition of “earner” for the
purpose of clause 4(1) would not
be reconcilable with the use of the term “earner” in other
provisions of the Act.
25. In any event, “loss of earnings” and “earnings”
are not the same. The term “loss of earnings”
does not appear in
clause 4(1) which does not concern actual or anticipated loss or any loss at
all, but the opposite. Clause 4(1)
concerns positive earnings in the relevant
period preceding the accident. “Loss of earnings” on the other hand
a relevant term once the injured person has met the definition of earner
and has had their PAWE calculated under clause 4. It then
becomes necessary to
look at actual loss in the post-accident period for the purpose of making
payments under section 3.6 or 3.7
of the Act. If, for example, a person is an
“earner” and has had their PAWE calculated at say $500 but they are
to continue to earn $500 in any week after the accident (or have been paid
sick leave in this sum) then they have not suffered a
earnings” (sick leave being excluded in the definition of loss of
earnings). As such, even though they have
been found to be an
“earner” and had their PAWE calculated, weekly benefits would not be
payable in any such week.
26. Clearly, “earnings as an earner” means earnings from
employment or self-employment. The definition of “loss
of earnings”
particularises the types of payments that are included in or excluded from
actual post-accident loss of earnings
for the purpose of calculating the extent
to which weekly benefits become payable under sections 3.6 and 3.7 which is
distinct from
the calculation to be carried out under clause 4(1).
27. As stated by Lord Mersey in
Thompson v Goold & Co
409, 420 it is “a strong thing and generally a wrong thing” to imply
into an Act of Parliament words which are
not there. The Act does not suggest in
any way that the definition of “loss of earnings” is to be taken as
a definition
of “earnings”. Nor is “loss of earnings”
included in or relevant to clause 4(1).
28. If “earnings” were given the same definition as “loss
of earnings” then for the purpose of clause 4(1)
all annual leave, sick
leave or any other leave entitlements (which are excluded from the definition of
“loss of earnings)
paid in the relevant pre-accident period would need to
be deducted from a claimant’s gross earnings before calculating their
PAWE, which is clearly not what is required of clause 4(1). This reinforces that
“earnings” and “loss of earnings”
are not the same and
it cannot be implied into the act that the definition of “loss of
earnings” is also to be taken
as the definition of “earnings”.
That would be a “strong thing” and a “wrong thing” to
29. If the words “earnings as an earner” were considered to
somehow also fix the period for calculation of the weekly
average (in addition
to limiting the type of earnings) such that the period over which the weekly
average is calculated is limited
to the total number of weeks in which earnings
were actually received it would result in overcompensation in many
circumstances.
Take for example the seasonal worker who ordinarily works only 13
weeks per year (meeting the threshold to be an earner under clause
2(a)) during
fruit picking season or at a ski resort in ski season. If that worker were
injured and their PAWE calculated as the
average earnings over the 13 week
earning period only, the weekly benefits payable would amount to a windfall.
30. Similarly a casual worker who works in after school day care only during
school terms and therefore does not receive earnings
during school vacation
periods would also be overcompensated if the school vacation weeks were excluded
from the calculation of their
31. However, neither the seasonal worker nor the casual school term only
worker has retired permanently from all employment. Accordingly,
their status as
an “earner” continues under clause 4(1):
(a) for the seasonal worker: during any period in between seasons that falls
within the 52 week pre-accident period, and
(b) for the school term only worker, during any school vacation periods
caught by the 52 week pre-accident period.
32. The words “earnings as an earner” in clause 4(1) limit the
earnings that can be taken into account to earnings obtained
“employment or self-employment” only. The period over which the
average of those earnings is then taken is “during
the 12 months”.
By reason of the definition of “earner” discussed above, Mr Shahmiri
is considered an earner for
each and every day of this 12 month period, even if
he did not obtain earnings from employment or self-employment during some of
this period. It follows that the words “during the 12 months” fixes
the period for the purpose of calculating the average
at 52 weeks.
33. Words in a statute are to be given their ordinary meaning. The ordinary
meaning of “during” is “throughout the
duration” of the
specified period, which in this case is the 12 month period preceding the date
of the accident. Mr Shahmiri’s
PAWE is therefore his total gross earnings
from employment or self-employment received throughout the duration of the 12
month pre-accident
period, divided by 52 weeks.
34. In reaching the above conclusion regard has also been had to the entirety
of clause 4. Clause 4(1) is one of a number of subclauses
dealing with
calculation of the PAWE in different circumstances. An injured person who is an
earner falls under subclause (1) unless
they fall under one of subclause (2)(a)
35. Clause 4(2)(a) accommodates injured persons who first began to earn as an
earner less than 12 months prior to the accident. However,
whilst the 12 month
period is adjusted to the period from when the earner first began to earn
continuously, as with Clause 4(1) it
continues up to the day before the
accident. For the same reasons in relation to clause 4(1) discussed above, this
subclause also
does not provide for any further adjustment, for example to
accommodate periods of interruption (when there were no earnings, regardless
the reason).
36. Subclause (2)(a1) accommodates injured persons who worked during the
first year of the two year pre-accident period but did not
obtain any earnings
at any time during the second year of the pre-accident period. Even if they did
not earn each week for the whole
of the first year (they only need to have
earned for at least 26 weeks) and did not earn over consecutive weeks, their
PAWE is nonetheless
calculated based on “average weekly gross earnings
received ... during the first year...”. In other words, like the second
year of the two year pre-accident period under Clause 4(1), any PAWE calculated
under (2)(a1) is the gross earnings in the first
year of the two year
pre-accident period, divided by 52 weeks.
37. Clause 4(2)(b) allows the period over which the average is calculated to
commence from the date of the change of circumstances,
until the accident. Other
than an adjustment to the beginning of the relevant period, Subclause (2)(b)
also does not allow for any
other adjustment to the relevant period. The average
must still be taken over the period up to the date of the accident and therefore
is inclusive of any periods, within this period, where there was an interruption
to earnings.
38. In short, regardless of whether an injured person’s PAWE is
assessed under Clause 4(1) or one of the subclauses under Clause
4(2) there is
no provision for any adjustment to be made to the period specified under the
applicable subclause to accommodate interruption
to employment or earnings
during the relevant period, regardless of the reason.
39. There may be many circumstances in which an earner’s pre-accident
earnings have been interrupted during the relevant period.
It may be because, as
is the case for
Mr Shahmiri, Covid-19 impacted their ability to earn or it
may be because other circumstances required them to take leave of absence
without pay (for example a pre-accident illness or injury, maternity leave or a
need to care for an injured or sick family member).
It may be because they were
made redundant or their employer went out of business and several weeks or
months passed before they
were able to secure a new job.
40. Whilst the COVID pandemic is an entirely new circumstance (and no doubt
unpredicted at the time the Act came into force), which
has interrupted the
earnings of many earners there is no flexibility in Clause 4(1) to vary the
calculation of an injured person’s
PAWE to accommodate an interruption or
variation in earnings for any reason, including COVID-19, other than those
prescribed in subclause
(2) (noting subclause (2) adjusts the relevant
pre-accident period in certain circumstances but also does not then allow for
adjustment, if there is an interruption to earnings during the adjusted
41. Unfortunately, under the current regime Mr Shahmiri’s COVID-19
circumstances are not distinguishable from other circumstances
such as the
seasonal worker who does not work a full year or the after school care casual
worker who only works during school terms
and does not receive any income in
school vacation periods.
42. As noted in paragraph 27 above it is “a strong thing and generally
a wrong thing” to imply into an Act of Parliament
words which are not
there. Until and unless the Act is amended to accommodate the specific
circumstances of COVID-19 clause 4(1)
has uniform application to any
circumstance of an interruption in earnings, whatever the reason for the
interruption.
Other considerations
Workers Compensation Act
(the WC Act)
contains similar provisions regarding calculation of an injured
worker’s pre-injury average weekly earnings (PIAWE). The
Compensation Amendment (COVID-19 Weekly Payment Compensation) Regulation 2020
specifically amended the WC Act to factor in COVID-19 circumstances into
calculation of a worker’s PIAWE. The amendments to
the WC Act mean:
(a) in calculating PIAWE, an adjustment may be made to the relevant earning
period if a worker has had a financially material reduction
in earnings due to
the pandemic, and
(b) only earnings for work performed may be included in the calculation of
44. Whilst there are similarities between parts of the WC Act
parts of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act), they are
distinctly different schemes, having different purposes. Unlike the WC Act,
Parliament has not taken steps
to amend the MAI Act
to accommodate the
impact Covid-19 may have on an injured person’s PAWE.
45. Accordingly, the relevant provisions in Schedule 1 continue to apply.
Clause 4(1) is clear in its terms that there is to be a
calculation of the
“weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an
during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor
accident occurred”. Earnings “as an earner” are the earnings
from employment or self-employment, as distinct from earnings obtained
in some other capacity, and (for the purpose of PAWE) may
include annual leave,
sick leave or other leave entitlements that were paid in the pre-accident
period. The weekly average is the
average of all earnings from employment or
self-employment throughout the duration of the relevant 12 month period and is
calculated on the basis of the gross earnings received throughout the
12 month period divided by 52 weeks.
46. It is also informative to consider the position in Victoria.
Section 4(1)
Transport Accident Act 1986
is in the same terms as clause
4(1) of the NSW Act and provides:
“In this Act, pre-accident weekly earnings, in relation to an earner
(other than a self-employed person) who is injured as a
result of a transport
accident, means the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner
as an earner during the 12
months immediately before the [day of the accident],
unless subsection (2) applies.”
47. Section 4(1) was inserted into the
Transport Accident
in 2004 and therefore precedes the NSW Act, which came into force in
48. The Victorian equivalent to clause 4(1) in the NSW Act was considered in
the matter of
Jansz v Transport Accident Commission (General)
[2010] VCAT
(21 June 2010) (
). In that matter, Ms Jansz had taken eight
weeks leave without pay during the relevant 12 month period preceding the
accident for
her wedding and an extended honeymoon. She received no income
during this eight week period whereas in any other given year she would
worked those eight weeks and received an income. However, the Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal affirmed the Transport
Accident Commission’s
decision that Ms Jansz’ PAWE is the weekly average of her earnings over
the 12 months/52 weeks
before the accident, inclusive of the eight weeks when
she did not receive any income.
49. Whilst the Review Panel is not bound by a decision of the Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal, this decision has persuasive
value particularly in
circumstances where the relevant provisions are in identical terms and the
Victorian provision has been in
force for some time prior to the NSW provision.
50. It is also relevant to note that once the first 78 weeks after the
accident expires, any entitlement to ongoing weekly benefits
is assessed under
clause 3.8. To the extent it might be considered that clause 4(1) could produce
an inequity for a person such as
Mr Shahmiri this is rectified for any person
who continues to be entitled to weekly benefits after the first 78 weeks.
Section 3.8
of the Act deals with weekly benefits after the first 78 weeks. It
calculates weekly benefits based on the “...difference between
person's pre-accident
earning capacity [rather than PAWE] and the person's post-accident
earning capacity (if any)...”.
Accordingly, an earner’s
PAWE no longer forms the basis of assessing weekly benefits. In this case, for
the purpose of section
Mr Shahmiri would only need to demonstrate he
had the capacity to earn on a full-time basis before the accident, even though
not earn every week due to COVID-19.
51. In the circumstance of this claimant the inclusion of weeks of no income
due to COVID-19 in the calculation of his PAWE under
clause 4(1) may seem
inequitable. On the other hand, it may not be. Mr Shahmiri was not working at
the time of the accident due to
COVID-19. The motor accident injuries scheme is
designed to compensate in circumstances where an injured party would not have
a loss but for the accident. In Mr Shahmiri’s circumstances it is
quite possible that he would have continued to be out of
work due to the
pandemic for some or all of the first and second entitlement periods under the
Act, even if he had not been injured
in a motor accident.
52. Section 33 of the
Interpretation Act (NSW) 1987
the Review Panel to prefer an interpretation of statutes which would promote
rather than retire to the purpose of the relevant
statute. As observed in
[at 19] statutes rarely have one simple purpose. Their purposes are
often complex and to understand the entirety of the purpose one
must look at the
entirety of the text. A compensation act such as the MAI Act has a general
objective of compensation. However, it
does not seek to compensate to the
highest level of theoretical perfection every loss that has been suffered at
every point. Similarly,
taxing statutes seek to raise tax. They do not at every
point seek to raise the maximum amount of tax from the taxpayer at every
53. Compensation statutes such as the MAI Act
include compromises
which give less than full compensation. As noted in the Motor Accident Injuries
Bill second reading speech on
9 March 2017 “the new defined benefits
scheme has been introduced with a
in loss of weekly earnings
and time frames where compensation is
scaled back
and ceases”
emphasis added
). Accordingly, the Act is not designed to compensate a
claimant to perfection and it is certainly not designed to over-compensate.
the Act were interpreted so as to compensate Mr Shahmiri in the way he desires
it may very well overcompensate if, for example
he would have continued to be
without work due to COVID-19 and therefore suffered a loss, even if the accident
had not occurred.
It would most certainly overcompensate the case of the
seasonal worker or casual employee working in school holiday periods only.
54. It is not possible to draw a distinction between COVID-19 affected
earners and seasonal or casual earners in the Act, as currently
worded even
though one might be tempted to have sympathy for Mr Shahmiri’s position.
To the extent it might be considered unfair
or inequitable to not take into
account those weeks where a person such as Mr Shahmiri did not work because of
COVID-19 rather than
circumstances of their own choosing in the calculation of
his PAWE the Act would need to be amended to specifically accommodate such
circumstances, as has been done with the WC Act.
55. Whilst there are previous single merit review decisions which interpret
clause 4(1) in the way desired by Mr Shahmiri, this Review
Panel is not bound by
those decisions and I consider those decisions to be wrongly decided.
56. My conclusion, on the basis of the above reasoning is that pursuant to
clause 4(1)
Mr Shahmiri’s PAWE is his gross earnings as an earner in
the 12 month period preceding the accident divided by 52 weeks. Accordingly,
am of the view that the merit review decision of 26 February 2021 should be set
aside and the insurer’s internal review decision
dated 17 December 2020
that Mr Shahmiri’s PAWE is $462.73 be reinstated.
Merit Reviewer
Personal Injury Commission
Schedule 1 cl. 2(a) MAI
Division 3.3 MAI Act,
specifically ss 3.6 & 3.7.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter