URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/847.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Sapkota [2025] NSWPICMP 847; (3 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Sapkota [2025] NSWPICMP 847
Prabin Sapkota
AAI Limited t/as GIO
REVIEW PANEL
Elizabeth Medland
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Ronald Gill
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Gerald Chew
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
single medical assessment; treatment and care dispute;
section 3.24(2)
request for eight sessions of psychological counselling; two prior motor vehicle
accidents; pre-existing psychological
injury; consideration of whether accident
has given rise to a psychological injury and whether treatment causally related;
documentary
evidence mentions work related issues;
Panel found those work related issues to be documented in error; motor accident
gave rise to a psychological injury
and eight sessions of psychological
counselling found to be reasonable and necessary.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
The Review Panel:
the certificate of Medical Assessor Christopher Canaris dated 19 January 2024.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Prabin Sapkota (the claimant) is a 51-year-old man who alleges injury from a
motor accident that occurred on 17 April 2020.
claim was lodged upon AAI Limited t/as GIO (the insurer) who is the compulsory
third party insurer of the vehicle considered at
fault. The insurer has a
liability to pay statutory benefits and/or damages under the
Motor Accident
Injuries Act
subject issue in dispute is whether certain treatment is causally related to the
motor accident and reasonable and necessary.
This is a medical dispute for the
purposes of the MAI Act.
is a review of a medical assessment pursuant to s 7.26 of the MAI Act. The
medical assessment the subject of this review was
conducted by Medical Assessor
Christopher Canaris. In a certificate dated 19 January 2024, the Medical
Assessor certified that “eight
sessions of psychological
counselling” relates to the injury caused by the motor accident and is
reasonable and necessary in
the circumstances.
application for referral of a medical assessment to a Review Panel (the Panel)
was made by the insurer. In a determination dated
17 May 2024, the
President’s delegate referred the medical assessment to the Panel as they
were satisfied that there was reasonable
cause to suspect that the medical
assessment was incorrect in a material respect having regard to the particulars
set out in the
application.
to s 7.26(5A) of the MAI Act and Schedule 1, cl 14F(2) of the
Injury Commission Act
(the PIC Act), the Panel consists of
two Medical Assessors and a Member of the Motor Accidents Division of the
Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
5 of the PIC Act enables the Commission to make rules with respect to the
practice and procedure before the Commission including
proceedings before a
panel reviewing a decision of a Merit Reviewer or a Medical
Injury Commission Rules 2021
(PIC Rules) are made pursuant to Part 5 of
the PIC Act. A Review Panel determines how it conducts and determines the
proceedings
and may determine the proceedings solely based on the written
application.
review is by way of new assessment of all matters with which the medical
assessment is concerned.
Panel met via videoconference on 13 March 2025 and it was determined that a
re-examination of the claimant was necessary. This
was arranged to occur with
both Medical Assessors via Microsoft Teams on 5 June 2025. The examination
proceeded as scheduled.
Panel reconvened via videoconference on 10 July 2025 to discuss the clinical
examination findings and material provided by the
parties. At that conference
it was decided that a further examination of the claimant was necessary to
ensure that all relevant
matters were adequately considered. A further
examination was arranged to occur between the claimant and all three Panel
on 4 September 2025.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
to Part 3 of the MAI Act the insurer is liable for the payment of statutory
benefits, including treatment and care benefits
as set out under Division 3.4.
3.24(2) of the MAI Act provides that:
“No statutory benefits
are payable for the cost of treatment and care to the extent that the treatment
and care concerned was
not reasonable and necessary in the circumstances or did
not relate to the injury resulting from the motor accident concerned.”
test of whether the subject treatment and care is reasonable
necessary is generally considered a stricter test than the corresponding test in
the New South Wales workers compensation benefits
scheme that requires a worker
to establish that the treatment is “reasonably
necessary”.
cases relating to the workers compensation scheme, whilst not binding, provide
some guidance. In
Diab v NRMA Ltd
) at [88] the following factors were found to be relevant to, but
not determinative of the criteria of reasonableness in the workers
compensation
(a) the appropriateness of the treatment in dispute;
(b) the availability of alternative treatment;
(c) the cost effectiveness of the treatment;
(d) the actual or potential effectiveness of the treatment, and
(e) the acceptance by medical experts of the appropriateness of the treatment.
words “did not relate to the injury resulting from the motor
accident” contained in s 7.26 of the MAI Act require
the Panel to
determine the issue of causation of the subject injury before determining
whether the treatment relates to that injury.
Panel has considered the case of
AAI Limited t/as AAMI v Phillips
), when determining the issue of whether the
treatment is related to the injury caused by the motor accident. The case of
involved a claimant involved in three separate motor accidents and
the Court, dealing with the issue of causation for surgical treatment
[28] and [29]:
“The requirements in s 58(1)(b) is to determine
whether the treatment relates to the injury caused by the accident. If the
that existed at the time of the Panel’s assessment was not the
injury caused by the accident (the mild soft tissue injuries
superimposed on the
chronic degenerative changes) but, rather, simply the continuation of those
pre-existing degenerative changes,
then the treatment cannot relate to
‘the injury caused by the motor accident’.
I accept the plaintiff’s submission that for any of the three motor
accidents to have been causative of the need for the suggested
surgery, the
accident would have to have made at least a material contribution to the need
for surgery. Further, the Panel should
have considered whether the proposed
surgery would not have arisen but for the occurrence of one or more of the
accidents being considered.”
of injury is addressed from cl 6.5 of the Guidelines. Whilst the clauses are set
out in respect of permanent impairment,
Clauses 6.5 and 6.6
“6.6 Causation is defined in the Glossary at page 316
of the AMA4 Guides as follows:
Causation means that a physical, chemical or biologic factor contributed to
the occurrence of a medical condition. To decide that
a factor alleged to have
caused or contributed to the occurrence or worsening of a medical condition has,
in fact, done so, it is
necessary to verify both of the following:
1. The alleged factor could have caused or contributed to worsening of the
impairment, which is a medical determination.
2. The alleged factor did cause or contribute to worsening of the impairment,
which is a non-medical determination.
This, therefore, involves a medical decision and a non-medical informed
6.7 There is no simple common test of causation that is applicable to all
cases, but the accepted approach involves determining whether
the injury (and
the associated impairment) was caused or materially contributed to by the motor
accident. The motor accident does
not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a
contributing cause, which is more than negligible. Considering the question
this injury (or impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?' may
be useful in some cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be
inapplicable in circumstances where there are multiple contributing
determining the issue of causation, the Panel is to also have regard to s 5D of
Civil Liability Act 2002
“5D General
(1) A determination that negligence caused particular harm comprises the
following elements—
(a) that the negligence was a necessary condition of the occurrence of the
factual causation
(b) that it is appropriate for the scope of the negligent person’s
liability to extend to the harm so caused (
(2) In determining in an exceptional case, in accordance with established
principles, whether negligence that cannot be established
as a necessary
condition of the occurrence of harm should be accepted as establishing factual
causation, the court is to consider
(amongst other relevant things) whether or
not and why responsibility for the harm should be imposed on the negligent
(3) If it is relevant to the determination of factual causation to determine
what the person who suffered harm would have done if
the negligent person had
not been negligent—
(a) the matter is to be determined subjectively in the light of all relevant
circumstances, subject to paragraph (b), and
(b) any statement made by the person after suffering the harm about what he
or she would have done is inadmissible except to the extent
(if any) that the
statement is against his or her interest.
(4) For the purpose of determining the scope of liability, the court is to
consider (amongst other relevant things) whether or not
and why responsibility
for the harm should be imposed on the negligent party.”
ASSESSMENT UNDER REVIEW
examination on 19 January 2024, Medical Assessor Canaris, in a certificate and
reasons dated 19 January 2024, diagnosed
the claimant as suffering a somatic
symptom disorder with predominant pain. He found:
diagnosis does not imply that his pain is without pathophysiological basis but
rather reflects the extent to which it
dominates his life. His somatic symptom
disorder is associated with anxiety, low mood, irritability, loss of motivation,
concentration, and social withdrawal which is consistent with a
diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder.”
found that both conditions were substantially caused by the subject motor
accident, while accepting that at various times other
factors have contributed
to the depression such as “vilification he experienced in his
workplace.” A history of depression
between 2002 and 2009 was noted.
Medical Assessor found that the eight sessions of psychological counselling were
related to the injury caused by the accident
and were reasonable and necessary.
SUBMISSIONS
only submissions provided to the Panel are those relied upon by the insurer.
The claimant has not lodged a reply to the insurer’s
application for
review and has also not lodged any documents in compliance with Panel directions
that the parties lodge a bundle
of documents relied upon.
insurer’s review application submissions are undated. The insurer
submits that the Medical Assessor confused the histories
of two separate motor
accidents, and he relates the subject treatment in dispute to the unrelated
motor accident of 5 May 2018 which
is the subject of a claim with Allianz
Australia Insurance Limited.
insurer submits:
“by reason of the assessor relying upon the
incorrect accident and factual circumstances it is the insurer’s
the assessor has misdirected himself. By relying on an inaccurate and
incorrect history of the accident and the claimant’s
medical history, this
renders his conclusions unsound.”
submissions dated 26 August 2022, in reply to the original application, the
insurer refers to an Allied Health Recovery Request
(AHRR) No. 1 for counselling
dated 27 October 2020,
Mr Prasad who completed same refers to the requested
services relate to the claimant being exposed to threats of violence and racial
vilification from a customer within the workplace.
is further noted that an AHHR no. 2 completed by Mr Prasad, which contains the
requested treatment that is the subject of this
dispute, Mr Prasad repeats the
rationale for the treatment request in exact terms as the previous request.
insurer notes that the claimant’s general practitioner (GP) does not
diagnose the claimant as suffering a psychiatric injury
and made no
recommendation for the involvement of a psychologist or counsellor.
DOCUMENTATION
directions dated 5 February 2025, the Panel required the parties to each lodge a
single indexed and paginated bundle of all documents
relied upon. The claimant
did not lodge a bundle. In addition, no reply was lodged in response to the
insurer’s application
for review.
Panel has been informed and verily believe that all documents relied upon by the
claimant in the original application has been
included in the insurer’s
bundle lodged in accordance with Panel’s directions.
making its determination the Panel has considered all documents included in the
insurer’s bundle lodged on 21 February 2025
consisting of 161 pages
– “2025.01.21 – Insurer’s Bundle of documents for review
of Assessor Canaris”.
not every document has been referenced within these reasons, the certificate and
reasons have been prepared in the context
of all documentation having been
considered.
Application for personal injury benefits
this claim form completed by the claimant on 24 April 2020, injuries are
described as: neck pain, back pain, lower back pain, fear
of driving, anxiety,
flash back and disturbed sleeping.
claimant ticks the “no” box to the question of whether he was
suffering from an illness or injury affecting the same
or similar part of his
body at the time of the accident.
Claimant’s statement
dated 17 May 2021
claimant gives a history of a workplace accident occurring on 5 May 2002. He
suffered a compound fracture to his right femur
after being in a tow truck with
failing brakes. The truck fell into an elevator pit and was stuck for a number
statement suggests that it took time for him to recover from that accident but
by around 2014 he had largely returned to normal
functioning and had no ongoing
significant problems.
2014 he was working normal duties for Henry Schein Dental Practice as a team
states that he was largely back to normal physically when he had a further motor
vehicle accident on 5 May 2018. He states that
he was stationary at a
roundabout in Wolli Creek when a car speeding behind him collided with the back
of his vehicle. He lists
a number of physical injuries suffered as a result of
that accident including to the back, neck and right knee, together with a
psychological
respect of the subject accident he notes that he was driving in Campbelltown
when a car coming from his right without stopping
collided with the right
driver’s side of his car. He states that he suffered an aggravation to
his back, right knee and neck
injury and an injury to his right heel.
statement sets out that prior to the 2018 motor accident he would regularly go
out to play football, weight lift and go dancing
socially. He no longer does.
He states that prior to the 2018 motor accident he had been taking
antidepressants and seeing a psychologist
on and off for the 5 May 2002
incident. He states that he was however, coping and working full time for Third
Eye Entertainment
Pty Ltd as an operations manager.
states that by the time of the motor accident on 5 May 2018 he had largely
returned to normal. Psychologically, he would prefer
to avoid driving if he
could and was more careful with driving.
Panel has considered the AHHR documents that the insurer has referred to within
its submissions and are summarised above.
Panel notes that the “rationale for services requested” is filled
out as follows: “client was directly exposed
to threats of violence and
racial vilification form a customer at her work place. Since this incident is
suffering from psychological
issues as mentioned earlier. Client is seeking
treatment and is referred by his GP for counselling.”
clinical assessment is detailed as “DASS 21 indicates anxiety” and
pain in the neck, knee and lower back is noted.
It was noted the claimant is
taking Adronix, increased to 8mg and he was reporting feeling down, lacking in
motivation and energy
and had disturbed sleep and poor concentration and
Report of Michael Griffiths, biomechanical engineer
dated 27 November 2023
Griffiths, following analysis of the accident dynamics and photographs of the
vehicles involved concludes that “...there
was no possibility of any
forces being applied to the right knee by way of impact with aspects of the
vehicle interior.”
He also concludes that in respect of the injuries to
the neck, lower back and heel, the available research shows that any possible
forces were well below the threshold for a new injury.
RE-EXAMINATION
below is the clinical examination findings summarised from both examinations
that were conducted.
Prabin Sapkota is a 50-year-old man who resides in Sydney, NSW, with his wife
and their two children. He co-owns and manages a
bar and conference centre with
a business partner, working approximately 25 hours per week. He describes
ongoing financial stressors
connected with the business.
Sapkota has a significant trauma history involving multiple accidents. He
provided the Panel with a history of relevant events.
2002, he sustained a major workplace injury when the brakes on the truck he was
driving failed, causing the vehicle to plunge down
an elevator shaft. He
sustained a right-hand tendon laceration and an injury to his right thigh, both
requiring surgical repair.
He described the event as life-threatening, with
paramedics attending the scene and a 12-day hospital admission following. In the
aftermath, he developed psychological problems consistent with post-traumatic
stress disorder, including nightmares and intrusive
memories. He made two
suicide attempts by overdose, one requiring emergency intervention when he was
found unconscious by a friend.
He received prolonged psychiatric treatment and
was prescribed venlafaxine and reboxetine. He recalls an admission to a
psychiatric
hospital for one week in 2004–2005. By 2009, he had ceased
medication and reported significant improvement, with only occasional
and no ongoing physical pain. He gradually resumed socialisation and described
himself as largely recovered by 2014.
5 May 2018, he was involved in a motor vehicle accident when his car was
rear-ended. The impact caused him to strike his right
knee, and the car was
badly damaged. Although able to exit the vehicle independently, his pain
worsened overnight, and he sought
GP care within days. He was referred to a
specialist, recommenced counselling with his former therapist, and was
prescribed reboxetine
by his GP. He developed disturbed sleep, nightmares of the
crash, and a degree of social avoidance, but his symptoms were less intense
in 2002, in part due to stronger family support. He remained able to drive short
distances but avoided crowded areas, ultimately
relocating closer to work to
reduce travel.
17 April 2020, he was again involved in a collision, this time a side-impact
crash in Campbelltown when another vehicle turned
into his path. His right knee
struck the steering column, aggravating pre-existing pain from 2018. He
described feeling fearful and
overwhelmed but did not seek immediate hospital
care, instead contacting his wife. A few weeks later, as his pain escalated, he
his GP, was prescribed analgesia, and referred to a specialist.
Compared with 2018, the psychological impact was greater, with heightened
anxiety, frequent nightmares, and worsening mood. At the time, he had ceased
antidepressants for several months, leaving him more
vulnerable to relapse.
early 2020, before the accident, Mr Sapkota considered himself to be functioning
better than in earlier years. While some records
suggested improvement by 2014,
he clarified that meaningful recovery began around 2009, with stabilisation by
2014. He described
his emotional state as “significantly better,”
with occasional seasonal mood changes and pain flare-ups, particularly
months. He was actively trying to improve his health, engaging in cycling and
gym activity, and was socially reconnecting.
Although not fully symptom-free, he
was regaining independence and striving for normality.
Sapkota denied any incidents of racial vilification or threats at his workplace.
He could not recall experiencing discrimination
of this nature, and there is no
indication that workplace events contributed to his psychological difficulties.
His distress is attributable
to accident-related trauma and its consequences. He
appeared surprised by this query and had no explanation for the inclusion of
mention of racial vilification in the AHHR.
to 2018, he was confident with both short and long-distance driving, including
for work. After the 2018 collision, his confidence
diminished, and he began
limiting travel to shorter trips. Following the 2020 accident, this avoidance
became more pronounced. He
no longer undertakes long-distance driving, instead
relying more heavily on his wife for transport. This restriction reflects a
combination
of chronic pain and driving-related anxiety.
2018, he was physically active, attending the gym regularly and participating in
sports. After the 2018 accident, pain forced
him to reduce such activities,
leading to a gradual withdrawal from exercise and some social functions. Since
2020, his functioning
has further declined. He now requires assistance with
heavier household tasks and is more dependent on his family. Activities that
once provided pleasure, such as sport and socialising, are now curtailed by the
interplay between physical pain and psychological
the 2020 accident, Mr Sapkota has remained in counselling, continuing his
therapeutic relationship with his psychologist. The
sessions primarily address
accident-related trauma, chronic pain, and associated anxiety. He does not
report workplace stressors
as a focus of therapy. He believes that without the
2020 accident, his need for ongoing psychological care would have been reduced.
He finds therapy helpful, particularly in managing mood, sleep disturbance, and
coping with pain, and regards his sessions as supportive
and confidential.
Psychologically,
Mr Sapkota continues to report significant distress. He describes poor sleep
with early, middle, and late insomnia,
nightmares, and occasional night terrors.
His memory and concentration are impaired, particularly with registering new
information,
though he compensates with notes and reminders. Motivation and
energy levels are low, impacted by both pain and mood. He reports
low tolerance
for frustration, irritability, and occasional impulsivity, though he denies
self-harm or current suicidal ideation.
He describes himself as emotionally
sensitive, prone to anxious rumination and catastrophising, though he values
structure and control.
He avoids crowded environments, reports social anxiety,
and remains hyperaware of his surroundings. He occasionally experiences
related to his accidents.
these difficulties, he maintains stable relationships with his wife and
children, finds moments of enjoyment, and continues
to hold a hopeful outlook
for improvement through treatment.
Risk profile
Sapkota did not report suicidal thoughts, intentions, or plans.
reported a history of attempted suicide requiring hospitalisation due to
overdose on two occasions. His children are a protective
factor, and there is no
known family history of suicide.
denies history of self-harm or risky behaviours.
reported feelings of irritability, poor frustration tolerance, and occasional
impulsivity.
Physiological symptoms
Sapkota's sleep is described as suboptimal. He sleeps for three to four hours at
night. He has early, middle, and delayed insomnia.
Anxious ruminations are
prominent at night. He has nightmares and night terrors, though
infrequently.
2002 accident nightmares are currently reported.
feels tired and lethargic because of the poor quality of sleep.
Sapkota's memory is described as suboptimal. He tends to be forgetful and
struggles with registration of information when meeting
people or reading. He
does not tend to struggle with organising himself. He relies on notes and
requires reminders. This has enabled
him to complete tasks and follow through
with them. His concentration and attention are also described as not
Sapkota's motivation and energy levels are poor. This is impacted by pain and
stress. He tries to remain behaviourally active but
struggles. When he goes to
the gym, he finds it difficult to engage effectively and without much
self-care and hygiene are adequate. He does not require assistance with personal
ability to drive is intact. He drives short distances but avoids long-distance
driving and seeks his wife’s assistance.
He does not use public transport,
but if required, he would force himself to use it.
appetite is described as adequate. His weight
fluctuates.
Psychiatric history
Sapkota has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder by his GP. He was
engaged in psychological and psychiatric treatment
prior to the subject
has been engaged with psychological support. He sees his counsellor, Ms Mohini
Prasad, once a fortnight. He finds engagement with
the psychologist beneficial.
Historically, he has also engaged with a psychiatrist.
Sapkota has no active medical issues. He has no history of head trauma or
seizures. He has no known allergies.
Medication history
takes venlafaxine 150 mg mane. He is also taking pain medications. His adherence
with venlafaxine has not been optimal as he had
stopped it for a few months.
Historically, he has tried reboxetine.
Addiction history
Sapkota does not drink alcohol, smoke, use drugs, or gamble. There is no history
of excessive caffeine intake.
Salient features of psychosocial and
developmental history
Sapkota's primary emotional support comes from his wife. They have been married
for eight years. She is a part-time nurse working
on a casual basis. The couple
has two young children.
from Kathmandu, Nepal, he has one older brother. His mother is still alive, but
his father passed away after falling from
a two-storey building. He has a good
relationship with his family.
moved to Australia in 1997 as a student.
Australia, he completed a business management degree and later obtained a
property management certificate in 2009.
2009, he resumed full-time work and held various jobs, including working for
McDonald’s and a dental equipment company.
In 2015, he started his own
business, which he continues to run today.
Sapkota has no criminal record.
Mental status examination
mental state examination, Mr Prabin Sapkota is a male of the stated age. He was
appropriately dressed and groomed. He was easy
to engage, and I was able to form
a good rapport with him. There was no psychomotor agitation or retardation. His
body demeanour
was anxious. His speech was of regular rate, volume, and tone.
The thought form was goal-directed, and the content revolved around
traumatic incidents and the consequences of these on the worsening of his
psychological and physical health symptoms. At times,
there was ambivalence
noted in his responses. There was no evidence of any psychosis or perceptual
disturbances. His affect was constricted
and depressed. His mood was depressed.
He was oriented to person, place, and time. His insight is best described as
fair. His judgement
at the time of this review was
reasonable.
Clinical summary
Prabin Sapkota presents with a long-standing depressive illness, best described
as persistent depressive disorder (Dysthymia),
which has been complicated by
chronic pain and repeated accident-related trauma. His difficulties noticeably
worsened following the
motor vehicle accident of 17 April 2020. Since then, his
low mood, poor sleep, anxiety, and pain-related distress have become more
pronounced, leaving him with reduced capacity to manage day-to-day demands.
a diagnostic perspective, his history and current presentation fit DSM-5-TR
criteria for persistent depressive disorder. He has
lived with a depressed mood
for many years, accompanied by low energy, feelings of hopelessness, and reduced
confidence. These symptoms
have had a tangible effect on his relationships,
work, and general quality of life.
his emotional state is closely tied to the pain he experiences, his concerns
and the limitations they
create. He does not show the features that would suggest somatic symptom
disorder, such as disproportionate
health anxiety or excessive pursuit of
medical reassurance. His preoccupations are consistent with the reality of
ongoing physical
impairment and its psychological consequences.
impact of repeated traumatic experiences has amplified his natural anxious
temperament. He has a tendency towards worry, rumination,
and heightened
emotional sensitivity, which, in the context of his accidents, has contributed
to further decline in mood and confidence.
Alongside this sits a sense of loss
— particularly the loss of independence and capacity to participate fully
in work, social
activities, and family life.
care has mainly been overseen by his GP, with antidepressant treatment
prescribed, although adherence has been patchy at times.
He has been more
consistent with psychological therapy, finding regular sessions with Ms Mohini
Prasad both supportive and beneficial.
These sessions help him to manage his
sleep difficulties, regulate mood, and adjust to living with chronic
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
above clinical examination findings were discussed by the Panel and it was
collectively agreed that they would be accepted by
the Panel and form part of
these reasons.
balance, the 2020 motor vehicle accident has compounded the claimant’s
psychiatric condition, both by aggravating existing
depressive symptoms and by
reinforcing his sense of physical and psychological vulnerability. In this
context, a further block of
eight psychological therapy sessions is not only
reasonable but also clinically justified, given the ongoing need to support his
recovery and maintain stability.
Panel accepts that the claimant would likely have been suffering psychological
symptoms at the time of the subject accident, which
relate to the earlier
accidents described. However, the Panel accepts the history of the claimant,
and the limited medical evidence
available that the subject motor accident has
made a material contribution to the claimant’s present psychological
is well established that psychological counselling in the context of
psychological symptoms arising from a traumatic event is beneficial.
claimant is likely to achieve an improvement in his symptomatology if the
psychological counselling is received. The counselling
should take place in the
context of management of his GP.
Panel has had regard to the submissions of the insurer in respect of the
rationale set out in the AHHR documents. The Panel has
formed the view that on
the balance of probabilities, such rationale is an error. In this regard, the
rationale uses the pronoun
of “she”, and when questioned the
claimant was surprised by the description read to him. He had no explanation
inclusion and denied having suffered racial vilification in the
Panel finds that the eight sessions of psychological counselling is related to
the injury caused by the motor accident and is
reasonable and necessary.
certificate of Medical Assessor Christopher Canaris is therefore confirmed.
See Division 7.5 and Schedule
2, cl 2 of the MAI Act.
Section 7.26(5) of the MAI
Section 41(2) of the PIC
Rule 128 of the PIC Rules.
Section 7.26(6) of the MAI
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Briggs v IAG Limited
t/as NRMA Insurance
[2022] NSWSC 372
See s 3B(2) of the CL Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (480 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter