URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/468.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Caller v State of New South Wales (No 2) [2025] NSWDC 468 (14 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Caller v State of New South Wales (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 468
Hearing Date(s):
Hearing 31 March 2025 – 7 April 2025, 9 April 2025 – 10 April
Directions 5 September 2025
Written submissions considered in
chambers 22 September 2025, further evidence admitted
Final written
submissions 30 October 2025
Judgment reserved 30 October 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Newlinds SC DCJ
(1) The Plaintiff’s claim is
(2) The Plaintiff is to pay the
Defendant’s costs.
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION — s 151D
Workers Compensation Act 1987
— Extension of time — Undesirability of application for leave being
heard at the same time as final hearing —
Such an approach to be
discouraged
NEGLIGENCE — Duty of care — Vicarious
liability — Employment health and safety — Claim by former NSW
officer against NSW Police Force for psychiatric injury being PTSD caused
by repeated exposure to traumatic incidents — Scope
and context of duty of
care — One breach established — Finding that breach did not cause
Legislation Cited:
Civil Liability Act 2002
Limitation Act 1969
Police Act 1990
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR
Caller v State of New South Wales (No 1)
[2025] NSWDC 379
of New South Wales
[2016] NSWCA 198
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
Gower v State of New South Wales
[2018] NSWCA 132
v Queensland Ambulance Service
[2007] Aust Torts Reports 81-919
Hill v Van Erp
(1997) 188 CLR 159
Holt v Wynter
[2000] NSWCA 143
(2000) 49 NSWLR 128
Howley v Principal Healthcare Finance Pty Ltd
Itex Graphics Pty Ltd v Elliott [2003] 54 NSWLR 207
Western Sydney Local Health District (trading as) Westmead Hospital
[2023] NSWDC
New South Wales v Fahy
[2007] HCA 20
(2007) 232 CLR 486
Perre v Apand Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 36
198 CLR 180
Prince Alfred College Incorporated v ADC
[2016] HCA 37
[2016] 258 CLR
Sills v State of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 4
Skinner v The State of
New South Wales (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 49
SM v State of New South Wales
State of New South Wales v Briggs
[2016] NSWCA 344
[2016] 95 NSWLR 467
New South Wales v Donnelley
[2004] NSWCA 133
State of New South Wales v
[2022] NSWCA 9
Tabet v Gett
[2010] HCA 12
(2010) 240 CLR 537
The Salvation Army
(South Australia Property Trust) v Rundle
[2008] NSWCA 347
Principal judgment
Lee Kevin Caller (Plaintiff)
State of New South Wales (Defendant)
Representation:
J Morris SC / M Hammond (Plaintiff)
D Stanton / N Hogan
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Bourke Legal (Plaintiff)
HWL Ebsworth
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/323841
Publication Restriction:
recent decades, it has become more and more apparent to the scientific and
medical community that a significant proportion of people,
if exposed to
repeated traumatic events, will ultimately succumb to the recognised psychiatric
disorder known as post-traumatic stress
disorder (“PTSD”).
follows that those most susceptible to PTSD are people who are regularly exposed
to witnessing, or being involved in, traumatic
events over an extended period of
time. Thankfully in 21st century Australia, most of us are exposed to very few
serious traumatic
events throughout the course of our lives. However, those
involved in front-line emergency services, including the Police Force,
Ambulance, Fire Brigade, and the like are not so fortunate.
part and parcel of their duties, these “
first responders
will be exposed to serious traumatic incidents on many occasions. The very
nature of their duties makes this inevitable. Their
job includes to try and
rescue and assist people in dire predicaments. Thus, they are inherently at
risk, by virtue of their duties,
of suffering PTSD, which is a recognised
psychiatric injury. The wider community is now well aware of this.
a society, it is essential that people involved in these front-line occupations
exist and carry out their duty. When any one of
us is in need of urgent help, we
expect them to come. Yet we know it is inevitable that some of them will suffer
psychiatric injury
as a result. Who then ought bear the economic cost of that
law is settled; notwithstanding the likely consequences, without more, there are
no common law remedies available to first responders
if they succumb to PTSD
just because of exposure to traumatic events. Rather, that situation is dealt
with by whatever pension arrangements
are put in place by the Government, the
Worker’s Compensation Regime determined by Parliament, together with
whatever insurance
a particular officer may have in place from time to
will be a claim, compensable by common law damages, available in negligence
against the employer of a first responder, if it
can be shown that reasonable
care was not taken to protect a particular officer by failing to take reasonable
steps to identify the
particular officer was at risk, over and above what might
be ordinarily expected. The circumstance may include knowledge that the
is suffering, psychiatric or psychological harm, or showing signs that they are,
or might, succumb to PTSD, and then failing
to take reasonable steps to ensure
that officer receives appropriate treatment and support to alleviate or lessen
the effect of his
or her injury, or potential injury.
such a claim, legal and factual questions going to breach of duty, causation,
and damages are notoriously difficult and interrelated.
This case is an example
of some of those complexities.
Plaintiff, who is still a young man, served as a New South Wales Police officer
from 2001 to 2019. There is no doubt he suffers
from PTSD as a direct
consequence of his work, which condition has had a profoundly adverse impact in
his and his family’s
issues in this case boil down to whether it has been proved that injury is a
consequence of breach of duty of care by the New
South Wales Police Force
(“Police Force”), if there was such a breach, did it caused the
injury, and, if so, what damages
have resulted from that injury. Each issue
involves complex legal and factual analysis.
consider the Plaintiff to be a thoroughly honest and decent person who served
the people of NSW for many years as a frontline police
officer out of a sense of
duty. Generally, I accept his evidence. As far as dates and order of events are
concerned, his memory is
slightly unreliable for perfectly understandable
reasons. There are many contemporaneous records which allow the chronology of
to be identified with some precision, and I prefer that type of evidence
over the Plaintiff's recollection as to date and order of
events. I also found
the Plaintiff’s wife, Mrs Caller, to be an extremely impressive witness,
and other than dates and order
of events, accept her evidence unreservedly.
have a great deal of sympathy for the Plaintiff and his family. He has
undoubtedly suffered a devastating psychiatric injury at
a young age which has,
for all intents and purposes, significantly, if not entirely, destroyed his
ability to earn an income so as
to support himself and his family. Prior to his
injury, he was a hard worker who no doubt would have continued to have been
to contribute to society in any way that he could. Our society needs
people to be prepared to serve as front line emergency workers,
notwithstanding
that it is clearly understood that, in doing so, they put themselves at
considerable risk of psychiatric injury.
In a perfect world, every one of them
that suffers such an injury would be compensated, but the world is not perfect
and the law
in this area is calibrated as it must be.
Notwithstanding
the sympathy I have for the Plaintiff, my duty is to apply the law to the facts
as I find them. For reasons I will
now explain, I have determined that the
Plaintiff's claim must be dismissed.
Introduction
Plaintiff was born on 19 December 1973 and is presently 51 years of age. He
attested as a probationary constable of police in
the Police Force on 5 May
Plaintiff sustained a work-related psychiatric injury which caused him to cease
work with the Police Force on or about 4 January
2019, and from that date has
caused him to have significantly reduced capacity for any type of
employment.
the period he served, the Plaintiff was exposed to a series of extremely
traumatic incidents which had an accumulating effect,
so as to ultimately cause
him to suffer PTSD, rendering him unable to work. He contends that psychiatric
injury was caused by the
Police Force breaching its duty of care to him.
I continue to describe the Plaintiff's case and to identify the real issues in
dispute, there is a threshold issue concerning
an application for leave,
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
The application for leave
Plaintiff filed a Motion seeking such leave on 12 February 2024, he having filed
these proceedings on 12 October 2023.
9 May 2024, the court ordered that Motion be determined by the trial judge at
the hearing of the matter.
apparent practice within this Court of such applications not being dealt with
well prior to a final hearing of the matter is to
be discouraged.
much was made clear by Abadee DCJ in
Skinner v The State of New South Wales
[2021] NSWDC 49
Skinner No 2
”) at [5]-[11].
short, and I would have thought obvious, point is that by the time the matter
comes on for final hearing, the parties will have
been put to the considerable
expense of preparing the matter upon the basis of a final hearing. True it is
that some cases are simple
and the extra added cost, over and above the hearing
of a notice of motion for leave to proceed with the hearing at all, might be
minimal. Such cases will be rare, and this case was never one of those cases. It
was set down with an estimate of 7 to 9 days’
hearing time.
Dicker SC DCJ explained it recently in
SM v State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWDC 295
, when endorsing what Abadee DCJ had said in
Skinner No 2
, as a general rule, these applications ought be heard prior
to the final hearing. An exception may be if a plaintiff with alleged
psychiatric injuries is to be cross-examined on the application, thus exposing
him or her to adverse medical consequences of being
cross-examined on two
occasions. Such cases will be rare, and this was not one of those cases. Indeed,
in my experience it is very
unusual for a plaintiff to be cross-examined at all
on applications to extend time, and if they are, the topics would almost always
be very limited. It is very hard to imagine a circumstance where cross
examination going directly to liability or damages would be
allowed on an
extension of time application.
should never ask for such applications to be deferred until final hearing unless
the circumstances are very unusual. If this
approach is suggested by the Court
for administrative reasons, it should be resisted for reasons which I consider
are axiomatic.
is not to say that I am suggesting some sort of inflexible rule. Both Abadee DCJ
and Dicker SC DCJ rejected such a notion. The
matter needs to be decided by
sensible and practical case management. Each case must be considered on its own
facts. The point is
that I consider it ought only be in very rare, exceptional
cases where the application is dealt with at the final hearing.
took evidence and heard submissions on the leave application on the first day of
the hearing, being 31 March 2025. At the conclusion
of those submissions, I made
an order under
granting the Plaintiff leave retrospectively to bring the
proceedings and indicated that I would deliver my reasons at the same time
final judgment.
are my reasons for that order.
The statutory context
provides that a person to whom compensation is payable
under that Act is not entitled to commence court proceedings for damages in
respect of the injury concerned against the employer liable to pay the
compensation more than three years after the date on which
the injury was
received, except with the leave of the court in which the proceedings are to be
specifically, the legal framework is as follows.
provides the following:
“151D Time limit for commencement of court proceedings against employer
for damages
(2) A person to whom compensation is payable under this Act is not entitled to
commence court proceedings for damages in respect
of the injury concerned
against the employer liable to pay that compensation more than 3 years after the
date on which the injury
was received, except with the leave of the court in
which the proceedings are to be taken.
Limitation Act 1969
does not apply to or in respect of court proceedings
to which this section applies.
(4) This section does not apply to the commencement of court proceedings in
respect of a claim within the meaning of
Motor Accidents Act 1988
or Chapter 5 of the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
application of s 151D is subject to the operation of s 151DA of the
. Section 151DA provides an elasticity to the calculation of time
under s 151D in that the running of time is stopped in specific
circumstances.
When was the injury received?
of the way the Plaintiff's case is framed, and the type of case it is, there is
a question here as to “
when the injury was received
purpose of s 151D(2).
is because the Plaintiff's case is that the psychiatric injury about which he
complained is the cumulative consequence of a series
of events which occurred
over the period from 2002 through to 2019, which was the Plaintiff's last day of
Plaintiff does not plead and the Plaintiff's expert, Dr Diamond, cannot say at
what precise time the Plaintiff suffered a diagnosable
clinical state of
is that disorder, which is the injury, the subject of the claim, not each
individual event wherein the Plaintiff was exposed to
trauma. Indeed, the breach
of duty of care relied on by the Plaintiff is not exposure to the traumatic
events themselves, rather
it is the alleged failure of the Defendant to identify
that the consequence of repeated exposure would be that he was liable to develop
PTSD, and the Defendant either knew or ought to have known that and yet failed
to take appropriate steps to minimise that prospect.
Plaintiff's counsel, Mr Morris SC and Mr Hammond, submit that the relevant dates
for calculation of time to start and stop running
pursuant to s 151DA(1)(b)
are January 2019 (being the Plaintiff's last day of work) and 7 June 2023, when
the Plaintiff served the
relevant pre-filing statement for the purpose of
s 151DA(1)(b).
Defendant takes issue with this analysis and Mr Stanton, who appeared with Mr
Hogan for the Defendant, submits that, on the state
of the Plaintiff's pleading
and evidence, it is not possible to identify when the particular injury
occurred, but it must have been
well prior to 4 January 2019.
counsel agreed that the debate was somewhat arid because it was only on 10
February 2021 that the parties agreed, following an
assessment by the Workers
Compensation Commission, that the Plaintiff was assessed as having a 17% whole
person impairment (“WPI”)
due to psychiatric injury.
Masic v Western Sydney Local Health District (trading as) Westmead
[2023] NSWDC 239
, I tried, without success, to resolve the apparent
tension between s 280(a) of the
, which stands as a complete bar to a
person making a claim for a workplace injury under s 151H unless at the time a
claim is made
for permanent impairment compensation under
there is an accepted impairment of at least 15%, the injured person
is not capable, as a matter of law, of serving a pre-filing statement
limitation period created by s 151D (as was explained in
Gower v State of New
South Wales
[2018] NSWCA 132
”) at [229] and
the Plaintiff's case, the three-year time period commenced on 4 January 2019 and
yet the Plaintiff was unable to commence any claim
at all until 10 February
2021. On the Defendant's case the time starts running sometime long before 2019,
which, if correct, means
the limitation period came and went before the
Plaintiff had a cause of action that he was legally entitled to commence (being
June 2023).
continues to strike me as more than anomalous that Parliament intended there to
be a statute of limitation running for a period
of time prior to the person with
a claim, the subject of that limitation, being entitled to bring that very
light of the fact that the claim by the Plaintiff is for economic loss only, I
consider the better starting point for the three-year
limitation period to run
to be 4 January 2019, which is when the Plaintiff actually started to incur
economic loss. However, if I
am wrong in that regard, I do not think it really
matters because when I come to consider a reasonable explanation for any delay,
it would be illogical to suggest that there was in fact any delay in bringing
the proceedings until reasonable steps had been taken
to work out and obtain
consent as to a more than 15% WPI due to psychiatric
Relevant discretionary factors
is now a substantial body of decisions regarding the discretion to grant leave
under s 151D.
J’s observations in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
168 CLR 541
at [551]-[552] and [554]-[555] (“
remain fundamental. They were applied with approval by the High Court in
Prince Alfred College Incorporated v ADC
[2016] HCA 37
[2016] 258 CLR 134
[100] and the Court of Appeal in
Itex Graphics Pty Ltd v Elliott
54 NSWLR 207 where lpp AJA said in relation to s 151D(2) when referring to what
Justice McHugh J said in
“In my opinion in limitation legislation such as 151D(2) of the
Compensation Act
, where a broad discretion is conferred to grant leave to sue
after the expiration of a limitation period, the general question that
asked is what is fair and what is just. In answering such a question, the
justice of the case must be evaluated by reference
to the rationales of the
limitation period that had barred the action including the four rationales to
which McHugh J referred.”
judgment of McColl JA in
Howley v Principal Healthcare Finance Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 447
emphasised the following overarching principle:
Section 151D(2)
does not spell out specific criteria to be taken
into account by the court when exercising the discretion to extend the time to
court proceedings sought to be commenced more than 3 years after the
injury was received: cf
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW); s 109
Accidents Compensation Act
1 999 (NSW).
[45] Rather, as lpp AJA (Spigelman CJ and Sheller JA agreeing) explained in ltek
[sic] Graphix (at [87]), in the passage to which
the primary judge referred, s
1510 confers a broad discretion to grant leave to sue after expiry of the
limitation period, in which
context "the general question that has to be asked
is what is fair and just ... [or] what does the justice of the case require?";
see also Sheller JA (at [2]).”
question of prejudice lies at the heart of any consideration of the matters
relevant to an application to extend time. As noted
by the Court of Appeal in
Holt v Wynter
[2000] NSWCA 143
(2000) 49 NSWLR 128
, per Sheller
JA (Meagher and Handley JJA and Brownie AJA agreeing), the question is whether
or not significant prejudice has been
caused by the late filing of
proceedings.
concept of significant prejudice was explained by the Court of Appeal in
Salvation Army (South Australia Property Trust) v Rundle
[2008] NSWCA 347
”) at [96]:
“Significant prejudice means such prejudice as would make the chances of a
fair trial unlikely.”
, Basten JA identified three matters that ordinarily a court should
be satisfied of when considering granting leave.
first is whether the cause of action has reasonable prospects of success, the
second being whether there has been a reasonable
explanation for the delay, and
the third being what is usually described as prejudice to the Defendant, but
properly understood,
as explained in cases like
, means significant
prejudice as would make the chances of a fair trial
Consideration
Stanton has conceded that there is, on the face of the material be, a reasonable
cause of action available to the Plaintiff.
to explanation for delay, Mr Stanton focuses on a 12-month period, which he
characterises as unreasonable delay, being the approximate
one year prior to 11
April 2023, when Dr Diamond's report was obtained.
explanation for that report taking so long from when it was requested, was the
fact that Dr Diamond could not allocate a date
for a consultation without a wait
of a little more than a year.
Watt, solicitor for the Plaintiff, gave evidence that she made the decision to
wait for Dr Diamond's availability, because she
considered Dr Diamond to be
the most appropriate expert to give an opinion as to the question of liability
that she was aware of.
Stanton has submitted that there is no evidence that there were not other
appropriately qualified people available who could have
provided an opinion. I
am prepared to infer that there were choices open to Ms Watt. However, the
question before me is whether the
explanation for the time lost in waiting for
Dr Diamond is a reasonable explanation. I do not think posing the question of
other lawyers in the same position might have formed a different opinion
than Ms Watt answers that question. In my opinion, Ms Watt’s
decision to
retain Dr Diamond in a medico-legal capacity was reasonable and so the
explanation for the period of delay identified
by Mr Stanton is in my opinion
reasonable.
turn then to the final question, being whether the delay is such as to make it
is to make the chances of a fair trial unlikely.
determine that question, It is first necessary to connect the delay in
commencing the proceedings with the chances of a fair trial
being unlikely.
Stanton relied on the Court of Appeal's decision in
State of New South Wales
v Donnelley
[2004] NSWCA 133
”), which case
does bear a remarkable similarity factually to the case before me.
Stanton, despite his team having prepared the matter fully for the final
hearing, chose not to put any evidence or submissions
of particular prejudice to
his client before me.
he relied on what is often referred to as ‘
prejudice, as explained in cases such as
, per McHugh J.
relies on the fact that over the period the Plaintiff served as a police
officer, he had very many, probably counted in the scores,
of other officers
supervising him, whose conduct is brought into question by the way the Plaintiff
frames his case. This is because
the Plaintiff asserts that, whilst it should
have been clear to those supervising him following the various traumatic
incidents and
as they commenced to accumulate, that he needed support and
referral to some form of early intervention treatment, which would have
prevented the development of the PTSD, effectively, nothing was done. The
submission is that I ought infer that the delay has made
it more difficult than
it would have otherwise been to locate those witnesses and, even on them being
spoken to, their memory would
have faded.
Stanton’s submission, based on the Court of Appeal’s analysis in
, is that the Plaintiff has not proved that the delay has not
made the chances of a fair trial to be less likely than they would have
the matter was bought in time. This raises squarely a question of onus.
my opinion, again referring to what McHugh J said in
regarding the discretion conferred by s 151D(2) of the
fundamental question that has to be asked is what is fair and what is just. So
much is made clear from the way Basten JA describes
this question in
it needs to be born steadily in mind that a fair trial does not equate with a
perfect trial.
my opinion, whenever the relevant three-year period commenced to run, the
Defendant was always going to encounter difficulties
in obtaining direct
evidence from people involved in the supervision of the Plaintiff at relevant
times in the past. The fact that
the Defendant would inevitably have encountered
such problems would have made it more difficult for it to defend the matter than
if it did not have such problems, but that does not mean that any trial will be
unfair. True it is that the longer the period of
delay, those difficulties
become more pronounced, but I do not think the circumstances are such that the
chances of a fair trial
are unlikely, and therefore, by reference to cases such
, do not see the level of prejudice requisite to make out
relevant prejudice for the purpose of s 151D.
the Court of Appeal in
was critical of the trial judge for
assuming there was no presumptive prejudice because the claimant had all the
personnel records and other records “
" the opponent. This was said to be inadequate reasoning. The Court
concluded at [52]:
“The burden of establishing fairness and justice being on the plaintiff,
if doubt remains it will weigh against a grant of
by four years, and as I have said, the
Court of Appeal in that case identified that relevant prejudice means
significant prejudice
which means such prejudice as would make the chances of a
fair trial unlikely. I think there is a very different, almost seismic
between the approach that commended itself to the court in
the analysis in
, so as to have made the test for what is fair and
just in this context a much less onerous one for a Plaintiff to
Resolution of leave application
taken all those matters into account, I am not satisfied that the chances of a
fair trial have been rendered unlikely as a
result of the delay in the Plaintiff
bringing its his claim. There is a reasonable explanation for the delay, and the
viable one. In my judgement, it is just and fair to grant leave to
bring the case, notwithstanding that it is, prima facie, out of
was for those reasons I made orders in accordance with the Plaintiff's Notice of
Motion filed 12 February 2024 on 31 March 2025.
I also ordered that costs of
that Motion ought be costs in the cause.
then to the case itself.
The real issues in dispute
reference to the Plaintiff’s Statement of Claim filed 12 October 2023, the
Defendant’s Defence dated 8 November 2023,
which was informally amended
during the course of the hearing, together with the respective statements
prepared by counsel for both
the Plaintiff and the Defendant as to their
perception of the issues, and having heard the parties submissions, it seems to
the case can be decided by reference to the following
(1) What is the nature and extent of the Defendant's duty of care to the
(2) Were the Plaintiff's alleged injuries foreseeable in the circumstances?
(3) By reference to the duty of care, has a breach of that duty been
established?
(4) If there has been a breach of any duty of care, what is the extent to which
any of the Plaintiff's injuries were caused by any
breach of duty?
(5) Has the plea of contributory negligence been made out?
(6) What damages has the Plaintiff suffered as a consequence of any breach of
with those issues in that order.
Duty of care
Civil Liability Act 2002
, it is the common
law, and not the provisions of that Act, which applies.
pleaded, the Plaintiff puts forward a duty of care in the following
“The Defendant owed the Plaintiff a non-delegable duty of care to take
reasonable care to ensure that the Plaintiff was not
exposed to unnecessary risk
is no dispute that the Police Force owed to the Plaintiff a duty to take
reasonable care to avoid foreseeable risks of injury
arising from the
Plaintiff's service as a police officer. Yet, to pose the duty at such a high
level of abstraction is, in my opinion,
not useful, as it masks real
complexity.
was explained by Gleeson CJ in
New South Wales v Fahy
[2007] HCA 20
(2007) 232 CLR 486
”), it is unwarranted to single out any occupation and
treat it as intrinsically dangerous. However, the nature of any occupation
be considered when defining the duty of care owed by any employer to an
employee. It is because of the very nature of the duties
of a general duties
police officer and the nature of PTSD, that concepts of risk and safety require
close analysis. Police officers
commonly are exposed to danger and extremely
stressful situations and individuals' ability to cope with those situations vary
and Hayne JJ in the same case, pointed out at [27] that, because what police
officers regularly are exposed to is traumatic,
systems ought to be devised to
try and deal with the consequences of that trauma which systems ought not
detract from the application
of the statutory powers and functions of police. If
I may say so, this is easy to say but is a very difficult balance to achieve
is clear is that the mere exposure of police officers to traumatic events on a
repeated basis will not, on its own, amount to
a breach of duty of care,
notwithstanding that the risk of developing PTSD from such exposure exists and
is well understood and is
foreseeable. To impose such a duty would be
unreasonable or unrealistic and would mean police could not perform their
important role
in society.
State of New South Wales v Briggs
[2016] NSWCA 344
[2016] 95 NSWLR 467
”), it has been established that the content of the
duty of care owed by the Police Force to a serving officer must:
(1) Accommodate the relevant statutory context including provisions of the
Police Act 1990
and the special nature of service rendered by
police officers to the Crown; and
(2) Take into account some of the incidents of the usual employer –
employee relationship (adjusted to take into account the
fact that the
relationship is between the State and a serving police officer).
formulated prospectively in
Sills v State of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA
”) at [9] and
State of New South Wales v
[2022] NSWCA 9
Skinner on Appeal
”), the duty of
care in the context of this sort of case requires the Police Force to take
reasonable steps to:
(a) Identify officers who, through the performance of their duties, were at
particular risk of suffering or were suffering psychiatric
or psychological
(b) Take (reasonable) steps to ensure that any officer so identified received
appropriate treatment and support to alleviate or lessen
the effect of his or
her injury; and
(c) Consult with appropriate persons in the workplace to identify hazards
associated with the work environment and systems of work
if and when the injured
officer returned to duty, including the assessment of the risk of injury or
further injury.
my opinion, the duty of care can be articulated at the high level of taking
reasonable care to avoid risks of foreseeable injury
arising from the
Plaintiff’s service as a police officer, with the particular content being
the three matters identified in
Stanton relies on cases such as
to the effect that the Police Force
is entitled to expect a general duties officer of being capable to perform the
duties they agree
to undertake, unless there are signs to identify the Plaintiff
is at some sort of risk. So much may be accepted in part, but I do
that relieves the Police Force from a duty to take reasonable steps to seek to
identify if such signs are present and,
if so, to take reasonable steps to try
and reduce the risk at that point.
is also authority for the
proposition that the Police Force does owe a duty of care to reduce the risk of
psychiatric or other injuries
to officers, so long as that duty of care is
carefully calibrated so as to ensure that it does not cut across the fundamental
of police officers, which will inevitably involve individual officers
being exposed to repeated trauma.
consider the various propositions to be found in cases like
to be consistent with the content of the duty of care that I have
articulated above.
Foreseeability
foreseeability of physical harm and, for the purpose of this case,
economic loss
," is generally enough to impose a duty of care on a
person who knows or ought to reasonably foresee that harm is a likely result
his or her conduct. Liability will arise when the duty is breached and where
there is a causal relationship between the breach
and the harm:
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
Hill v Van Erp
(1997) 188 CLR 159
Perre v Apand Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 36
(1999) 198 CLR 180.
at [60], the High Court recognised as long ago as 2007 that the risk
of a police officer suffering recognisable psychiatric injury
encountering traumatic events is foreseeable in the legal sense.
then, the level of discussion in academic literature, the community generally,
and many decided cases in relation to the risk
of front-line emergency service
workers and military personnel being susceptible to recognisable psychiatric
injury, and in particular
PTSD, has become even more pronounced.
is of course foreseeable that a serving police officer will almost inevitably be
exposed to and involved in traumatic and distressing
events. This is, not just
foreseeable, it is to be expected. However, that is part of the job for which
there is no legal recourse
for the very reason that exposure to such events, and
the risk of adverse medical consequences, such as acquiring PTSD, is so
and so obviously part and parcel of the role of a serving police
Plaintiff is not claiming damages for being exposed to those events per se,
albeit the first step in his argument is that the
psychiatric injury –
PTSD, and the consequent economic loss – that he seeks to be compensated
for is a direct consequence
of that exposure.
he is seeking compensation because he claims that the Defendant failed to
educate him properly, failed to take reasonable
steps to identify that he was a
person who was exhibiting signs that he was at particular risk of suffering, or
indeed was suffering,
an onset of PTSD, and failed to take reasonable steps to
ensure that he received appropriate treatment and support to alleviate or
the effect of that state of affairs.
only is the risk of a police officer suffering recognisable psychiatric injury
through encountering traumatic events foreseeable,
it is also foreseeable that,
if a police officer is exposed to repeated traumatic events, the likelihood of
that police officer suffering
a recognisable psychiatric injury being
exacerbated with each exposure is foreseeable in circumstances where the Police
Force fails
to take reasonable steps to identify that the particular officer is
showing signs of being at elevated risk of developing a psychiatric
then fails to take reasonable steps to ensure that the Plaintiff receives
appropriate treatment, et cetera.
am satisfied that the risk of harm, against which the relevant duty of care is
to be judged, was foreseeable in the legal sense.
Does the Plaintiff have PTSD as a result of his being exposed to trauma in
the course of his duties?
is a threshold and necessary finding for the Plaintiff but is by no means
determinative of liability.
is a vast body of evidence, including a large amount from various treating
doctors and doctors retained for medico-legal purposes.
I do not propose to
summarise all of that material. That evidence starts with a report of Dr Gabb,
the Plaintiff's treating general
practitioner in 2011, for the purpose of a
worker’s compensation claim, arising out of what I will describe as the
PolAir episode
,” where Dr Gabb recorded that, as at 14 July
2011, he had seen the Plaintiff who had described a history of “
at work, anxiety, depression, and loss of motivation.
” On 1 December
2011, Dr Nazir Sumar, another general practitioner at Woy Woy, expressed the
opinion that the Plaintiff was
on permanently restricted duties due to
work-related adjustment issues
" and in February 2012, Dr Gabb recorded his
opinion that the Plaintiff showed “
symptoms of anxiety and depression,
demotivation, and loss of interest in leisure time activities
is also comprehensive reports of Mr Russell Gibbs, psychologist, and Dr
Parsonage, a psychiatrist. They all are consistent
with a diagnosis that the
Plaintiff is now suffering from PTSD as a consequence of his police work.
medical evidence concludes with two medico-legal reports of Dr Michael Diamond
prepared for the case. He is a highly qualified
and very experienced consultant
psychiatrist retained by the Plaintiff. His first report is dated April 2023 and
the second December
2023. Dr Diamond diagnoses the Plaintiff with PTSD, combined
with major depressive disorder, which he considered to be directly related
various traumatic incidents the Plaintiff encountered during his time as a
police officer, which have manifested into a psychiatric
illness – PTSD
– and that this occurred progressively as a result of the cumulative
effects of exposure to trauma as
he encountered that trauma in the course of his
police career.
only is the medical evidence consistent, Dr Diamond's evidence on this point was
not challenged or contradicted. I have no doubt
that the Plaintiff is suffering
from PTSD directly caused by him being exposed to a series of incidents at his
work. All but one
of those incidents involved exposure to horrible and obviously
traumatic events involving violent death or injury to members of the
public. The
exception is what I am calling the PolAir episode.
Findings as
to traumatic incidents
Diamond records some of the incidents in his first report, having interviewed
the Plaintiff and reviewed various statements of
the Plaintiff, together with
the then existing and available contemporaneous medical evidence.
Plaintiff has given evidence consistent with the history recorded by Dr Diamond,
albeit perhaps not covering the field. I find
Dr Diamond's history to be
accurate, and sufficient for the purpose of this judgment. I put to one side,
for the purpose of that
finding, the PolAir episode, which I will deal with
separately. I leave in Dr Diamond’s narrative history of the PolAir
as the Plaintiff’s subjective view of what occurred and to show
where it fits chronologically. I have edited Dr Diamond's narrative
to take out
various matters of fact he recorded of which there is no evidence, together with
some of his editorial commentary.
“Walgett April 2002 to May 2004
I asked Mr Caller about his experiences when stationed at Walgett Police
He confirmed the incident involving a decayed corpse in a motor vehicle, a
result of a suicide by gassing. I noted the description
of the severity of the
decomposition including the grotesque state of the body as is described in the
documentation.
Mr Caller spoke of the man who had hanged himself in a public payphone. The
details of what occurred were confirmed especially Mr
Caller's sense of
with the psychiatrically unwell man
who was known to be suicidal and whose
family had tried to elicit help from the local health services.
The sense of helplessness was emphasised in Mr Caller's description, as was the
extent to which he was involved with the family of
the deceased man in those
circumstances.
Mr Caller spoke more generally about the exposure to trauma that occurred when
he was stationed at Walgett. He said eighty percent
of the population were
Indigenous people. There was severe physical and domestic violence on a regular
basis where offenders used
weapons and caused serious injuries. He said there
was a great deal of mental health disturbance and substance abuse problems. He
said the policing was not so much to do with motor vehicle accidents and
suicides but the day to day violence was significant. Mostly
he said the
Indigenous population tended to leave the police alone but there were
altercations where he was compelled to engage during
Mid North Coast LAC at Kempsey from May 2004 until September 2010
Mr Caller confirmed some of the trauma that he experienced when working at the
Mid North Coast LAC at Kempsey from 2004 until 2010.
He confirmed attendance at a motor vehicle accident where a child was thrown out
of a four-wheel drive vehicle that then rolled over
the child. Other children
were trapped in the vehicle and the father of the children, who had also been
thrown out of the vehicle,
required attention for his injuries.
The trauma of that incident was complicated further when Mr Caller's fellow
officer investigating the accident suicided as a result
of Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder. For Mr Caller, the job was additionally traumatic because his own
children were of similar ages
to the child victims of that motor vehicle
Another extremely violent incident during his service at Kempsey involved a
pursuit of a vehicle where the driver eventually died
in a crash. The nature of
the violence was extreme. The offender tried to run head on into the police
vehicle on two occasions, necessitating
the police driver to take evasive action
in terrifying circumstances. The speed of the offending driver was sufficient
for the vehicle
to be torn in two when it finally collided with a stationary
object. There was a passenger in the offending vehicle who survived
grotesque setting where parts of the crashed vehicle were spread out over a
hundred metres from the site of the fatal crash.
He said he developed "a persona of arrogance". I asked him what that meant. He
said it was expressed as increased anger and aggression
expressed towards
figures of authority such as more senior officers who made decisions about his
Similarly, he said "I was taking it out on crooks". He felt driven in his
policework. He described it as "I had my ear to the ground
... I had informants
Police Aviation Support Branch -PolAir between September 2010 and February
Mr Caller spoke about the workplace conflict that he encountered between
September 2010 and February 2012 when he served at the Police
Aviation Support
I was aware of the considerable amount of documentation relevant to that
conflicted state. Mr Caller said that his experiences in
that environment
functioned as a key issue in the exacerbation of overt psychiatric symptoms
within the workplace while he was at
He explained that the work environment was dysfunctional from the time he began
there in 2010. He referred to witnessing an altercation
between older/senior and
younger/junior pilots where he was coerced to provide a witness statement in an
internal complaint about
a scenario he had witnessed.
His statement was not to the liking of his more senior officers whom he named as
Sergeant Grant Waddups and Inspector Tim Calman.
In effect he believed their
intent was to support a particular version of events that was not consistent
with what he had observed.
When he was coerced to change his statement, he
declined to do so. Despite being intimidated, he did not change his
What followed, was described by Mr Caller as a series of unfounded complaints
sufficient effort in his
duties overall to be able to complete his probationary period. The basis to
delay this process was unfounded.
Mr Caller believes that there was a fabricated
excuse to delay his probationary period. He said the decision was based on
of emails about his allegedly suboptimal performance. He said that
these emails could never be produced. He said it was likely that
no dispute that the Plaintiff, as perhaps must be sadly expected of serving
police officers, was exposed to a series of extremely
traumatic events over his
time as a serving police officer, which, on the medical evidence, has had the
cumulative effect of now
manifesting in a clinical diagnosis of PTSD.
Mr Caller agreed that he was placed in a situation where he was powerless and
was extended for six
months. When he became psychologically affected by the workplace stressors his
reporting of workplace injury
was rejected. It was not based on any justifiable
reason (as was determined at later hearings before the Worker's Compensation
in 2013 and a further hearing before the Personal Injury Commission
in October 2022).
Mr Caller confirmed the psychiatric symptoms he experienced at the time where
his anxiety symptoms and depressed state became overwhelming
for him at that
time. He noted away from that environment those symptoms settled
significantly.
Mr Caller spoke further about the effects of the lack of support in the
workplace. He spoke of the extent of the targeting and bullying
behaviour that
he had been exposed to at PASB and the negative effects that this had on his
ability to cope and reinstate his previous
coping mechanisms. He described the
presence of underlying psychological vulnerability when faced with further
exposure to trauma.
The long-drawn-out nature of the conflicted state and the failure to resolve it
during the second half of 2011, with additional distress
because of the
rejection of his claim for a work related injury by the insurers, was discussed
and understood to have exacerbated
his existing psychological
vulnerabilities.
The workplace experience was further significant because up to this point, Mr
Caller had not been thwarted and bullied in his career.
His workplace experience
previously was that hardship was tackled and problems were resolved. The
experience at PASB was different.
It acted to intensify feelings of defeat and
at the time.
Mr Caller spoke about the period he was overwhelmed by his psychiatric symptoms
and was off work and was unable to return to the
When Mr Caller returned to work after a period, he worked in restricted duties
at a different LAC.
He accepted the return to work plan based at Brisbane Waters. It was signed off
by the Police Medical Officer and he carried out
station duties for a period.
Later the Police Medical Officer signed off his fitness to return to full
operational duties. Mr Caller commented that it was clear
to the Police Medical
Officer that he was keen to return to work and that it was not a case of him
looking to exit the NSW Police
Force. He said there was no remedial shoot
ordered before he returned to full operational duties. He understood this to be
of support from the Police Medical Officer. His return to work however
was not without difficulties.
He was then able to return to full operational duties and was stationed in
General Duties at Hornsby Police Station.
Ku-Ring-Gal Local Area Command - Hornsby Police Station February 2012 to July
Mr Caller said he was exposed to ongoing trauma when he worked at Hornsby. There
were multiple motor vehicle accidents involving
fatalities. The Area covered
three major highways. There was a significant amount of drug work. There were
frequent suicides and
sexual assaults that he struggled to deal with.
Mr Caller described many incidents of exposure to trauma in the course of his
duties at Hornsby Police Station. He spoke about the
death by hanging of a
thirteen year old female child in the family home. He was in the home assisting
with paramedics trying to resuscitate
the child and having to deal with family
members in the home as well.
He described a particularly harrowing consequence on that day when he turned up
to coach his thirteen year old daughter's soccer
team where his existing
emotional state was triggered. He spoke of feelings of helplessness and futility
at that time.
There were other attendances when Mr Caller had to deliver a death message in
the course of these duties. These experiences were
accompanied by confronting
emergence of his own emotions, feelings of futility and sadness and having to
confront the emotional state
of family members of the deceased at these
He described the distress at the traumatic site of a motorcycle accident where a
man was fatally injured. A medical helicopter was
at the scene that added an
additional evocative component to the traumatic scenario. Mr Caller was involved
with covering the body
of the deceased when the helicopter departed.
He spoke of three years of struggling to get back up to the Mid North Coast and
his repeated failed applications for a transfer to
Kempsey or Wauchope. He again
spoke of being thwarted and undermined by the Local Area Manager at the Mid
North Coast Local Area
Command, that he had told me about earlier.
He persevered with making applications until finally when an opportunity arose
for a transfer to Manning/Great Lakes Local Area Command
at Taree came up, he
Manning/Great Lakes Local Area Command LAC) at Taree from 2015 to 2019
With transfer to Taree Police Station, Mr Caller was exposed to very confronting
incidents involving severe child abuse. One of these
was a boy who had been
locked in a shipping container by his father as a form of punishment. The
environment was extremely hot. There
was no sanitation. The mattress was a
filthy foam slab. The traumatic experience compounded the feeling of defeat and
futility of
previous jobs.
Another case of child abuse involved a girl who had been assaulted. The
notification came via the school. Investigation disclosed
that the child was
being abused together with her sister and living in a non-habitable environment
where they had been for the past
three years. The experience was overwhelming
for Mr Caller. He felt helpless and defeated to encounter this type of abuse of
girls. He seriously contemplated having the child move into his family
There were other attendances involving deceased persons, violence and situations
in which Mr Caller repeatedly experienced the futility
of his work, the
inability to be effective and overall, the struggle to deal with his worsening
psychiatric symptoms in the face
of feeling overwhelmed and helpless.
Subjectively he said he was becoming severely and overtly psychiatrically
impaired. He said
it was apparent to everyone.
Mr Caller said he struggled on but the cumulative effects of regular exposure to
death, trauma and distressed families built up over
Ending of ability to keep functioning as a police officer
Matters came to a head in late December 2018. The initial callout was through
other emergency services at the fire and the body was
reported as being a dead
Mr Caller confirmed his presence at a crime scene where a body was obviously
mutilated, burnt and had a leg and both hands cut off.
It was an extremely brutal and gory image to confront. The trauma of the
incident was increased because Mr Caller had to set up the
crime scene and was
then tasked with guarding it whilst further investigations took place.
Mr Caller confirmed that these were not all of the incidents of trauma that
affected him but that he was unable to function as of
1 January 2019.
He presented to a general practitioner, Dr Nicholas Hirst, on 4 January 2019
where Post Traumatic Stress Disorder was diagnosed as
consistent with his
presenting symptoms.
The appropriate medical certificate was issued. Mr Caller never returned to
have no doubt the Plaintiff was exposed to many other less dramatic traumatic
incidents that he cannot recall. Dr Diamond did not
record all of the specific
events about which the Plaintiff gave evidence before me. The specific traumatic
incidents that I accept
the Plaintiff was exposed to are, in roughly
chronological order:
(1) An incident in between 2001 and 2004, whilst the Plaintiff was stationed at
Walgett, involving the discovery of a dead body in
a car which had been there
for a number of days during the heat of summer;
(2) A public suicide of a male whilst the Plaintiff was stationed at Walgett,
again between 2001 and 2004;
(3) A motor vehicle accident involving a deceased child between 2004 and 2010
whilst the Plaintiff was stationed at Kempsey;
(4) A horrific car crash following a police pursuit, whilst the Plaintiff was
stationed at Kempsey/Port Macquarie;
(5) A helicopter crash, including witnessing the helicopter burst into flames
with a male victim jumping from the wreckage, when
stationed at PolAir between
2010 and 2012;
(6) Attending a particularly distressing suicide of a 13-year-old girl, and
trying unsuccessfully to save her life by administering
CPR in the presence of
her parents, whilst stationed at Hornsby Police Station sometime between 2012
(7) Whilst at Hornsby, being exposed to a fatal motorcycle accident; and
(8) Being involved in the delivery of many “
death messages
September 2010, the Plaintiff transferred to PolAir, and it was while stationed
there between 2011 and 2014 that he alleges he
suffered bullying and harassment.
In 2014, he spent a period of about six months off work on worker’s
compensation, having
been diagnosed with an acute adjustment disorder with mixed
anxiety and depressed mood. He reported symptoms of stress, anxiety,
depression at the time. He then made an application to transfer out of PolAir
but became embroiled in a battle with the Police
Force as to that transfer
application. Ultimately, having been cleared as fit for work by a number of
medical practitioners, including
his general practitioner, a psychologist, and
the Police Medical Officer, he resumed general duties. None of those
practitioners
identified him as being at any greater risk than might be expected
of PTSD. The symptoms were taken as signs of a transient adjustment
caused by the PolAir episode, which was expected to resolve and was considered
to have resolved once the PolAir episode
2015 and January 2019, the Plaintiff was stationed at Taree Police Station in
the Manning Great Lakes Regional Command. The
traumatic events he witnessed and
was involved in during that period included:
(1) On 21 April 2016, he was exposed to a serious motor vehicle accident
involving seriously injured children;
(2) Between 2015 and 2019, he was exposed to children who had been rescued from
a child abuse imprisonment situation, having been
locked in shipping containers
and mistreated;
(3) A hanging suicide of a male; and
(4) Finally, on 27 December 2018, the identification and recovery of a mutilated
and burnt body of a murder victim discovered in
the bush near Taree.
final incident, which I can only describe as beyond horrible, triggered what
appears to have been a complete psychiatric breakdown
and the Plaintiff has not
returned to work as a police officer, or at all, since.
will not in this judgment set out in detail the horrifying and gruesome details
of some of the incidents the Plaintiff was exposed
to, Dr Diamond’s
descriptions are enough for present purposes. Suffice to say at least three or
four of them appear to me to
be at the highest end of any scale one could
imagine when imagining traumatic incidents.
find each and every one of them and more occurred and that the Plaintiff was
exposed to them and others and that the cumulative
effect of that exposure is
the root cause of the Plaintiff's PTSD.
I have said, there is one incident, more accurately described as an
, being the Plaintiff’s experience in PolAir,
that falls into its own category and requires separate consideration and
heard significant and contested evidence from the Plaintiff as to what happened.
I am satisfied that the Plaintiff was on a training
flight in a helicopter with
two pilots. One of the pilots subsequently alleged that the other had flown too
close to the Sydney Harbour
Bridge and in so doing had breached certain safety
protocols. The other pilot denied that had occurred. The Plaintiff was directed
by a senior officer to provide a statement as to what had happened. He did so
and he was then asked by officers more senior to him
to change his statement
and, in the course of that process, was told that he was being untruthful. He
refused to change his statement.
He felt he was being treated unfairly.
of itself, caused the Plaintiff significant stress and anxiety.
long after, officers supervising the Plaintiff determined that his probation
period In the PolAir squad ought be continued for
a further three months,
because it was asserted that various reports had been received to the effect
that the Plaintiff was “
." He was told that these complaints
were to be found in a series of emails, which he was never shown, and still has
not seen, despite
there being a worker’s compensation claim hearing, which
concluded as follows:
'I do not consider the meeting of 5 May 2011 as representing reasonable actions
of the employer in this context. It occurred some
five weeks after the
Applicant's initial probation period ended and did not result in any measures
being put into place to remedy
the alleged failings of the Applicant, and also
did not result in any formal notice being given to the Applicant concerning the
or reasons for it. The process lacks transparency. It is reasonable
that reasons be given, that procedures be in place to allow for
all parties to
be able to examine allegations which directly affect a worker's employment, that
procedures should be put in place
to remedy any alleged problems in performance,
and that actions and decisions be documented. I am not satisfied, on the basis
the submissions made by the Respondent at the teleconference and
documentation referred to, that this occurred in the present matter.'
Plaintiff believes his probation period was extended, not because he was
considered lazy, but because his supervisor unfairly
and wrongly considered his
response to the directive to provide a statement as to the Harbour Bridge
incident was not full and frank
and/or was dissatisfied with his refusal to
change his statement.
a direct result of the entire episode, the Plaintiff had six months off work
suffering from what was diagnosed at the time as stress,
anxiety, and mood
disorder. All of this was known to the Police Force. His claim for
worker’s compensation initially failed
because there was a finding that
the conduct of the Police Force, albeit not reasonable, was not compensable
. Ultimately, it was successful for the reasons I have set
out above. The final stage of the episode was a prolonged, antagonistic,
ultimately successful, application by the Plaintiff for transfer back to the
North Coast.
PolAir episode falls into its own category. It is probably wrong to categorise
it as a traumatic incident at all, rather, it was
a very stressful episode. Dr
Diamond describes it as traumatic and a triggering event. Like any employee, it
is a necessary component
of a job to have a relationship with an employer and,
from time to time in the course of that relationship, uncomfortable things
be said or done. For example, an employee who was told that they are not doing
their job up to an expected standard will find
it very difficult to successfully
brand such conduct as bullying or harassment or give it some other label which
might be a breach
of duty of care. This is so, notwithstanding the fact that
often being told such things will cause anxiety and distress.
is no doubt that, wherever the rights or wrongs of the entire PolAir episode may
lie, the experience was extremely stressful
for the Plaintiff. He appears to
have become close to obsessed with a crusade to get hold of the alleged emails
containing suggestions
that he was lazy. All of the medical opinions at the time
were to the effect that the episode caused an adjustment disorder in the
Plaintiff, and he was not fit for work because of that for six months. The
symptoms of that adjustment disorder were described by
the Plaintiff to Dr
Diamond for the purpose of this case as “
anxiety symptoms
depression symptoms
.” That is also how he described them
to various practitioners at the time. It is those contemporaneous opinions, the
spent off work, and the fact his superiors and the Police Medical
Officer knew about his symptoms and diagnosis that forms an important
of the way the Plaintiff puts his case.
Diamond treats the PolAir episode as a traumatic event and includes it as part
of the relevant history. He considers the diagnosis
of adjustment disorder, and
the symptoms reported at the time, to be a “
sign, for what he considers to be the fact that the Plaintiff was at particular
risk of developing PTSD. He considers
the Police Force should have recognised
those signs and taken steps to protect the Plaintiff. Mr Morris adopts this
opinion as an
important plank of the case. The submission is the Police Force
failed to react appropriately to this “
failure amounted to a breach of duty of care.
sum up my findings as to the PolAir episode:
(1) On or about 2010, the Plaintiff was, as part of his training, on a
helicopter ride with two pilots heading east up Sydney Harbour,
helicopter passed over the south pylon of the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
(2) There was a suggestion by someone that the helicopter had hovered within 15m
of the Harbour Bridge and the crew had waved to
people on the Bridge.
Self-evidently, to hover a helicopter within 15m of the Sydney Harbour Bridge,
let alone within 15m of people
climbing the Sydney Harbour Bridge, is
(3) An investigation into what happened occurred, and on 4 March 2011, a
directive was given to the Plaintiff to provide his version
(4) The Plaintiff's response by email was as follows:
“To start with I do not wish to get involved with this complaint as l am a
new member of the PASB and I don’t agree with
this form of
investigation.
With regards to this flight I was a third party in the flight. I was in my
initial training period and was having a ride along with
Sp Constable GRAY and
DODDS for a Pilot check and training flight.
I was seated in the rear of Polair 1 and using my UBD street directory for
navigation training as I am not entirely conversant with
the Sydney area coming
from the North Coast.
During this flight I had my head in the UBD and was cross referencing landmarks
with the UBD and the landmark itself.
As part of the flight I recall flying east in R405 and flying over the South
Pylon of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. I do not recall
anything wrong with this
part of the flight and at no stage did we fly at a distance of 15 meters from
the bridge. I would have noticed
this. I believe that I may have waved to bridge
climbers as we passed over the bridge but I am unsure if this occurred at this
but as per normal this was done with the door closed and the window open
with no more than a hand protruding from the window as a
slow speed.
As to who was in control of the aircraft at the time as far as I was aware the
control of the aircraft was shared between both pilots
throughout the
As far as I am aware we were never in any danger as crew, pilots or aircraft at
any time during this flight.
I have nothing further to offer this complaint.”
(5) Shortly after that response, the Plaintiff was called into a meeting with
Inspector Calman, who was the then head of PolAir and
another senior officer. It
was clearly put to the Plaintiff that at least Inspector Calman did not think he
was being full and frank
in his response, because it was inconsistent with other
evidence available to Inspector Calman, including from members of the public
staff on a “
Bridge climb
,” which suggested the helicopter was
flying too close to the Harbour Bridge.
(6) Inspector Calman pointed out to the Plaintiff that questions of trust and
honesty are considered absolutely essential in the Police
Force generally, but
in particular for police working in dangerous team situations in helicopters. He
was told that disciplinary
action might be considered, but in the meantime,
invited the Plaintiff to change his statement.
(7) The Plaintiff was extremely offended and annoyed at this suggestion. To
this day, he denies that his statement was anything other
than the truth and
that the suggestion that he change it was the product of some sort of serious
wrongdoing by those above him in
the Police Force. Suffice to say he refused to
change his statement.
(8) Shortly thereafter, the Plaintiff's three-month probation period with
PolAir expired. He was told nothing about what his status
was at the end of that
period and chased up his superiors, who about six weeks later convened a meeting
where the Plaintiff was told
that his probation period was being extended
because there was a perception that he was not a hard worker and in particular
a number of emails (perhaps up to 6) existed where colleagues had branded
the Plaintiff as “
(9) The Plaintiff denied that allegation and became extremely upset and
anxious about it, which ultimately caused him to take time
off work and make a
claim for worker’s compensation, in which claim he expressly stated that
the unfair way he considered he
had been treated had caused him significant
anxiety and stress. He became convinced that the suggestion he was lazy was
the real reason his probation was extended was because his superiors
thought he was lying in his response about the Harbour Bridge
incident. He does
not believe there were ever any emails saying he was lazy and has done
everything possible to try and prove they
do not exist.
Plaintiff was cross-examined about all this. It was put to him that, in his
response to the directive that he provide a statement
in relation to the
incident involving flying too close to the Harbour Bridge, that he was arrogant,
insubordinate, and importantly
that his response was, in part, incomplete, in
that he left out any reference to the helicopter hovering at all in
circumstances
where he accepts that the helicopter did hover but at a distance
of about 50m from the Bridge and to the extent that he asserted
helicopter was not 15m from the Bridge, that he had deliberately lied.
Calman, who was the then head of PolAir, gave evidence as to his perspective of
the incident, to the effect that, having
considered all the material available
to him, he formed the view that the response to the directive by the Plaintiff
had not been
full and frank. He accepts that at a meeting with the Plaintiff he
put that to the Plaintiff and effectively did invite him to change
Thereafter,
Inspector Calman was involved in a meeting with the Plaintiff where various
complaints that had been received from other
members of PolAir, to the effect
that the Plaintiff was either “
not pulling his
" around the station were considered and a decision was made to extend
his probation period.
behalf of the Plaintiff, it was put to Inspector Calman that the real reason for
the extension of the probation period was because
of the perceived dishonesty in
the Plaintiff's response to the directive memorandum. Inspector Calman denied
The relevance of the PolAir episode findings
am not sure that the resolution of this case within the case takes the
resolution of the real issues in dispute anywhere. What is
important to
understand is that the Plaintiff’s subjective belief was, and is, that he
was dealt with very unfairly. He considers
he was bullied or harassed.
to whether he was lazy or not, on balance I have concluded, on the evidence
before me, that Inspector Calman and others senior
to the Plaintiff within
PolAir, honestly believed that there was an issue with the Plaintiff's attitude
in that he was considered
not pulling his weight
especially in relation to work required on the ground and that some people
considered him lazy. I do not know whether that belief
was correct or not,
however, I am satisfied that it was honestly held, although I am sceptical as to
whether there were ever any
emails. I do not consider it necessary to resolve
the question of whether the Plaintiff was lazy during his time at PolAir for the
purpose of determining this case. Nor do I find it necessary to consider if the
findings by the Worker’s Compensation Commission,
that the process lacked
transparency, et cetera, are accurate. The same can be said for the question of
whether the Plaintiff was
honest in his statement. I do not think that matters.
What does matter is that I accept that Inspector Calman honestly had concerns
and that the Plaintiff honestly considered those concerns wholly
unjustified.
accept that the Plaintiff honestly believes now, and believed at the time, that
the decision to extend his probation period and
the subsequent refusal for a
time to consent to a transfer out of PolAir were all the consequence of what he
considers, and considered
at the time, to be the wrongheaded opinion of
Inspector Calman and others, to the effect that he was not telling the truth in
statement concerning what happened over the Harbour Bridge. Again, there is
not sufficient evidence, nor do I consider it necessary
to resolve that
question. I am satisfied that Inspector Calman honestly believed that the
Plaintiff's response was not full and frank.
I also accept the Plaintiff
believes to the contrary. I do not accept that the decision to extend the
Plaintiff's probation period,
and any subsequent decisions concerning transfers,
was in any way infected or influenced by that state of mind. However, again I
accept that the Plaintiff genuinely believes to the contrary.
I am satisfied about is that all of this caused the Plaintiff to be greatly
anxious and stressed at the time. This anxiety and
stress manifested in an
adjustment disorder, which was diagnosed as such, causing the Plaintiff to not
be able to work for 6 months.
He was ultimately compensated for that time off in
the way I have described.
The Plaintiff’s return to work
following the PolAir episode
Plaintiff returned to duties in 2014, following six months off work. Prior to
returning to work and being certified fit to do
so by the Police Force, he was
seen by a number of doctors and medical practitioners, all of whom formed the
opinion that he was
fit to return to work and that the adjustment disorder which
he had been diagnosed with as a result of the PolAir episode had resolved.
particular, there were reports created at the time by Dr Ng – the
Plaintiff's general practitioner who put forward a six-hour
per day return to
work plan and Ms Rebecca Guest – a clinical psychologist who
“I can see no reason why this (an ability to function successfully under
stressful conditions) cannot continue. [The Plaintiff's]
injury appears to have
resolved with psychological intervention and time, and I do not anticipate
further impact on his capacity
a report dated 10 February 2014, prepared for or in support of the Plaintiff's
application to transfer to another area command,
Dr Ng said as
“Mr Caller has been referred for psychological counselling. Psychiatric
review by a psychiatrist as suggested by yourself may
be helpful"
is clear that the psychological counselling to which Dr Ng was referring was the
referral to Rebecca Guest, who produced her report
containing her opinion after
seeing the Plaintiff on three occasions. On behalf of the Plaintiff, Mr Morris
emphasises that the Plaintiff
was never seen by a psychiatrist, which Dr Ng
considered might have been helpful.
Police Medical Officer – Dr Bill Kirby – notes of an examination he
conducted on 28 February 2014, include the statement:
“Clinically, on testing, the Plaintiff was fit, and his mood disorder was
in remission"
is in evidence a document which I am satisfied contains the notes made by Dr
Kirby at the time, which include:
“Thought process; content” – “logical, coherent,”
[both of which are ticked];
“Thought process; content” –
disorganised/confabulation/repetitive/ruminating/flash back”, [none of
which are ticked].
[This document also refers to an inquiry about] “intrusive thoughts”
[which is circled] “No” [and] “persisting
– [with “No” circled]. “Concentration”,
“insight” [and] “judgment”
[were also ticked as being]
“satisfactory.”
Kirby also recorded:
The Plaintiff was seen for periods of absence in relation to
depression related to the handling of administrative issues as outlined
clinical and on testing this officer was fit and his mood disorder
was in remission
recommended to him to continue with his clinical psychologist
while he integrates himself back into full duties
Police Force psychologist also examined the Plaintiff at this time, administered
a psychometric test, and concluded in a note to
Dr Kirby that the Plaintiff was
fit to resume full time duties. I infer that Dr Kirby took account of that
opinion and test result
when reaching his conclusion.
considering those medical opinions, the Police Force decided it was appropriate
for the Plaintiff to return to general duties.
leave the PolAir episode by concluding that the interaction between the
Plaintiff and the Police Force concerning this incident
was extremely stressful
and traumatic for the Plaintiff. More importantly, for the purpose of the issue
I have to decide, the Defendant
was on notice from that time of the mood
disorder diagnosis, but only allowed him to return to general duties after
obtaining three
separate medical opinions that it was transient, had resolved,
and that he was fit to return to active duties. It was upon that basis
was allowed to return to general duties work.
Plaintiff’s case as to breach
final submissions, Mr Morris put the Plaintiff's case by reference to three
factual categories, which he contended ultimately coalesced
at the time of the
Plaintiff's return to work after the PolAir episode, so as to amount to a breach
of the Police Force’s duty
of care, which breach is the cause, or a
material cause, of the Plaintiff’s PTSD.
categories of alleged breach are as follows:
(1) A failure to properly educate the Plaintiff;
(2) A failure to implement proper systems so as to identify and thereafter
monitor that the Plaintiff was at particular risk of developing
(3) In light of those failures, the various medical examinations carried out on
the Plaintiff at the conclusion of the PolAir episode
all miscarried because the
various medical practitioners failed to obtain a proper history of the
Plaintiff's service in the Police
Force, in part because he was not capable of
providing a proper history from him as to his symptoms because of the lack of
and the failure of the Police Force to implement systems. In part, it
was submitted that the failure to obtain a proper history was
because the Police
Force medical office asked the wrong questions. Another way of describing this
category of breach is as a failure
to take reasonable steps to identify that the
adjustment disorder the Plaintiff encountered at PolAir, causing time off work,
,” or a sign, that the Plaintiff was at a
heightened risk of developing PTSD. In particular, the Plaintiff contends that
should not have been medically cleared for a return to general duties without
being examined by a psychiatrist.
though, ultimately, the various strands of the Plaintiff's case morph into the
one proposition, I will try and deal with them
separately. Whilst I have found
it difficult, I have also tried to keep questions of breach and causation
separate, but inevitably
there must be some overlap.
evidence as to what relevant education the Plaintiff actually received is scant.
He cannot recall being taught in any formal sense
injuries to which serving police officers are susceptible as a result of
exposure to traumatic events.
is in evidence a record of the various courses the Plaintiff attended and
completed throughout his career and a similar record
relating to Inspector
Calman’s service.
think it is fair to say that both those records demonstrate that there was,
during the Plaintiff’s period of service and indeed
since (by reference to
Inspector Calman’s records), very little formal, relevant education.
Plaintiff conceded in cross-examination that he was well aware that he was being
exposed to repeated traumatic events and that
he was aware that he was at risk
therefore of developing psychiatric disorders such as PTSD. I infer that
understanding was in part
a consequence of what he had been taught either
formally or informally.
Morris points out that it is tolerably clear that he did not himself have any
clear understanding of what particular symptoms might
be markers for such a
disorder developing. This, he submits, is a breach of duty of care by the
Defendant. He submits that the Plaintiff
should have received ongoing education
as to the symptoms of PTSD. Whilst I accept that such ongoing education would be
reasonable,
I do not accept the submission. It is clear that during the PolAir
episode, the Plaintiff had no trouble connecting his symptoms
to the stress he
was encountering at work. He knew what the symptoms were and probably learned
that from either formal or informal
implement systems
is a large body of evidence, albeit it is confusing, to the effect that at
various times from 1990 when a document entitled
Operational and
Training Guide... Critical Incident Stress Debriefing Team
" was created, to
2006, when a document entitled “
Standard Operating Procedures at the
Lake Macquarie Area Command
” was published, to 2007, when a
Standard Operating Procedure – Critical Traumatic
” document was published, to 2015, when an “
and Support Database User Guide for Workforce Safety Command
was published, and early 2008, when the then Commissioner appears to have also
produced a pamphlet entitled “
Traumatic Incidents in the
” and then published it in the Police Force newsletter, that
the Police Force was acutely conscious of the risk to officers
of contracting
PTSD as a result of being exposed to traumatic (and/or critical) incidents.
at least 2006, the Police Force had obviously decided that, in order to
alleviate the risk of officers developing PTSD, procedures
should be developed
and put in place which at the very least would provide for comprehensive records
to be kept and be easily accessible,
in relation to particular officers,
identifying how many traumatic events that officer had been exposed to and a
description of those
suggested guidelines for monitoring staff following such incidents included
debriefing sessions, the availability of various counselling
services, and the
following up of officers so exposed a few days after the event and then again at
a later date to pick up late onset
various counselling type services were put in place, although on the Plaintiff's
evidence, there appears to have been a marked
absence of any proactive contact
by those services to officers exposed to traumatic incidents. Rather, it seems
to have been left
to individual officers to self-identify that they may need
character, perhaps because of a culture within the Police Force that I accept
was very critical of officers acknowledging that they
may need help in these
sort of situations, did not avail himself of such services.
am comfortably satisfied that, despite the best efforts of those within the
Police Force who created and wrote the various instructions
and manuals for
systems to be put in place to try and identify and monitor officers at risk of
PTSD and, notwithstanding the fact
that significant effort was put into
publicising those systems, they were in fact never fully implemented. In other
words, the Police
Force’s efforts to put in place what it considered
appropriate systems for monitoring the risk of officers developing PTSD
nearly 20-year period largely started and finished with documenting what those
systems should be, publicly proclaiming that
they were to be implemented, but
then not actually taking the important step of fully implementing those very
systems. In
Skinner on Appeal
a similar failure was held to be a breach
of the relevant duty.
Resolution as to lack of education and
failure to implement systems
two topics are of course interrelated. The monitoring system and the likelihood
of any individual officer seeking out help from
counselling services et cetera,
will self-evidently be impacted by what education that officer has received as
to potential psychiatric
injuries and an understanding by the officer, gained
from that educative process or otherwise, as to symptoms that they may be
experiencing,
which may themselves be a marker of such an injury, thus making it
more likely for the officer to bring to the attention of someone
in authority,
or a medical practitioner, those symptoms.
first with the allegation as to failure to educate.
Stanton took a pleading point to the effect that the only failure to educate or
train alleged in the pleading as a relevant component
of the duty of care was a
failure to train officers other than the Plaintiff, so as to allow those
officers to identify, in the Plaintiff
and others like him, symptoms that might
be warning signs of PTSD.
as Mr Morris points out, albeit not in the section of the pleading dedicated to
identification of the duty of care, at [94]
of the Statement of Claim, where the
breach of duty is alleged, there is a tolerably clear pleading identifying, as
part of the Plaintiff's
case, a failure to properly train the Plaintiff so as to
allow the Plaintiff to self-identify symptoms and thus, so the argument
more likely to have disclosed relevant symptoms to the various medical
practitioners he saw. Far from a model for good pleading
practice, I consider
the issue to have been identified from that and also the evidence in the
Plaintiff’s case sufficiently
so as to not be unfair to the
was pointed out by Keane J, in the Queensland Court of Appeal in
Queensland Ambulance Service
[2007] Aust Torts Reports 81-919
, a failure to train case in the context of emergency workers at risk
of PTSD will always be extremely complex and difficult. Such
a case will invite
attention to the nature of the training said to be required for superior
officers, so as to allow them to make
better decisions as to intervention, the
likelihood that the Plaintiff would have accepted and acted upon the suggestion,
likelihood that, at the time when he could reasonably have been expected
to be advised to seek assessment and treatment by the supervisor’s
intervention, what treatment would have been available et cetera.
same can be said of a case based on a failure to train the injured plaintiff him
or herself. Again, one needs to identify with
some precision what training was
actually received, what different or additional training should have been
provided, and why that
different or extra training ought be considered
reasonable and why it would have reduced the risk to the Plaintiff of suffering
by causing him to seek help earlier, having self-identified some
an analysis only demonstrates how difficult a failure to educate case in the
present context will always be.
am satisfied that the Plaintiff, albeit that he did not receive very much formal
education relevant to his risk of PTSD, did receive
some training at the academy
and thereafter receive training as part of his time at the Operations Support
Group (“OSG”)
what that training was is not the subject of any direct evidence, but I think it
reasonable to infer that he was told from time
to time that, as he was
inevitably going to be exposed to traumatic incidents, that, consequently, he
was at risk of PTSD and that
the various symptoms that might indicate he was
either suffering PTSD or at risk would have been identified, such as nightmares,
flashbacks, anxiety depression, and the various other matters identified in
said that, I do not think it matters whether the Plaintiff was told he was at
risk of PTSD as result of traumatic exposure
or what the symptoms were, because
I am satisfied that, from very early on in his police career, he was well aware
of that. He also
knew that, if he was suffering the types of symptoms I have
described, that is, anxiety, depression, inability to sleep etc, they
well be signs of PTSD and that he ought get help and that help was available. He
did just that after the PolAir episode.
am also satisfied that the Plaintiff was a person who was not afraid to seek
medical help when he felt he needed it. This is very
clear from his time at
PolAir, when he saw multiple medical practitioners and gave each and every one
of them a reasonably detailed
history and description of his symptoms, including
that he was having trouble sleeping, was suffering stress from work, was feeling
depressed, and was having some difficulties at home with his wife and children.
He himself connected those symptoms to work-related
am conscious that Inspector Calman, when he was asked about the relevant
training he had received during his 37-year career at the
Police Force, gave
evidence which to my mind made it pretty clear that such training was minimal.
Nonetheless, he was conscious of
PTSD as a risk to officers under his command
and took the view that it was necessary for him to keep a good eye on all of his
to monitor for symptoms. He was aware, in general terms, what those
symptoms might be.
am not satisfied that the Defendant breached its duty of care to the Plaintiff
by failing to take reasonable steps to educate the
Plaintiff and other officers
in the Police Force, so as to alert them to the risks and signs and symptoms of
PTSD. There was training
and it appears to have been sufficient so as to impart
to the Plaintiff what he needed to know.
I am wrong as to that finding, I am comfortably satisfied that, even if there
was a breach of such a duty, it did not cause any
injury to the Plaintiff. He
was well aware of the risk of PTSD and of the signs and symptoms. He was also
well aware that if he started
having such symptoms he ought seek help and he
knew such help was available to him by various services made available by the
then to the failure to have in place proper systems so as to monitor the
Plaintiff’s actual exposure to trauma and have
in place appropriate
counselling services.
am satisfied that the Defendant failed to take reasonable steps to put in place
and implement the very systems that it itself designed
and announced with some
considerable fanfare. In particular, there was a marked failure of keeping
accurate and complete records
of each and every exposure to traumatic incidents
that each individual officer encounters, so as to allow those superior in
to monitor closely those with more exposure than others. The Police
Force did have in place appropriate counselling services. It
had, and has, a
selection of such services available to officers. However, it failed to
implement its own published system so as
to allow senior officers to know how
often and to what extent individual officers were being exposed to traumatic
reasons I shall shortly explain in the “
” section of
these reasons, I do not consider this breach of duty of care is in any way the
cause of the Plaintiff's psychiatric
injury and the economic loss for which he
seeks damages.
to the PolAir episode and the submission that it ought to have been seen as a
warning sign or “
” that the Plaintiff being at
particular risk of PTSD. By 2014, there was a lot of material before the Police
Force in support
of the Plaintiff's worker’s compensation claim to alert
the Police Force that the Plaintiff was at risk, in that he was already
suffering anxiety, stress, and a mood related adjustment disorder, caused by the
employment dispute he was involved in, including,
by early 2014, his application
to transfer. The Police Force was aware of all of that and took steps to have
the Plaintiff medically
assessed by a number of qualified people and they all
certified him fit to return to work, and he was consequently allowed to return
to general duties. The question is did the Police Force fail to take reasonable
steps, over and above what it did, to satisfy itself
at that time that the
Plaintiff was fit to return to general duties.
Diamond explained in his evidence the relevance to him of the PolAir episode in
a way that is consistent with the evidence given
by the Plaintiff as
“Q. If we just treat the PolAir situation as not work related, just that
he got involved in this terrible conflict, went on
for years, and he was
obviously stressed and anxious about it all. But then he is assessed as fit for
work. Would you still say,
in those circumstances, he should have a full
psychiatric work up before he goes back to work?
A. Yes, I would.
Q. Could you explain why?
A. Yes, I'd like to. First thing is that an adjustment disorder can easily
coexist with post-traumatic stress disorder. It's often
the case if you read
medical psychiatric reports, there will be both diagnoses. The reason is that
the precipitant for the presentation
of the acute illness might be an
undercurrent event. That is identified as an adjustment disorder. But it exists
on top of a post-traumatic
stress disorder that has different features. It has
the re-experiencing symptoms. It has the hyper arousal symptoms. It has the
disturbance. It has the aggression. It has the avoidant behaviours. It
often has the comorbid self-treatment problems of substance
abuse. All of that
can easily, and often does, coexist and remain present preceding the adjustment
disorder trigger. So, you'd have
the two processes happening together. You
remove the individual from the external stressor, like a family bereavement or a
of a marriage or physical injury is often the case, where people are
coping because they feel physically robust, but they suffer
a back injury, and
their whole sense of robustness collapses. They are much more affected by the
underlying post-traumatic stress
disorder. So, it's the model ought to
incorporate coexistence of the two diagnoses.”
way the Plaintiff puts his case, and this is consistent with Dr Diamond's
opinion, is that the PolAir episode, if I can describe
it as that, which did
lead to the Plaintiff having six months off work on worker’s compensation
with a diagnosed adjustment
disorder, involving stress and anxiety, was a
Diamond explained that the whole experience of becoming embroiled in an ongoing
dispute with his superiors perhaps cannot properly
be described as a
traumatic incident
" like the other incidents. Rather, in his view,
the Plaintiff was already suffering from some early form of PTSD as result of
repeated exposure to trauma and that part of his “
" in being able to function without symptoms, was the support he
perceived he received from the Police Force in general and his comrades.
Plaintiff described this as his “
wall of arrogance
Diamond opined that the experience of becoming alienated in PolAir and feeling
that he was being treated unfairly, provoked
an adjustment disorder, but that
such an adjustment disorder can often and, in his opinion did here, coexist with
PTSD, which, when
the Plaintiff was being assessed by various medical
practitioners to consider if he was fit to return to work and full-time general
duties, including the Police Medical Officer(s), those medical practitioners
failed to assess the Plaintiff adequately and that the
Plaintiff ought to have
undergone what Dr Diamond described as a “
full psychiatric
” which, on Dr Diamond's review of all of the medical
records, did not happen. Dr Diamond believes that, if that had occurred,
Plaintiff would have been identified early as either suffering from, or at a
heightened risk of, PTSD and should have been managed
accordingly and thus would
not be injured as he is now. Quite how he should have been managed was not
entirely clear, but Dr Diamond
considers he ought not have been allowed to
Resolution as to PolAir
the time of his return to work after the PolAir episode, Mr Stanton has
emphasised that the Plaintiff had told his wife, at least
four medical
practitioners, and his superiors, that he was suffering work-related stress and
anxiety and as a consequence had six
months off work but was now felt able to
and was keen to return.
Police Force knew about this and did not allow him to return to work until they
had obtained and reviewed positive reports of
Dr Ng, Rebecca Guest, Dr Kirby,
and a Police Force psychologist who performed psychometric testing. Each of
those medical practitioners
certified the Plaintiff as being fit to return to
work at that time. It seems to me therefore that the Police Force did recognise
the episode as a “red flag” that the Plaintiff might be at greater
than normal risk of suffering psychiatric injuries.
Ng did suggest a psychiatric assessment might be helpful but, nonetheless, was
satisfied that the Plaintiff was fit to return to
full duties.
Diamond's opinion is that those medical practitioners failed to ask the right
questions and failed to appreciate that there is
a real overlap between the
symptoms for an adjustment disorder manifesting as stress and anxiety and PTSD
in an officer who has been
the subject of repeated exposure to trauma. I
consider there is a fundamental flawed assumption in this hypothesis. Even when
by Dr Diamond himself as to his symptoms at the time, the Plaintiff,
who is now well aware of the risk he was at because, with the
hindsight, he knows he ultimately developed PTSD, described no more than
anxiety symptoms
.” He reported to practitioners those same symptoms at the
embracing Dr Diamond's opinion and relying on it, Mr Morris also expands on it.
He submits that, if the Plaintiff had been
properly educated or trained as he
contends he was not and/or if the various systems that the Police Force
announced were to be in
place had in fact been implemented, then the Plaintiff
would have been armed with better insight as to the particular risk he was
and would have in some way emphasised his symptoms in a different way and/or the
various practitioners would had a more detailed
understanding of what he had
been exposed to and that would have led at least one of the medical
practitioners to come to a different
medical opinion than they did.
do not accept Dr Diamond's suppressed premise that the various medical
practitioners that I have referred to did not do their job
adequately. There is
a significant amount of material in the form of notes of each of the
practitioners, which quite clearly indicate
that they each were conscious to ask
many questions directed to what symptoms the Plaintiff might have, so as to
identify some sort
of ongoing psychological or psychiatric disorder. They all
got answers from the Plaintiff in the negative. In my view, this is not
the Plaintiff was being dishonest or exaggerating, although all of the
consultations were in the context of him seeking to
promote his prospects of him
successfully being allocated back on general duties and/or transferring to the
area command of his choice.
Rather, I consider the negative answers as to
symptoms is because the Plaintiff, as at 2014, was actually not suffering any
that might be a sign of underlying PTSD. I also infer that all of the
medical practitioners would have assumed that the Plaintiff
had been exposed to
repeated traumatic events as they all knew he had been a serving police officer
on general duties for many years,
and thus the lack of previous records of those
events made no difference to the opinions they expressed.
to the PolAir episode as a standalone matter being some sort of “
”. I consider that it was, but I am not satisfied that the Police
Force did anything other than exercise reasonable care by
doing everything
realistically and reasonably available to it to ensure that the Plaintiff was
medically fit to return to full duties
as a front-line police officer following
his time off for mood disorder, before allowing him to do so. In other words, I
am satisfied
the Police Force recognised the “
” and then took reasonable steps to respond. Taking
those steps discharged the duty of care.
am not satisfied the Plaintiff was exhibiting any symptoms consistent only with
PTSD. True it is that the symptoms of PTSD and a
transient adjustment disorder
overlap in part, but I do not consider that the diagnoses of each of the medical
practitioners at the
time, that he had suffered a transient adjustment disorder
as a result of his conflict at PolAir, which had resolved, and that he
longer at any greater risk than any other person serving as a general duties
police officer, were anything other than correct.
any event, I do not accept Dr diamond's thesis that the PolAir episode itself
amounted to a “
" that the Plaintiff was actually suffering
from PTSD or likely to suffer it in the future. Looked at on its own, it was a
significant
dispute between an employer and employee, which made the employee
extremely anxious and stressed, because he felt he was being treated
It directly brought on an adjustment disorder. When the stressful situation
passed, those symptoms resolved. I am not satisfied
that the fact that the
Plaintiff spent time off work as a result of that type of stress and anxiety was
some sort of “
,” or sign, so as to require him to
either to be examined by even more medical practitioners than he was before he
was allowed
to return to general duties, or if he had been examined by any
further medical practitioners, that they would have come to any different
conclusion than those who did examine him and express opinions in 2014. Nor do I
think that, if the Plaintiff had been examined by
a psychiatrist, that could be
expected to produce a different diagnosis. Dr Diamond’s opinion to the
contrary is the be respected,
but it is given with the full benefit of hindsight
knowing that the Plaintiff thereafter developed PTSD. I do not accept Dr Diamond
would have predicted that at the time and concluded that the Plaintiff was at
greater than the expected risk without the benefit
of knowing what happened
those reasons, I am not satisfied that the decision by the Police Force to
permit the Plaintiff to return to active general duties
in early 2014
constituted a breach of its duty of care to the Plaintiff.
with the period after the PolAir episode, I do not accept that there was any
failure to monitor the Plaintiff between 2014
and 2019. This is because I do not
accept the submission, or the evidence of Dr Diamond, to the effect that the
transient disorder
of itself, having passed and therefore proved itself to be
transient, should have been seen as a “
,” nor am I
able to identify precisely what monitoring, over and above what occurred in any
event, it is suggested the Police
Force should have undertaken so as to
discharge the duty in the calibrated way described in the cases. It is not
irrelevant that,
while stationed at Kempsey after the PolAir episode, the
Plaintiff was, when dealing with at least one, if not two, traumatic events,
was not in need of any help.
I deal with Mr Morris's fundamental submission that it is the combination of the
various breaches he has identified, which
has caused the Plaintiff's
light of my findings that there was no breach in relation to failure to educate,
no breach in allowing the Plaintiff to return
to work to return to general
duties after the PolAir episode. That leaves only the breach I have accepted in
relation to having appropriate
systems in place, that now needs to be dealt with
on its own for the purpose of causation.
Resolution as to breach
of duty of care
reference to the categories identified earlier of failure to educate, failure to
put in place proper systems, and the PolAir episode
being a "red flag", I am
satisfied for the reasons I have given that the Defendant breached its duty of
care in one respect, in that
it failed to implement the various record-keeping
systems that it itself determined were appropriate.
now turn to the separate and distinct question of causation.
legal test, as I understand it, is as articulated in
Tabet v Gett
[2010] HCA 12
240 CLR 537
”) at paragraphs [46]-[47] per Gummow ACJ,
and [68]-[69] per Hayne and Bell JJ.
law is that it is not enough for damages in this type of case to be
characterised as the loss of a chance of a better medical
a respondent can only be held liable where what is said to have been lost was
the probability, as opposed to the possibility,
that the damage suffered would
have been less severe than it was.
that basis, the question for me is would the Plaintiff probably have suffered
PTSD at all or, if he did, was its severity probably
materially contributed to
by the Defendant’s breach of duty?
Morris submitted that the failure of the Defendant to properly have systems in
place to monitor the Plaintiff, combined with the
failure to properly educate
the Plaintiff, caused the medical opinions that were obtained after the PolAir
episode to misfire.
then submits that I ought be satisfied that, if those systems had been in place
(and if the Plaintiff had been properly educated
and understood the type of
symptoms that might be a marker for PTSD), the Plaintiff would have told those
medical practitioners the
(1) He was stressed as a consequence of work;
(2) He could not “
" the various incidents of trauma that
he had witnessed;
(3) He was having troubles in his marriage, and his wife was accusing him of
reacting disproportionately to situations; and
(4) He was having difficulty sleeping, which he put down to working shift work.
top of that information in the “
counterfactual
”, the medical
practitioners would have had precise knowledge of the amount of, and timing of,
traumatic incidents to which
the Plaintiff had been exposed. This is because
full records of those events would have been available to them.
Morris asked me to infer that, armed with those pieces of information, the
opinion of the various doctors would have been that
the Plaintiff was not fit to
further traumatic events,
undergone treatment, and that he probably either would
not now have PTSD, or its severity would have been materially less than it
if I accept the three breaches of duty of care identified, which I do not, and
as attractive as that submission is, I am afraid
to say that I think I consider
it involves too many steps, many of which involve too much speculation to
support a finding to the
requisite standard of probability.
of all, I have no way of knowing precisely what each of the relevant doctors was
told by the Plaintiff in the various consultations.
It may have been limited to
the information that they wrote down in their contemporaneous notes or they may
have learned more from
the Plaintiff. He gave no evidence as to what he did or
did not tell them.
I am not at all persuaded that, even if they were not told of all those matters,
that if they had been, they would have
come to any different conclusion. All of
that information would have been assessed by practitioners at the time through
of their understanding of the PolAir episode itself, which had been
diagnosed as an adjustment disorder. All those practitioners
had been told that
the Plaintiff’s symptoms had resolved, in part no doubt because the
Plaintiff in fact told everyone that
he was no longer suffering any particular
symptoms. He told them this because he was not suffering any particular symptoms
keen himself to get back to work and to obtain the transfer he was
even for the purpose of obtaining a medical opinion for this case, the Plaintiff
told Dr Diamond only of “
depression and anxiety symptoms
Dr Diamond, presumably, asked what he considered were appropriate questions and
yet this is all he got. I do not think any
different system of record keeping or
education would have changed what the Plaintiff told medical practitioners at
as far as the counselling services are concerned, they were available. The
Plaintiff knew they were available. The Plaintiff
knew of the risk of PTSD, he
knew what the symptoms were, yet chose not to speak to counsellors. I do not
consider that more education
or the keeping of better records by the Police
Force would have changed any of that.
the failure to have before the various medical practitioners a full and detailed
record of the Plaintiff’s traumatic
history would have, in my view, made
no difference to their opinions. After all, they knew he had been a general
duties police officer
for many years and therefore would have assumed exposure
to repeated trauma.
then leaves the question of the period after the Plaintiff returns to general
duties up until he ceases work in 2019. A period
of five years. As I have
already recorded, during that period he was exposed to a series of further
traumatic events. I am satisfied
that there was a breach of duty of care during
that period in that proper systems were not put in place and that the Police
failed to keep records of those incidents and therefore failed to take
proactive steps to monitor the Plaintiff's health and well-being
in that regard.
I accept that during that period he started having nightmares and becoming
hypervigilant, both of which are signs
of PTSD. I am not satisfied that anything
the Police Force did or did not do during this period caused the
Plaintiff’s current
state or made any difference to the ultimate
conclusion of the Plaintiff's career. This is because I do not consider he was
greater risk of PTSD than any officer performing general duties over a
long period of time.
sum up my findings on causation, even if I were to accept that there was a
breach of duty of care in relation to a failure to educate
the Plaintiff and if
I consider that there was a failure by the Police Force to have the Plaintiff
examined by a psychiatrist at
the conclusion of the PolAir episode, both of
which propositions I do not accept, I consider the process of reasoning involved
the Plaintiff’s submission as to causation to be fundamentally flawed
as it involved much speculation and assumptions not supported
by evidence. As I
understand it, the process of reasoning is as follows:
(1) If the Plaintiff had been properly educated, he would have provided a more
detailed explanation as to his symptoms to medical
practitioners in 2014 and/or
positively sought out help for PTSD thereafter.
(2) If the Police Force had in place proper systems for recording the actual
specific exposure of the Plaintiff to traumatic events,
then the doctors
examining him in 2014 would have asked more, or better, questions of the
Plaintiff, which would have provoked a
different diagnosis and he would not have
been allowed to return to general duties but instead would have been medically
in some way or that he would have been identified as being at risk after
he left PolAir and returned to general duties.
(3) If the Plaintiff had been examined by a psychiatrist – for example Dr
Diamond – in 2014, he would have diagnosed
the Plaintiff as being, either
already suffering from PTSD, or being at an elevated level of risk to so
suffering because Dr Diamond
or another psychiatrist would have elicited a
different history.
(4) Upon that diagnosis, the Plaintiff would have been diverted from a return to
general duties, which would have prevented him from
developing PTSD.
(5) In the five years following the PolAir episode, if the Police Force had kept
proper records of the traumatic events the Plaintiff
was exposed to, things
would have been different.
course, in that counterfactual, it is possible that, in 2014 or thereafter, the
Police Force would have recognised signs in the
Plaintiff that he was
potentially going to become incapacitated as a result of PTSD. However, I do not
consider it is probable that
anything different than actually occurred would
have happened, even if the Police Force had acted differently in some or all of
various ways suggested by the Plaintiff. To the contrary, I think the
outcome would have been the same.
Conclusion as to
satisfied that, in the limited way I have described, the Defendant breached its
duty of care to the Plaintiff during the period
he was a police officer, I am
not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that breach of duty, or indeed a
combination of all of
the alleged breaches, was a material contributor to the
Plaintiff's current significant symptoms and diminished earning capacity.
other words, even if I am wrong as to breach, I do not consider the
Plaintiff’s case on causation to rise higher than a
possibility of a
better outcome.
those reasons, the Plaintiff's claim must be
light of those findings, I will deal with damages shortly against the
possibility that I am wrong.
exercise is difficult for two separate and distinct reasons. The first is, if it
be found that I am wrong in relation to the
questions of breach and causation,
then it seems to me that there are potentially a large number of quite different
avenues for the
Plaintiff to succeed on liability. Depending on which one might
be selected, that may well produce a very different outcome on damages.
words, this case really does emphasise why sometimes it is impossible to
compartmentalise the issues of duty, breach, causation,
and damages because they
each are interrelated and, depending on the precise outcome of one, that will
have a flow on effect to others.
the evidence is that the Plaintiff has had two incidents of
" which have required him to be hospitalised and treated
by a neurologist.
second incident has resulted in the suspension by Services New South Wales of
the Plaintiff's driver’s licence, which his
treating neurologist does not
agree with, and there is now some sort of appeal process going on whereby he is
trying to get his driver’s
licence back.
Unfortunately,
until the Plaintiff was giving his evidence in the witness box in April 2025,
the second seizure incident and the consequential
loss of driver’s licence
was not known to any of the lawyers involved in the
Adjournment, further evidence, and written
submissions
enough, those facts took the Defendant by surprise, which was acknowledged by Mr
Morris. It was agreed that the only fair
basis upon which the case then
proceeded was that I would hear all evidence and submissions to conclusion, then
adjourn to allow
the Plaintiff to be examined by a consultant neurologist, so
that some judgment could be made as to the impact of this medical condition,
least for the purpose of future economic loss. If necessary, further evidence
and submissions could then be received on the topics
of seizures, the
Plaintiff’s drivers’ licence, and the impact these matters might
have on his earning capacity. On that
basis, I heard all the available evidence
and submissions and then adjourned the matter.
that adjournment, the Plaintiff was medically examined, and following a further
directions hearing on 5 September 2025,
I received written submissions from both
parties, together with proposed further medical and lay evidence. On the
question of the
admissibility of that further evidence I considered the
parties’ written submissions in chambers and delivered judgment on
September 2025 (
Caller v State of New South Wales (No 1)
[2025] NSWDC
, wherein I gave leave to the parties to both rely on further evidence. I
will not repeat what I said in that judgment.
Thereafter,
I made further directions for written submissions and have now considered the
further evidence and those written submissions
as to the impact of the evidence
concerning the Plaintiff’s second “
Plaintiff's submission as to the second seizure evidence is that it is
a red herring
" and ought make no difference to the outcome as to
Defendant takes a very different approach, contending that the consequence of
the evidence of the second seizure is that the Plaintiff
would have been unable
to work as a police officer at all for a period of 12 months from November 2024
and that, as far as the future
is concerned, in combination with the other
comorbidities suffered by the Plaintiff, in particular the physical injuries and
disabilities
he suffered as a consequence of the physically demanding nature of
his police job, he would have been totally incapacitated from
work regardless of
the psychiatric injuries the subject of these proceedings. In other words, the
Defendant submits that the conclusion
should be no economic loss proved from
November 2024.
will not reiterate in detail the competing submissions by the parties but have
marked for identification their written submissions,
respectively, the
Plaintiff’s filed 10 October 2005 will be MFI-19, the Defendant’s
filed 23 October 2025 will be MFI-20,
and the Plaintiff’s in reply filed
30 October 2025 will be MFI-21. All of those documents will remain with the
have concluded that the evidence of the second seizure ought reduce the
Plaintiff's past economic loss component by 12 months because
I consider, on the
balance of probabilities, the second seizure would have occurred even if the
Plaintiff was not suffering from
PTSD. This is because the episode was brought
on (as was the first) by a weekend away at a music camp, which involved
significant
consumption of alcohol and not much sleep at all.
Plaintiff, on his own evidence, was a heavy drinker during the whole of his
police career and he most certainly enjoyed the weekends
away, not just because
of their therapeutic effect, but because they were fun. I, therefore, think it
is more likely than not that
he would have from time to time engaged in heavy
bouts of drinking over weekends, which would have reduced his sleep, which all
medical evidence is in agreement is the cause of the seizures.
to the future however, I do not accept the evidence of Dr Milder that the
Plaintiff would have been, from November 2024 for the
foreseeable
," unable to work as an operational police officer, unless
foreseeable future
” is limited to a 12-month period from
November 2024, which is Dr Reddell’s opinion.
reasons are that, firstly, Dr Milder does not in any way explain what is assumed
to be the requirements of an operational police
officer and, secondly, and in
any event, Dr Milder seems to assume that there is a requirement for an
operational police officer
to be able to drive a “
Reddell, on the other hand, who is the Plaintiff's treating neurologist,
concludes that the Plaintiff would have been able to return
to operational
police work, albeit after a period when he would not have been able to work at
all. I consider 12 months to be the
probable period the Plaintiff would have
been off work in any event.
is consistent with what occurred after the 2016 seizure, where after a period of
not being able to perform operational police
work, the Plaintiff returned to,
albeit restricted, operational work.
to the lay evidence, it is to the effect that, without being able to work night
shifts (which neither doctor recommends), there
would have been no work
available for an officer with a history of the Plaintiff and an inability to
work night shifts, at least
in the operational commands near where he
do not accept that evidence and I think, having regard to the successful efforts
the Police Force made to get the Plaintiff working
again after his various
episodes of both physical and mental problems, that it is more likely than not
that the Police Force would
have found him some work to do and, in any event, if
there really was not work available in the operational commands near where he
lives, there was always the prospect of him moving to another area, which is
more likely to have occurred now that his children have
grown up. It should not
be overlooked that the Plaintiff had an extremely good work ethic, and, in any
event, Inspector Calman’s
evidence was very different to the new lay
evidence. He said that redeployed police officers are commonplace and continue
fulfilling careers in the Police Force.
is for those reasons that I have determined that the second seizure, which I do
not consider was related to the Plaintiff's psychiatric
injury, would have
prevented him from working for a period of 12 months from November 2024, but
after 12 months would not have affected
his earning capacity.
therefore, propose to reduce his past and future economic loss, so as to take
out any component for that 12-month period.
set out below the Defendant's Schedule of Damages which was marked MFI-11 in the
hearing. It is agreed that, as a theoretical exercise,
it is the appropriate way
to consider
“Actuarial Factors
Plaintiff’s date of birth:
19 December 1973
Date of ceasing work:
11 November 2018
Weeks since cessation:
Weekly salary at cessation (net)
Date of assessment:
31 March 2025
Age of Plaintiff at assessment:
Years to retirement at age 67:
5% multiplier for 16 years:
Past economic loss
1. The defendant has allowed a 2%annual increase in earnings commencing on 1
July 2018 until 1/7/2024 when earnings increased by
2. The plaintiff’s net earnings if uninjured would now be $1,7262 npw.
3. The average weekly earnings for the period is $1,600.
4. The plaintiff has been incapacitated for a period of 6 years and 20 weeks.
5. Past incapacity is accordingly $1,600 x 332 weeks = $531,200
6. Past superannuation is 11% of such loss which amounts to $58,432.
7. The plaintiff has been in receipt of weekly payments of workers compensation
and is entitled to tax on such payments pursuant
to Fox v Wood which will be
quantified at the trial.
8. Such payments are to be deducted from any award of damages – see
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Future economic loss
1. But for injury, the Plaintiff’s earnings would be $1726 npw.
2. The mathematical calculation for total incapacity is $1,726 x 579.5 x 85% =
3. Future superannuation is calculated at 14.63%3 which amounts to the sum of
On the basis of total incapacity in the past and future, the Plaintiff’s
damages are as follows:
Past economic loss
Past superannuation loss $ 58,432
Future economic loss
Future superannuation loss $124,382
DEFENDANTS CONTENTIONS
1. Any breach of duty (if found) was not causative of the Plaintiff’s
injury. Rather, the Plaintiff has the condition of PTSD
and major depressive
disorder caused by the cumulative effect of exposure to trauma during the entire
period of the Plaintiff’s
service as a police officer.
2. The Defendant contends the Plaintiff is not totally incapacitated for all
forms of employment and retains earning capacity.
3. If injury due to a breach of duty is established, the Plaintiff’s
incapacity is due to tortious and non-tortious events.
In that event, the
damages are to be apportioned between the two in accordance with DC v State of
[2016] NSWCA 198
and State of NSW v Skinner
[2022] NSWCA 9.
reference to that document, I identify the areas of dispute between the
The second seizure
reasons I have explained above, I propose to reduce the Plaintiff's past
economic loss by 12 months (52 weeks) as an acknowledgement
of the effect that
the second seizure would have had on his ability to work during that period in
Accordingly,
this reduces the past economic climate loss claim from 332 weeks to 280
would also reduce the past superannuation claim slightly.
I have taken the full 12 months into account for the past, it does not reduce
the future economic loss claim.
Contributory negligence
is an issue of contributory negligence.
is a topic about which I do not think my consideration will be useful. The
allegation by the Defendant is that the Plaintiff
failed to take reasonable care
for his own medical well-being by failing to report symptoms to various medical
practitioners or to
his superiors.
have already concluded that the Plaintiff did have adequate education and, in
any event, understood the need to bring such matters
to people's attention and
yet did not do so. On the other hand, I have concluded that, at no particular
time and in particular at
2014, was the Plaintiff actually suffering
particularly serious symptoms.
Morris's answer to this is that the Defendant cannot rely on its own breach of
duty if it is the cause of the alleged contributory
negligence. So much may be
accepted. However, I have found no breach in failing to educate. I have also
found it made no difference.
Upon that hypothesis, I think that the Plaintiff
needs to take some responsibility for the injury. I understand that he was
keen to get back to work and that he was working in an organisation that
probably does have some sort of culture where people who
bring attention to this
sort of matter are criticised. If I am wrong as to failure to educate and its
lack of causative effect, the
result may well be different.
all circumstances, I consider that any award for damages ought be reduced by 20%
to give effect to that contribution, but as I
say, if others come to a different
view as to breach and causation, undoubtedly this finding will need to be
Other causes
next point made by the Defendant, based on cases like
DC v State of New South
[2016] NSWCA 198
, is that I have to take into account prior
non-tortious exposure to trauma and the trauma involved in the PolAir episode,
do not think of itself amounts to any wrongdoing by the Defendant, and
then the Plaintiff's current physical restrictions.
to those, I think if the matter is looked at from the Plaintiff's perspective
and liability is found, it is likely that finding
would not involve any
criticism of the Defendant for any exposure to trauma by the Plaintiff prior to
the PolAir episode. Nor do
I think the Defendant is responsible for any
causative effect of the PolAir episode itself. What level of contribution that
has to his ultimate condition can of course never be known.
those exposures are some of the cumulative matters which are the cause of his
injury, for which the Defendant cannot be held
Diamond also considers that the PolAir episode itself was a traumatic incident
that needs to be factored in as one of the cumulative
factors. I am not
satisfied that it was tortious, and this should be taken into account for the
purpose of assessing damages.
there is a considerable body of medical evidence to the effect that the
Plaintiff has significant physical injuries which would,
at least by now, have
probably caused him to not be able to work as an active police officer and, if
he had left the Police Force,
would be a considerable impediment and restriction
on his earning capacity. The Police Force is not liable for this loss of
the seizures are themselves not the consequence of any wrongdoing by the
Defendant but seem to have caused the Plaintiff
to lose his driver’s
licence which self-evidently would have hampered his career as a police
to the seizures, I have dealt with them by reducing the economic loss claim by
52 weeks. There is no need to adjust vicissitudes
over and above that
into account the other non-tortious injuries and disabilities the Plaintiff is
dealing with. I consider it appropriate for
damages to be calculated as follows.
This is not scientific and is difficult to explain over and above I am doing my
best to evaluate
all of the relevant factors:
(1) Past economic loss should be based on a figure of $1,000 per week, as
opposed to his uninjured capacity of $1,726 per week.
(2) Past economic loss ought be calculated by $1,000 x 280 weeks to take into
account the 52 weeks following the second seizure.
(3) Future economic loss again should be awarded upon the basis of $1,000 per
week for the period identified in the Defendant’s
(4) Instead of the usual 15% reduction for vicissitudes, I consider there should
be a 20% reduction to take into account the other
matters I have identified as
various non-tortious contributors to the Plaintiff's claim.
(5) From that figure there should then be deducted 20% to take into account my
finding as to contributory negligence.
(6) I will leave the “
Fox v Wood component
worker’s compensation payback to be agreed by the parties.
(7) I will leave it to the parties to perform the appropriate calculations to
arrive at a total figure.
Conclusion/Orders
these reasons, my orders are:
(1) The Plaintiff’s claim is dismissed.
(2) The Plaintiff is to pay the Defendant’s costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (503 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter