URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Taghi Zadeh Vardough [2023] NSWNMPSC 2 (24 February 2023)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National
to hold an Inquiry into a
complaint in relation
Mr Hamed Taghi Zadeh
NMW0001357729
Date/s of Inquiry:
3 November 2022 and 18 January 2023
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul
Mr Rohan Langstaff
Ms Melissa Cooke
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Joan Lee and Ms Hannah Boxall of the Health Care Complaints Commission
on 3 November 2022.
Ms Sarah McCarthy instructed by Ms Hannah Boxall of the
Health Care Complaints Commission on 18 January 2023
Appearance for Mr Hamed Taghi Zadeh Vardough:
Mr Ian Latham
Decision date:
24 February 2023
The Committee found the complaint of a criminal finding for an offence
established. The Committee found unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The
Committee determined to reprimand and impose conditions
Publication of decision:
No non-publication directions have been made
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Introduction
1. Our inquiry concerns a Complaint brought by the Health
Care Complaints Commission against Mr Hamed Taghi Zadeh Vardough, a
nurse. On 18 September 2020 Mr Vardough, visited a chemist and
presented a script that he had earlier altered. He was charged with
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
in that he had
presented the script knowing it had been fraudulently altered. Mr Vardough
attended court on 14 May 2021 and admitted
the offence. He was found
guilty, but without the court proceeding to a conviction. He entered a
Conditional Release Order under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
for a period of 18 months.
2. The first component of the
Complaint is that pursuant to s144(a) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) (the
National Law) the finding of guilt and the imposition of
the conditional release order made Mr Vardough the subject of a criminal
finding for an offence. This aspect of the Complaint is made out.
second component of the Complaint is that in altering and presenting the script
Mr Vardough had engaged in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the
practice or purported practice of nursing which amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s139B(1)(l)
of the National Law. In our view, his
conduct in altering and presenting the script was improper conduct relating to
the practice
of nursing and amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct by
him as a registered nurse.
4. We have decided to reprimand Mr Vardough
and impose conditions on his registration that he be mentored and that his
employers are
made aware of our decision.
5. Our inquiry proceeds upon a Further Amended Complaint
(the Complaint) brought by the Health Care Complaints Commission and dated
18 January 2023.
6. Although the Complaint has two components each
concerns the same scenario: that of Mr Vardough, in or around September
2020, improperly
altering a script and knowingly presenting it to a chemist to
7. Mr Vardough did not dispute the Complaint and acknowledged
the conduct alleged against him. The evidence provided to us supports
conclusion that Mr Vardough was made the subject of a criminal finding for
an offence and that his conduct was improper such
as to amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
8. The substantive consideration of our inquiry was
whether we should exercise our powers under s146B of the National Law and if so
in what ways.
hearing and adjournment
9. Our inquiry commenced on 3 November 2022. The
Commission was represented by Ms Joan Lee of the Commission, supported by
Boxall. Mr Vardough attended, and Mr Ian Latham appeared on
his behalf. On 18 January 2023 the Commission was represented by Ms
McCarthy with Ms Boxall.
10. The Commission provided us with two volumes
of 38 tabbed documents relating to its investigation of the Complaint, the
of guilt and the events following the offence on 18 September 2020.
Mr Vardough did not object to or contest any of that material,
received and marked Exhibit A.
11. In response Mr Vardough provided us
with his statement which attached his resume, records of study and reports from
The Commission did not object and we received it as Exhibit 1.
12. Tab 15 of the Commission’s materials contained the Conditional
Release Order. We accept that record as establishing the
complaint under
s144(a) of the National Law. At page 8 of Tab 14 was the police brief of
evidence which included a copy of the fraudulently
altered script the subject of
the offence. We refer to this script as the ‘handwritten script’.
The police brief also
contained and referred to another script (page 7 of
tab 14 of Exhibit A). We refer to this script as the “printed
The copy of the printed script appeared to have behind it a
third script, although partially obscured.
13. On initial consideration the
printed script and the partially obscured script appeared factually relevant to
our inquiry, especially
when considering whether and what protective orders
might be made. As we did not have sufficient information about the printed or
the partially obscured scripts, we adjourned the hearing to allow the Commission
to obtain further information and to consider any
amendment to the Complaint,
and for Mr Vardough to respond.
14. The hearing resumed on
18 January 2023. The Commission sought to rely upon a Further Amended
Complaint containing amendments
to the original Complaint of 14 July 2022 but
with no formal complaint about the printed or partially obscured script.
Mr Vardough
did not object and we accepted the Further Amended
15. Commission provided a statement by one of the
Commission’s officers containing information about both scripts (received
and marked Exhibit B). At annexure A was a complete copy of the partially
obscured script. The script had been written on a hospital
script pad, and we
refer to it as the ‘hospital pad script’. Although the Commission
did not seek to make a complaint
was relevant to protective orders.
16. On analysis the printed script was a
prepared by a
chemist. It did not hold any immediate significance for our
17. Mr Vardough did not dispute any of the further information
in Exhibit B. In response he gave us an expanded statement which dealt
issues raised by the hospital pad script (received and marked Exhibit 2).
18. We also received a statement from Mr Vardough’s wife (Exhibit
3). She carefully explained her observations and assessments
Mr Vardough over the last few years, particularly following the offence,
the court case and Mr Vardough’s involvement in
various proceedings
under the National Law. Her evidence was a thoughtful and useful assessment of
Mr Vardough’s reflections
on his conduct. We thank her for her
contribution.
19. Mr Vardough gave evidence and answered our
20. As there is no substantive dispute as to events or conduct it
is convenient to summarise what we accept happened.
of Registration
21. Mr Vardough was first registered as a nurse in
Australia on 16 October 2007 after completion of a Bachelor of Nursing
Azad University Iran in 2004.
22. He completed a Bachelor of
Pharmacy degree at the University of Sydney in 2014 and was first registered as
a pharmacist on 7 May
2014. He worked as a nurse and a pharmacist in
various capacities until October 2020.
23. At the time of committing the
offence, 18 September 2020, Mr Vardough was working as a registered
nurse at a private cosmetic
24. Following some complaints,
including a complaint about the altering of the handwritten script,
Mr Vardough’s registration
as a nurse was suspended on
30 September 2020.
25. At the same time his registration as a pharmacist
was likewise suspended.
26. Matters relating to Mr Vardough’s
registration as a pharmacist are not part of our consideration and our decision
affect Mr Vardough’s registration status as a
pharmacist.
27. The suspension of the nursing registration took place under
s150 of the National Law. Although the suspension has been reconsidered
under s150A of the National Law the interim suspension of
Mr Vardough’s registration as a nurse has and will continue
disposal of the present Complaint.
28. Other than the present complaint,
Mr Vardough has not been subject to any adverse findings now relevant to
our considerations.
No matter was raised by the Commission other than the
altering of the handwritten script and its presentation to the chemist. Matters
canvassed at the s150 and 150A hearings have not been advanced.
Mr Vardough’s
conduct – the hospital pad script
29. In his statement (Exhibit 2, paragraphs 18 to 24)
Mr Vardough admits that he wrote the hospital pad script on or about its
2 November 2019. He said he had found the blank script form in a desk at
his workplace. He filled out the script not in his own
name and address but
that of a work colleague. He listed five different drugs each with repeats of
five or two. As the prescriber
he gave the name and position of a colleague
from an earlier workplace, who he thought was still working at one of the
listed on the script form. Finally, he forged that doctor’s
30. Some years before he had injured his shoulder while skiing and
he has continued to have pain and need pain relief. He told us
he was under
treatment by his general practitioner for recurring pain, and the drugs he put
on the hospital pad script were those
he had been prescribed at earlier
31. Over the next few months, he filled the scripts from different
pharmacies, which he said were near his workplaces.
32. Mr Vardough was
unable to give any meaningful explanation of what prompted him to take the
script form from a desk drawer at his
workplace, to then create the hospital pad
script, and then use it to obtain those drugs. He said he was working hard, was
busy, and did not have time to see his doctor again. In his statement he
said he did not fill the scripts immediately but only when
“My pain was
flaring up” and then he “Filled the script to reduce the pain and
continue doing my duties that day”.
33. It seems that
Mr Vardough thought his form of self‑prescribing was somehow
acceptable given that he had been receiving these
same drugs on a script from
his medical practitioner and he was only presenting the script to be filled when
he decided that he needed
a particular drug.
34. In his statement
Mr Vardough went on to say that the importance of not altering
prescriptions was brought home to him during the
hearing under s150 of the
National Law on 29 September 2020.
35. Mr Vardough was unable to give a
coherent explanation of why, if he was writing up the script for his own use, he
decided to use
somebody else’s name, address, and personal details of date
of birth, sex, and weight to complete the script and, further,
to use not his
own medical practitioner’s name and supposed signature but to use that of
a colleague he had worked with some
36. Mr Vardough’s explanation for not seeing his medical
practitioner at the time for a new script was that he was working long
He does not offer that explanation as an excuse for doing what he knew was
wrong. He appeared unable to understand his own
Mr Vardough’s
conduct – the handwritten script
37. Some months later, early in 2020, Mr Vardough says
that he was asked by a medical practitioner colleague to see if he could obtain
a flu vaccine for the practitioner’s father, as she had been unable to
fill it at local pharmacies. Mr Vardough said he might
be able to help and
took the script. Apparently, he then forgot about it, made no effort to get it
filled, was not asked about it,
and it was still in his bag in August 2020.
38. At that time, he was having a significant dispute with a previous
business colleague and found out that the former business colleague
complaints about him to the Nursing and Midwifery Council and the Pharmacy
39. Mr Vardough said he was experiencing stress and an
aggravation of pain. He said he contacted his medical practitioner’s
rooms to make an appointment but without success. He could not return to his
specialist as that practitioner was seeing limited
patients as part of
COVID‑19 precautions.
40. Mr Vardough said his pain and stress was
getting worse and he needed something to deal with his cold sores He knew he
again to see his regular GP or go to a local hospital emergency
department, but he did neither. He told us, “I did not want
burden on the health system”. He then realised that he was still holding
in his bag the script from his medical colleague
on behalf of her father for the
flu vaccine. He decided to alter the script and did so on 10 August
41. Mr Vardough used the same name as he earlier used for the
hospital script, being the name of the business partner with whom he
dispute. Mr Vardough could give no explanation for that continuity of
choice of name.
42. We drew his attention to the copy of the handwritten
script at Exhibit A, tab 14, page 8 and asked him what amendments
He said all the writing was his which he had created by very carefully
pressing upon the carbonated paper so that his alterations
appeared on the
script. He said the script had originally been written with a light hand.
43. Not having access to the original document, we were unable to determine
with any confidence how it was that the handwritten script
was produced. The
copy showed none of the original text for flu vaccine for the
practitioner’s father. All text that was
visible was in
Mr Vardough’s hand.
44. Whatever the method makes no significant
difference to our consideration. Mr Vardough admits that he falsely and
improperly created
the script and then falsely and improperly presented it to
obtain Tramadol for pain relief and Valaciclovir for his cold sores.
gave Mr Vardough the opportunity to reflect on what he had done and explain
to us what prompted him to behave as he did in
creating and using the two
scripts. Although he was able to say that he now understood that his conduct
was wrong and regrettable
he had no real explanation for what he did. He
repeated he had been under stress, was very busy, had previously received
of this kind from his own general practitioner, and he did not want to
bother anybody. As he said, all he was doing was obtaining
the drugs that he
could have obtained if he had the time to see his general
practitioner.
46. In our assessment Mr Vardough had a disconnect in his
understanding of his conduct. At the time it seems that he did not see
improper or illegal, or he allowed those considerations to be displaced by his
assessment that in some way there was no real
harm done if all he was doing was
creating these scripts for medications that he had been prescribed in the past
and could have obtained
from his general practitioner.
47. It seems it was
not until the s150 hearing on 29 September 2020 that it was brought home to
him that the issues were more extensive
and significant. As he says in his
statement of 14 December 2022, Exhibit 2, paragraph 24:
experience has reinforced to me that the system of prescribing drugs requires
practitioners to act with total honesty.
The system is in place to protect the
public. I realise that by seeing a prescribing practitioner the pain will be
thoroughly investigated.
This prevents the public taking the pain killer and
mask the underlying health concerns. It is important to follow the rules set
out by the Poisons and Therapeutic scheduling so that not everyone has access to
prescribed medication without seeing a health
practitioner.”
48. Although we asked the question in several ways
Mr Vardough was unable to explain how it was that he had a different view,
less rigorous view in the past such that on two occasions he fraudulently
created the two scripts. It is significant that he did
not write those scripts
in his own name nor use the name of his general practitioner. Instead, he chose
the name of a colleague
with whom he was in dispute and different medical
practitioners. That to us suggests he was conscious of wrongdoing, and trying
to hide his tracks, but went ahead in an event. Or he thought that because he
was in pain, under stress and busy at work it was
somehow permissible to
fraudulently alter a script and then present it to be filled. Doing so was
obviously improper.
of Complaint
49. The scope of the complaint is limited to the finding of
guilt with respect to the presenting of the fraudulent handwritten script
18 September 2020 and that the conduct improper or unethical conduct
relating to the practice of nursing.
50. We are satisfied the Complaint under
s144(a) of the National Law is made out in that Mr Vardough was made the
subject of a criminal
finding for a criminal offence in NSW. It is not
necessary for us to decide if any criminal finding for an offence necessarily
in a finding that the subject matter of a complaint is proved. However,
in this case we are considering a criminal for an offence
that relates to an
integral aspect of nursing practice – the proper management, control, and
issue of scripts. Mr Vardough
fraudulently altered a script that he then
proffered to be filled.
51. In our view the Complaint under s144(a) of the
National Act is made out, and it is appropriate to consider protective
52. The second aspect of the Complaint requires some further comment.
A finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(l)
depends upon
the improper or unethical conduct be related to the practice of nursing. There
is no suggestion or argument that falsifying
the handwritten script was improper
and would be so even without a prosecution. To reach this conclusion it is not
necessary to
point to proscriptive words in the Code of conduct for nurses
(Exhibit 1, tab 36). Mr Vardough’s conduct denied the vaccine
patient, undermined the established system of issuing and filling of scripts,
and was undertaken with the intention of clandestinely
obtaining a prescription
drug. For these reasons we find it was improper for Mr Vardough to
intentionally alter the handwritten
53. However, the mere fact that
Mr Vardough was a registered nurse at the time of the alteration of the
script does not mean his conduct
was related to the practice of nursing.
Something more is required. We are assisted by the comments of Walton J in
Attia v Health
Care Complaint Commission
[2017] NSWSC 1066
, paragraphs 146
to 153 and his consideration of the broad interpretation to be given to the
practice of a pharmacy. We take the
same approach in considering conduct
relating to the practice of nursing.
54. At the time of the offence
Mr Vardough was registered as a nurse, was practising as a nurse, and was
employed as a nurse. When
a medical practitioner at Mr Vardough’s
clinic sought Mr Vardough’s assistance to fill a flu vaccine script
Mr Vardough
was in the position of a nurse working with the medical
practitioner. No doubt the practitioner was implicitly relying on and trusting
Mr Vardough as a nurse to fill the script for the purpose of treating a
patient, and not for it to be altered and then used for some
improper purpose.
Mr Vardough was handed the script for a purpose. In our view his
subsequent alteration and misuse of the script
was conduct relating to the
practise of nursing.
55. The public is entitled to expect that nurses
understand and respect that scripts are issued for a reason – the care and
treatment patients in need - and that those within the nursing profession will
respect that reason and not ignore or act contrary
to it. In his statement
(Exhibit 2, paragraph 24, and set out above) Mr Vardough said he accepts
those principles and acknowledges
his unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Consideration
of protective orders
56. Having found the subject matter of the Complaint to have
been proved we consider whether to exercise any of the powers under s146B
National Law.
57. The Commission and Mr Vardough helpfully provided
written submissions. There were no significant differences between the parties
in the application of legal principles, findings of fact or proposed protective
orders. We do not need to further review or assess
those submissions, other
than to record that the submissions were of assistance. We thank Ms Lee and Ms
McCarthy, and Mr Latham
for their helpful approach to our inquiry.
commencement of our inquiry the Commission proposed orders for a reprimand and
conditions on practice that would require
Mr Vardough to be mentored.
Mr Vardough accepted the appropriateness of those orders and did not
contest them.
59. In meeting the primary purpose of protecting the public we
are aware of the value of demonstrating to the public that it will
be protected;
deterring Mr Vardough from similar conduct; deterring others in the
profession; and educating the public and the profession
of expectations of the
conduct of registered nurses.
60. Mr Vardough’s improper conduct
in altering the handwritten script was not a one off. Almost a year before he
created the
hospital pad script in much the same way. He happened to come
across a blank form at work which he took and altered for his own
purposes, and
then presented it about six times over a period of a few months. Neither case
was a momentary lapse of judgment but
involved careful steps to obtain what he
wanted and with the aim of avoiding the inconvenience of returning to his
general practitioner.
61. Although we do not know the precise circumstances
it seems that in each case an initiating step was that he happened to come into
possession of a script through his workplace, hold onto it and then later make
use of it. Mr Vardough’s improper conduct is
not lessened by the
easy access he had to the scripts, but the events suggest that if similar
circumstances arise again, he might
be tempted to repeat his conduct.
62. We asked Mr Vardough about the studies he had undertaken in the
last few years. It is apparent that he has tried to keep his
nursing knowledge
up to date but there is not much that he has done that touches on his improper
conduct. The courses that he has
attended on ethics and similar were more
general. The observation might be made that a member of the nursing profession
need to be told that fraudulently altering or creating a script and
then misusing it is improper conduct.
63. We asked Mr Vardough what he
had gained from the courses in ethics. He had some difficulty expressing what
he had learned about
how his conduct was improper. Rather than see the serious
flaws in his own conduct, he in part judged the wrongness of his actions
consequence of being caught up in the s150 hearings and the proceedings before
this Committee. He refers to the stress he
was under at the time he altered the
handwritten script. However, there was no similar stress at the time of his
creation of the
hospital pad script almost a year earlier. We are not confident
that he yet has a good understanding of what it was about himself
that allowed
his conduct, and the ways in which he needs to understand his personal
responsibility to his profession.
64. Mr Vardough says he would like
to again practice as a nurse in cosmetic skin care. He says he understands the
crucial importance
of seeking help from his doctor when things are difficult and
addressing health concerns as they arise rather than choosing self-medication.
He readily admits his conduct was wrong. He believes that the public can be
confident in him if he is given a second chance.
65. To signify the wrongness
of Mr Vardough’s actions we propose to reprimand him for his conduct
in altering the handwritten
script. His actions were not only an offence but
also a breach of the obligations expected of him as a nurse. He corrupted the
scrip and undermined its purpose. His conduct is not in any way excused or
lessened by reason of stress management or notions of
self-medication.
our view the public would be protected if Mr Vardough continued to review
and seek to understand his conduct. Mentoring would
assist that process,
particularly on the topics of professional obligations of honesty and integrity,
as well as learning how to
manage stresses and strains that might lead to
improper conduct.
67. Mr Vardough may well be motivated not to repeat
his conduct. Nevertheless, we remain concerned that the easy access he had to
the hospital script pad form, and the trust that the practitioner placed in him
when handing over the flu vaccine script were both
initiating temptations.
68. For those reasons there is utility in a condition requiring
Mr Vardough to draw to the attention of those who engage him our decision
and the role that may have been played in Mr Vardough’s easy and
casual access to scripts. During submissions, neither the
Commission nor
Mr Vardough objected to a condition of this kind if we thought it
appropriate.
Determination
69. The Complaint of Mr Vardough having been made the
subject of a criminal finding for an offence is proven.
70. We find
Mr Vardough guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of his
improper or unethical conduct relating to
the practice of nursing in the
alteration of the handwritten script.
71. Mr Vardough is reprimanded.
His registration as a nurse is made subject to mentoring and notification to
those that engage him,
and to be responsible for the associated
Under section 146B(1)(a) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law, the Professional Standards Committee reprimands the
practitioner.
Practice conditions
Under section 146B(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law, the Professional Standards Committee directs that the
following Conditions be imposed on the practitioner's
registration:
The practitioner must engage in a mentoring
relationship. The mentoring relationship must occur when the practitioner is
as a nurse, commencing from the date the mentor is approved by the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales (“the Council”).
The mentor must be:
a registered nurse who meets the criteria specified in
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales Mentor Guidelines;
approved by the Council.
The practitioner must:
provide the Council
with the name, contact details, and resume of the registered nurse who has
agreed to act as mentor and act as
specified in the conditions, no later than 21
days from the practitioner recommencing practice as a nurse.
provide to the
Council a copy of the conditions signed by the practitioner and by the
submit, within 4 weeks of the mentor being approved, a mentoring plan
that is developed in consultation with the mentor which meets
the standards
required by the Council.
ensure the mentoring plan includes focus on the
professional obligations of honesty and integrity, and on managing stress and
that might lead to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
mentoring report to the Council every month for the first three months and then
every three months thereafter for a minimum
cumulative period of 12 months and
until the Council advises the practitioner otherwise in writing. The mentoring
report is to be
co-signed by the approved mentor and must meet the standards
required by the Council.
authorise the approved mentor to notify the Council
of any breach of conditions including failure to attend mentoring meetings,
termination
of mentoring relationship against the advice of the mentor, or any
other matter the mentor considers appropriate, and authorises
the mentor to
exchange information with the Council in relation to the practitioner’s
compliance with the conditions.
Notifying future employers
Within seven
days of a change in the nature or place of practice, the practitioner is to
forward evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW that the
practitioner has provided a copy of the Statement of Decision of the
Professional Standards Committee to
the person who engages the
practitioner.
The practitioner is responsible for all costs
associated with complying with the conditions.
Mr Hamed Taghi Zadeh Vardough has the right to appeal this decision to the
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
The Council is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Division 8 of
Part 8 of the National Law. However, should the practitioner
seek to change or
remove any of the conditions imposed by this Committee’s orders when his
principal place of practice is anywhere
in Australia other than in New South
Wales, sections 125 to 127 inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
are to apply, so that a review of these conditions can be
conducted by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
Distribution of Decision
Our statement of decision is to be publicly available and may be provided
Hamed Taghi Zadeh Vardough
Care Complaints Commission
_________________________
Chairperson
February 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter