URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2012/406.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Asuzu v Council of the New South Wales Bar Association [2012] NSWCA 406 (10 December 2012)
Court of Appeal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Asuzu v Council of the New South Wales Bar Association
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2012] NSWCA 406
Hearing Date(s):
3 December 2012
Decision Date:
10 December 2012
Proceedings summarily dismissal
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise
orders, a judgment or order is taken to be entered when it is recorded in the
Court's computerised
court record system. Setting aside and variation of
judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
Parties should in particular note the time limit of fourteen days in
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE -challenge to competency of appeal - whether Notice
of Appeal filed out of time pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
51.61(1)(c) - consideration of material date - reliance by appellant on doctrine
of functus officio - effect of liberty to apply
- objection to competency raised
later than 28 days after Notice of Appeal filed - r 51.41 considered
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - application for summary dismissal on the basis
that the appeal is frivolous or vexatious pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure
r 13.4 - whether grounds disclose any error of law, fact or discretion
that affected the result - application of principles in General
Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
and Dey v Victorian Railways
Commissioner
[1949] HCA 1
(1949) 78 CLR 62
- whether grounds disclose a reasonably arguable
basis for the appeal - whether appeal manifestly groundless
PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE - whether leave to appeal from costs order required if challenge to
substantive orders had been able to be
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Civil Procedure Act
District Court Act 1973
Land and Environment Court Act
Legal Profession Act 2004
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Cases Cited:
Abigroup Ltd v Abignano
[1992] FCA 567
(1992) 39 FCR 74
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR
Alvaro v Temple
[2009] WASC 205
Austin v Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR
[2003] HCA 3
Australian Executor Trustees Ltd v Pachkovski
[2011] NSWCA
Brimson v Rocla Concrete Pipes Limited
[1982] 2 NSWLR 937
Victorian Railways Commissioner
[1949] HCA 1
(1949) 78 CLR 62
Dillon v Gosford City
[2011] NSWCA 328
Director-General, Family and Community Services Re
[2012] NSWCA 272
Durham v Durham
[2011] NSWCA 62
Wollongong City Council
[2001] NSWCA 55
Financial Integrity Group Pty Ltd v
Farmer and Anor
[2009] ACTSC 143
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner
for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Kassem v Colonial Mutual General Insurance
[2001] NSWCA 38
Kogolo v State of Western Australia (No 3)
Kracke v Mental Health Review Board & Ors (General) [2009] VAT 646
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
Law Society of New South Wales
[2003] NSWADT 36
Law Society of New South Wales v Rex
[2003] NSWADT
Maritime Union of Australia v Geraldton Port Authority
[2000] FCA 1342
Minister for Immigration v Bhardwaj
[2002] 209 CLR 597
Munn for and on
behalf of the Gunggari People v State of Queensland (2001) 115 FCR 109
National Australia Bank v Petit-Breuilh (No. 2) (unreported, [1990] VSC395,
18 October 1999
Newmont Yandal Operations Pty Ltd v J Aron Corporation and
the Goldman Sachs Group inc & ors
[2007] NSWCA 195
(2007) 70 NSWLR 411
Phillips v Walsh
(1990) 20 NSWLR 206
Poplar Housing Association Ltd v
[2001] EWCA Civ 595
[2002] QB 48
R v Big M Drug Mart Ltd
(1985) 18 DLR (3d) 321
Green and Quinn
[2011] NSWCCA 71
Ragata Developments Pty Ltd v Westpac
Banking Corporation (unreported, Federal Court, Davies J, 5 March 1993)
[1996] QCA 37
[1996] 2 Qd R 218
Redcliffe Forestry Venture Ltd v Commissioner of
Inland Revenue
[2010] NZHC 176
[2011] 1 NZLR 336
Robert John King v The
Honourable Terence John Higgins AO and Others [2009] ACTSC153
Shaw v State
of New South Wales
[2012] NSWCA 102
Simmons v Protective Commissioner of NSW
also known as NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2012] NSWSC 455
Smith v State of
Western Australia
[2000] FCA 1249
(2000) 104 FCR 494
Spencer v Commonwealth
of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
Tame v New South Wales
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
Wheeler v Somerfield
[1966] 2 QB
Woollahra Municipal Council v Sved (Unreported, New South Wales Court of
Appeal, Mason P and Sheller JA, 24 July 1998)
Woodbud Pty Ltd v Warea Pty
(1995) 125 FLR 346
Interlocutory applications
Ignatius Nwafor Asuzu (Appellant/Respondent on Notice of Motion)
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association (Respondent/Applicant on
Notice of Motion)
Representation
D A McLure (Respondent/Applicant)
- Solicitors:
E T Ezekiel-Hart (Solicitor) (Appellant/Respondent)
Niger Delta Lawyers & Maritime Services (Appellant/Respondent)
Hicksons (Respondent/Applicant)
File Number(s):
CA 12/294978
Decision Under Appeal
S Norton SC, R J Wright SC, C Bennett
- Citation:
[2011] NSWADT 209[2012]
NSWADT 104[2012] NSWADT 183
- Court File Number(s):
09/2020, 10/2005
: Before me for hearing on 3 December 2012 was an application brought
by the respondent (the Council of the New South Wales Bar Association)
of motion filed on 30 October 2012 for the summary dismissal of an appeal filed
by Mr Asuzu from the decision and orders
of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal in proceedings relating to complaints by the Council as to his
professional conduct as a
bases on which summary dismissal of the appeal is sought are, first, that the
appeal is incompetent because the Notice of Appeal
was not filed within the time
required by
Uniform Civil Procedure Rule
51.16(1)(c) and, second, that
the appeal proceedings are frivolous and vexatious (and should be dismissed
pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rule
13.4). Further or in the
alternative, the Council seeks an order striking out one of the grounds of
appeal (ground 18) on the basis
that it seeks to appeal a decision of the Legal
Services Division of the Tribunal as to costs without the leave of the Court,
s 729(4)(c)
Legal Profession Act 2004
July 2009 and March 2010, two separate proceedings were brought by the Council
against Mr Asuzu, a barrister, alleging that he
had engaged in professional
misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct or both. A variety of grounds
of complaint were raised,
relating broadly to Mr Asuzu's response (or failure to
respond) to requests made by the Bar Association (for information as to whether
he had practised for a short period without a practising certificate) and to his
conduct of two matters: probate proceedings before
Windeyer J in the Supreme
Court and appellate proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia in relation to
a migration matter in
which the issue was whether there was jurisdictional
two Tribunal proceedings were heard together in May 2011. The Administrative
Decisions Tribunal (Legal Services Division) published
its reasons on 31 August
2011 ([2011] NSWADT 209), finding that Mr Asuzu was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in relation
to three of the specified grounds and of
professional misconduct in relation to a further ground. Otherwise, the grounds
applications were dismissed.
were made at that time for the filing of any affidavits on which the parties
sought to rely in relation to the appropriate
orders that the Tribunal should
make in relation to the findings of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
The Tribunal received evidence and submissions in relation
thereto; there was an oral hearing on 8 February 2012 (on which occasion
Asuzu was cross-examined); and an opportunity was given for the parties to file
further written submissions. That hearing concluded
on 16 May 2012 and the
Tribunal published written reasons as to the orders it then made on 30 May 2012
([2012] NSWADT 104).
orders made by the Tribunal on 30 May 2012 included that Mr Asuzu be publicly
reprimanded with respect to his professional misconduct
(as found by the
Tribunal) and the imposition of a $1,000 fine. By order (iii) the Tribunal
further ordered (and this is one of the
now contentious orders) that "within 12
months of being issued with a practising certificate" Mr Asuzu complete and
provide evidence
of completion of certain courses (the first three modules of a
principles of risk management education workshop offered by LawCover
course in administrative law offered by the Legal Profession Admission Board or
some other institution approved of by the Director,
Professional Conduct) and
sit and pass the bar exams both in practice and procedure and in evidence. The
Tribunal also ordered (in
(iv)) that the first practising certificate issued
after the making of the said orders be subject to certain stated conditions (a
prohibition on acceptance of direct access briefs, which prohibition lies at the
centre of Mr Asuzu's present complaint, and entry
into a mentoring agreement
with a barrister and on terms both of which were to be approved by the Director
of Professional Conduct).
to apply was granted in relation to those orders on 7 days notice in writing to
the other party. Mr Asuzu was ordered (by
order (vi)) to pay 50% of the
Council's costs including reserved costs, as agreed or
matter was subsequently relisted before the Tribunal, on the application of the
Council with Mr Asuzu's consent. There was a hearing
on 27 August 2012 in
relation to these matters. In substance, the Council sought an amendment to
order (iv) in order to make it clear
that the 12 month restriction (on
acceptance of direct access briefs and the requirement for mentoring) was to
operate for 12 months
from whatever date that Mr Asuzu chose to return to
practice at the bar. Mr Asuzu did not consent to such an amendment and submitted
that the orders should be amended to allow him to accept direct access briefs,
with supervision, from the time he recommenced practice
(an amendment that,
unlike the amendment sought by the Council, clearly involved a variation to the
substance of the initial orders
and raised issues already considered and not
accepted by the Tribunal in relation to the orders made in May 2012). Mr Asuzu,
sought clarification as to the ambit of the costs order.
4 September 2012 the Tribunal amended orders (iv) and (vi) of the 30 May orders.
It published reasons for so doing ([2012] NSWADT
183). As to the amendment to
order (iv), the Tribunal noted that when the original orders were made it
appeared that Mr Asuzu would
be seeking a new practising certificate on 1 July
2012 (in which case the condition to which it was to be subject would have
for the 12 month period envisaged in the Tribunal's reasons). He did
not do so and the Tribunal recognised that if a practising certificate
issue some time after that date (and to expire on 30 June the following year in
the ordinary course) then the period of supervision
and restriction required by
the original order might be significantly less than the 12 month period. The
Tribunal considered that
this result would be inconsistent with the orders it
had originally made and the Tribunal's intent in making those orders; and that
an amendment to order (iv) was therefore warranted.
to the costs order, Mr Asuzu sought clarification as to whether he was required
to pay 50% of all the costs or only 50% of the
costs associated with those
aspects of the proceedings on which the Council had been successful. The
Tribunal referred to [27] of
its May decision, which made it clear that the
order related to the entire costs of the proceedings including reserved costs.
to put the matter beyond doubt the Tribunal amended its original order
relevant order made on 4 September 2012 was to amend the 30 May 2012 orders. The
Tribunal reproduced at [9] of its September reasons
the earlier orders as
amended. It is clear that the original orders were amended only in respect of
the operation of (iv) and (vi).
The remaining orders were not affected by the
September orders.
Notice of Appeal was then filed for Mr Asuzu on 21 September 2012. His
solicitor, Mr Ezekiel-Hart, had earlier foreshadowed, by
an email on 27 August
2012, that in the event that the Tribunal did not order "direct access brief"
(which would have required a
reconsideration and substantive amendment to the
earlier orders) that he had instructions to consider an appeal. In that email,
Ezekiel-Hart expressly noted "that Appeal time will start counting from the
date of the final proposed amendment/clarification that
the Respondent objects
to on 27 August 2012". It seems that there was no indication by the Council that
it considered this to be
Notice of Appeal identifies the date of the hearing as being 3 September 2012
(presumably this is an incorrect reference to the
date of the last of the
decisions published by the Tribunal) and seeks to set aside the "judgment" of
the Tribunal and "an order
varying the final orders to reflect the appropriate
findings in the interest of justice and equity". It seems clear from the grounds
of appeal (which I reproduce below) that Mr Asuzu is appealing from the decision
and findings made in August 2011 which were the
subject of the initial May 2012
orders, not simply to the decision to amend those orders as
Grounds of Appeal
grounds of appeal specified in the Notice of Appeal (reproduced uncorrected) are
as follows:
1. The orders of the Tribunal are at variance with the findings and
manifestly excessive in the circumstance that the Respondents
submissions admitted that "Mr Asuzu's errors are not of the same magnitude as
those discussed in
and do not, by themselves, establish that he is
not a fit and proper person to treated unfairly."
2. The Tribunal err in failing to take into account information of material
significance or give less weight to information of material
significance
3. The decision was plainly unjust and plainly wrong in that the Tribunal err
in making findings it did
4. The Tribunal exercise of discretion was infected with bias and assisted
the Respondent to achieve ulterior motives
5. The decision plainly institutionalize oppression against the appellant in
the circumstance that the Tribunal was aware of the motive
to exclude the
appellant from NSW jurisdiction and Australia, the respondent stated in their
written submission, "He should be given
the opportunity to apply for variation
of those orders if, for example, he wished to seek a solicitor's practising
certificate in
another jurisdiction."
6. The Tribunal incorrectly applied the law to the fact and made orders that
are manifestly unjust and inconsistent with the tenet
of fairness in the
circumstance that the Tribunal did not find in aggregate that the
Barrister's(appellant) conduct warrant unsatisfactory
professional conduct let
alone professional misconduct
7. The Tribunal incorrectly applied the principle of procedural fairness in
the circumstances that the material that could prove appellant
case was withheld
from the appellant and the Tribunal
8. The orders made it impossible for the appellant to comply with if not in
9. The orders made it impossible for the appellant to return to practice by
denying the appellant the benefit of supervised direct
access work
10. The Tribunal misapprehends the fact and proceeded with that
misapprehension to arrive at wrong conclusion in the circumstance
that it was
open to the Tribunal to caution or dismiss the allegations.
11. The Tribunal err in failing to take into account the Human Rights of the
12. The Tribunal decision treats the appellant differently and encouraged
discrimination against the appellant without rational distinction,
13. The Tribunal orders discriminate against the trainings of the
14. The Tribunal orders were contrary to the rights of the appellant to be
protected against disability, disadvantage and discrimination
and contrary to
section 117 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
, contrary to the
Discrimination Act 1975
sec 9(l)(a)(c)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
sec 7(l)(a)(c)
is breached, hence other barristers are not subjected to
the same restriction as the Appellant.
15. The Tribunal erred in fact in failing to find that the exercise of
discretionary power by the Respondent was in bad faith and
at direction or
behest of another.
16. The Tribunal erred in fact in not finding that there was an improper
exercise of power by the Respondent to cause exclusion of
the appellant for life
from practicing his legal profession in NSW or exercise of power for a purpose
other than a purpose for which
the power is conferred;
17. The Tribunal decision and orders was inequitable in light of other
decisions and facts.
18. The cost orders made against the appellant was manifestly unjust in the
light of the findings of the Tribunal and failures of
the Respondent in over 80%
of its particularized allegations and refusal to discuss to narrow the lengthy
allegations when invited
by the appellant. The respondent only made application
to withdraw some allegations after intense hearing that could not sustain
allegations. The time and cost could have been saved if the respondent had
accepted the invitation to discuss.
19. Injustice and damage to the system of justice will be done if the orders
made on 27 August 2012 were to remain unchanged.
I understand the submissions made by Mr Ezekiel-Hart (who appeared on Mr Asuzu's
behalf on the present application), Mr Asuzu's
complaints include that the
direction issued to him by the Bar Association (for him to provide a statutory
declaration as to whether
he had engaged in legal practice for fee, gain or
reward during a short period in which it was not disputed before the Tribunal
Mr Asuzu did not hold a current practising certificate), with which he was
found not to have complied (giving rise to the sole finding
by the Tribunal of
professional misconduct), and the earlier requests to that effect were not
reasonable (and hence that it would
be open to this Court to find that he should
not have been required to submit the statutory declaration in question). The
reasonableness
of the direction and/or requests issued by the Bar Association is
not identified in the Notice of Appeal as an issue in respect of
Tribunal made any error of fact, law or discretion in coming to its decision in
August 2011 or in making or amending its
orders consequent upon that decision.
(Before the Tribunal, it was contended for Mr Asuzu that he had complied with
the Tribunal's
requests for information, although he had not provided a
statutory declaration as directed.)
gravamen of Mr Asuzu's complaint is that the orders made by the Tribunal have or
will have the effect of barring him from practising
as a barrister in New South
Wales for life and therefore that they are discriminatory and in breach of
Constitution
and Mr Asuzu's human rights. Mr Ezekiel-Hart submits
that Mr Asuzu has a constitutional right to be protected from disability and
discrimination and that the orders that have been made contravene that
Asuzu has deposed to the effect that he cannot obtain professional indemnity
insurance while the direct access prohibition is in
place; that he therefore
cannot obtain a practising certificate; and that without a practising
certificate he cannot undertake the
educational studies ordered by the Tribunal.
to the first proposition (that Mr Asuzu cannot obtain professional indemnity
insurance while bound by the direct access prohibition),
Mr Asuzu's affidavit
deposes in general terms (at [36]) that he has contacted "at least three
indemnity insurers" but that after
"good initial discussions" all declined to
insure him and that this refusal was "immediately [he] notified them that [he]
have direct access client and provided them with the lengthy orders that
[he has] to comply with". Mr Asuzu has deposed (at [37])
to his belief that the
refusal to provide insurance cover is because the insurers erroneously believe
that a person with this type
of protective orders must have been involved in
fraudulent activities (though if that is in fact the reason that insurance cover
has been declined once would expect that this erroneous belief could be readily
dispelled by the provision of the Tribunal's reasons
for judgment which make
clear that no question of dishonesty or deception on Mr Asuzu's part was
to the third proposition in Mr Asuzu's chain of reasoning (that he cannot
undertake the educational courses without a practising
certificate), this is
said to flow from the fact that the order contemplates that the studies will be
("within 12 months from") the issue of a practising
certificate so that any studies undertaken before that time would not satisfy
the order. That does not in my view properly reflect the substance of the order
(which would in its terms be satisfied if Mr Asuzu
the studies
at some time within the period of 12 months after the issue of the relevant
practising certificate even though those
studies might have been commenced and
even perhaps largely undertaken before so doing). The purpose of the time frame
specified in
order (iii), having regard to the Tribunal's reasons of 30 May
2012, is fairly obviously to ensure (for the protection of clients
utilise his legal services) that Mr Asuzu's knowledge of administrative law
principles (and of matters of practice and procedure
and evidence) is refreshed
within a relatively short time after he recommences practice at the bar. That
purpose would be served
whether the studies were commenced shortly before or
shortly after the issue of a practising certificate. There is no basis for a
suggestion that the latter is a necessary pre-requisite for admission to any of
the relevant courses.
Issues for determination
the present application, there are three issues for
determination:
(i) whether the appeal is incompetent on the basis that it was filed outside
the time specified in the
without leave;
(ii) whether the appeal should be summarily dismissed on the ground that it
is frivolous or vexatious; and
(iii) if the appeal is not summarily dismissed as a whole, whether the appeal
in relation to the Tribunal's costs orders (ground 18)
should be struck out for
want of the leave required under
Legal Profession Act 2004
consider each of those issues in turn.
(i) Competency of appeal
already noted, Mr Asuzu's Notice of Appeal was filed on 21 September 2012. The
Council contends that the material date, for the
purposes of calculation of the
time within which any notice of appeal was required to be filed, is the date on
which the original
orders were made by the Tribunal (namely, 30 May 2012) and
therefore that the appeal has not been commenced within time. For Mr Asuzu,
is contended that the material date is 4 September 2012 when the orders were
Ezekiel-Hart's submission is based on the proposition that it was not until
September 2012 that the Tribunal became
functus officio
(since it had
granted liberty to apply in terms not limited to the supervision or machinery of
the orders and it was not until then
that the liberty was exercised and final
orders made).
51.16(1)(c) provides that if (as here) a notice of intention to appeal has not
been filed and served under
and the notice of appeal is not filed
pursuant to leave to appeal, then a notice of appeal must be filed within 28
days of the material
date or such other time as the Court may fix. "Material
date" is defined, relevantly, in
Rule 51.2(3)
as the date on which the decision
is pronounced or given. There is nothing in the definition of "material date" to
suggest that it
is determined by reference to the date on which the relevant
decision-maker became
functus officio
, nor was Mr Ezekiel-Hart able to
point to any authority that suggested this was the relevant test for determining
the material date.
(Therefore, if the material date was 30 May 2012, by the time
Mr Ezekiel-Hart had sent his 27 August 2012 email the time for filing
of appeal had already well and truly expired.)
Ezekiel-Hart relied, for his submission that the Tribunal was not
until September 2012 on what was said in
Redcliffe Forestry
Venture Ltd v Commissioner of Inland Revenue
[2010] NZHC 176
[2011] 1 NZLR
as to the principle of finality in litigation (there, the principle was
discussed in the context of a submission that the court had
no jurisdiction to
revisit an earlier judgment absent a proper pleading of fraud or a pleading that
the judgment was a nullity).
In response to this, Counsel appearing for the
Council (Mr McLure) referred to what was said by Gleeson CJ in
Minister for
Immigration v Bhardwaj
[2002] 209 CLR 597
where his Honour (recognising that
circumstances can arise where a rigid approach to the principle of
is inconsistent with good administration and fairness) noted that
much may depend on the nature of the power being exercised and
of the error that
has been made, when considering whether a power to make an administrative
decision once purportedly exercised is
necessarily spent.
debate prompted by Mr Ezekiel-Hart on this issue, however, is one that goes to
the question (assuming any such question were raised
on the appeal, which it is
not) whether the Tribunal had the power to make the orders that it did on 4
September 2012 not to whether
the material date for the calculation of the time
for filing a notice of appeal was that date (and to that extent the submission
is misconceived).
McLure submits that the Tribunal had power under
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) to make the amendments that it did (and
that this power being described in
R v Green and Quinn
[2011] NSWCCA 71
) is a statutory manifestation of the implied power of the Tribunal to
make such corrections to its orders as necessary to give expression
actual intention of the Tribunal). Such a power is akin to the "slip rule"
applicable to curial proceedings.
note that in the arbitral context it has been recognised (see
Woodbud Pty Ltd
v Warea Pty Ltd
(1995) 125 FLR 346
Alvaro v Temple
that the statutory power given to an arbitrator to correct an award
(not unlike that in
is an exception to the rule that, after the making of
a valid award, the arbitrator is
functus officio
. Here, it is clear from
the Tribunal's reasons that the amendment made to the May 2012 orders was to
ensure that they operated in
a manner that reflected the intent of the Tribunal
at the time (circumstances in which the slip rule would operate in curial
proceedings
and in which the comparable power under
enlivened).
fact that the Tribunal gave the parties liberty to apply in relation to the
orders initially made on 30 May 2012 does not change
the character of the orders
as from that date. They took effect when pronounced. No further step was
required by the Tribunal or
the parties to bring them into effect. Unless and
until the jurisdiction conferred by
or like jurisdiction was successfully
invoked (or any appeal therefrom were to succeed), the Tribunal's orders were
final and operative.
as Mr Ezekiel-Hart relied on the grant of liberty to apply in support of the
proposition that the Tribunal was not
in September 2012, I have
had regard to the analysis in
Maritime Union of Australia v Geraldton Port
[2000] FCA 1342
of the nature of the liberty that is granted when
parties are given liberty to apply in the ordinary course. Nicholson J reviewed
various authorities and accepted that such liberty is limited to matters that
are necessary or desirable for the working out of the
order and does not extend
to the grant of relief which is substantially different to that given by the
final order. His Honour expressed
that conclusion in terms consistent with the
understanding that the orders that might be the subject of liberty to apply in
a case would nevertheless be characterised as final orders (for example at
[9] where his Honour referred to the scope of the court's
power "subsequent to
the making of final orders"). Nicholson J referred to the statement in
Abigroup Ltd v Abignano
[1992] FCA 567
(1992) 39 FCR 74
at 88 by Lockhart, Morling and
Gummow JJ that:
The reservation of liberty to all parties to apply to a court is a provision
directed essentially to questions of machinery which
may arise from the
implementation of a court's orders. They include cases where a court may need to
supervise the enforcement of
orders after they have been made ...Historically
orders reserving liberty to apply are for limited purposes.
This demonstrates
that there is no inconsistency between the making of final decrees, judgments or
orders or declarations and subsequent
orders of the court
. It all depends
upon the circumstances of the case and the particular order or decrees
formulated by the court. (my emphasis)
authorities to which Nicholson J referred do not suggest that orders in respect
of which liberty to apply has been granted do
not become final or operative
until some later point (when and if the liberty is exercised) nor would that
make sense (since if that
were the case it would be impossible to know when an
order in respect of which liberty to apply could be regarded as final or
operative).
it seemed to me that the analysis in
of the scope of the grant
of liberty was consistent with the view I have taken that the orders made on 30
May were final and operative
from that date (and, for the purposes of the
definition in the Rules, that this is the material date in relation to the time
filing an appeal therefrom) but this authority had not been the subject of
discussion in the course of oral submissions before me,
I gave the parties an
opportunity (if they so wished), to make submissions as to the analysis
contained in this case. Both parties
then did so. I have taken those further
submissions into account.
the question of liberty to apply, Mr Ezekiel-Hart's further submission may be
summarised as being that the 30 May orders did not
envisage that the Tribunal
would perform a supervisory role in their implementation and did not state or
define the scope of the
liberty as being in respect of the operation of the
orders; that therefore there was no limit to the scope of the liberty there
and hence the May orders should be construed as not being final and the
Tribunal had not become
functus officio
. Mr Ezekiel-Hart submitted that
the liberty to apply permitted the Tribunal to vary the practical effect and the
material nature
of the earlier orders; that the 4 September orders were
substantially different from those earlier orders; and hence that the material
date for an appeal from those orders was 4 September 2012. That, as I understand
it, is the effect of the submission that:
...while we accept that the Tribunal have power to vary its orders, it did
not give the liberty to apply simply because it had hindsight
that it had power
to vary the order. The variation of the orders created new order though not all
the orders were varied after the
hearing on 27 August 2012.
coupled with the submission that if the prior orders were "perfected" then
they should not have been varied except by appeal or under
the "slip" rule (and
hence the variation of the orders changed the character of the prior orders and
made the 4 September 2012 orders
substantially different).
difficulty with that submission is that, whether or not the Tribunal had power
to do so at that point, the amendments made on
4 September did not substantially
change the previous orders at all. In relation to order (iv), the Tribunal was
obviously exercising
a power to correct the order in order to ensure that it
operated as the Tribunal had intended it to do (a permissible exercise of
slip rule -
Newmont Yandal Operations Pty Ltd v J Aron Corporation and the
Goldman Sachs Group inc & ors
[2007] NSWCA 195
(2007) 70 NSWLR 411).
The amendment to order (vi) was regarded by the Tribunal as unnecessary and
simply to remove doubt as to its intended operation.
(Nor is there any basis in
my view to construe the liberty to apply otherwise than as contemplated would be
the ordinary course in
Maritime Union
accept as correct Mr McLure's submission that the Tribunal's decision on 4
September 2012 to amend order (iv) did not create a new
right or impose a new
obligation but was for the (stated) purpose of giving effect to the Tribunal's
intention that the conditions
would apply to Mr Asuzu for a period of 12 months.
The amendment was clearly within the scope of the reservation of liberty to
and/or the power provided by
It did not give rise to a new set of
final orders and therefore did not give rise to a new material date.
Conclusion as to issue (i)
fact that there was a grant of liberty to apply in respect of the May 2012
orders (and that this liberty was ultimately exercised
so as to produce an
amendment to the orders) does not mean that the material date (for the purpose
of calculating when the time for
appeal therefrom was to run) was a date later
than 30 May 2012. The amending order made on 4 September 2012 did not operate to
the material date to that later point in time. The position would be
different if the subject matter of the appeal was as to the
making of the
amendment itself but that is clearly not the case here. What grounds of appeal
raised in the Notice of Appeal challenge
are the orders made on 30 May 2012
(albeit as now amended) consequent upon the findings made on 31 August 2011, not
the decision
to amend the earlier orders (ie the exercise of power under the
slip rule or
the material date for the purposes of the filing of Mr Asuzu's appeal is 30 May
2012. The Notice of Appeal was not filed
within 28 days of that date and, in the
absence of leave for it to be filed out of time, the proceedings are liable to
be summarily
Leave to extend time for the filing of notice of appeal?
initially suggesting otherwise, Mr Ezekiel-Hart ultimately acknowledged that no
application had been made by or on behalf
of Mr Asuzu for leave to extend the
time for the filing and service of the notice of appeal (and, as I understand
it, he then sought
to make such an application orally). Similarly, Mr Asuzu in
his affidavit of 9 November 2012 (at [121]) purports to rely on the affidavit
constituting such an application:
In event that my Appeal was out of time or that part of the decision require
leave I rely on this affidavit seeking leave for my appeal
and saying that
actual injustice and denial right to work will be done to me except the court
review the Tribunal decisions and orders
which I believe are manifestly
excessive and did not allow any leeway to encourage compliance and are at
variance to previous orders
put before the Tribunal.
should have been clear to Mr Asuzu and his legal advisers, at the very least
from service of the Council's submissions on its Notice
of Motion, that there
was an issue as to whether the Notice of Appeal had been filed in time. No
attempt seems to have been made
to prepare a proper application for leave to
extend the time, in the event that such an extension might be necessary.
Woollahra Municipal Council v Sved
(New South Wales Court of Appeal,
unreported, 24 July 1998), Mason P and Sheller JA were of the view that if an
appellant (faced
with an objection to the competency of the appeal) intended to
seek leave to appeal then such an application for leave must be made
hearing of the competency application. In
Director-General, Family and
Community Services Re Felicity
[2012] NSWCA 272
, an oral application for
leave to appeal made during the hearing of the objection to the competency of
the appeal was rejected.
authorities suggest that an oral application for leave to extend the time for
filing of the Notice of Appeal should not be entertained
in the present case
(since the application was not made in advance of the hearing of the challenge
to competency). It is not necessary
to decide the question on this point since
even if (contrary to the practice applied in
Re Felicity
) the application
should now be entertained, my view is that leave should not be granted in the
circumstances of the present application
for the following
application for leave to extend time must be assessed having regard to what the
interests of justice require in all the circumstances
of the case. Relevant
factors include the reason why the appeal was not lodged in time; the period for
which an extension is sought;
any prejudice to the opposing party; and the
apparent prospects of success on the appeal. In
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
, Basten JA considered (at [58]) that it would generally be
sufficient for the applicant to demonstrate a fairly arguable case (at
assuming there is a reasonable explanation for the delay and no significant
prejudice to the opposing party). (It may be necessary
to show more than fairly
arguable prospects of success in circumstances where there is no, or no
satisfactory, explanation for the
delay or where there is prejudice to the
opposing party.)
no explanation was given, as such, for the delay. While it might perhaps be
inferred, from the submissions made on the present
application by Mr
Ezekiel-Hart and the affidavit affirmed by Mr Asuzu on 9 November 2012, that Mr
Ezekiel-Hart and/or Mr Asuzu proceeded
on the basis of an incorrect view as to
when the time for commencing the appeal would expire, there is also a suggestion
in the material
that the explanation is simply that a decision was made not to
pursue an appeal until after the "workability" or "practicability"
of the orders
was assessed and after the application for 'clarification' or amendment to the
direct access restriction was determined.
Mr Asuzu's affidavit, at [25], he asserts that the decision of 31 August 2011
was not final because the Tribunal allowed submissions
and more evidence. (I
note that the Council does not suggest that the time for filing of the appeal
commenced at the time of publication
of the principal reasons.) At [26], Mr
Asuzu asserts that the 30 May 2012 orders "allowed indefinite time to seek
clarification on
7days [sic] Notice leading to the final orders with material
date of 4 September 2012" and deposes that "This enable me time to test
practicability of the Orders before Appeal". In his reference to "indefinite
time to seek clarification, Mr Asuzu must be referring
to the grant of liberty
to apply in relation to the orders, which as noted earlier is said for Mr Asuzu
to mean that the Tribunal
functus officio
until such time as
orders were made consequent upon the exercise of liberty to apply. However, it
also suggests that a decision was
made not immediately to lodge any appeal but
to "test the practicability" of the orders before so doing.
[34], Mr Asuzu refers to instructions given to his legal representatives that he
"will Appeal the decision if the clarity is not
what I anticipated" and that
this view was foreshadowed by the email to the Council's solicitor. It is by no
means clear what Mr
Asuzu seeks to draw from the fact that there was, he says,
no response to the email communication made to the Council's solicitors
August 2012 in which the assertion was made that time for the appeal to be
lodged would commence to run from the determination
of the application on 27
August 2012. It is not, for example, alleged that Mr Asuzu delayed filing the
Notice of Appeal on the basis
of any representation arising from the fact that
there was no correction made to the assertion contained in the email as to the
for appeal.
[35], Mr Asuzu says that "To ensure that I gave thought to my appeal I tested
the workability of the Tribunal decision and orders
to enable me have informed
need for my clarification before Appeal [sic]". This does not suggest that there
was any misapprehension
or mistake as to the procedural requirements for the
filing of an appeal; rather, that Mr Asuzu was still deciding whether he would
be prepared to accept the outcome of the Tribunal's decision or should appeal
from it. Similarly, at [40] Mr Asuzu says that prior
to the application for
clarification (namely, the re-listing before the Tribunal) he wanted, for the
sake of peace, to see the "workability"
of the findings and orders.
is also a reference at [44] to Mr Asuzu having become "temporarily sick
emotionally". It is not clear at what time this happened
(other than that it
seems to have been after Mr Asuzu realised the "effect of the impossibility to
practise law" and before he formed
the opinion that the only option was to
appeal the decision and orders).
the extent that an explanation for the delay in lodging the appeal can be drawn
from the above, it thus seems to be a mixture of
a desire to assess the
"practicability" or "workability" of the regime provided for under the orders; a
hope that the direct access
prohibition might be removed or ameliorated; and a
misapprehension of the time for commencement of the appeal. In those
circumstances
the explanation for the delay is not particularly compelling. On
balance it might perhaps have been enough (in circumstances where
suggested that there was any relevant prejudice to the Council arising from the
delay) had there been at least fairly
arguable grounds of appeal raised in the
Notice of Appeal. However, I am not satisfied that this is the case. Therefore,
from the fact that the application for leave was not made in advance
of the hearing of the objection to competency, I would not have
granted leave
for the filing out of time of the Notice of Appeal.
the consideration of this issue overlaps to an extent with the consideration of
the further and alternative basis on which summary
dismissal is sought (namely
that the appeal is frivolous and vexatious), I set out in (ii) below the reasons
for my conclusion on
this aspect of issue (i).
as a consequential matter arising from my determination of issue (i), I note
that complaint was made by Mr Ezekiel-Hart as
to the fact that service of the
Notice of Motion seeking summary dismissal was over 28 days after the filing of
the Notice of Appeal.
Although not made clear in the course of his submissions,
it seems that this is a reference to the requirement in the Rules (where
challenges an appeal on the grounds of incompetence) for such a challenge to be
made within 28 days.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
provides that:
(1) A respondent who objects to the competency of an appeal must, by notice
of motion filed and served on all other parties within
28 days after service on
the respondent of the notice of appeal, apply to the Court for an order
dismissing the appeal as incompetent.
(2) If the respondent fails to comply with subrule (1) and the appeal is
nevertheless dismissed as incompetent:
(a) the respondent is not entitled to costs of the appeal unless the Court
otherwise orders, and
(b) the Court may order the respondent to pay the appellant any costs of the
appeal proving useless or unnecessary.
time for the filing of the Council's motion to dismiss summarily on the ground
that the appeal was frivolous or vexatious was
not so limited. The rules,
however, contemplate that even if not filed within that 28 day period, the
appeal may nevertheless be
dismissed as incompetent. The relevance of this rule
in the present case would thus be as to the costs implications of the objection
to competency not being made within the 28 day period. The rule in r 51.41(2)
has been applied in
Kassem v Colonial Mutual General Insurance Co Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 38
Falamaki v Wollongong City Council
[2001] NSWCA
, where it was said that generally respondents who fail to object to the
competency of an appeal will not be awarded their costs even
though the appeal
may be held to be incompetent. The Court does, nevertheless, retain the
discretion to make an order for the costs
of the appeal otherwise than as
contemplated in sub-rule (2) where it is deemed appropriate.
the delay in lodging a challenge to competency, was only a period of some 10
days. There is nothing to suggest that Mr Asuzu
incurred unnecessary costs in
pursuing his appeal in that period. Moreover, the balance of the Notice of
Motion would have succeeded
in any event. I consider that it would be
appropriate in those circumstances for the costs to follow the event. However, I
any further brief oral submissions before making such a costs
this first ground, therefore, I find that the appeal is incompetent as the
Notice of Appeal was filed out of time. I do not consider
that leave should be
granted to extend the time for the filing of the Notice of Appeal. It should be
summarily dismissed.
(ii) Dismissal on the frivolous/vexatious ground
further or alternative basis for dismissal does not strictly arise in light of
my finding in (i). However, insofar as my consideration
of the issues relevant
to this ground is relevant on the leave question considered above, I set out
below the reasons why, had I
found otherwise on issue (i), I would have
summarily dismissed the appeal on the second basis.
power pursuant to
to dismiss proceedings which are either frivolous or
vexatious applies to proceedings in the Court of Appeal subject to modifications
as are necessary (see
Rules 51.1(3)
and (4)) including the fact that reference
to an originating process is to be read as reference to a notice of appeal. Mr
notes that an appeal may be summarily dismissed if the issues sought to
be raised are not reasonably arguable (referring to
Australian Executor
Trustees Ltd v Pachkovski
[2011] NSWCA 23
, though in that case McColl JA did
not exercise the power to do so).
considering the exercise of the power summarily to dismiss the appeal, it is
noted that an appeal to this Court from a decision
of the Tribunal is by way of
rehearing and not by way of a de novo hearing
Profession Act 2004
(NSW)) and hence that what must be shown by Mr Asuzu on
any appeal from the Tribunal's decision is that it was incorrect as the result
of some legal, factual or discretionary error (
Allesch v Maunz
at [23]). Mr McLure therefore submits that the appeal should be
summarily dismissed if the issues raised by the Notice of Appeal
do not disclose
a reasonable prospect of establishing an error of the relevant kind that would
result in the Court re-exercising
the Tribunal's powers. McColl JA from [76] in
set out the principles to be applied on such an
application.
requirements for a Notice of Appeal are set out in Rule 51.18 (and Practice Note
SC CA 1 at [10]). In
Tame v New South Wales
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317
noted that a significant aspect of those rules is that the Notice of Appeal must
state specifically, but briefly, both the
grounds of appeal (Rule 51.18(1)(c))
and the material factual findings that the appellant contends that the court
below should, or
should not, have found (Rule 51.18(2)). It is not sufficient
merely to allege that the primary court erred in law or fact or that
decision is against the evidence or the weight of the evidence (
[2011] NSWCA 62).
is submitted by Mr McLure that the Notice of Appeal filed on behalf of Mr Asuzu
does not comply with the requirements of the Rules
and does not disclose
reasonably arguable grounds of appeal. Each of the grounds was addressed in Mr
McLure's submissions and I set
out briefly below the complaint raised in
relation to each of the grounds.
summary, the criticism of Mr Asuzu's Notice of Appeal is well-founded as is the
submission that the grounds set out therein do
not disclose any reasonably
arguable grounds of appeal.
1. The orders of the Tribunal are at variance with the findings and
manifestly excessive in the circumstance that the Respondents
submissions admitted that "Mr Asuzu's errors are not of the same magnitude as
those discussed in Rex and do not, by themselves,
establish that he is not a fit
and proper person to [be?] treated unfairly."
does not specify the findings with which it is said the orders are at
variance or (other than by inference in comparison with the
case to which
reference is there made) manifestly excessive. Mr McLure submits that this
ground relates to the Tribunal's orders
of 30 May 2012 in that it refers to (and
inaccurately reproduces) a submission made on behalf of the Council to the
Tribunal when
the latter was considering what orders should be made following
the principal reasons for judgment.
as a comparison is sought to be drawn with the conduct considered in
Society of New South Wales v Rex
[2003] NSWADT 36
[2003] NSWADT 148
case in which the legal practitioner whose misconduct was accepted to be more
serious than that of Mr Asuzu was not struck off),
Mr McLure notes that in fact
the submission made to the Tribunal (characterised as an admission by Mr Asuzu)
Mr Asuzu's errors are not of the same magnitude as those discussed in
and do not, by themselves, establish that he is not a fit and proper
person to remain on the Roll.
is difficult to see how the Tribunal's apparent acceptance of that proposition
(in the sense that there was no order made for Mr
Asuzu to be struck off) is
inconsistent with the orders that were in fact made. There is no identification
in Ground 1 of the basis
on which it is suggested that the Tribunal's discretion
as to penalty miscarried. The protective orders that were in fact made by
Tribunal (and which are the focus of Mr Asuzu's complaint) in relation to the
undertaking of identified practice or educational
courses and the imposition of
a prohibition on direct access briefs for a period of time are directly relevant
to the grounds on
which findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct had been
made against Mr Asuzu.
Tribunal found Mr Asuzu guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
relation to two matters: first, the failure properly
to plead an allegation of
forgery in respect of a will (in the context of probate proceedings in which Mr
Asuzu was acting for a
plaintiff seeking probate of an earlier will). The
Tribunal noted (at [208] of its principal judgment that Mr Asuzu did not appear
to have obtained sufficient instructions to enable him adequately to identify
the case that he was seeking to plead in relation to
forgery and was not able to
prepare an amended pleading that identified the material facts and particulars
relied upon to disclose
the case in relation to forgery.
Tribunal also noted that the trial judge had expressed the view that there was
an improper pleading in relation to the allegation
of forgery in relation to a
1992 will and not a proper allegation of forgery in relation to a 1995 will. The
Tribunal noted that:
This whole aspect of the plaintiff's case appears to have been left in an
unsatisfactory state by the Barrister not only from the
point of view of the
Court but also from the perspective of the Barrister's client, the plaintiff,
especially if any of the wills
had in fact been forged.
Tribunal found (at [209]) that Mr Asuzu's inability to identify, plead and
adequately particularise the plaintiff's case in relation
to forgery of the
wills "fell short of what a member of the public was entitled to expect from a
reasonably competent Australian
legal practitioner, especially a
barrister..".
second ground on which unsatisfactory professional conduct was found to have
been established was in Mr Asuzu's preparation for
and conduct of an appeal from
the dismissal by a Federal Magistrate of an appeal from the Migration Review
Tribunal. The Tribunal
found that Mr Asuzu was aware of the need, for the
purposes of that appeal, to identify jurisdictional errors on the part of the
Migration Review Tribunal which were not identified and accepted as such by the
Federal Magistrate but found that Mr Asuzu had not
adequately considered or
addressed why the errors he identified were or could be argued to be
limit his submissions to what would be
relevant to potential jurisdictional errors) ([300]). The Tribunal considered
that Mr Asuzu
had not turned his mind to certain issues and was insufficiently
diligent in preparing and presenting the appeal ([304]-[305].
Mr Asuzu's professional conduct had been the subject of criticism from the
judicial officers hearing the appeal, the Full Court
reasons including the
statement that Mr Asuzu had "persisted in ignoring [the distinction between
merits review and jurisdictional
error] notwithstanding the guidance which the
Bench sought to give to him on this fundamental issue".
Council submitted that Mr Asuzu should be required to undertake further
education (a submission that the Tribunal accepted). Indeed,
in its reasons of
30 May 2012, the Tribunal noted (at [9]) that, although initially requesting the
Tribunal to take no further action,
Mr Asuzu had, during oral submissions,
agreed to undertake courses in administrative law and civil procedure and had
agreed to undertake
the modules of the principles of risk management education
for which provision was subsequently made in the orders (the largest area
dispute before the Tribunal on that occasion on this issue being the question
when Mr Asuzu should undergo further education and
what form that education
should take).
Council submitted that (because of its concern that Mr Asuzu refused to accept
that there had been any deficiencies in his behaviour)
he should not be issued
with any practising certificate until he had successfully passed the bar
readers' examination and completed
the bar readers' course. The Tribunal did not
accept that submission. It formed the view that "given the difficulties he
experienced
in the [migration appeal]" Mr Asuzu would benefit from some further
courses of study in the area of administrative law but did not
find it necessary
that those courses be completed before he recommenced practice. The Tribunal
also considered that it would be of
assistance for Mr Asuzu to re-sit the bar
exams with respect to practice and procedure (explaining that this was because
practised for a period of four years "and we think the public would
be protected by requiring him to objectively demonstrate he has
the necessary
knowledge of those areas" ([21]). There is nothing on the face of those reasons
to suggest that the condition was manifestly
excessive or at variance with the
findings of unsatisfactory conduct (which findings are not themselves explicitly
challenged by
Mr Asuzu in his grounds of appeal). I accept Mr McLure's
submission that Ground 1 does not identify any error of law, fact or discretion
that could have affected the Tribunal's decision.
to the restriction on acceptance of direct access briefs, the Tribunal expressed
a concern (by no means unreasonable on the facts
outlined in its principal
judgment) that the conduct of Mr Asuzu had demonstrated an inability to be
objective and to maintain a
sufficient distance from his clients so as to be
able to distil relevant from irrelevant matters. This was the basis of the
to impose such a condition. There is nothing to suggest that this was
manifestly excessive or at variance with the findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct nor was any error of fact, law or discretion identified
that could be said to have affected that decision.
2. The Tribunal err[ed] in failing to take into account information of
material significance or [gave] less weight to information
of material
significance
, which alleges that the Tribunal erred in failing to take into account or
giving less weight information of material significance,
does not specify the
information that it is alleged should have been taken into account or should
have been given more weight. It
does not identify any error of law, fact or
discretion that could have affected the Tribunal's decision or the orders made
3. The decision was plainly unjust and plainly wrong in that the
Tribunal err[ed] in making findings it did
is a broad assertion that the decision was "plainly unjust and plainly
wrong" in the making of unidentified findings. Presumably,
Mr Asuzu is referring
only to the findings that were against him (there being a number of findings in
his favour). In any event,
this ground does not identify any error of law, fact
or discretion that it is said rendered the decision plainly wrong or unjust
could have affected the result.
4. The Tribunal exercise of discretion was infected with bias and
assisted the Respondent to achieve ulterior motives
5. The decision plainly institutionalize[d] oppression against the
appellant in the circumstance that the Tribunal was aware of the
exclude the appellant from NSW jurisdiction and Australia, the respondent stated
in their written submission, "He should
be given the opportunity to apply for
variation of those orders if, for example, he wished to seek a solicitor's
practising certificate
in another jurisdiction."
raise issues of bias and oppression. Mr Ezekiel-Hart conceded that
there was no allegation of bias directly put to the Tribunal (and
it does not
appear that there was any application made by or on behalf of Mr Asuzu during
the Tribunal hearing to have any member
of the Tribunal recused on account of
apprehended or actual bias).
Ezekiel-Hart, in his oral submissions before me, submitted that bias was not a
matter that could only arise during or at the beginning
of a hearing but that it
"could come up at any particular time". He did not point to any particular
instance from which it was suggested
that a reasonable objectively minded lay
observer would have apprehended that the Tribunal (or any member of the
Tribunal) would
be unable to bring a fair and impartial mind to the decision it
had to make, nor did he point to any evidence of actual bias.
the bias submission was confirmed to be one that was put on the basis, in
effect, that because the decision was said to be
wrong it must have been
infected by bias. Mr Ezekiel-Hart submitted that the evidence of bias was that
the Tribunal had inclined
to the submissions or the desire of the Council in
requiring Mr Asuzu to re-sit in New South Wales exams that he had earlier passed
in Queensland. In that regard, the Tribunal's reasons for requiring Mr Asuzu to
undertake further educational courses were not based
on a distinction between
the courses in the respective states and it was expressly contemplated that Mr
Asuzu might seek approval
for courses other than those identified in the orders
(thus there is no apparent jurisdictional bias to the orders).
his further written submissions, Mr Ezekiel-Hart submitted that the matter
involved the commencement or continuation of proceedings
(by the Council) for an
ulterior motive (apparently paraphrasing the reference to "ulterior or
extraneous purpose" in
Ragata Developments Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking
Corporation
(unreported, Federal Court, Davies J, 5 March 1993)). It was
submitted that the Council's ulterior motives had been achieved through
orders of the Tribunal and this was the bias identified by Mr Asuzu. (As I
understand it, the ulterior motive or 'ulterior quest'
is said to be a desire to
exclude Mr Asuzu from this jurisdiction.)
Tribunal's reasons do not in my opinion disclose any reasonably arguable ground
of bias or oppression (nor is the basis for such
contention specified in the
Notice of Appeal). The Tribunal appears to have considered carefully the matters
raised by both parties
and to have given Mr Asuzu the benefit of the doubt on a
number of matters. There is no identified basis for the allegations that
Tribunal was aware of and had assisted the Council "to achieve ulterior motives"
(namely, the alleged motive to exclude Mr Asuzu
from this jurisdiction and from
this country) nor have I been taken to any evidence to suggest that the Council
had any such motivation.
allegation appears to be predicated on the characterisation of a submission made
by the Council that Mr Asuzu should have the
opportunity to apply for a
variation of the orders if he chose to practise law otherwise than as a
barrister in New South Wales (in
that it would not then arguably be necessary
for him to satisfy conditions attached to a practising certificate issued by the
There is no reasonably arguable basis to extrapolate from such a
submission an ulterior motive of the kind asserted or knowledge
thereof and an
intention by the Tribunal to assist therein.
McLure explained that the relevant submission made for the Council was that Mr
Asuzu should have an opportunity to apply for a
variation of the orders should
he wish to practise as a solicitor, since in those circumstances the requirement
that Mr Asuzu undertake
various courses before being permitted to practise as a
barrister, such as the Bar exams and the Readers' course, might be seen to
been inappropriate. Mr Asuzu's account of the submission, as set out in the
Notice of Appeal, places emphasis on there being
a jurisdictional element
thereto. It is by no means clear that this was the case but in any event,
whatever the words in which the
submission was made, there is no basis disclosed
for the suggestion that the Tribunal understood the submission as an attempt to
exclude Mr Asuzu from practice in this jurisdiction or imposed the orders with
that intent. I am not satisfied that grounds 4 and
5 disclose any fairly or
reasonably arguable basis for appeal from the Tribunal's
McLure submits that if this ground is an allegation that the Tribunal erred in
failing to find that the Council pursued the proceedings
for a collateral
purpose (acknowledging that such an allegation was raised before the Tribunal),
such an allegation was not relevant
to the issues in the proceedings. In any
event, the Notice of Appeal does not properly raise any such
allegation.
is no fairly or reasonably arguable case shown by Mr Asuzu that the Tribunal
erred by failing to find that the Council was motivated
to exclude him either
from this jurisdiction or from the country.
6. The Tribunal incorrectly applied the law to the fact and made orders
that are manifestly unjust and inconsistent with the tenet
of fairness in the
circumstance that the Tribunal did not find in aggregate that the
Barrister's(appellant) conduct warrant unsatisfactory
professional conduct let
alone professional misconduct
alleges an incorrect application of the law to the facts and the making of
orders said to be manifestly unjust and inconsistent with
the tenet of fairness.
There is no specification of the basis of this ground other than insofar as it
asserts that the orders were
inconsistent with the fact that the Tribunal did
not find "in aggregate" that the conduct warranted a finding of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
is seemingly a reference to the finding that had been sought by the Council of
professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional
conduct based on the
aggregate of a number of separate grounds (the allegation being that in
aggregate these involved a substantial
or consistent failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence and hence amounted to
professional misconduct
within the meaning of
s 497(1)(a)
Profession Act
). The Tribunal did not uphold that 'aggregate' ground. It
did, however, uphold findings on particular individual grounds. The fact
did not find consistent professional misconduct is not inconsistent with the
orders made in relation to those grounds that
were held to amount to misconduct.
No error of law, fact or discretion has been identified as to the making of the
findings of individual
acts of misconduct.
7. The Tribunal incorrectly applied the principle of procedural
fairness in the circumstances that the material that could prove appellant
was withheld from the appellant and the Tribunal
contends that the Tribunal incorrectly applied the principle of procedural
fairness. The basis on which that contention is made is
the assertion that
material that could have proved Mr Asuzu's case was withheld from him and from
the Tribunal. The Tribunal considered
(at [81] and [82]) the allegation by Mr
Asuzu (apparently in response to the Council's complaint allegation that he had
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct
because he had failed to provide the Bar Association with a statutory
declaration in compliance with its request) that he had been denied access to
the file held by the Council in relation to him. Mr
Asuzu had asserted that this
file would reveal "all correspondence when received". (As I understand it, Mr
Asuzu had asserted that
he had provided the Council with the information it had
sought, though not in the form of a statutory declaration.)
his written submissions Mr Ezekiel-Hart refers to "[t]he failure until after the
commencement of the trial, and without explanation,
to discover documents the
timely discovery of which would have considerably shortened, and very possibly
avoided, the trial:
National Australia Bank v Petit-Breuilh (No. 2)
(unreported, [1990] VSC395, 18 October 1999)". This appears to be a complaint as
to late delivery rather than withholding of documents
and is a complaint of a
nature that would appear to go to a costs dispute rather than a denial of
procedural fairness as such.
Tribunal concluded that there was no evidence (other than Mr Asuzu's assertion
in his affidavit) that would provide any basis
for it to conclude that the Bar
Association or the Council had withheld documents that might have assisted Mr
Asuzu's case and stated
that it did not find that the Association or Council had
done so. There is no material before me to suggest that this finding is
incorrect or that there is a reasonably arguable case that it is incorrect.
McLure submits, and I accept, that Ground 7 does not raise a reasonably arguable
error of law, fact or discretion.
8. The orders made it impossible for the appellant to comply with if
not in practice
9. The orders made it impossible for the appellant to return to
practice by denying the appellant the benefit of supervised direct
go to the contention that the Tribunal's orders are impossible to
comply with if Mr Asuzu is not in practice and that it is impossible
Ezekiel-Hart explained the basis of this submission, in effect, as being that Mr
Asuzu cannot undertake the relevant courses until
he has obtained a practising
certificate; cannot obtain the latter without professional indemnity insurance;
and cannot obtain that
insurance while he is prohibited from accepting direct
access briefs. In Mr Asuzu's affidavit of 9 November 2012 (at [36] - [44]),
deposes to the steps taken to test the 'workability' of the Tribunal's decision
and orders. In summary, Mr Asuzu deposes at [43]:
As I do not have direct access clients, I will not have insurer, because I
cannot provide insurer to the Bar Council I will not be
issued the practising
certificate and because I am not issued with practising certificate I cannot
commence any aspect of the orders
including trainings required.
McLure notes that the stated purpose of the
Legal Profession Act
provide for the regulation of legal practice in this jurisdiction in the
interests of the administration of justice and for
the protection of clients of
law practices and the public generally (referring to
of the Act) and submits
that if the commercial consequence of the Tribunal's orders is that Mr Asuzu
cannot secure professional indemnity
insurance, that does not mean that the
Tribunal made a relevant error. I agree.
any event, it seems to me that the conclusion asserted by Mr Asuzu suffers from
a circularity of reasoning at least to the extent
that there seems to me to be
no reason to preclude Mr Asuzu from commencing the educational courses in
advance of obtaining a practising
certificate (as he asserts at [41] of his
affidavit) - all that is required by the order is that they be undertaken and
within 12 months of the issue of a practising certificate. A course of
study commenced now but completed some time before the end
of a 12 month period
commencing from issue of the practising certificate would on a fair reading of
the clause satisfy that requirement
(and I did not understand Mr McLure to
suggest otherwise).
accept that Grounds 8 and 9 do not raise a reasonably arguable error of law,
fact or discretion.
10. The Tribunal misapprehend[ed] the fact and proceeded with that
misapprehension to arrive at [the or a?] wrong conclusion in the
circumstance
that it was open to the Tribunal to caution or dismiss the
allegations.
asserts that the Tribunal misapprehended "the fact" and proceeded with
that misapprehension to arrive at a wrong conclusion. Neither
the fact that is
said to have misapprehended nor the particular conclusion said to have been
wrongly reached is identified. However,
some insight into what is contended to
have been the error might be gleaned from the fact that the ground refers to
circumstances
in which it was open to the Tribunal either to have cautioned Mr
Asuzu or to have dismissed the allegations.
McLure notes if this is a complaint that the Tribunal should have dismissed the
allegations of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
conduct then it goes
to the reasons of 31 August 2011 and, to the extent that it is a complaint as to
the orders imposed by the Tribunal
then it amounts to a challenge to all of the
Tribunal's orders of 30 May 2012.
10 does not identify an error of law, fact or discretion that could have
affected the findings made by the Tribunal. Nor does
it identify any such error
in either the decision not to impose a caution or not to dismiss all of the
allegations as to Mr Asuzu's
conduct or the actual orders
11. The Tribunal err[ed] in failing to take into account the Human
Rights of the Appellant
asserts a failure to take into account Mr Asuzu's human rights. At [119]
of his affidavit, Mr Asuzu asserts that the Council:
...by discriminating against my training from QLD cause me disability loss of
right to live peacefully and work in NSW contrary to
my protected constitutional
right as a subject of the Queen from Queensland living in NSW...
Poplar Housing Association Ltd v Donoghue
[2001] EWCA Civ 595
[2002] QB 48
Kracke v Mental Health Review Board & Ors (General)
[2009] VAT 646
(23 April 2009) at 81 and
R v Big M Drug Mart Ltd
(1985) 18 DLR (3d) 321
at 352. It seems that what is sought to be raised by this ground of appeal is
the complaint that the effect of the orders made is
to impose a limitation on a
human right to live and work in New South Wales. Apart from the fact that there
does not appear to be
a reasonably arguable basis for a case that the effect of
the orders is necessarily that which has been claimed, I accept Mr McLure's
submission that the ground does not identify an error of law, fact or discretion
that could have affected the result.
12. The Tribunal decision treats the appellant differently and
encouraged discrimination against the appellant without rational
distinction
13. The Tribunal orders discriminate against the trainings of the
14. The Tribunal orders were contrary to the rights of the appellant to
be protected against disability, disadvantage and discrimination
and contrary to
section 117 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
, contrary to the
Discrimination Act 1975
sec 9(l)(a)(c)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
sec 7(l)(a)(c)
is breached, hence other barristers are not subjected to
the same restriction as the Appellant.
12, 13 and 14
raise allegations of discrimination.
that the Tribunal treated Mr Asuzu "differently" and "without rational
distinction". It is not clear how it is said that
such discrimination is
manifested by the decision. In his affidavit, at [120], Mr Asuzu cites
v Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR 185
[2003] HCA 3
and emphasises the statement
in that case to the effect that the essence of discrimination lies in the
unequal treatment of equals
or the equal treatment of those who are not equal,
where the differential treatment and unequal outcome is not the product of a
distinction
which is appropriate and adapted to the attainment of a proper
objective. This ground does not identify the basis on which it is
said there was
an error of law, fact or discretion that could have affected the ultimate
appears to suggest that there has been discrimination against Mr Asuzu's
"training" and is apparently referable to a belief by Mr
Asuzu that the Tribunal
did not consider his training in Queensland to be as good as that which he might
receive in this jurisdiction.
There was no such finding and nor is there any
reasonable basis to suggest that this was a factor in the Tribunal's reasons. I
that Ground 13 does not identify any error of law, fact or discretion
that could have affected the result.
is an assertion that the Tribunal's orders were contrary to Mr Asuzu's
right to be protected against disability, disadvantage and
discrimination and
contrary to
Constitution
and (c) of the
Discrimination Act 1975
and (c) of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW). This assertion is apparently put on the
basis that other barristers are not subjected to the same restriction as Mr
is nothing in the Tribunal's reasons to support a conclusion that there is a
reasonably arguable case that it discriminated
against Mr Asuzu by reason of his
race or any other characteristic. Nor is there any reasonably arguable basis for
the suggestion
that there was discrimination because (unidentified) other
barristers are not subjected to the same restrictions as those imposed
Tribunal. Mr Asuzu does not fall in the general category of barristers in the
sense that he has been found to have engaged
in professional misconduct and
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Any complaint of differential treatment
would need to take into
account the treatment of other barristers against whom
similar findings of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory conduct have
made. The Tribunal's reasons were carefully considered. I accept that Ground 14
does not raise a reasonably arguable error of
law, fact or discretion that could
have affected the result.
15. The Tribunal erred in fact in failing to find that the exercise of
discretionary power by the Respondent was in bad faith and
at direction or
behest of another.
16. The Tribunal erred in fact in not finding that there was an
improper exercise of power by the Respondent to cause exclusion of
the appellant
for life from practicing his legal profession in NSW or exercise of power for a
purpose other than a purpose for which
the power is conferred;
raise allegations as to whether the Council was exercising an
unidentified discretionary power in bad faith and at the direction
or behest of
an (unidentified) other person or improperly for a purpose other than that for
which the power was conferred (it being
contended that the purpose was to cause
exclusion of Mr Asuzu for life from practising his legal profession in New South
basis for these contentions is not apparent on the material before me. I accept
that these grounds do not raise a reasonably arguable
error of law, fact or
discretion on the part of the Tribunal in determining the issues that were
before the Tribunal.
17. The Tribunal decision and orders [were] inequitable in light of
other decisions and facts.
raises the contention that the Tribunal's orders were inequitable in
light of other unidentified decisions and facts. This ground
does not identify
the basis on which it is contended that the decision and orders were inequitable
nor any error of law, fact or
discretion that could have affected the
18. The cost orders made against the appellant [were] manifestly unjust
in the light of the findings of the Tribunal and failures
of the Respondent in
over 80% of its particularized allegations and refusal to discuss to narrow the
lengthy allegations when invited
by the appellant. The respondent only made
application to withdraw some allegations after intense hearing that could not
those allegations. The time and cost could have been saved if the
respondent had accepted the invitation to discuss.
(which is also the subject of the third issue raised on the present
Notice of Motion) goes to the costs orders made against Mr Asuzu
and contends
that those were manifestly unjust (in light of the outcome of the proceedings;
the assertion that the Council refused
to narrow the lengthy allegations it had
made and only withdrew some allegations "after intense hearing that could not
sustain those
allegations"; and on the basis that time and cost could have been
saved had the Council accepted Mr Asuzu's invitation "to discuss").
The Tribunal
ordered Mr Asuzu to pay 50% of the Council's costs, including reserved
McLure notes that s 566 of the Act provides that the Tribunal must make orders
requiring an Australian legal practitioner whom
it has found to have engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct to pay costs,
unless the Tribunal
is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist. Ground 18
does not identify any error of law, fact or discretion made by the Tribunal
reaching its decision on costs and there is no contention by Mr Asuzu that
exceptional circumstances existed that would have justified
there being no order
Tribunal's reasons show that it considered the matters that Mr Asuzu says were
relevant to the costs order were taken into account
by the Tribunal when fixing
the amount at 50% and there is no apparent error revealed in those
19. Injustice and damage to the system of justice will be done if the
orders made on 27 August 2012 were to remain unchanged.
is a broad pleading that injustice and damage will be done to the system
of justice if the orders made on 27 August 2012 remain unchanged.
This ground
does not identify any error of law, fact or discretion that could have affected
the result.
Conclusion on issue (ii)
Mr Asuzu it was contended that the present application was an abuse of process
and that the Council was not acting in "good faith
and rationality", though the
basis on which this allegation was made was not made clear in the submissions.
What seems to be asserted
is that, although on the present application the Court
does not need to embark on an enquiry into the merits of the claim, it should
consider the evidence for the limited purpose of being satisfied as to whether
the Council (and/or the Tribunal) acted in good faith
and rationally (there
being a reference to what was said by Gilmour J in
Kogolo v State of Western
Australia (No 3)
[2012] FCA 1332
). There is nothing on the material
before me to suggest that there is any reasonably arguable basis for an
allegation that the Council
or the Tribunal acted otherwise than in good faith
and rationally.
essence of Mr Asuzu's response to the present Notice of Motion (which he
believes is itself frivolous and vexatious, aimed at
'institutionalising'
oppression, misconceived and having only the intent to delay justice - see paras
[15] and [18] of his affidavit)
is his belief that the effect of the orders is
to bar him for life from practising his profession in New South Wales (para
He contends that the orders are unreasonable, manifestly excessive, and
plainly unjust; and that they will cause disability and discrimination
extent that he is banned from practising law in this jurisdiction (that being
what his solicitor submits has been the "ulterior
quest" of the Council). The
appeal grounds therefore appear to be focussed on the practical effect of the
orders on Mr Asuzu rather
than whether there has been appellable error in the
decision and orders of the Tribunal.
the submissions filed for Mr Asuzu, emphasis is placed on the fact that the
Tribunal found that none of the complaints against
him involved dishonesty or
deception of any kind and that the proceedings did not arise out of any
complaint made by a client of
his. It is noted that the Tribunal stated that it
did not doubt that Mr Asuzu was an intelligent man and a diligent worker who,
the course of his career as a barrister had undertaken a number of pro
bono matters and did his best to assist his clients in some
very difficult
cases. Those matters, however, do not identify any reasonably arguable ground
for the appeal against the complaints
that were upheld by the Tribunal nor do
they suggest that the Tribunal's discretion miscarried in a way that constitutes
Ezekiel-Hart submits that the Notice of Appeal is not frivolous or vexatious,
having regard to authorities as to the meaning of
those terms (including those
referred to in
Robert John King v The Honourable Terence John Higgins AO and
[2009] ACTSC153 (18 November 2009), 39-44). In effect, he submits
that what is necessary is to show that the appeal has no prospects
and is therefore an abuse of the process of the court. Reference was made to the
dicta of Fitzgerald P in
[1996] QCA 37
[1996] 2 Qd R 218
at 220, namely
It is also necessary to decide what makes legal proceedings vexatious.
Although there are sometimes statutory indications, the broad
test potentially
concerns such factors as the legitimacy or otherwise of the motives of the
person against whom the order is sought,
the existence or lack of reasonable
grounds for the claims sought to be made, repetition of similar allegations or
arguments to those
which have already been rejected, compliance with or
disregard of the court's practices, procedures and rulings, persistent attempts
to use the court' processes to circumvent its decisions or other abuse of
process, the wastage of public resources, and funds, and
the harassment of those
who are the subject of the litigation which lacks reasonable basis: see, for
Attorney-General (NSW) v Wentworth
(1988) 14 NSWLR 481
[1992] HCA 39
(1992) 66 ALJR 810
Jones v Cusack
[1992] HCA 40
(1992) 66 ALJR 815
Attorney-General (NSW) v West
(NSW Common Law Division No 16208 of 1992,
19 November 1992, unreported, BC9201474).
accept that the power summarily to dispose of a proceeding should be exercised
with the utmost caution and only in very clear cases
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Webster v Lampard
(1993) 170 CLR 598
at 602-3 and
Brimson v Rocla
Concrete Pipes Limited
[1982] 2 NSWLR 937
at 942). In
Dey v Victorian
Railways Commissioner
[1949] HCA 1
(1949) 78 CLR 62
at 91 it was said that it must be
clear that there is no real question to be tried. There is recognised to be a
high burden on a
party seeking summary dismissal (as made clear in the reasons
of McColl JA in
, where the relevant principles set out in
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 84 ALJR 612
were considered
and applied).
Ezekiel-Hart refers to
Financial Integrity Group Pty Ltd v Farmer and
[2009] ACTSC 143
(at [15]) for the proposition that the Court should
look at the substance of what is claimed, or sought to be claimed, not merely
what might be an inadequate expression of the claim. (Mr Ezekiel-Hart also
notes, although it is not apparent what relevance this
has to the issues in the
present case, that an important element of the common law is that causes of
action seen at one time to be
unsustainable may, over time and perhaps in
changed circumstances, become untenable.)
test generally applied on applications for summary disposal of part of all of
proceedings is that set out in
General Steel
at 128-9. In
, Barwick CJ, in considering the circumstances in which a party ought
be denied access to a final hearing on the claims made in the
proceedings, noted
the various descriptions given in the authorities of the test to be applied in
identifying whether there is a
real cause of action (or, as applied to the
present case, whether there is a real defence to the claim):
... The test to be applied has been variously expressed; "so obviously
untenable that it cannot possibly succeed"; "manifestly groundless";
manifestly faulty that it does not admit of argument"; "discloses a case which
the Court is satisfied cannot succeed"; "under
no possibility can there be a
good cause of action"; "be manifest that to allow them" (the pleadings) "to
stand would involve useless
General Steel
test was recently endorsed and applied by the Court of
Shaw v State of New South Wales
[2012] NSWCA 102
Barrett JA (with whom Beazley, McColl, Macfarlan JJA and McClellan CJ at CL
agreed) stated:
The question is...whether the claims in question are so obviously untenable
or groundless that there is "a high degree of certainty"
that they will fail if
allowed to go to trial; and whether this is one of the "clearest of cases" in
which the court may accordingly
intervene to prevent the claims being
is a suggestion that this test has been modified by the current legislative
regime in relation to the conduct of litigation
in this Court. Hammerschlag J,
Simmons v Protective Commissioner of NSW also known as NSW Trustee and
[2012] NSWSC 455
, expressed the view, in
reasonable cause of action was one giving rise to real issues requiring
resolution by the Court (such that proceedings need
not be hopeless or bound to
fail in order to be struck out as disclosing no reasonable cause of action),
referring to the approach
. Nothing ultimately turns on whether
that be the case, as I consider that the
Dey/General Steel
test is met in
the present case having regard to the grounds of appeal as set out in the Notice
of Appeal and the material before
emphasis placed by Mr Ezekiel-Hart was as to the effect of the orders being
"manifestly excessive" on the basis that they operated
as a "ban for life". I am
not persuaded that there is any reasonable basis for the contention that these
orders have the necessary
or likely effect of banning Mr Asuzu from practising
in this jurisdiction as a barrister for life. (Whether Mr Asuzu is able to
professional indemnity cover, as a practical matter, must ultimately be a
function not of the orders that have been made but of the
commercial decision of
insurers whether to offer such cover.) The material before me does not show a
reasonably arguable basis for
a contention that the Tribunal erred in making the
findings of misconduct that it did nor in the exercise of its discretion to
the orders that it did consequent upon those findings.
the material before me, no error in the Tribunal's reasons or in the exercise of
its discretion is apparent. The foundation of
the appeal in the present case is
not something that could be described as slender; it is in my view obviously
untenable. The present
case in my view falls within the category of case in
which the Court, in the interests of case management and the overriding
purpose identified in the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
should intervene to prevent the claims being litigated. I am firmly of the view
that the grounds of appeal set out in the
Notice of Appeal do not disclose
either a fairly arguable or reasonably arguable basis for the appeal. On the
material before me
the appeal is so manifestly groundless or untenable such that
its maintenance is frivolous or vexatious within the meaning of
(iii) Strike-out of Ground 18
this strictly does not arise, having regard to my findings in (i) (or
alternatively (ii)) above.
Legal Profession Act
provides that an appeal does not
lie to the Supreme Court against a decision as to costs except by leave of the
court. Mr McLure
notes that no application for such leave has been made. He
acknowledges that (if the remaining grounds are not summarily dismissed)
issue arises as to whether leave is required (referring to the discussion in
Dillon v Gosford City Council
[2011] NSWCA 328
, Basten JA explained that the practice of this Court is not to
require leave to appeal from a costs order where there is a challenge
substantive orders as well (in the context of the operation of
Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW)). His Honour noted at
[53] that it was commonplace to find a requirement for leave in respect of
appeals against orders as to
costs and that in relation to appeals within the
Supreme Court and from the District Court, the court had followed English
to the effect that leave was not required if the appeal contained
grounds relating to issues other than costs (and is thus not an
appeal from "a judgment given or order made in proceedings in the
Court ... as
to costs only which are in the discretion of the Court", citing
[1966] 2 QB 94
at 106 (per Lord Denning MR) and 107 (per Harman
Honour there noted three points of distinction between
s 101(2)(c)
Supreme Court Act 1970
s 127(2)(b)
District Court
(NSW)) on the one hand and
Land and Environment
on the other (those being: the absence of the word "only" in
; the omission in the
Supreme Court Act
of the words "which are in
the discretion of the Court", on which his Honour said nothing turned since
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) confers a broad discretion in
relation to costs; and the fact that appeals under
are by way of
rehearing, whereas an appeal under
Land and Environment Court
is limited to an order or decision of the court on a question of
the present case,
Legal Profession Act 2004
(NSW) provides
that an appeal against an order of decision of the Tribunal proceeds by way of
rehearing and that an appeal does not
lie to the Supreme Court against, inter
alia, an interlocutory decision or a decision as to costs "except by leave of
the Supreme
, his Honour considered that where an appeal is extensive (by way
of rehearing), as is the present appeal, there might be a stronger
principle for restricting appeals as to costs (though that tendency would be
countered by the requirement in the
Supreme Court Act
for leave where the
appeal was from a judgment or order as to "costs only"). His Honour also
referred to practical considerations
that militated in favour of a leave
requirement limited to appeals raising a challenge only to a costs order, noting
that an appellant
would usually not need to pursue an independent challenge to
the costs order unless all other grounds of appeal had failed. (Here,
submitted by Mr Ezekiel-Hart that it would be futile to strike out ground 18 on
the basis that it would be open to this Court
if the appeal were to succeed on
the substantive grounds to set aside the whole of the decisions and orders of
the Tribunal, including
costs. It is also submitted that the application to
strike out this ground is misconceived in light of the provisions of
Supreme Court Act 1970
had regard to the practice of this Court not to require leave where there is a
challenge to substantive orders as well as to
a costs order, though noting that
this might not be in conformity with the approach adopted in other
both the Supreme Court provision and that in the
Land and Environment Court dealt with order under challenge and not with the
or nature of the appeal, his Honour followed the prior interpretation of
(and s 127(2)(b)) and held that no leave was there
in the present case this would suggest that, notwithstanding the
absence of the word "only" in sub-s (4)(c), if the present appeal
proceed on the substantive grounds, the ordinary practice would be not to
require leave for ground 18 to be maintained (even
though s 729A is expressed in
mandatory terms). Subject to the qualification I make below, I would have
adopted the spirit of that
approach (recognising that costs orders inconsistent
with those made by the Tribunal could in any event be made if the substantive
appeal were to be successful) and would have granted leave to appeal from the
costs order made by the Tribunal had I been satisfied
(which I am not) that the
substantive grounds of appeal raised a reasonably arguable basis for the appeal.
The qualification is that
I would have need to be satisfied (and I am not) as to
the adequacy of ground 18 to identify any relevant error of law, fact or
by the Tribunal in the making of the costs orders.
had I not been persuaded summarily to dismiss the whole of the proceedings,
while I would have been inclined not to strike
out Ground 18 I would have
required the Notice of Appeal to be amended in order properly to identify the
basis on which it was said
that the Tribunal had erred in making the costs
the reasons set out above, I am of the view that the appeal is not competent
(having been filed out of time); that leave was necessary
for Mr Asuzu to file
the Notice of Appeal out of time and that such an application should have been
made in advance of the hearing
of the competency objection; but that in any
event that leave should not be granted for an extension of time in which to file
Notice of Appeal because the Notice of Appeal does not disclose any fairly
arguable grounds of appeal.
I been satisfied that Mr Asuzu's contention on the first issue was correct (and
the Notice of Appeal had been filed in time),
then (conscious as I am of the
high level of satisfaction required to be reached before summarily dismissing
proceedings in this
fashion) I would have concluded that the grounds of appeal
were nevertheless so untenable as to make the appeal manifestly groundless
hence to warrant the summary dismissal of the Notice of Appeal as one that is
frivolous or vexatious.
to costs, notwithstanding that the competency objection was not filed within the
required time, the Council would have succeeded
on its application for summary
dismissal on the second and alternative ground. Therefore, subject to any
further brief oral submissions
on this point I consider that it should have its
costs of the proceedings.
dismiss these proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (346 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter