URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keogh v CPB Contractors Pty Ltd & Ors (No 3) [2024] NSWDDT 10 (9 October 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Keogh v CPB Contractors Pty Ltd & Ors (No 3)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 10
Hearing Date(s):
30 September 2024
Date of Orders:
9 October 2024
Decision Date:
9 October 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Dismiss the application made by the second defendant,
and the first and third defendants in respect of their liability to the
plaintiff as an employer in Queensland (the Applicants), for a variation of the
existing costs orders.
(2) Order the Applicants for the
variation to pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental to the
application.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – damages – defendant entitled to reduction of
damages to reflect workers compensation benefits paid –
issue not raised
at trial – damages reduced to reflect totality of payment –amendment
unnecessary because of parties’
sensible solution
– choice of law – whether costs are procedural or substantive law
– power to make costs orders circumscribed
by Queensland legislation
– costs are a tool for courts to manage proceedings – costs are
procedural – Queensland
legislation fettering discretion over costs
ineffective to bind courts in NSW – law of forum applies for costs
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Interpretation Act 1987
Statute of Gloucester (1278) 6 Edw I c 1
Workers Compensation
and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
Cases Cited:
Chubs Constructions Pty Ltd v Chamma
[2009] NSWCA 98
Cvilikas v Sunshine
Coast Hospital and Health Service
[2023] QSC 36
Hamilton v Merck & Co Inc
[2006] NSWCA 55
(2006) 66 NSWLR 48
Hudson v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDDT
John Pfeiffer Pty Ltd v Rogerson
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503
v CPB Contractors Pty Ltd & Ors (No 2)
[2024] NSWDDT 9
Labuda v Langford
[2001] ACTSC 126
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
(2019) 265 CLR
Peregrine Fixed Income Ltd v JP Morgan Chase Bank
[2005] HKCFI
Preferential Trade Area Bank v ESCOM
[2003] MWHC 74
Somers v Fournier
(2002) 60 OR (3d) 225 (Ont
Tickner v Teys Australia Biloela Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 62
Union Discount Co Ltd v Zoller
[2001] EWCA Civ 1755
(2002) 1 All ER 693
Wimpey Construction (UK) Ltd v Martin Black & Co (Wire Ropes) Ltd
[1988] SLT 637
Texts Cited:
William Reynolds, “Legal Process and Choice of Law”
Maryland Law Review 1371
GE Dal Pont, Law of Costs (2003, 1st ed, LexisNexis)
Richard Garnett, Substance and Procedure in Private International Law (2012,
1st ed, Oxford University Press)
Sagi Peari, “Substance and Procedure
in Private International Law by Richard Garnett”
[2013] MelbJlIntLaw 11
(2013) 14(1) Melbourne
Journal of International Law 304
Richard Oppong, “A decade of Private
International Law in African Courts 1997-2007 (Part I)”, (2007) 9 Yearbook
International Law 223
Craig Andrew Keogh (Plaintiff)
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd (First
Campbell Mining Services Pty Ltd (Second Defendant)
Mining Pty Ltd (Third Defendant)
Downer Mining Regional (NSW) Pty Ltd (Fifth
Representation:
S Tzouganatos/V Boutas (Plaintiff)
A Schonell (First
Defendant re Poitrel Mine)
A Truce (Solicitor) (First Defendant re Moorvale
A Schonell (Second Defendant re Moorvale Mine)
A Schonell (Third
Defendant re Blackwater Mine)
J Sheller SC (Third Defendant re Boggabri
T Rowles (Fifth Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
Solicitors:
Lawyers (Plaintiff)
BT Lawyers (First Defendant re Poitrel Mine)
Oakley (First Defendant re Moorvale Mine)
BT Lawyers (Second Defendant re
Moorvale Mine)
BT Lawyers (Third Defendant re Blackwater Mine)
& Kearney (Third Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
Sparke Helmore (Fifth
Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
File Number(s):
DDT 2021/45484
these proceedings I delivered judgment in favour of the plaintiff against the
defendants on 25 July 2024 (the primary judgment):
Keogh v CPB Contractors
Pty Ltd & Ors (No 2)
[2024] NSWDDT 9.
this judgment I will refer to the following parties as the “WorkCover
Defendants”:
(1) The first defendant re the Poitrel Mine.
(2) The second defendant re the Moorvale Mine.
(3) The third defendant re the Blackwater Mine.
plaintiff and the WorkCover Defendants have returned to the Tribunal to litigate
the following post-judgment issues:
(1) Whether the damages ordered against the WorkCover Defendants should be
reduced by reason of workers compensation payments made
by WorkCover Queensland
to the plaintiff.
(2) Whether the costs ordered in favour of the plaintiff against the WorkCover
Defendants should be varied because of
Workers Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) (the WCRA), by limiting costs payable by the
WorkCover Defendants to ordinary costs from 10 December 2021.
these issues, Mr Tzougantos and Ms Boutas appeared for Mr Keogh and Mr Schonell
appeared for the WorkCover Defendants.
Issue 1: Should the
Damages be Reduced by Reason of Queensland Workers Compensation
parties agreed that the answer to this question is “yes”.
of the WCRA provides as follows:
270 When damages are to be reduced
(1) The amount of damages that an employer is legally liable to
pay to a claimant for an injury must be reduced by the total amount
payable by an insurer by way of compensation for the injury.
(2) However, subsection (1) applies to compensation paid or
payable under chapter 4A only if the damages include treatment, care
and support
(3) Also, the amount of damages must not be reduced by an
amount paid under
section 193.
(4) This section does not limit the reduction of the amount of
the damages by any other amount that the insurer or the claimant
liable to pay on account of the worker under another law.”
of the WCRA provides as follows:
271 Assessment by court of total liability for
(1) This section applies if—
(a) damages are awarded for an injury; or
(b) damages are to be paid in settlement of a claim for an
(2) To establish the reduction under
section 270(1)
for compensation paid, the claimant or insurer may apply to—
(a) the court in which the proceeding is brought; or
(b) if a proceeding has not been started—the Industrial
Magistrates Court.
(3) The court’s decision is binding on the insurer and
all persons entitled to payment by the insurer for the injury.”
parties agreed that
is expressed in mandatory terms and that the damages
that an employer is legally liable to pay must be reduced by the total amount
compensation paid or payable for the injury. The evidence established that
workers compensation benefits in the aggregate sum
of $268,682.89 were paid by
WorkCover Queensland (as the insurer of the WorkCover Defendants) to Mr Keogh.
Had this issue been raised
in the Defence, and had evidence been presented at
the trial, then the ultimate judgments against the WorkCover Defendants would
have been reduced to reflect the totality of this payment.
was informed from the Bar Table that:
(1) The WorkCover Defendants had paid the plaintiff all of the damages which I
ordered, less the workers compensation benefits which
he had received.
(2) The plaintiff acknowledged that he was only entitled to this reduced amount.
those circumstances the necessity to amend the judgments disappears, as the
parties have sensibly worked out a solution to give
of the WCRA.
I recite this matter in this judgment, to record that the WorkCover Defendants
are entitled to a reduction in the damages
payable because of workers
compensation benefits paid to the plaintiff.
express the view that in any future case similar to that of Mr Keogh, it would
be the better course for this issue to be raised
at the trial, rather than after
the event. Mr Schonell cited two decisions of the Supreme Court of Queensland,
Cvilikas v Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service
[2023] QSC 36
Tickner v Teys Australia Biloela Pty Ltd
[2020] QSC 62.
I note that
in both cases, the trial judge who assessed damages was also asked, as part of
the primary judgment, to reduce the assessed
damages by reason of an agreed
amount of workers compensation benefits which had been received. I do accept the
submission of Mr
Schonell that
of the WCRA entitles a defendant to come to
court after damages have been assessed to obtain a reduction.
my view there is no need to amend the assessed damages, because of the sensible
agreement reached between the parties and the agreed
amount which has already
been paid, to reflect the damages assessed minus the workers compensation
benefits received.
Issue 2: Should the Costs Orders Against the
WorkCover Defendants be Varied?
the primary judgment, Order 9 was as follows:
“Order the first, second, third and fifth defendants to pay the costs of
the plaintiff.”
WorkCover Defendants sought a variation of that order, so that the costs order
against the WorkCover Defendants in respect of
the plaintiff’s costs be
expressed as follows (MFI 34, par 2):
“The second defendant, and the first and third defendants in respect of
their liability to the plaintiff as an employer in
Queensland, pay the
plaintiff’s costs on the ordinary basis from 10 December 2021.”
factual background to that application is to be found, in part, in the affidavit
of Mr Thomas sworn on 12 August 2024 (DX 14).
Mr Thomas is the solicitor for the
WorkCover Defendants. The chronology of events is as follows:
(1) On 23 October 2018 the plaintiff lodged an application for workers
compensation with WorkCover Queensland.
(2) On 19 June 2019 WorkCover Queensland accepted the plaintiff’s workers
compensation claim and commenced making workers compensation
payments (which
were back paid from 28 October 2018 and then paid up to 10 May 2020). The total
of the workers compensation benefits
paid to the plaintiff by WorkCover
Queensland was $268,682.89.
(3) On 15 July 2020 WorkCover Queensland issued a Notice of Assessment to the
plaintiff in respect of his injury, pursuant to
of the WCRA. Inter alia,
such a notice must state whether the worker has sustained permanent impairment
from the injury, and if so,
the degree of permanent impairment assessed by
WorkCover Queensland. The Notice of Assessment stated that the plaintiff had a
permanent impairment.
(4) On 16 February 2021 the Statement of Claim commencing these proceedings in
the Dust Diseases Tribunal was filed.
(5) On 19 May 2021 the plaintiff served a Notice of Claim for damages pursuant
of the WCRA upon WorkCover Queensland as the insurer of the WorkCover
Defendants.
Section 275(1)
of the WCRA provides that “
before starting a
proceeding in a court for damages
, a claimant must give notice under this
section within the period mentioned in
” (emphasis added). The
of the WCRA prescribes the matters which must be contained in
the Notice of Claim.
(7) On 10 December 2021 the plaintiff, WorkCover Queensland and the Queensland
employers participated in a conference. In his affidavit
(DX 14, par 7) Mr
Thomas characterised this as “a compulsory conference pursuant to
the WCRA”. I deal below with whether that assertion is correct.
(8) At the conclusion of that conference, WorkCover Queensland and the plaintiff
served written offers upon each other. Mr Thomas
characterised these offers in
his affidavit (DX 14, par 7) as “mandatory final offers pursuant to
of the WCRA”. I deal below with the question of whether that assertion is
Section 292(2)
provides that if a claim is not settled at a compulsory
conference, each party must ensure that it makes a written final offer which
would dispose of the claim if it were accepted. Again, any such written final
offer must necessarily be given before starting a proceeding
in a court for
(10) Such written final offers have to be filed with the court in sealed
envelopes –
This did not happen.
(11) The judgments ordered against the WorkCover Defendants exceeded the offer
made by the plaintiff on 10 December 2021.
The Conference held on 10 December 2021
to the conference between the parties which took place on 10 December 2021,
there was a considerable amount of correspondence
as to whether the plaintiff
was obliged to attend any conference, and as to whether any conference was a
compulsory conference pursuant
of the WCRA. The ultimate position of
the solicitors for the plaintiff was expressed in an email dated 26 March 2021
(PX 20, p 2).
That email said:
“We do not agree that there is any necessity for the plaintiff to comply
with the pre-court procedural provisions of the WCRA,
for the reasons we have
already set forth. However, to avoid the costs and delay of a hearing on this
issue, I am instructed to agree
to an amended version of Bruce Thomas’
proposed orders, as set out below.”
email proposed, inter alia, that the parties attend a mediation, and that
“such mediation is to be considered a compulsory
conference with respect
to the plaintiff’s claim against the first defendant, the second defendant
and the third defendant
in their capacity as the plaintiff’s employers in
the State of Queensland pursuant to
of the WCRA”.
the parties agreed to characterise the mediation as a compulsory conference
under the WCRA, consideration of that legislation
suggests that the mediation
was not, as a matter of law, a compulsory conference under the WCRA.
of the WCRA provides as follows:
“Before the claimant starts a proceeding for damages, there must be a
conference of the parties (the compulsory conference).”
of the WCRA provides that a claimant may start proceedings in a court for
damages only if the complainant has complied with the “Pre-Court
Procedures” in accordance with Chapter 5
of the WCRA. It was
common ground that the parties did not comply with many of those pre-court
procedures before the Statement of
Claim was filed in this Tribunal. In
particular there was no compulsory conference. Further, no written final offers
were made or
placed in sealed envelopes prior to the commencement of court
proceedings for damages.
conference between the parties was held 10 months after proceedings were
commenced by the plaintiff, whereas
of the WCRA required such a
conference to be held before the claimant started a proceeding for damages.
Section 289(6)
of the WCRA entitles a party to apply to a court to fix the time
and place for the compulsory conference or dispense with the compulsory
conference for good reason. No such application was made by either party. Nor
was any application made by the WorkCover Defendants
to stay the proceedings
brought in this Tribunal or to strike them out because of non-compliance with
of the WCRA.
find that the conference held between the parties on 10 December 2021 was not a
compulsory conference within the meaning of
of the WCRA.
The Written Offers Made After the Conference on 10 December
of the WCRA provides that if a claim is not settled at a compulsory
conference, each party must make a final written offer to every
other party. I
find that the offers made in writing at the conclusion of the conference held on
10 December 2021 were not final written
offers within the meaning of
the WCRA, as they were offers made after a conference between the parties which
was not a compulsory conference within the meaning
of the WCRA, and
further because they were made after, and not before, proceedings for damages
were commenced.
Statutory Basis for a Variation of Costs
5 of the WCRA deals with “Access to Damages”. Part 12 of Ch 5 deals
with “Costs”. Division 2 of Pt
12 deals with “Costs applying
to worker who does not have a terminal condition and has DPI of less than
20%”. Mr Schonell
submitted that Div 2 applies to Mr Keogh, who does not
have a terminal condition (defined in s 39A of the WCRA as one which will
to the worker’s death within five years of diagnosis) and who has been
assessed as having a degree of permanent impairment
of less than 20%.
316 of the WCRA provides as follows:
316 Principles about orders as to costs
(1) No order about costs, other than an order allowed under
this section, is to be made by the court in the claimant’s proceeding.
(2) If a claimant or an insurer makes a written final offer of
settlement that is refused, the court must, in the following circumstances,
the order about costs provided for—
(a) if the court later awards an amount of damages to the
worker that is equal to or more than the worker’s written final
offer—an order that the insurer pay the worker’s costs on the
standard basis from the day of the written final offer;
(b) if the court later dismisses the worker’s claim,
makes no award of damages or awards an amount of damages that is equal
less than the insurer’s written final offer—an order that the worker
pay the insurer’s costs on the standard
basis from the day of the final
(3) If an award of damages is less than the claimant’s
written final offer but more than the insurer’s written final
offer, each
party bears the party’s own costs.”
submission made by Mr Schonell was that s 316(2)(a) of the WCRA applied
(1) The claimant had made a written final offer of settlement to the insurer
that was refused.
(2) The Tribunal awarded an amount of damages to the worker that was more than
the claimant’s written final offer.
(3) Thus, the appropriate order was for the insurer to pay the worker’s
costs on the standard basis only from the date of the
written final offer.
previously recited, the evidence of Mr Thomas (DX 14) showed that the judgment
sum ordered by the Tribunal against the WorkCover
Defendants exceeded the
written offer made by the plaintiff after the conference held on 10 December
such a costs order were to be made it would deny the plaintiff any costs prior
to 10 December 2021, noting that by that date these
proceedings had been on foot
in the Tribunal since 16 February 2021 and costs had been incurred in
investigating the claim and formulating
it before it was filed in the
costs provisions in s 316 of the WCRA, if they did apply, would not have such a
draconian effect. This is because the compulsory
conference, and the making of
final written offers, are required to take place
proceedings are
commenced. In the ordinary course of events, if a claimant bettered their offer
at a hearing, they would still obtain
all of the costs of the proceedings, as
well the costs of any preliminary investigation and preparation costs incurred
making of the written final offer, within the meaning of the
Is s 316 of the WCRA Substantive or Procedural Law?
primary submissions made by Mr Tzouganatos and Mr Schonell, revolved around
whether or not s 316 was a matter of substantive law
or procedural law. If s 316
is characterised as substantive law, then the power of this Tribunal to make an
order against the WorkCover
Defendants in these proceedings is circumscribed by
the WCRA. If on the other hand s 316 of the WCRA is to be characterised as
law, then the Tribunal is not bound to apply that provision, and can
exercise its general discretion to order costs, to be found
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Introduction
a provision is substantive or procedural is not always an easy matter to
determine. In the journal article “Legal Process
and Choice of
Maryland Law Review
, Professor William
Reynolds said:
“The confusion is complete. The poor lawyer who gives advice to clients on
choice-of-law matters meets with stares of disbelief.”
a Book Review by Sagi Peari of “Substance and Procedure in Private
International Law”, published in the
Melbourne Journal of International
, the reviewer stated:
“Issues like rules of proceedings, admissibility of evidence, witnesses,
functions of the judge, burden of proof, pleadings,
discovery, trial, mode of
argumentation, joinder, rules of jurisdiction, appeal and preclusion must be
treated as procedural issues.
Viewed as a technical part of litigation,
procedural issues are related to the manner in which the court regulates its
proceedings
rather than to the litigating parties’ substantive rights and
duties. In other words, procedural rules are the means by which
the courts apply
their substantive rules to the particular circumstances of the case.”
the same Book Review, the learned author said that “[w]hile procedural
matters deal with the machinery of proceedings, the
substantive matters address
the rights and duties of the litigating parties”.
Orders: Historical Background
power of the common law courts to order costs has always been a power granted by
statute. The foundation for the common law jurisdiction
as to costs is the
Statute of Gloucester
(1278) 6 Edw I c 1.
GE Dal Pont,
Law of Costs
(2003, 1st ed, LexisNexis), the learned author
says at [6.4]:
“The historical legacy has dictated a starting point that, statute apart,
there is no power to order costs, so that authority
to award costs must always
be traced to a statutory provision. To this end, the court’s primary task
when the issue of jurisdiction
arises is to examine the provisions of the Act
relied upon and to consider whether those provisions sustained the order.”
is noted that s 316(1) of the WCRA commences by saying that no order about
costs, other than an order allowed under the section,
can be made by the court
in the claimant’s proceeding. Section 316 does not grant a power to order
costs, but rather it limits
any costs order which might be made. Thus, one needs
to find a statutory provision applicable in the Tribunal to order costs in the
first place. That provision is
Civil Procedure Act 2005
which provides as follows:
Courts powers as to costs
(1) Subject to rules of court and to this or any other Act—
(a) costs are in the discretion of the court, and
(b) the court has full power to determine by whom, to whom and to
what extent costs are to be paid, and
(c) the court may order that costs are to be awarded on the ordinary
basis or on an indemnity basis.
(2) Subject to rules of court and to this or any other Act, a party to
proceedings may not recover costs from any other party otherwise
than pursuant
to an order of the court.
(3) An order as to costs may be made by the court at any stage of the
proceedings or after the conclusion of the proceedings.
(4) In particular, at any time before costs are referred for assessment,
the court may make an order to the effect that the party
to whom costs are to be
paid is to be entitled to—
(a) costs up to, or from, a specified stage of the proceedings,
(b) a specified proportion of the assessed costs, or
(c) a specified gross sum instead of assessed costs, or
(d) such proportion of the assessed costs as does not exceed a
specified amount.
(5) The powers of the court under this section apply in relation to a
married woman, whether as party, tutor, relator or otherwise,
and this section
has effect in addition to, and despite anything in, the
Married Persons
(Equality of Status) Act 1996
(6) In this section,
(a) the costs of the administration of any estate or trust, and
(b) in the case of an appeal to the court, the costs of the
proceedings giving rise to the appeal, and
(c) in the case of proceedings transferred or removed into the court,
the costs of the proceedings before they were transferred
or removed.”
did raise with Mr Schonell whether the words “or any other Act” in
Civil Procedure Act
could encompass a reference to the WCRA.
On reflection, I have come to the view that those words can only apply to a NSW
Interpretation Act 1987
example of a case where a NSW statute restricted the type of costs order which
could be made in a NSW court is
Chubs Constructions Pty Ltd v Chamma
[2009] NSWCA 98.
The Court of Appeal held that provisions in the NSW workers
compensation legislation meant that NSW courts had no power to order
costs on an
indemnity basis for a work injury damages claim made under that legislation.
Ineffective Queensland Provision Concerning Substantive
is noted that Ch 5 of the WCRA, dealing with “Access to Damages”
contains s 235 which is in the following terms:
Requirements of chapter to prevail and are substantive law
(1) If a provision of an Act or a rule of law is inconsistent
with this chapter, this chapter prevails.
(2) All the provisions of this chapter are provisions of
substantive law.
(3) However, subsection (2) does not affect minor
variations in procedure.”
the NSW Court of Appeal has made it clear that while the Parliament of
Queensland can modify the common law for the purposes
of the rules to be applied
by the courts of Queensland, the Parliament of Queensland cannot vary the common
law choice of law rule
which is to be applied by the courts in NSW:
v Merck & Co Inc
[2006] NSWCA 55
(2006) 66 NSWLR 48
provision in s 235 of the WCRA is “ineffective” to bind a court in
High Court Approach to
Substantive/Procedural Distinction
John Pfeiffer Pty Ltd v Rogerson
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503
) the High Court said at [99] and [100]:
“99 Two guiding principles should be seen as lying behind
the need to distinguish between substantive and procedural issues.
litigants who resort to a court to obtain relief must take the court as they
find it. A plaintiff cannot ask that a tribunal
which does not exist in the
forum (but does in the place where a wrong was committed) should be established
to deal, in the forum,
with the claim that the plaintiff makes. Similarly, the
plaintiff cannot ask that the courts of the forum adopt procedures or give
remedies of a kind which their constituting statutes do not contemplate any more
than the plaintiff can ask that the court apply
any adjectival law other than
the laws of the forum. Secondly, matters that affect the existence, extent or
enforceability of the
rights or duties of the parties to an action are matters
that, on their face, appear to be concerned with issues of substance, not
issues of procedure. Or to adopt the formulation put forward by Mason CJ in
McKain, “rules which are directed to governing
or regulating the mode or
conduct of court proceedings” are procedural and all other provisions or
rules are to be classified
as substantive.
100 These principles may require further elucidation in
subsequent decisions but it should be noted that giving effect to them
significant consequences for the kinds of case in which the distinction between
substance and procedure has previously been applied.
First, the application of
any limitation period, whether barring the remedy or extinguishing the right,
would be taken to be a question
of substance not procedure (which is the result
arrived at by the statutes previously referred to). The application of any
period would, therefore, continue to be governed (as that legislation
requires) by the
lex loci delicti
questions about the kinds of damage, or amount of
damages that may be recovered, would likewise be treated as substantive issues
governed by the
lex loci delicti
example of the kind of damage or the amount of damages recoverable occurred in
the present case, where the parties argued the effect
of s 306H of the WCRA
– see the primary judgment at [439]-[462]. Clearly the quantification of a
head of damage is a matter
of substance. Section 306H applies in dust cases. The
existence of and elements of a cause of action, including provisions regarding
liability, causation and contributory negligence (see Ch 5
of the WCRA) are
also substantive and not procedural, although they did not apply in these
proceedings as it is a dust case –
see s 306A of the WCRA.
was not a case concerning whether costs orders were substantive or procedural
law. Neither counsel could cite any authority on that
Non-Binding Authorities Say That Costs are Procedural not
Substantive
Richard Garnett does deal with the issue in his book
Substance and Procedure
in Private International Law
(2012, 1st ed, Oxford University Press). This
text is the subject of the Book Review noted above. In par 6.31 Professor
Garnett says
that the position under the laws of Commonwealth countries (ie
common law countries) regarding the classification of costs, in the
whether they are substantive or procedural is “reasonably settled”.
Professor Garnett says that “[w]here
the question relates to what law
should be applied to determination of costs at the time of judgment, the law of
the forum has exclusive
application”. For that proposition Professor
Garnett cites authorities from the following jurisdictions:
(1) Australia:
Labuda v Langford
[2001] ACTSC 126
(2) Canada:
Somers v Fournier
(2002) 60 OR (3d) 225 (Ont
(3) Scotland:
Wimpey Construction (UK) Ltd v Martin Black & Co (Wire
[1988] SLT 637.
(4) Malawi:
Preferential Trade Area Bank v ESCOM & Ors
[2003] MWHC
Court of Malawi, 2003, cited in
of Private International Law in African Courts 1997-2007 (Part I)”, (2007)
9 Yearbook of Private International
Law 223 at p 241).
(5) England:
Union Discount Co Ltd
[2001] EWCA Civ 1755
(2002) 1 All ER 693
(6) Hong Kong:
Peregrine Fixed Income Ltd v JP Morgan Chase Bank
Garnett, citing
“Costs are therefore ‘an essential tool designed... to make the
machinery of the forum court run smoothly’ and
to aid courts ‘in
administering their machinery’. Costs are also incidental to the rights of
the parties in that they
are awarded at the conclusion of litigation and so not
determinative of outcome (although, under Commonwealth law, they normally
the outcome). Consequently, the court’s power to award costs is best seen
as a tool in the forum court’s management
of its proceedings and therefore
properly subject to forum law.”
academic interest is the citation by Professor Garnett (in par 6.32) of a
similar approach taken by courts in civil law countries
– Germany, Japan,
France and Greece.
authorities cited by Professor Garnett from common law countries are of course
not binding. However, they speak with one voice.
In particular, the judgment of
the Court of Appeal for Ontario in
is most instructive. The appeal
involved the choice of law to be applied in an international negligence action
commenced in Ontario
which arose from a two-car motor vehicle accident which
occurred in the State of New York. One of the issues was the choice of law
applicable to costs in the action. The trial judge had held that the substantive
law of New York and the procedural law of Ontario
applied to the action. He
concluded that costs were procedural in nature and were therefore governed by
Ontario law.
Court of Appeal for Ontario said at [16] that while costs have a primary
function of indemnifying the party to whom they awarded
for legal fees and
expenses incurred in litigation, that is not the exclusive function of an award
of costs. The court said that
costs served many purposes, among them being the
goal of encouraging settlement and facilitating the management and control of
litigation process.
[17] the court said that costs are both a discretionary indemnification device
and a mechanism by which abusers of the court’s
processes may be deterred
and penalised. This echoes the words of the High Court of Australia in
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
(2019) 265 CLR 164
phrases from
reproduced in par
above appear at [18].
[19] the Court of Appeal for Ontario said:
“Finally, costs of litigation are incidental to the determination of the
rights of the parties. They are not part of the
litigants.”
find such reasoning persuasive. Courts in NSW make costs orders not only to
indemnify a party for the legal expenses incurred in
running an action but also
award costs to encourage settlement – see
Dust Diseases
Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW) concerning Offers of Compromise. Indemnity costs
can be awarded, including in circumstances where a party has been dilatory
default of directions or procedural provisions – see
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW). Further, courts in NSW have a power to
impose a cost liability upon a legal practitioner for unnecessary costs incurred
reason of serious neglect, incompetence or misconduct, or incurring costs
improperly or without reasonable cause – see
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW). The power to award costs is thus a machinery
provision, to be used in administering the machinery of the court as
distinguished
from the product of the court – see
find that, in these proceedings, s 316 of the WCRA is to be regarded as
procedural law, which does not govern or bind this Tribunal
in making an
appropriate costs order.
s 316 of the WCRA does not fetter the discretion of this Tribunal in making a
costs order, the application for a variation
of the existing costs order is
Further Reasons for Declining to Apply Section 316
is an additional reason why this Tribunal is not bound by s 316 of the WCRA in
the circumstances of this case. That is because
a necessary precondition in s
316 has not been met. As found above, the parties never made a “written
final offer of settlement”
as that phrase is understood in the WCRA.
Section 316(2) only applies if the parties had made a written final offer of
settlement.
The legislation clearly contemplates that such an offer must be made
before the commencement of the proceedings. As a fact, written
offers were not
made by Mr Keogh, or by WorkCover Queensland, until over 10 months after the
proceedings were commenced in this Tribunal.
If a party wishes to take advantage
of a restrictive provision in legislation such as the WCRA, it is incumbent upon
that party to
follow the procedure laid down by the legislation to obtain any
protection afforded, whether in relation to costs or otherwise. WorkCover
Queensland did not follow the procedure in the WCRA in the case of Mr Keogh, and
thus s 316 of the WCRA could never have any application
to the present
proceedings.
the WCRA provisions relating to pre-court procedures are clearly procedural law,
similar to the pre-court notice provisions
in the law of the Australian Capital
Territory considered by the Tribunal in
Hudson v Amaca Pty Ltd
. It would be an anomalous result if procedural provisions could
lead to s 316 of the WCRA being substantive and not procedural. Surely
procedures (which are part of procedural law) could only lead to costs
consequences which are themselves procedural and
not substantive.
is emphasised that these are alternative reasons why this Tribunal will not have
its costs discretion fettered by s 316 of the
WCRA. The primary reason,
applicable not only in this case, but in any similar case, is that s 316 of the
WCRA is procedural law
not substantive law, and thus it is not the applicable
law in proceedings in this Tribunal concerning a tort committed in Queensland.
Exercise of this Tribunal’s Costs Discretion
I have found that costs are governed by the law of the forum, I confirm that my
costs orders were made under
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Mr Schonell made a submission that if I was against his primary submission, I
should still “award costs in accordance
with section 316 as a matter of
comity” (Tcpt 30/9/24 p 17/15). I see no reason on the facts of this case
to apply a Queensland
procedural provision to proceedings conducted entirely in
a NSW court, and which have been run from start to finish in accordance
procedural law. Firstly, the necessary steps to enliven the exercise of the
power, even by a Queensland court, were not
taken. Secondly, the solicitors for
the plaintiff asserted in correspondence that the WCRA provisions were
procedural only and were
thus not binding in NSW litigation, but only consented
to the conference with WorkCover Queensland in order to save time and expense.
Thirdly, when the conference was held, it was treated as a mediation and was
attended by the other parties to this litigation, who
had no involvement with
the WCRA. Fourthly, the application of s 316 of the WCRA would cause injustice
to the plaintiff, as it would
deprive him of costs incurred in the 10 months
between the proceedings being commenced in this Tribunal (without demur by
Queensland) and the holding of the conference.
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Dismiss the application made by the second defendant, and the first and
third defendants in respect of their liability to the
plaintiff as an employer
in Queensland (the Applicants), for a variation of the existing costs orders.
(2) Order the Applicants for the variation to pay the plaintiff’s costs of
and incidental to the application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (301 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter