URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2021/272.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman (No 2) [2021] NSWCATAP 272 (13 September 2021)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2021] NSWCATAP 272
Hearing Date(s):
5 February, 14 and 15 July 2021
Date of Orders:
13 September 2021
Decision Date:
13 September 2021
Appeal Panel
G Curtin SC, Senior Member
D Charles, Senior Member
1. Application dismissed.
2. If any party desires to make an
application for costs of the new hearing:
a. that party is to so
inform the other party within 14 days of the date of these
b. the applicant for costs is to lodge with the Appeal
Panel and serve on the respondent to the costs application any written
submissions
of no more than five pages on or before 14 days from the date of
these reasons;
c. the respondent to any costs application is to
lodge with the Appeal Panel and serve on the applicant for costs any written
submissions
of no more than five pages on or before 28 days from the date of
these reasons;
d. any reply submissions limited to three pages are
to be lodged with the Appeal Panel and served on the other party within 35 days
of the date of these reasons;
e. the parties are to indicate in
their submissions whether they consent to an order dispensing with an oral
hearing of the costs
application, and if they do not consent, submissions of no
more than one page as to why an oral hearing should be conducted rather
application being determined on the papers.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW — consumer guarantees — supply of goods —
guarantee as to acceptable quality – evidence established
vehicle did not
contain any defect - evidence insufficient to establish vehicle not of
acceptable quality in context of inherent
limitations in the vehicle’s
systems the subject of complaint
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2013
(NSW), Sch 1 cl
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Sch 2 – Australian
Consumer Law, ss 54, 259, 260, 262, 263
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Akratos v Papadopoulos
[2016] NSWCATAP 139
Allen v TriCare (Hastings)
[2016] NSWCATAP 216
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Blessed Sydney Constructions Pty
Ltd v Vasudevan
[2018] NSWCATAP 98
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman
NSWCATAP 246
Newcrest Mining Ltd v Thornton
(2012) 248 CLR 555
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
[2008] NSWCA 246
Vautin v By Winddown (No
[2018] FCA 426
(2018) 362 ALR 702
Watson v Foxman
(1995) 49 NSWLR
Principal judgment
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Warwick Gregory Sherman
(Respondent)
Representation:
M Murphy (Appellant)
D J Townsend
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Thomson Geer Lawyers (Appellants)
Finlay Thorburn & Marshall (Respondent)
File Number(s):
AP 20/12193 (2020/00370673)
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
12 February 2020
P Smith, General Member
File Number(s):
MV 19/49966
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 This appeal is concerned with the question whether, when it supplied a new
Mercedes Benz passenger motor vehicle to the respondent,
Mr Sherman, the
appellant car dealer (“LSH”) complied with the consumer guarantee
provided in s 54 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Sch 2,
as applied as a law of NSW [“ACL (NSW)”], namely, that the car was
of acceptable quality.
2 Mr Sherman alleged that the vehicle’s proximity sensor system and
speed advisory system were faulty, which individually or
in combination amounted
to the vehicle not being of acceptable quality within s 54(2) of the ACL
3 In basic terms, the speed advisory system in this vehicle consists of a
forward-facing camera which, with the aid of on-board computers
and software,
attempts to recognise speed advisory signs and notify the driver of any speed
advised by such signs by an indication
on the head-up display and/or dashboard
of the vehicle.
4 The proximity sensor system consists of a number of ultra-sonic sensors
situated at various places around the vehicle. The system
is designed to detect
objects in the vehicle’s proximity and with which it may collide.
5 In a decision dated 12 February 2020 the Tribunal found that LSH had not
complied with that guarantee and made orders to the effect
that LSH was to
supply a replacement Mercedes Benz E53 AMG 4Matic Cabriolet vehicle to Mr
6 Two replacement Mercedes Benz E53 AMG 4Matic Cabriolet vehicles were
subsequently offered to Mr Sherman. He did not accept them
because he said they
did not have exactly the same colour, trim and options as his original
7 An appeal from that decision (referred to in these reasons as the First
Appeal) was upheld -
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman
[2020] NSWCATAP
The Appeal Panel held that the Tribunal erred on a question of law and
directed that the appeal be dealt with by way of a new hearing
conducted by an
Appeal Panel.
8 This is the decision resulting from that new hearing.
9 There was no dispute between the parties that neither the proximity sensor
system nor the speed advisory system were foolproof systems,
nor would they
operate perfectly in all circumstances. Both parties accepted the two systems
had inherent limitations to which we
will refer later in these reasons, although
the parties differed as to the nature and extent of those limitations.
10 The question at the heart of this case is whether the evidence established
that the perceived failures of these systems as observed
by Mr Sherman’s
witnesses amounted to the vehicle failing to meet the standard of acceptable
quality per s 54(2) of the ACL
11 In our opinion Mr Sherman did not establish on the balance of
probabilities that the nature and extent of the perceived failures
in these two
systems was greater than what may be expected as a result of their inherent
limitations, and did not arise from any
faults or defects in either system, and
thus did not establish that the vehicle failed to meet the standard of
acceptable quality
per s 54(2) of the ACL (NSW). It follows that, in our
opinion, Mr Sherman did not establish that LSH had failed to comply with the
consumer guarantee as alleged.
Procedural Background
12 The relevant factual background was described by the previous Appeal Panel
in the First Appeal as follows, a description which
we gratefully adopt:
“1. In February 2019, the respondent, Mr Sherman, bought
a new luxury vehicle (a Mercedes AMG E53 Cabriolet), from the appellant,
operates a motor vehicle dealership. The cost was approximately $200,000.00.
2. Mr Sherman encountered ongoing difficulties with the
operation of the vehicle, including problems with the operation of the
(proximity) sensors and the speed limit indicator. The vehicle also braked or
slowed on occasion without apparent reason.
There were faults in the cosmetic
appearance of the vehicle, including a paint chip on the bonnet and a dent in
the body work, together
with other faults which have been resolved or taken on
no significance in this appeal.
3. After several attempts to have the faults resolved with the
appellant, Mr Sherman commenced proceedings in the Tribunal and,
in September
2019, consent orders were made after a conciliation conference wherein the
appellant consented to orders that it collect,
inspect and repair the vehicle in
respect of the identified faults (“the First Decision”). The orders
provided for the
parties to have leave to renew the proceedings if required.
4. The appellant collected the vehicle from the respondent on
subsequently returned the vehicle to the respondent. The respondent continued to
experience problems with the vehicle’s
advisory speed warnings and parking
5. In November 2019, the respondent renewed the proceedings in
the Consumer and Commercial Division.
6. In the renewed proceedings, the Tribunal made directions for
the respondent to produce the vehicle to the appellant so that
undertake any further testing and the preparation of any reports which it may
7. The matter proceeded to hearing on 12 February 2020.
8. At the hearing, the appellant relied only upon diagnostic
program (XENTRY) reports and the vehicle’s owner’s manual.
9. The respondent relied on his own evidence and a report by a
Mr Senz, an expert who had prepared a report in respect of the remaining
with the vehicle.
10. Mr Senz was not required for cross-examination by the
11. The fact that several of the identified faults remained in
the vehicle does not appear to have been disputed.
12. The Tribunal ordered that the respondent return the
vehicle, and have it replaced with another vehicle of the same type. (“the
Decision”).”
13 For reasons which do not need
detailed repeating here, the previous Appeal Panel held that the Tribunal erred
in making its decision
on a question of law and directed that the appeal be
dealt with by way of a new hearing.
14 Suffice to say that the previous Appeal Panel described the error of law
in the Tribunal’s reasons as follows:
“58. An order for the return or replacement of the
vehicle on the basis that s 260(e) of the ACL is engaged and there has
major failure on the basis of safety, must be predicated on a finding that the
vehicle, is ‘unsafe’. ...
59. The question of whether the vehicle was unsafe was,
thereby, a statutory condition which needed to be determined before the
ordered that the vehicle be replaced on the basis that it did so.
60. The Tribunal made no specific finding in its reasons that
the vehicle was unsafe. ...”
15 The previous Appeal Panel
held (at [62]) that in the absence of a finding that the vehicle was unsafe, the
Tribunal had failed
“... turn its mind to the correct question before making its orders, and
thereby fell into error on a question of law.”
First Appeal, and on this new hearing, there was no contest that the relevant
conditions for the application of the ACL
(NSW) were met, in that Mr Sherman was
a consumer who acquired the vehicle for personal, domestic, or household use,
LSH was a supplier,
the claim was for the supply of goods in NSW and Mr
Sherman’s claim was brought within time. There was also no dispute that
had jurisdiction to hear the claim pursuant to the provisions of the
Trading Act 1987
17 Insofar as the ACL (NSW) allows for the rejection of goods by a consumer,
there was (and is) no contest that Mr Sherman purported
to reject the vehicle
with notice of that rejection having been given to LSH during the rejection
period, and no contest that Mr
Sherman sought replacement of the vehicle.
18 This new hearing was directed by the previous Appeal Panel to be
undertaken on the basis of the same evidence which had been given
Tribunal at first instance and granted leave to the parties to adduce some
limited new evidence.
19 The grant of leave for the adducing of new evidence arose because during
the First Appeal LSH raised, for the first time, a defence
to the effect that Mr
Sherman was not entitled to reject the vehicle. This defence was said to arise
from s 262(1)(c) of the ACL
(NSW) which says that a consumer is not entitled,
under s 259, to notify a supplier of goods that the consumer rejects the goods
... the goods were damaged after being delivered to the consumer for reasons not
related to their state or condition at the time
20 That defence arose out of the following facts. There
was no dispute that in March 2019 Mr Sherman parked his car in a designated
open-air car space which had a concrete wheel stop preventing vehicles
proceeding forward past the wheel stop. Mr Sherman said he
parked without
incident, but when he returned to his vehicle and reversed out of the car space
the front spoiler (or bumper) of his
car contacted the concrete wheel stop and
was damaged.
21 The previous Appeal Panel disallowed the raising of that issue for the
first time on the hearing of the First Appeal, but said
it would allow that
defence to be raised on this new hearing and would grant leave for evidence to
be given in relation to that issue.
22 In that regard, and in directing that the appeal be conducted by way of a
new hearing, the previous Appeal Panel said:
“78. Of course, that is a new hearing of the renewal
application only. In conducting that hearing, we will need to consider
issues which were relevant to the Tribunal when it made the Decision, as
outlined above.
79. In respect of any further evidence, there was no apparent
challenge in the proceedings below that the damage to the front spoiler
vehicle was repaired. In submissions, the respondent says it was repaired by an
authorised Mercedes Benz vehicle repairer.
Notwithstanding that, as the
respondent was not challenged on this below, we will allow fresh evidence to be
given and tested on
this issue and the issue of whether the damage was caused by
reasons not related to its state or condition at the time of supply,
the respondent made a bare assertion below, and the Tribunal made no
23 Some uncertainty arises out of the way the
case was conducted before the Tribunal and the previous Appeal Panel, and out of
paragraphs quoted above, because there is authority in the Tribunal that the
substantive merits of a claim are not reconsidered in
renewal (or renewed)
proceedings, the proceedings being limited to whether the Tribunal makes other
orders (or refuses to make other
orders) in light of the original orders not
having been complied with -
Akratos v Papadopoulos
[2016] NSWCATAP 139
, followed in
Blessed Sydney Constructions Pty Ltd v Vasudevan
NSWCATAP 98.
24 That limitation was held to arise from the terms of cl 8(4)(a) of Schedule
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
“NCAT Act”). Cl 8 says:
8. Renewal of proceedings in respect of certain Division
(1) If the Tribunal makes an order in exercise of a Division function in
proceedings, the Tribunal may, when the order is made or
later, give leave to
the person in whose favour the order is made to renew the proceedings if the
order is not complied with within
the period specified by the Tribunal.
(2) If an order has not been complied with within the period specified by the
Tribunal, the person in whose favour the order was
made may renew the
proceedings to which the order relates by lodging a notice with the Tribunal,
within 12 months after the end of
the period, stating that the order has not
been complied with.
(3) The provisions of this Act apply to a notice lodged in accordance with
subclause (2) as if the notice were a new application
made in accordance with
(4) When proceedings have been renewed in accordance with this clause, the
(a) may make any other appropriate order under this Act
or enabling legislation as it could have made when the matter was originally
determined, or
(b) may refuse to make such an order.
25 In this case, there was no hearing of the substantive merits of the claim
as the original orders made by the Tribunal (in relation
to which the renewal
application was made) were made by consent at a conciliation hearing before the
Tribunal, and were not made
by the Tribunal after a contested hearing on the
26 Further, Cl 8 of Sch 4 requires non-compliance with an order and it is not
clear to us what (consent) order was not complied with.
In addition, it is not
clear to us that Mr Sherman was entitled to reject the two proffered replacement
vehicles on the basis he
did given, on one interpretation, the Tribunal’s
order did not mean that an identical vehicle had to be proffered.
27 Nevertheless, we do not need to decide those matters. It is clear that the
parties desired to have a hearing before us (and before
the original Tribunal
hearing the renewed proceedings) on the substantive merits of their dispute, and
both parties agreed that we
should decide those substantive merits. Accordingly,
we shall do so noting that s 36 of the NCAT Act provides that the guiding
for the NCAT Act and the procedural rules, in their application to
proceedings in the Tribunal and Appeal Panel, is to facilitate
the just, quick
and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings, and noting that in
Moloney v Taylor
[2016] NSWCA 199
the Court of Appeal held that the NCAT
should conduct itself with minimum formality and should reach decisions
according to the substantive
merits of the case and not by reference to legal
form or technicalities.
28 Therefore, in relation to this substantive hearing, the evidence we have
considered is the evidence which had been led before the
Tribunal, and the
further evidence which the previous Appeal Panel granted leave to the parties to
adduce on this new hearing.
Relevant Legal Principles
The ACL (NSW)
29 The relevant sections of the ACL (NSW) are ss 54, 259, 260, 262 and 263 of
the Commonwealth Act which are part of the law of NSW
by reason of
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) (“FTA”).
relevantly says:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a
consumer; and
(b) ... there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that
kind are commonly supplied; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
31 Section 259 relevantly says:
259 Action against suppliers of goods
(1) A consumer may take action under this section if:
(a) a person (the supplier) supplies, in trade or
commerce, goods to the consumer; and
(b) a guarantee that applies to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1 of
(other than
sections 58
and 59(1)) is not complied
(2) If the failure to comply with the guarantee can be remedied and is not a
major failure:
(a) the consumer may require the supplier to remedy the
failure within a reasonable time; or
(b) if such a requirement is made of the supplier but the supplier refuses or
fails to comply with the requirement, or fails to comply
with the requirement
within a reasonable time—the consumer may:
(ii) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer rejects the
goods and of the ground or grounds for the
(3) If the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or is a major
failure, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the
consumer rejects the goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection;
32 Section 260 relevantly says:
260 When a failure to comply with a guarantee is a major failure
A failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b) that
applies to a supply of goods is a major failure if:
(a) the goods would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure; or
(e) the goods are not of acceptable quality because they are
33 Section 262 relevantly says:
262 When consumers are not entitled to reject goods
(1) A consumer is not entitled, under section 259, to notify a supplier of goods
that the consumer rejects the goods if:
(c) the goods were damaged after being delivered to the consumer for reasons not
related to their state or condition at the time
34 Section 263(4) of the ACL (NSW) says that if the consumer
rejects the goods, the supplier must, in accordance with an election
made by the
consumer refund any money paid by the consumer for the goods; and an amount that
is equal to the value of any other consideration
provided by the consumer for
the goods; or replace the rejected goods with goods of the same type, and of
similar value, if such
goods are reasonably available to the supplier.
35 The relevant principles to apply in a case such as the present were
summarised by Derrington J in
Vautin v By Winddown (No 4)
[2018] FCA 426
(2018) 362 ALR 702
as follows:
“[142] Mr Vautin asserts that the existence of the construction defects in
the sandwich core panels of Revive means that the
vessel is not of an
“acceptable quality” within the meaning of the guarantee imposed by
of the ACL. In determining whether the guarantee in that section is
contravened the following matters are relevant:
(a) The test as to whether goods are of an
“acceptable quality” is an objective one; being taken from the
perspective
of a “reasonable consumer” (
APS Satellite Pty Ltd
(formerly known as Sky Mesh Pty Ltd) v Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC
APS Satellite Pty Ltd
Merck Sharp & Dohme
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
(2011) 196 FCR 145
[2011] FCAFC
(b) The question for the “reasonable consumer” is whether the goods
in question have the identified qualities enumerated
in 54(2) to an
“acceptable standard”. This requirement is derived from the words
“as a reasonable consumer ...
would regard as acceptable”.
(c) The “acceptable standard” is used as the yardstick against which
the qualities of the goods are to be measured. It
is ascertained by a
consideration of the matters referred to in
; the nature of the goods,
their price, any statement made about the goods on packaging or labels, any
representations made about
the goods by the supplier or manufacturer, and any
other circumstance relating to their supply.
(d) It is necessary the goods have all of the qualities identified in
the ascertained acceptable standard. Those qualities are that the goods are fit
for all the purposes for which goods of that kind
are commonly supplied,
acceptable in appearance and finish, free from defects, safe and durable.
(e) In the assessment of whether the goods meet that relevant standard, the
reasonable consumer is taken to be fully acquainted with
the state and condition
of the goods (including any hidden defects of the goods).
(f) If the goods supplied do not have all of the identified qualities to the
acceptable standard, they will not be of an “acceptable
[143] In compendious terms, the issue is whether, objectively, the goods
supplied (when taking into account their actual quality
including any latent
defects) are, to an acceptable standard, fit for all the purposes for which
goods of that kind are commonly
supplied, acceptable in appearance and finish,
free from defects, safe and durable when measured by a standard which reflects
nature of the goods, their price, statements about the good as per their
packaging, representations made about the goods and any
other relevant
circumstance. In
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Ltd v Bonnefin
N Adams J identified the manner in which
applied in the following way:
“The relevant test in
of the ACL (NSW) of
whether or not goods are of “acceptable quality” is an objective one
based on whether a reasonable
consumer who was aware of the
“defects” in the goods at the time of the supply would have
considered them to be of acceptable
quality. There was no issue taken that the
determination of what is objectively reasonable for a consumer to expect is to
taking into account the relevant information known as at the time of the
trial, including “after-acquired knowledge”:
Medtel Pty Ltd v
(2003) 130 FCR 182
198 ALR 630
[2003] FCAFC 151
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation
[2020] FCA 1672
Wheelahan J said:
“[25] ... The standards under
include that goods
will be fit for all purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied.
This general standard of fitness
for purpose is not dependent upon the consumer
communicating any intended purpose to the supplier, or relying upon the
skill or judgment. And, in relation to the general standard, it
does not suffice that the goods will be fit for only some of those
[26] The standard of acceptable quality in
reference point a construct, namely the objective standard of a reasonable
consumer fully acquainted with the state and
condition of the goods, including
any hidden defects of the goods. The reasonable consumer sits with an array of
other hypothetical
persons who have been recruited by the law and by reference
to whom objective standards are evaluated: see,
Healthcare at Home Ltd v The
Common Services Agency
[2014] UKSC 49
; 4 All ER 210 at
JSC). Such a person has been described as an anthropomorphic conception of
justice that is and must be the court itself:
Davis Contractors Ltd v
Fareham Urban District Council
[1956] UKHL 3
[1956] AC 696
at 728 (Lord Radcliffe).
[27] The hypothetical question whether the reasonable consumer
would have regarded the quality of the goods as acceptable is to
be determined
at the time of supply. However, the reference in
to hidden defects has
the consequence that for the purposes of determining that question, the
reasonable consumer may be acquainted
with information known at the time of
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
130 FCR 182
(Branson J, Jacobson J agreeing). The standard of acceptable quality
prescribed by
is not absolute, or a standard of perfection. It is
tempered by what a reasonable consumer would regard as acceptable having regard
to the several matters in
These matters render the standard of
acceptable quality elastic, and context specific:
[2009] NZHC 2631
[2009] 2 NZLR 830
(Miller J). The significance of the
components of the guarantee of acceptable quality will therefore vary with the
circumstances
of each case.”
Fair Trading
37 The jurisdiction to determine ACL (NSW) claims is conferred on the
Tribunal by
of the FTA. There is no dispute between the parties that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this claim, and we are satisfied that
38 Relevantly, and in relation to relief, the FTA provides in
that are in addition to the remedies referred to in the provisions of the ACL
(NSW) referred to above.
Section 79N
79N Orders in favour of claimant (cf CC Act 1998, s 8 (1))
In determining a consumer claim wholly or partly in favour of a claimant, the
Tribunal may, subject to this Division, make any one
or more of the following
orders that it considers appropriate—
(a) an order that requires a respondent to pay to the claimant a specified
amount of money,
(b) an order that requires a respondent to perform specified work in order to
rectify a defect in goods or services to which the
claim relates,
(c) an order that requires a respondent to supply to the claimant specified
services other than work,
(d) in the case of a claim for relief from payment of money—an order
declaring that a specified amount of money is not due
or owing by the claimant
to a respondent,
(e) an order that requires a respondent to deliver to the claimant goods of a
specified description,
(f) an order that requires a respondent to return to the claimant specified
goods which are in the possession or under the control
of that respondent,
whether the property in the goods has passed or not,
(g) an order that requires a respondent to replace goods to which the claim
(h) an order that requires a respondent to refund all or part of the purchase
price of specified goods that are in the possession
(or under the control) of
the claimant and the claimant to return all or part of those goods to the
respondent (whether the property
in the goods has passed or
Other Principles
40 Being a civil case, factual disputes in this case are to be resolved on
the balance of probabilities.
41 In relation to whether a fact is proved on the balance of probabilities, a
finder of fact (such as us) must feel an actual persuasion
of the existence of
the fact. As to “actual persuasion” McDougall J, with whom McColl
and Bell JJA agreed, said in
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
“[44] A number of cases, of high authority, insist that for a
tribunal of fact to be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
existence of a fact, it must feel an actual persuasion of the
existence of that fact. See Dixon J in
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
His Honour’s statement was approved
by the majority (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ) in
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 CLR 691
[45] Dixon CJ put the matter in different words, although to similar
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
at 305 where his Honour said that “[t]he facts proved
must form a reasonable basis for a definite conclusion affirmatively
the truth of which the tribunal of fact may reasonably be satisfied”.
Although his Honour dissented in the outcome
of that case, the words that I have
quoted were cited with approval by the majority (Stephen, Mason, Aickin and
Wilson JJ) in
West v Government Insurance Office of NSW
[1981] HCA 38
at 66. See also
Stephen J in Girlock (Sales) Pty
Ltd v Hurrell
[1982] HCA 15
(1982) 149 CLR 155
at 161–162, and Mason
J (with whom Brennan J agreed) in the same case at
The Respondent’s Evidence
42 We shall now set out the evidence that was adduced by the parties,
interspersed from time with agreed or incontrovertible facts,
or findings, where
convenient to do so. As the respondent is effectively the plaintiff or
applicant, we shall order these reasons
on that basis.
43 Mr Sherman tendered a transcript of his oral evidence given before the
Tribunal, his original undated written statement, two statutory
declarations
declared on 10 December 2020 and a statutory declaration declared on
25 February 2021. A number of documents were annexed
to the statement and
statutory declarations. Mr Sherman was cross-examined.
44 Mr Sherman said that in February 2019 he purchased a new luxury vehicle (a
Mercedes AMG E53 Cabriolet), from LSH, which operates
a motor vehicle
dealership. The purchase price of the vehicle was approximately $204,000.00.
45 Mr Sherman had several complaints about the vehicle which commenced
shortly after he took delivery of it, but only two areas of
complaint were
pressed on this new hearing in relation to the ACL (NSW) guarantee, those two
being allegations of a faulty proximity
sensor system and a faulty speed
advisory system.
46 Mr Sherman said that on 12 March 2019 he parked on the street, nose to
curb, being very careful. He had parked in that area many
times previously. He
parked without incident and heard no sensor alarms or warnings from the
47 After a time, he returned to the vehicle and reversed out of the parking
spot. He said that the front spoiler of his vehicle caught
on a cement wheel
stop beneath the front of the motor vehicle (and being forward of the front
wheels) and pulled the spoiler almost
totally off the vehicle. He heard no
sensor alarms or warnings from the vehicle at any time when he first parked or
whilst reversing.
48 He denied accelerating fast when he reversed and denied reversing at
speed. He denied the nose of the car dropped or dipped (towards
the ground and
wheel stop) when he reversed the vehicle.
49 Mr Sherman said that the damage to the spoiler was occasioned because of
defective proximity sensors in the vehicle in the sense
that the sensors did not
warn of the proximity of the wheel stop to the spoiler.
50 The vehicle was taken to Parramatta Smash Repairs and the spoiler
51 In his written statement Mr Sherman said that the proximity sensors (which
he called movement sensors) seemed to go off randomly.
He complained of this
several times in emails to LSH. Mr Sherman said that LSH inspected the vehicle,
performed a systems upgrade,
but Mr Sherman said the problems persisted.
52 Mr Sherman annexed to his statement a number of emails he sent to LSH and
other documents.
53 No mention of the proximity sensors is made in his first email annexed to
his statement, namely the email dated 28 February 2019.
54 On 28 May 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH and said “parking sensors as
per previous email ...” but that “previous
email” was not
tendered, and we are unaware of its contents.
55 On 30 May 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH and said:
“As you can see the drivers (sic) sensor is going off and yet there is
nothing there. This concerns me as they didn’t
work when the front guard
was damaged and I am very concerned about trusting them. You have told me I can
trust these but I am not
convinced!!!”
56 According to the
email, there were attached to that email several photographs and other
documents, but those photographs and documents
were not tendered.
57 On 28 June 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH and said that the car had been
troublesome from the start with, amongst other things, front
spoiler issues,
proximity sensor issues and speed zone issues (which relates to the speed
advisory system).
58 On 4 July 2019 LSH emailed Mr Sherman and said that a software update had
been carried out on the Command unit. It said that the
parking (proximity)
sensors had been checked and were working fine.
59 On 8 July 2019 LSH emailed Mr Sherman and said, amongst other things, that
their service team had investigated Mr Sherman’s
concerns regarding the
cameras and sensors and had been unable to find a fault.
60 On 23 July 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH saying that, as they could see by
“these photos” (the photos were not tendered),
the proximity sensors
were still not working correctly. He also said that the advisory speeds produced
by the speed advisory system
illuminated on the dash were totally incorrect and
randomly offered an array of incorrect speed “areas” (sic).
61 On 5 August 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH and said that the speed zones
indicated by the car were totally inaccurate and random.
He said he had just
come over the Gladesville Bridge and the vehicle’s speed advisory system
was saying that the speed limit
in that area was 40 kph when in fact it was 70
62 The vehicle was, as previously arranged between the parties, collected the
following day for examination and repairs (if necessary)
63 On 19 August 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH to say that when driving that
morning at 6:45 am on Huntleys Point Road, Huntleys Point,
the speed advisory
system showed 40 kph when the speed limit for that area was 50 kph.
64 On 22 August 2019, a Thursday, Mr Sherman emailed LSH to say that on the
previous Tuesday the speed advisory system had indicated
a speed limit of 40,
60, 70, 40 and 60 kph along Victoria Road when the zone speed limit for that
area was 60 kph.
65 The email also said that on a drive to the airport (on an unspecified
date, on an unspecified road and at an unspecified time)
the speed advisory
system had indicated a speed limit of 40 kph when the zone speed limit for that
area was 70 and 80 kph.
66 On 26 August 2019 LSH emailed Mr Sherman to say that LSH was satisfied
that the concerns raised by Mr Sherman had been addressed.
Later that day LSH
again emailed Mr Sherman to say that the speed advisory system may not always
recognise signs dependent upon various
ambient and sign conditions.
67 Mr Sherman responded by email that same day raising a number of alleged
defects with the vehicle including that the proximity sensors
were not going off
at all as allegedly observed by LSH’s driver who had recently collected
the vehicle from Mr Sherman.
68 On 9 September 2019 Mr Sherman commenced proceedings against LSH in the
69 On 19 September 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH to say that on that day the
speed advisory system did not function properly because
the notification of the
advised speed vanished completely (presumably meaning it vanished from the
head-up display). The email continued
to say that this happened frequently. Mr
Sherman said that the speed advisory system would advise a 40 kph speed limit on
Road, Drummoyne, when the speed limit was 60 kph. He said the same
thing occurred along Lyons Road, Drummoyne. He said that the speed
system finally acknowledged the school zone as “Temporary 40”, this
area often being 40 kph, temporary 40 kph,
60 or 70 kph, but the speed advisory
system was inaccurate with regards to school zone times. He said that the front
side parking
sensor went “berserk” with nothing around “for
miles” when he turned onto the parking apron at his home.
70 On 24 September 2019, the Tribunal made orders in the proceedings
commenced by Mr Sherman with the consent of the parties. These
orders were made
at a conciliation hearing undertaken by the Tribunal with the parties, and not
as a result of a contested hearing.
The orders made were:
1. The applicant will make available for collection on 48 hours’ notice in
writing, his vehicle being a Mercedes [Registration
redacted] for the respondent
to investigate and inspect the vehicle.
2. The applicant will notify the respondent in writing or by text / SMS or email
when and where it can be collected.
3. The respondent will provide the applicant with an equivalent vehicle for the
applicant’s personal use, pending the return
of his vehicle.
4. The respondent will have a period 21 days to inspect the vehicle from the
date of collection and in particular for the following
a. Random speed display
b. Sensors not responding and randomly responding
c. Underdash heating not working
d. Concern with using auto functions for parking and cruise
5. The respondent will carry out such repairs as might be necessary and at
its’ own expense during the period of 21 days, or
such longer period as
may be reasonably agreed between them.
6. Either party may seek to renew these proceedings on or before 10 November,
2019, in the event these orders are not complied with
(or) the applicant remains
of the view that the vehicle requires further repairs.
vehicle was picked up by LSH shortly thereafter and later returned to Mr Sherman
72 When the car was returned to Mr Sherman, he drove the car in the company
of a Mr Shea, apparently an employee of LSH who had delivered
the car to Mr
Sherman that day, and said that the “car failed miserably as per my email
73 On 31 October 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH and said that, as Mr Shea would
attest, the car failed miserably. He said that there
were numerous errors with
the speed advisory system, including it disappearing entirely twice and reading
differently in opposite
directions through the same school zone during a half
hour drive. He said that the proximity sensor on the right-side front door/guard
went off in the driveway as usual. He said he even opened the door to show the
employee there was nothing near the car: front, rear
and either side.
74 Mr Shea did not give evidence in the proceedings. He was (we infer) an
employee of LSH. There was no explanation why he did not
give evidence and
accordingly we infer that his evidence would not have assisted LSH’s
75 Mr Sherman said in his statement that he had received extracts of the
Mercedes Benz manual from LSH as to why, in some circumstances,
some functions
may not work. The particular functions were not identified, but we infer from
the context in which this evidence was
given that Mr Sherman was intending to
include in that description the proximity sensors and the speed advisory
76 Mr Sherman said that he clearly appreciated and understood that in heavy
weather (like snow, dust storms etc) or when a road sign
had been damaged that
there may be the occasional misread or fault, but this was clearly not the case
with this vehicle in his opinion.
77 On 6 November 2019 Mr Sherman filed his Renewal of Proceedings
Application.
78 On 18 November 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH to say that he had heard
nothing further from LSH since the car was returned to him.
He said that
LSH’s employee had witnessed the continuing errors in relation to the
operation of the speed advisory system and
the proximity sensors. He said the
errors had continued.
79 On 20 November 2019 Mr Sherman emailed LSH to say that he had more
screenshots of the speed advisory system’s continued inaccuracies
proximity sensors going off randomly which, he said, had become typical. Those
screenshots were not tendered.
80 On 5 December 2019 Mr Sherman said he was driving from Kirrawee to
Huntleys Point on the Princess Highway between 2:45 pm and 4
pm i.e. in school
zone hours. He said he drove through five school zones, all with flashing
lights, and the advisory speed sign on
the dash and head-up display never
altered, staying at either 60 or 70 km/h.
81 Mr Sherman said that the proximity sensors would often go off randomly and
for no apparent reason, particularly common at the driver’s
driver’s front panel. He said this was incredibly unnerving and
distracting when parking.
82 Mr Sherman said he had a “Final quick test log” downloaded
from the vehicle done by the mechanic who had serviced his
last Mercedes-Benz.
He said the mechanic advised, and the report (which was tendered) clearly
showed, faults in the systems designated
N45, N10/6, N22/6, E1n9 and N40/3. The
log was a read-out from the vehicle’s computer systems using the Mercedes
Benz diagnostic
program (the Xentry system) and is dated 5 December 2019.
83 No expert witness gave evidence on behalf of Mr Sherman in relation to
this log, and Mr Sherman did not call the unidentified mechanic.
Mr Sherman said
the mechanic requested anonymity because he received a substantial amount of
work through Mercedes Benz and bought
parts etc from it, and the mechanic was
concerned as to what effect any evidence he might give would have on his ongoing
relationship
with Mercedes Benz. We do not draw any adverse inference against Mr
Sherman for not calling the mechanic as a witness.
84 The log is not set out in a narrative form and contains many code numbers
and other notations which are not explained. Be that
as it may, on the face of
the log none of the “faults” identified by Mr Sherman in the log
seem to refer to or include
either the proximity sensors or the speed advisory
system. For example, on its face the log says that N40/3 is the sound system,
E1n9 is the left headlamp, N22/6 is the rear control unit (the fault was said to
be in relation to the right rear power window),
N10/6 was the front signal
acquisition and actuation module (the fault was reported to be with the engine
hood sensor) and N45 was
the all-wheel drive system.
85 The absence of any faults appearing in this log which refer to or include
the speed advisory system or the proximity sensors is
some evidence against Mr
Sherman’s case that either system contained a remediable fault.
86 Mr Sherman gave more evidence to the general effect of that stated above
in relation to the perceived malfunctioning of the proximity
sensors and the
speed advisory system. Some of that was contained in the transcript of his oral
evidence given to the Tribunal (which
we have considered in full). This
additional evidence was more evidence of a generalised nature to the effect that
at various unidentified
dates and times, and often at unidentified locations, he
observed a discordance between what the speed advisory system advised and
speed limit as Mr Sherman believed it to be, and generalised observations to the
effect that the proximity sensors provided warnings
when, on investigation,
there was no object nearby.
87 That is not to be critical of Mr Sherman. No one would expect him to note
dates, times, and locations when these perceived problems
first became apparent,
but the absence of such details, and particularly some cogent evidence as to
what speed signs were displayed
along a particular stretch of road when the
speed advisory system was said to malfunction, reduces the weight we can give to
observational evidence in terms of whether the vehicle was of acceptable
quality. We shall return to this issue later in these reasons.
88 Mr Sherman said he had never read the vehicle’s Owner’s
Manual, was unaware that the sensitivity of the proximity sensors
adjusted and had never adjusted them himself. He said that LSH had said it would
adjust the sensors after the vehicle had
been to LSH several times and no-one
told him that the sensors could be adjusted by the owner following the
instructions in the Owner’s
Manual. The sensitivity of the proximity
sensors could be adjusted between a standard setting and a more sensitive
setting (detecting
objects further away) called “Ward Early”. No
evidence was given which setting was active at any point in time other
Dr Casey’s testing (referred to later in these reasons).
89 Mr Sherman tendered three photographs of the vehicle’s display which
was indicating the proximity of an object when no object
could be seen
reasonably proximate to the vehicle.
90 Mr Sherman also tendered some photographs of the street outside his house
which was said to corroborate his and Mr Senz’s
observations of the
proximity sensors warning of a proximate object when no such object was present.
Mr Senz was Mr Sherman’s
expert who gave evidence in the proceedings.
91 Mr Sherman gave evidence of driving his vehicle on 7 January 2020
accompanied by Mr Senz. They drove about 33 km for the purpose
of trying to
demonstrate the vehicle’s faults to Mr Senz so that he could provide an
expert opinion on those faults.
92 It was put to Mr Sherman that he and Mr Senz observed only one occasion
during that drive when the speed advisory system showed
an incorrect reading. Mr
Sherman at first said he did not believe that that was correct but later said
that that may have been correct,
and that the only incorrect speed advisory
demonstrated by the car was when he and Mr Senz were travelling east toward Mr
93 Mr Sherman said that the malfunctioning of the speed advisory system made
him concerned for his safety. He said that, at least
in his lay opinion, a
significant safety issue arose from not being able to disarm or turn the sensors
off with the result that the
driver was often provided with wrong information in
the form of incorrect speed advisory information. He said that he therefore had
to consciously and constantly ignore the information the speed advisory system
provided, which impeded his ability to use the vehicle
safely, especially in
unfamiliar areas.
94 Mr Sherman said he was unable to confidently lend the vehicle to any other
driver as he was concerned the defective speed advisory
system would cause that
other driver to come to harm or cause harm to others by being misled as to the
true speed limit.
95 Mr Sherman said that despite his concerns as to the safety of the vehicle
he currently had no option but to use it in a limited
fashion as a vehicle for
grocery shopping and the like. He said he had no other suitable alternative
vehicle and no suitable replacement
had been offered by LSH. He said his
concerns as to the safety of the vehicle caused him to restrict his use of this
vehicle for
long trips and general pleasure drives he would otherwise have
wished to undertake with a luxury vehicle.
96 Mr Sherman presented as an honest and forthright witness who endeavoured
to answer questions directly and without evasion to the
best of his
recollection. We accept his evidence was honestly given, although the impression
we had was that his concerns as to safety,
whilst not non-existent, were
somewhat exaggerated.
97 We accept his evidence that he perceived malfunctioning of the speed
advisory system and proximity sensors insofar as he provided
dates or specific
occasions when he said these occurred and which are corroborated by reasonably
contemporaneous emails or other
documents. The weight of the evidence is another
matter and something to which we will return.
98 Whilst we accept it was honestly given, we do not give any weight to Mr
Sherman’s more generalised evidence of perceiving
either system
malfunctioning, such as his testimonial evidence that the sensors “seemed
to go off randomly” without any
attendant identification of when or where
these incidents occurred.
99 In that regard we have in mind the oft-referred to passage of McLelland CJ
Watson v Foxman
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
at 319, namely that:
“Furthermore, human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible
for a variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree
fallibility increases with
the passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and
the processes of memory
are overlaid, often subconsciously, by perceptions of
self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said
or could have been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little
more than an impression from which plausible details
are then, again often
subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human
experience.”
100 Although that passage refers to
conversations, it is equally apt to recollection of events.
101 Amongst the documents annexed to Mr Sherman’s statement was a
letter dated 9 January 2020 purporting to be from Mr Sherman’s
partner, Ms
O’Brien to “To Whom It May Concern”. It is signed but was not
verified by way of affidavit or statutory
declaration. Ms O’Brien did not
give oral evidence, was not cross-examined and her evidence was not referred to
in submissions.
102 In that letter Ms O’Brien said she’d been a passenger in the
vehicle on numerous occasions.
103 She said that she had travelled in the car as far north as Port Stephens
and south to Kirrawee. She said that almost without exception
the advisory speed
indicator on the dash had been random, offering an array of differing and
inaccurate advisory speeds, often ignoring
school zones, showing temporary
school zones when out of school hours or disappearing completely from the dash.
She said that Mr
Sherman had found this incredibly distracting and frustrating,
especially when they were driving in areas they were unfamiliar with.
104 She said that the proximity sensors seemed to have a mind of their own,
often activating without any reason or “threat”
of collision.
105 She said that she was a passenger in the vehicle when the advisory speed
indicator disappeared completely for two days and couldn’t
106 We do not place any weight on Ms O’Brien’s statement even
though she was not cross-examined and her statements unchallenged.
Her evidence
is even more generalised and less detailed (to the extent details were given)
than Mr Sherman’s evidence and,
in relation to the issues in this case,
her evidence is of little value for reasons which we will later explain.
107 Mr Senz was a motor vehicle expert who gave evidence by way of two
reports, dated 10 January and 8 December 2020, and was cross-examined.
108 Mr Senz commenced in Automotive Mechanical Engineering apprenticeship in
1967. His duties included all aspects of repair and maintenance
on his then
employer’s industrial plant and fleet of light and heavy vehicles.
109 In mid-1982 he commenced employment with the NRMA, initially as a vehicle
inspector assessing vehicle performance, condition,
roadworthiness, repair
compliance and fire causation. He later moved to NRMA Technical Research to
develop and perform specialised
vehicle and component tests. He later managed
NRMA Technical Advice which employed around 28 staff entering around 3000
technical related inquiries per week. He personally prepared expert
technical reports and attended court on matters pertaining to
systems, failure causation, fault diagnosis, repair procedures, vehicle dynamics
and motor vehicle accidents.
110 In December 1996 he commenced an independent full-time automotive
consultancy business specialising in mechanical failure analysis,
motor vehicle
accident reconstruction and fire causation. He performed failure analysis
related activities for a number of government
departments.
111 Mr Senz performed work for a wide variety of insurance companies
providing reports in relation to failure causation in relation
transmission, driveline, suspension, and brake system related failures on a wide
range of light and heavy vehicles. He
has provided reports on the validity of
mechanical failures, fraudulent or suspicious incidents, including fire, marine,
112 Mr Senz obtained an Automotive Mechanical Engineering Certificate from
TAFE in 1971 and a Mechanical Engineering Certificate from
TAFE in 1986.
113 Mr Senz is a Member of the Institute of Automotive Mechanical Engineers,
an Associate Member of the Society of Automotive Engineers
Australia and a
Member of the Australian and South Pacific Association of Collision
Investigators.
114 There is no evidence that Mr Senz had acquired any specialised knowledge
based on his training, study or experience in relation
to proximity sensor
systems or speed advisory systems, either generally or in relation to those
particularly used in Mercedes Benz
115 Nor is there any evidence that Mr Senz had acquired any specialised
knowledge based on his training, study or experience in relation
behaviour in specified circumstances.
116 Mr Senz inspected Mr Sherman’s vehicle on one occasion, being on
7 January 2020, and accompanied Mr Sherman on a drive of
the vehicle of
approximately 33 kms that day.
117 Mr Senz was provided with three emails from Mr Sherman (dated
25 December 2019, 7 and 9 January 2020), a list of concerns/event
a certificate of registration and a Mercedes-Benz invoice. The last two
documents are not relevant to the resolution of
the issues in this case. Insofar
as the remaining documents may have been relevant, they were not tendered except
for some photos
attached to the January 2020 emails.
118 Mr Senz said he inspected the vehicle’s front windscreen. This was
relevant because the speed advisory camera was mounted
high up on the front
windscreen, in the centre. Mr Senz said that the “sensors” (meaning
camera) should not be affected
by road grime or other contamination concerns
which might hinder its effectiveness.
119 It is unclear whether Mr Senz was saying that the road grime or other
contamination he observed on the windscreen
on that particular day
not have affected the camera on that day, or whether no road grime or
contamination at all should affect the camera on any
120 Whichever be the case, no facts or reasoning process was provided by Mr
Senz to support this opinion, nor is it apparent to us
what training study or
experience he had which entitled him to express that opinion as an expert. In
courts bound by the rules of
evidence this would usually result in the opinions
being rejected as inadmissible, but this is not the case in the Tribunal.
121 In relation to that opinion, and Mr Senz’s other opinions to which
we will come, the Tribunal is not bound by the rules
of evidence, and it has
been held that non-compliance with the rules of evidence should be treated as a
matter of weight rather than
admissibility -
Allen v TriCare (Hastings)
[2016] NSWCATAP 216
. That is, whereas as an expert report
may be rejected as inadmissible in the Supreme Court for example, because of a
failure by the
expert to prove that his or her opinion is based on their
training, study, or experience, or where an expert fails to provide the
and reasoning process which led to their opinion, the report will not be
rejected in the Tribunal. Rather, the report will
be admitted and the absence of
the matters we have identified are taken into account when assessing how much
weight is given to the
expert’s opinion.
122 That these matters are taken into account when assessing weight is made
at [191]-[192] where the Appeal Panel said that the
Tribunal must be satisfied that the expert evidence provides a satisfactory
upon which it can make its findings, and that that requirement for a
satisfactory basis is found in the Tribunal’s procedural
direction dealing
with expert evidence. That procedural direction includes requirements that
experts establish the link between their
opinions and their training, study, or
experience, and identify the facts and reasoning process supporting their
123 Fundamentally, Mr Senz did not do either of these things in relation to
any of his opinions expressed in his two reports.
124 Turning to his first report, Mr Senz referred to a photograph (E 53 4)
which was taken by Mr Sherman on 9 January 2020. The photograph
was taken of the
instrument cluster in the vehicle, and the first few centimetres of the front
windscreen immediately above the instrument
cluster. Mr Senz opined that the
speed advisory system displayed its information in the instrument cluster of the
vehicle and on
the windscreen (the head-up display).
125 Mr Senz referred to a second photograph (E 53 5) also taken by Mr Sherman
on 9 January 2020. It was taken from a position roughly
equivalent to where a
driver’s eyes may be and through the front windscreen of the vehicle when
it was stationary at a set
of lights. It showed that the speed advisory system
advised the vehicle was in a temporary 40 km/h speed zone. No opinion was
by Mr Senz concerning this photograph.
126 Mr Senz referred to a third photograph (E 53 6) which he said was taken
whilst on the drive with Mr Sherman on 7 January 2020.
The photograph is taken
of the instrument cluster and navigation screens, from an oblique angle and
seemingly from the front passenger
seat of the vehicle. The quality of the copy
given to us is poor and its details not apparent. Mr Senz did describe what the
demonstrated in his original report but deleted that description from
his report when he gave his oral evidence-in-chief.
127 Mr Senz opined that both the speed advisory system and proximity sensor
systems on this vehicle were not functioning as intended
or reasonably expected.
This is a rather extraordinary opinion given he said he had not read the
Owner’s Manual which gave
at least some indication of how the manufacturer
intended these systems to operate (and their limitations) and would
significantly
influence a reasonable consumer’s expectations. In any
event, we are not satisfied Mr Senz had any training study or experience
relevant to those opinions, he did not set out the facts and reasoning process
by which he came to those opinions, and so we gave
them no weight because we
were not satisfied that his evidence provided a satisfactory basis upon which we
could make the findings
sought by Mr Sherman.
128 Mr Senz opined that he was concerned with what would happen when a driver
had no local knowledge of an area and slammed the brakes
on to avoid being fined
and caused an accident because of the speed advisory system displaying an
incorrect speed.
129 There is no cause to doubt that that might be a genuine concern held by
Mr Senz. However, his
concerns are not relevant to the issues in
the case. What may have been relevant in this case were industry standards,
publications
from professional industry associations or widely held peer
opinions from suitably qualified experts (with the requisite training,
experience) which expressed such a concern and through some facts and reasoning
process, or by reference to studies or experiments,
established some link
between incorrect speeds displayed by speed advisory systems and the driver
behaviour asserted by Mr Senz.
130 Mr Sherman did not prove that Mr Senz had any qualifications in relation
to driver behaviour in the circumstances specified. Mr
Senz did not say, and did
not prove, that his concerns were well-founded (by reference to studies,
experiments, or anything else)
and did not say, or prove, that his concerns were
held by many relevantly qualified persons in the automotive industry.
131 These omissions are telling, not least because the test for acceptability
is an objective test, and Mr Senz’s personal concerns
are of little weight
given the omissions to which we have referred above.
132 Mr Senz said in his report that “as previously mentioned”,
testing (with Mr Sherman) was not conducted in active school
zones, however he
observed on “numerous instances” where the vehicle would falsely
indicate 40 km/h zoning when no school
zones were evident. He said that, on the
other hand, he observed that often when he and Mr Sherman entered a designated
school zone,
the system did not suggest it was a temporary 40 km/h (as in
photograph E 53 4) but would simply display nothing until the vehicle
designated zone. There was one particular instance mentioned in his report where
he said that the speed advisory system
showed an incorrect reading when he and
Mr Sherman were travelling east toward Mr Sherman’s home.
133 The difficulty with this evidence was that the report did not contain any
information or details about the “numerous instances”
referred to by
Mr Senz. The one specific occasion mentioned did not include any details of the
speed limit signs which the system
is alleged to have misread or failed to read,
and whether any of the limitations of the system referred to in the
Owner’s Manual
may have accounted for the failure to read.
134 As it is accepted by Mr Sherman that the system has some inherent
limitations, the mere fact that there were incorrect readings,
in the absence of
any other relevant facts, did not necessarily mean that there were any faults
with the vehicle as distinct from
incorrect readings stemming from the
system’s inherent limitations.
135 When Mr Senz and Mr Sherman returned to Mr Sherman’s house, Mr Senz
observed one of the proximity sensors provide a warning
when there were no
objects near the vehicle.
136 Mr Senz also attached a photo (E 53 7) which was a still image taken from
a video recorded by Mr Sherman (the video was not tendered).
Mr Senz says, by
inference, that this photo showed the vehicle approaching an object (which may
have been Mr Sherman’s garage
door) and he would expect a warning from the
left-hand front sensor. The photo appears to show a warning in relation to the
of the vehicle. His opinion was that:
“Proximity sensors would indicate danger when nothing was
137 Mr Senz said that he had experienced
instances where proximity sensors were triggered by “the likes of
there was no evidence of dust “or other material”
on the one occasion he observed the apparent malperformance of the
138 In cross examination Mr Senz accepted that he had not inspected any other
vehicle of the same make and model, or any exemplar
vehicle, to determine
whether Mr Sherman’s vehicle behaved any differently to that of an
exemplar vehicle.
139 Interestingly, Mr Senz had not been asked by Mr Sherman to proffer any
opinion on the contents of the “Final quick test
log” tendered by Mr
140 Mr Senz concluded his first report by saying that based on his
“... in the area of failure analysis, vehicle repair and interpretation of
visible evidence from photographs it is the writer’s
considered opinion
that it is far more than reasonable to conclude on the balance of probability
that inspection of this vehicle
revealed that its ... Speed Advisory and
Proximity Sensing systems are not functioning as intended or reasonably expected
reasonable consumers perceive perception of vehicle quality
expectation.”
141 Three things may be said about those
opinions. First, in our opinion there was no evidence of any connection between
training, study or experience in failure analysis (whatever that
quite means), vehicle repair or interpretation of photographs, with
his opinions
as to the functioning of the speed advisory system or the proximity sensors.
Second, nor, in our opinion, did his first
report set out any facts or reasoning
process by which he came to those various opinions. Third, there was no evidence
of any connection
between Mr Senz’s training, study or experience and his
opinion as to what reasonable consumers perceive, nor any facts or
process exposed in his report explaining how he came to that conclusion.
142 Mr Senz also opined:
“Provision of wrong information is distraction which is a known cause of
accidents. ...
Since broadcasting of incorrect information is distracting, then the vehicle can
be deemed as being unsafe. ...
The vehicle displays wrong information which is a recognised safety
143 Whilst it could be accepted that at some
generalised level the display of wrong information by a vehicle might be a
distraction
to a reasonable driver, it is a leap of some orders of magnitude
from that position to the opinions expressed by Mr Senz. Again,
there is no
evidence of any connection between Mr Senz’s training, study or experience
with these opinions, nor did he set
out any facts or reasoning process which
supported those opinions.
144 In his second report Mr Senz was asked by Mr Sherman’s solicitors
to opine whether the vehicle’s spoiler would have
wheel stop had the proximity sensors been functioning properly.
145 He answered by referring to modern vehicle’s crumple zones and
smart anti-collision brake systems. The relevance of those
matters to the
question asked is not apparent.
146 Mr Senz then said that in his opinion the radar used to calculate how far
the vehicle is from an object is reliant on the radar
being able to get a
recognisable rebound signal from the object. He said that some materials and
shapes will obviously reflect better
than others. He said that although a
concrete barrier should reflect well, there was the problem of the height of the
sensors (above
the ground) which may prevent suitable detection.
147 Mr Senz then said that the proximity sensor issue that he was looking at
was not the concrete wheel stop, but Mr Sherman’s
garage doors which had
allegedly not been detected, and that there had been a tripping of the
right-hand rear sensor (when no object
was nearby). He then opined that one
would expect the vehicle’s sensors should detect the presence of a solid
object which
was close to vehicle panelling.
148 Any opinion about the concrete wheel stop and the vehicle’s sensors
seems to be qualified by Mr Senz’s statements
height (more compendiously described by Dr Casey), and we are unable to
reconcile Mr Senz’s opinion
with his qualification as to height.
149 There is no doubt that Mr Senz was an honest and forthright witness, but
we attach no weight to his opinions. We have already
observed the lack of
connection between his opinions and his training, study and experience, and the
lack of exposure of any facts
and reasoning processes by which he arrived at his
150 Whilst an honest witness attempting to do the best he could, our
impression was that he was giving evidence of matters beyond
his expertise and
giving evidence of opinions that, whilst genuinely held, were not based on any
recognised expertise, objective
criteria, industry standards or widely held peer
opinion. We were not satisfied that his evidence provided a satisfactory basis
which we could make the findings sought by Mr Sherman.
151 David Collins, the general manager of Parramatta Smash Repairs gave
evidence in relation to the repairs undertaken in relation
to the damage to the
front spoiler. Although he did not personally undertake the repairs, he did
inspect them.
152 A statutory declaration of Mr Collins declared on 25 February 2021 was
tendered, Mr Collins gave some additional brief oral evidence
before us and he
was cross-examined.
153 Mr Collins said that in relation to parts needed for the repair, all
damaged parts were replaced with new parts ordered from Mercedes-Benz
a bracket which had been bent but which was able to be straightened.
154 Some re-painting was required. Mr Collins gave evidence that the paint
was a paint authorised by Mercedes Benz and was mixed on
site to achieve the
correct colour following a Mercedes Benz formula.
155 The result of the repairs, according to Mr Collins was that the vehicle
was in an as new condition when those repairs were completed.
156 Mr Collins was another honest witness. He gave his evidence cogently and
in a direct and forthright manner. We accept his evidence.
The Appellant’s Evidence
157 Dr Casey provided a report dated 13 January 2021 and was
cross-examined.
158 Dr Casey is a qualified Mechanical Engineer. He holds a PhD, Master of
Engineering Science and Bachelor of Engineering (1st class
honours) all in the
field of mechanical engineering.
159 Dr Casey is a Member of the Institute of Engineers Australia.
160 Dr Casey said he had been Head of the Internal Combustion Engines
Laboratory, University of New South Wales, lecturer in the School
of Mechanical
and Manufacturing Engineering at the same university, Assistant Professor at the
Institute of Fluid Science, Tohoku
University, Japan, and Tutorial Assistant,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Queensland.
161 Dr Casey said he had worked on numerous international journals,
conferences, and other professional bodies. He said he had investigated
than 1,500 heavy vehicle accidents, crashes, fires, and failures. He said he had
worked extensively in the area of automotive
forensic investigation since March
1993 with many cases coupled with extensive testing programs.
162 Dr Casey said he had an extensive knowledge of vehicular systems
including systems that form Driver Assistance Packages (“DAP”).
speed advisory system and proximity sensor system fall within this description.]
He said he had dealt with such systems for
various manufacturers including BMW,
Audi, VW as well as in lower marques of vehicles such as Jeep and Toyota. He
said that his involvement
included assessment of the systems installed on those
vehicles as well as analysis of the way in which the systems were intended
function. He said he had driven dozens of vehicles fitted with these types of
systems and his own vehicle is fitted with an extensive
range of DAP.
163 Dr Casey said he had a very strong working knowledge of the methodology
used by systems that form DAP since these are in common
with many analytic
experimental methods that he used throughout his time in academia. This included
ultrasonic distance methods,
Doppler methods, and image processing.
164 Dr Casey said he was very familiar with Mercedes AMG vehicles and the
systems fitted to them. Mr Sherman’s vehicle was a
Mercedes Benz AMG
165 Dr Casey was provided with the two reports of Mr Senz amongst other
documents and inspected and tested Mr Sherman’s vehicle
on 7 January
166 Dr Casey explained how the proximity sensor system worked. He said that
Mr Sherman’s vehicle is fitted with sensors to alert
driver to objects
that are in and around the vehicle. He said the sensors were ultrasonic sensors
that emit a high frequency soundwave.
He said the sensors would emit a sound
wave which would bounce off nearby objects. Some of the reflected wave would
then return to
the sensor and then the system would calculate the distance to
the object detected.
167 Dr Casey explained the limitations in such systems. He said they can be
affected by variations in temperature and humidity. He
said that sound waves can
be affected by wind. He said that not all objects reflect sound directly back
towards the direction from
which it came. For example, he said rounded objects
could scatter sound in many directions, and slanted objects with faces slanted
away from the incoming direction will reflect the sound wave away from the
direction from which it came.
168 Dr Casey said that sound emitted by such sensors can reflect off multiple
surfaces which can cause multiple signals to return
to a sensor or a signal
emitted by one sensor may be incorrectly captured by another sensor which can
lead to erroneous interpretation
of distances by the system.
169 Dr Casey said that the sensors typically emit sound in a directed beam
and only objects within that beam can be detected. He said
that such systems
engage in a trade-off. The intention is to detect things close to the car but
not to detect the road surface. Therefore,
the directed beam had to be angled in
such a direction to attempt to detect close objects without continually or
indeed often detecting
the road surface.
170 In cross-examination Dr Casey was pressed on the question of whether the
vehicle sensors should have detected the wheel stop.
Dr Casey said the only real
way to answer that question was to test this particular vehicle with that
particular wheel stop, however
he thought it unlikely given the height of the
wheel stop.
171 Dr Casey also said this vehicle was fitted with a second object detection
method that was radar based. It had certain limitations
in that it only detected
objects that were moving at a different speed to the vehicle which meant that
for the system to detect a
stationary object the vehicle had to be moving. He
said this could limit the effectiveness of the radar system at very slow
172 Dr Casey said that these inherent operational limitations went a long way
to explaining why these types of systems were referred
“assistance” systems or as “Driver Assistant Packages”.
In other words, Dr Casey said, the systems
drivers, but
drivers must still use the normal means of avoiding objects because they could
not be relied upon to work perfectly
at all times.
173 Dr Casey said that these types of systems undergo developments that
improve their implementation. That is, they get better with
time as the
technology improves and matures.
174 Dr Casey inspected the vehicle on 7 January 2021.
175 Dr Casey investigated the possibility that the ability of this vehicle to
change its height may have been responsible for the
spoiler and the concrete wheel stop. Dr Casey ruled out this possibility, and we
need not say more about
this because Mr Sherman’s evidence was to the
effect that the height of the vehicle when he parked was the same height as when
he reversed.
176 In contradistinction to Mr Senz, Dr Casey tested the proximity sensors by
driving the vehicle around the premises where he was
inspecting it and which he
said contained many obstacles. He said he could not find any fault or defect
with the proximity sensor
system. He tested the system at its various
sensitivities (it can be adjusted by the driver). He tested the system in
relation to
low objects (a square-faced gutter), other vehicles and vertical
objects. After all of his testing he came to the view that the behaviour
proximity sensors was as expected, and he did not find any aberrant
177 He also tested an exemplar vehicle (the same model) for the same tests
and said that to all intents and purposes the results were
178 Dr Casey had the vehicle’s diagnostic memory downloaded using
Mercedes’ diagnostic program (the Xentry system). He
said that any faults
or issues would be recorded in that download. He said that in terms of the
system responsible for the proximity
sensors there were no faults or issues. He
repeated the download after his road tests and found no faults or issues
179 For completeness, Dr Casey’s report also contained evidence in
relation to the speed advisory system. However, as that evidence
had not been
led before the Tribunal and was outside the previous Appeal Panel’s grant
of leave for the service of new evidence,
that evidence was, on objection,
180 Dr Casey was well qualified by his training, study and experience to
provide the opinions he did. The facts and reasoning process
by which he came to
his opinions were set out in his report. Dr Casey gave his evidence in an honest
and forthright way. He answered
questions directly and without evasion. He was
not shaken in cross-examination. We accept Dr Casey’s opinions.
181 Mr Lazzaro was LSH’s Service Manager. He gave oral evidence to the
Tribunal and the transcript of that evidence was before
us. Otherwise, he gave
no further testimonial evidence.
182 Mr Lazzaro said that LSH had checked the vehicle and all its software was
up-to-date or was updated when the vehicle was with
LSH, and any update was
183 He said that the speed advisory system relied on two factors. It relied
on predetermined data in the navigation system, and it
relied on the camera. He
said they were never perfect in reading signs because for example they had
difficulty with LED lighting.
He said that there were limitations described in
the Owner’s Manual, such as, for example, if you took a corner the camera
might not read a sign straight away and will miss that speed zone because it
couldn’t capture the sign quick enough.
184 He said the test conducted by LSH on 30 January (presumably 2020) showed
no faults displaying in the systems.
185 We did not observe Mr Lazzaro give his evidence, but his evidence that
LSH checked the vehicle and all its software was up-to-date
or was updated when
the vehicle was with LSH was corroborated by Mr Sherman and contemporaneous
186 His evidence about the working of the speed advisory system was
corroborated by Dr Casey, and his evidence about the Xentry data
of 30 January
2020 was corroborated by the document itself.
187 We accept Mr Lazzaro’s evidence.
188 Mr Harish was an accountant employed by LSH. He provided a statutory
declaration and was cross-examined.
189 His evidence was directed to the proffered replacement vehicles which Mr
Sherman rejected, and the difficulties involved in sourcing
an identical
190 Mr Harish gave his evidence in an honest and forthright manner. We have
no reason to doubt his evidence.
Other Evidence
191 LSH tendered two other Xentry logs, both dated 30 January 2020. One was
an “Initial quick test log” and the other
was a “Final quick
test log”. Neither log indicated any fault.
192 A Xentry “Documentation for repair order” indicated that the
vehicle’s “control unit programming was completed
successfully”.
193 The extracts from the vehicle’s Owner’s Manual revealed
various warnings as to when the proximity sensor system may
not work as
expected. The Manual said that the system was:
“... only an aid. It is not a substitute for your attention to the
surroundings. The responsibility for safe manoeuvring and
parking remains with
you. Make sure that there are no persons, animals or objects in the manoeuvering
area while manoeuvering and
parking in/exiting parking
194 The Manual said that the system did not
necessarily take into account certain obstacles such as obstacles below or above
the detection
range. It said that the sensors must be free of dirt, ice and
slush, otherwise they may not function correctly.
195 On other pages of the Owner’s Manual several different scenarios
are described in which the sensors may indicate nearby
objects when none are, in
fact, present. The Manual suggests action to be taken, and says that the system
may have malfunctioned
and was deactivated (by the vehicle) due to signal
interference.
196 In relation to the speed advisory system, called the Traffic Sign Assist,
the Manual said that the system assists the driver by
displaying detected speed
limits in the instrument cluster. It said the system also uses data stored in
the navigation system so
that it can update the display in certain situations
without detecting traffic signs. It said that the system was only an aid and
that the driver was responsible for keeping an appropriate speed.
197 The Manual said that the system may be impaired or may not function in
certain situations including:
(1) if there was poor visibility (due to insufficient illumination of the
road or highly variable shade conditions or even rain, snow,
fog or heavy
(2) if there is glare from oncoming traffic, direct sunlight or
reflections;
(3) if traffic signs were hard to detect;
(4) if the information in the navigation system’s digital map was
incorrect or out of date;
(5) if the traffic signs were ambiguous;
(6) if a driver turned sharply when passing traffic signs were outside the
camera’s field of vision.
The Parties’ Submissions
198 Mr Sherman’s factual case was based on the alleged deficiencies in
the speed advisory system and the proximity sensors.
199 His legal case was that the existence of those deficiencies meant that
the vehicle was not of acceptable quality per s 54(a),
(c) and/or (d) of the ACL
(NSW). In addition to the evidence we have summarised, he said that the consent
of LSH to the orders made
by the Tribunal on 24 September 2019 “is grounds
to infer” that LSH tacitly accepted that the vehicle was not of acceptable
200 Mr Sherman said he was entitled to reject the vehicle on two bases.
First, he said that LSH’s failure to comply with the
guarantee provided by
s 54 amounted to a major failure per s 260(a), (c) or (e) and thus he was
entitled to reject the vehicle per
s 259(3). Alternatively, he said that if
LSH’s failure to comply with the guarantee provided by s 54 could be
remedied and
was not a major failure, he had requested LSH to remedy the
failure, LSH had failed to comply with that requirement, and thus he
entitled to reject the vehicle per s 259(2)(b)(ii).
201 LSH said that the alleged deficiencies did not amount to the vehicle not
being of acceptable quality. It said that its consent
to the orders made by the
Tribunal on 24 September 2019 did not operate as a tacit acceptance that the
vehicle was not of acceptable
202 LSH said that if the deficiencies meant that the vehicle was not of
acceptable quality, they did not amount to a “major
failure” and
thus Mr Sherman was not entitled to reject the vehicle. If the deficiencies did
not amount to a major failure,
LSH said that Mr Sherman had not identified any
fault in either system (as opposed to the system working as designed, but simply
not to an acceptable standard) and so had not proved that the deficiencies could
be remedied and thus did not prove an entitlement
to relief based on s 259(2) of
the ACL (NSW).
203 In further defence to the claimed entitlement of Mr Sherman to reject the
vehicle, LSH relied on s 262(1)(c) of the ACL (NSW)
and said that as the vehicle
had been damaged that section was called into play and operated to deny Mr
Sherman any entitlement to
relief based on a rejection of the vehicle.
204 In answer to LSH’s defence per s 262(1)(c), Mr Sherman says that
the section did not apply because the vehicle was repaired
to an as good as new
205 In our opinion Mr Sherman did not prove that this vehicle was not of
acceptable quality. Our reasons for that finding are as follows.
The Tribunal’s Orders of 24 September 2019
206 On 24 September 2019, at the conclusion of a conciliation hearing, and
with the parties’ consent, the Tribunal made the
orders set out at [
] above, the most
important of which (for this point) were orders 4 - 6 which were in the
following terms:
“4. The respondent will have a period 21 days to inspect the vehicle from
the date of collection and in particular for the
following named
a. Random speed display
b. Sensors not responding and randomly responding
c. Underdash heating not working
d. Concern with using auto functions for parking and cruise
5. The respondent will carry out such repairs as might be necessary and at
its’ own expense during the period of 21 days, or
such longer period as
may be reasonably agreed between them.
6. Either party may seek to renew these proceedings on or before 10 November,
2019, in the event these orders are not complied with
(or) the applicant remains
of the view that the vehicle requires further
207 Mr Sherman submitted that it is reasonable to
infer that the consent orders operated as a tacit acceptance by LSH that the
was not of acceptable quality in respect of the matters complained of.
By “tacit acceptance” we assume Mr Sherman means
“admission”. No submissions were made in support of the contention
advanced, Mr Sherman simply pointing out that this
was what was said by the
previous Appeal Panel at [15] of its reasons.
208 LSH submitted that the orders did not involve any finding of liability,
rather the orders were restricted to orders for inspection
in relation to the
identified “concerns”, with LSH to carry out such repairs as
“might” be necessary. LSH
submitted it denied it had failed to
comply with the guarantee provided in s 54 of the ACL (NSW) at all times. LSH
also submitted
that the orders were inadmissible given the terms of cl 2(2) of
Schedule 1 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2013
(NSW). That
clause says:
Any statement or admission made before the Tribunal or any person at a meeting
or other proceeding held for the purposes of a resolution
process to which
parties have been referred by the Tribunal under section 37 of the Act is not
admissible in the proceedings in which
the referral was made, or in any other
legal proceedings before a court or other body, unless the person who made the
statement or
admission consents to its disclosure in the
proceedings.
209 Whilst the previous Appeal Panel did make the
observation referred to, it was not a finding made by it and does not bind us.
Newcrest Mining Ltd v Thornton
(2012) 248 CLR 555
the High Court considered the effect of a consent order made in settlement of
personal injury proceedings in the District Court of
Western Australia. French
CJ said, in relation to such an order, at [17]:
“A consent order of the kind made in this case can properly be described
as an order which expresses an agreement in a more
formal way than usual. ...
However, when a consent order in favour of a plaintiff gives effect to
an agreement which does not involve
any admission of liability in
respect of any cause of action asserted by the plaintiff, it cannot be taken as
an admission of liability
or as a determination of
liability by the court.”
(Emphasis ours)
211 There was no evidence of any agreement
between the parties involving an admission of liability. Nor do the terms of the
imply one. LSH agreed to carry out such repairs “as might be
necessary”, presumably meaning as might be thought necessary
by LSH given
the terms of order 6. Logically, this was agreed to against the event some fault
could be found in the vehicle and was
no more than one would expect for a
vehicle still under warranty.
212 We do not agree that the orders are an admission by LSH of any
contravention of a consumer guarantee. They were not “statements”
“admissions” made “before” the Tribunal. They were
orders made by the Tribunal, entered into the Tribunal’s
records and are
part of the public record.
213 In our opinion the consent orders did not operate as an admission made by
LSH to the effect that the vehicle was not of acceptable
quality in respect of
the matters complained of.
The Speed Advisory System
214 We accept that there were occasions when the vehicle displayed a speed
advisory which was different to the actual speed limit
applicable.
215 However, beyond that the evidence is not clear.
216 Although Mr Sherman gave evidence with varying degrees of specificity of
occasions when he said the speed advisory was different
to the mandated speed
limit, there was no evidence of how many occasions the speed advisory was
accurate. The relevance of the latter
evidence would be to contextualise the
former evidence so that one could assess how often the system performed
imperfectly (from
Mr Sherman’s perspective). That is, for example, did it
perform imperfectly 50% of the time (misread or fail to read 50% of
speed signs)
which might be considered as regular and often, or less than 0.1% of the time
which might be considered as rare and
irregular, or some other percentage?
217 In addition, there was no qualitative evidence as to the misread signs or
the signs the system failed to read. By qualitative
we mean a description of the
particular sign (what it displayed) which was misread or which the system failed
to read, and those
features mentioned in the Owner’s Manual which the
manufacturer said may impair the functioning of the system such as whether
was poor visibility, glare from oncoming traffic, direct sunlight or
reflections, whether the traffic signs were hard to detect
or ambiguous or
whether Mr Sherman turned sharply such that the traffic signs were outside the
camera’s field of vision.
218 To the extent the system relied on the navigation system’s digital
map, we infer that the digital map was correct and not
out of date because Mr
Lazzaro said that LSH had checked the vehicle and all its software was
up-to-date or was updated when the
vehicle was with LSH, and any update was
219 Further, some of Mr Sherman’s evidence was by way of assertion
rather than observation. For example, in his email of 22
August 2019 Mr Sherman
emailed LSH to say that on the previous Tuesday the speed advisory system had
indicated a speed limit of 40,
60, 70, 40 and 60 kph along Victoria Road when
the zone speed limit for that area was 60 kph. Whilst it is one thing to say
speed advisory is being displayed by the vehicle, it is another to assert
what the speed limit was without giving evidence of the
location of the speed
sign allegedly misread (or failed to have been read) by the system. Appreciating
we are not bound by the rules
of evidence, the lack of such details greatly
reduced the weight we could give to such descriptions.
220 For the reasons set out below commencing at [
] we find that there was
no remediable fault or defect in either system. That is, there was nothing
broken that could be fixed. The
problem, if one existed, was in the design of
the system.
221 However, we are not persuaded by Mr Sherman’s evidence that the
perceived failures of the system were beyond what one may
expect given the
inherent limitations in the system’s design. The lack of evidence of the
number of times it did not work as
designed (in the context of the number of
times it did) and the lack of evidence of the physical circumstances in which it
work as designed (in the context of the system’s limitations) do
not allow us to make any finding that the system’s “failures”
(we use that term neutrally) exceeded what one may expect given the inherent
limitations in the system’s design.
The Proximity Sensors
222 The same observations we have just made apply to Mr Sherman’s
evidence as to the proximity sensors, except for the one occasion
when Mr Senz
observed the sensor system sounding an alarm when no visible object was
223 But otherwise, we do not know how often the proximity sensors worked, and
so are unable to ascertain whether they worked imperfectly
50% of the time, less
than 0.1% of the time or some other percentage.
224 The Manual refers to signal interference, and sometimes problems with the
sensors being covered by dirt. The evidence does not
allow us to say that those
matters were not responsible for the observed false indications.
225 We are unable to find, on the evidence, that the proximity sensors should
have, but failed to, detect the concrete wheel stop
which caused damage to the
front spoiler when Mr Sherman reversed out of the car parking spot.
226 As Dr Casey said, the proximity sensors send out a beam, and there is a
trade-off with the direction in which the beam is sent
between detecting objects
close to the car whilst not detecting the road surface.
227 The vehicle did not sound an alarm when the vehicle entered the car
parking spot, and so it would appear the system worked in
the sense that it did
not detect an object that
did not contact
a part of the vehicle (other
than, perhaps, the tyres). And given that by the time the car came to a stop the
wheel stop was underneath
the spoiler, it is clear that the wheel stop was not
inside the directed beam of the front proximity sensors at that point in time.
Therefore, they could not have detected the wheel stop when Mr Sherman commenced
228 Why the spoiler caught on the wheel stop when the vehicle reversed and
did not do so when it first entered the car parking spot,
when the vehicle was
at the same height during both manoeuvrers, we are unable to say on the
Setting the Standard of Acceptable Quality
229 Section 54(2) requires regard to the matters set out in s 54(3) when
judging what a reasonable consumer would regard as acceptable
230 In this case the good was a prestige, luxury motor vehicle with some
driving performance characteristics of a superior kind.
231 The price of the vehicle was a little under $204,000 including various
charges and taxes. Mr Sherman submitted, in substance,
that for that price a
reasonable consumer would be entitled to expect the systems would work perfectly
at all times. We do not agree.
Section 54 does not require perfection. As was
at [27], the standard of acceptable quality prescribed by s
54(2) is not absolute, or a standard of perfection. The standard of acceptable
quality is elastic, and context specific. In our view, a reasonable consumer
might expect a higher standard of performance than might
be exhibited by lower
priced vehicles, but even in expensive vehicles such as this one these systems
have their limitations, as made
clear to owners in the Owner’s Manual.
232 There is no evidence of any statements made about the vehicle on any
packaging or label on the vehicle, and most particularly
no evidence of any
representation made about the speed advisory system and the proximity
233 There is no evidence of any representation made about the vehicle by the
supplier or manufacturer of the vehicle, and most particularly
no evidence of
any representation made about the speed advisory system and the proximity
234 There are no other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
vehicle other than the Owner’s Manual. In our view
the contents of the
Manual are relevant to a reasonable consumer’s state of mind as it
contained relevant information about
the two systems complained of and their
inherent limitations. The Owner’s Manual also made the point that these
systems were
aids for drivers, or of assistance to drivers, but ultimate
responsibility rested with the driver. In relation to the proximity sensor
system the Manual said:
“It is not a substitute for your attention to the surroundings. The
responsibility for safe manoeuvring and parking remains
235 In relation to the speed advisory system the
Manual said that the system:
“... is only an aid. The driver is responsible for keeping a safe distance
to the vehicle in front, for vehicle speed and for
braking in good
236 As mentioned earlier, there was no dispute that
neither the speed advisory system nor the proximity sensors were foolproof
nor would they operate perfectly in all circumstances. Both systems had
inherent limitations.
Design or Fault, Free from Defects
237 LSH makes the point that, accepting that the speed advisory system and
proximity sensors did not always work perfectly, there
was no evidence whether
those systems worked imperfectly because of their inherent (or design)
limitations, or whether those systems
worked imperfectly because there was one
or more faults within each system. This is an important distinction not least
54(2)(c) requires goods to be “free from defects” to be of
acceptable quality.
238 There was no evidence tendered by Mr Sherman on this question. Mr Sherman
himself could not give that evidence.
239 We do not accept that Mr Senz was qualified to express any opinions as to
the design limitations of these systems or whether these
systems were faulty or
whether the perceived defective operation of the systems was the result of the
former or the latter.
240 Even if he were so qualified, Mr Senz did not address this question in
any direct way in his evidence. To the extent he did, we
do not accept Mr
Senz’s opinions. He did not conduct any form of test on the vehicle, or
its components. He limited himself
to making observations as to the performance
of the two systems on one 33 km drive on one day in January 2020. He made no
investigations
as to the design of the systems, expressed no understanding how
they worked, made no reference to the Owner’s Manual and the
information
it contained, made no reference to the Xentry data, made no reference to other
objective facts or criteria and did not
himself test (as Dr Casey did) the
proximity sensors in relation to various objects.
241 We accept Dr Casey’s opinions. Dr Casey was highly qualified in the
area of mechanical engineering, he was acquainted with
such systems in Mercedes
Benz vehicles and many other marques, knew how the systems worked, knew the
limitations of the technology,
tested the vehicle and had downloaded and
examined the vehicle’s Xentry data (twice).
242 The Xentry data, tendered by both parties, is objective evidence that the
two systems complained of were functioning as designed.
Dr Casey could find no
fault with the proximity sensors on his testing.
243 Contemporaneous correspondence from LSH on 4 and 8 July 2019 that a
software update had been carried out on the Command unit,
the parking sensors
had been checked and were working fine and that LSH’s service team had
investigated Mr Sherman’s
concerns regarding the cameras and sensors and
had been unable to find a fault are further contemporaneous evidence that the
themselves did not contain faults.
244 Mr Lazzaro also gave unchallenged evidence that the test conducted by LSH
on 30 January (presumably 2020) showed no faults displaying
in the systems.
245 Dr Casey’s opinions about the speed advisory system were not
admitted because they were outside the previous Appeal Panel’s
leave for new evidence, but there was no evidence from the plaintiff, who bore
the onus of proof, that any perceived defects
in the speed advisory system were
the result of some fault in the system.
246 The Xentry data is evidence against there being any fault, and both Dr
Casey and the Owner’s Manual referred to the inherent
limitations in the
two systems.
247 Therefore, in our view, the perceived defective performance of the speed
advisory system and proximity sensors arose out of the
inherent or design
limitations of the systems and not out of any fault or faults within those
248 It follows that, in our opinion, the vehicle was free from defects per s
54(2)(c) of the ACL (NSW).
Safe / Unsafe
249 There was no evidence in this case akin to that of Mr Rodgers in
, on the question of what a reasonable consumer would have
considered.
250 In our opinion, tested objectively, the vehicle was as safe as a
reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state and condition
vehicle (including any hidden defects of the goods), would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in s 54(3), and
particularly the contents of the
Owner’s Manual and the warnings as to the inherent limitations in the two
251 We appreciate Mr Sherman’s feelings of insecurity, but we do not
regard his feelings as being those of the reasonable consumer
and reject his
submission that his evidence is some evidence of the thinking of a reasonable
consumer. To accept that submission
would be to introduce a subjective element
into an objective test. Rather, a reasonable consumer who purchased this vehicle
being fully acquainted with the state and condition of the vehicle and the
Owner’s Manual) is to be taken to have some degree
of tolerance for the
two systems’ imperfect performance from time to time and to adjust
accordingly.
252 A reasonable consumer would also accept, in our view, that the process of
production and development of complex systems such as
these could never be
perfect. As Dr Casey said, these types of systems undergo developments that
improve their implementation and
get better with time as the technology improves
and matures.
253 As the authorities establish, the standard of acceptable quality
prescribed by s 54(2) is not absolute, or a standard of perfection.
254 Assuredly, this vehicle was an expensive, prestige luxury motor vehicle.
But there are many expensive machines that fail, our
point being that the
reasonable consumer would know that expense does not guarantee perfect
performance with complex systems.
Fit For All Purposes
255 In our opinion, and for the reasons given above, the vehicle was fit for
all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied as a
reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
vehicle would regard as acceptable.
256 It follows from what we have said above that in our opinion the vehicle
was of acceptable quality to a reasonable consumer and
LSH did not fail to
comply with the guarantee provided in s 54 of the ACL (NSW).
257 As that finding is dispositive of the application, we do not need to
decide the remaining issues in the case. However, against
the event the
proceedings are taken further, we shall provide our findings and short reasons
on the remaining issues.
258 If the proper conclusion was that LSH had not supplied a vehicle of
acceptable quality it does not matter, in our view, whether
or not there was a
major failure to comply with the guarantee. That is because the ACL (NSW)
provides for three scenarios, each of
which leads to the same result in this
case: a major failure, failures that can’t be remedied and failures that
can be remedied.
259 If the failure is a major failure Mr Sherman is prima facie entitled to
reject the vehicle per s 259(3) of the ACL (NSW). If the
failures can’t be
remedied Mr Sherman is prima facie entitled to reject the vehicle per s 259(3).
If the failures can be remedied
but LSH failed to do so (and the evidence is
that, if there were failures, LSH had the opportunity to but did not remedy
Sherman is prima facie entitled to reject the vehicle per s
260 We would have upheld LSH’s s 262 defence that Mr Sherman was not
entitled to reject the vehicle because it was damaged after
being delivered to
Mr Sherman for reasons not related to their state or condition at the time of
supply. Assuming the proximity sensors
were faulty, there was no evidence that
had the sensors been working properly the concrete wheel stop would have been
detected and
the damage not have occurred, and thus there was no evidence that
the damage was related to the condition of the vehicle at the time
261 The section simply requires the occurrence of damage. We would have found
that damage meant non-negligible damage. The fact the
vehicle was repaired
“as good as new” is not to the point. The section only refers to the
occurrence of damage not related
to the condition of the vehicle at the time of
supply. To qualify that requirement by allowing for repaired damage would be to
words into the section that do not exist. Having said that, the defence
only extended to disallowing Mr Sherman to reject the vehicle,
and obtain a
replacement, a remedy we would not have been inclined to grant in any event as
we shall now explain. Section 262 does
exclude other remedies.
262 Notwithstanding Mr Sherman elected to reject the goods, we would not have
granted him that remedy, that is the remedy provided
in s 263, namely return of
the vehicle to be replaced by another, identical vehicle. The parties tried to
resolve their differences
along those lines without success, and Mr Harish gave
evidence, which we accept, of the difficulties in obtaining an identical
263 We also do not think return of the vehicle and repayment of the purchase
price would be a practical remedy given the payment of
significant sums from
that purchase price by way of GST (approx. $15,000) and luxury car tax (approx.
$30,000). We do not know whether
those taxes would be recoverable if this
transaction were, in effect, unwound.
264 Had we given Mr Sherman a remedy it would have been by way of
compensation as is provided for in s 259(3)(b) of the ACL (NSW)
reduction in the value of the vehicle below the price paid, or pursuant to s
79N(a) of the FTA. We appreciate that s 259(3)
is expressed in terms of
alternative remedies to be chosen by the consumer, but s 79N provides us with
the power to grant other remedies
(such as compensation) in relation to consumer
claims brought before us, of which this case is one, and we regard compensation
be assessed on the basis set out in s 259(3) as being the most appropriate
265 No party led evidence on the quantum of such compensation, and it was
apparent that neither party considered compensation as an
available possible
remedy. In the circumstances of this case, had we got this far, we would have
been minded to grant leave to the
parties to adduce further evidence on quantum,
with any experts to confer to attempt to agree on a figure or reduce any areas
dispute and, subject to any submissions to the contrary, would have been
minded to decide that issue on the papers.
266 We make the following orders:
(1) The application is dismissed.
(2) If any party desires to make an application for costs of the appeal:
(a) that party is to inform the other party within 14 days of the date of
these reasons;
(b) the applicant for costs is to lodge with the Appeal Panel and serve on
the respondent to the costs application any written submissions
of no more than
five pages on or before 14 days from the date of these reasons;
(c) the respondent to any costs application is to lodge with the Appeal Panel
and serve on the applicant for costs any written submissions
of no more than
five pages on or before 28 days from the date of these reasons;
(d) any reply submissions limited to three pages are to be lodged with the
Appeal Panel and served on the other party within 35 days
of the date of these
(e) the parties are to indicate in their submissions whether they consent to
an order dispensing with an oral hearing of the costs
application, and if they
do not consent, submissions of no more than one page as to why an oral hearing
should be conducted rather
than the application being determined on the
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (454 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter