URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lim v AAI Limited t/as GIO [2023] NSWPICMRP 1; (2 May 2023)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Lim v AAI Limited t/as GIO
[2023] NSWPICMRP 1
Back Chun Lim
AAI Limited t/as GIO
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Katherine Ruschen
Shana Radnan
Terence O’Riain
DATE OF DECISION:
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
section 3.24
and/or 3.28; dispute
section 8.10
; interpreter fees; meaning of
treatment and care; jurisdiction;
sections 42
Personal Injury
Commission Act 2020
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
compliance with directions; power to dismiss proceedings;
the application for a merit review is dismissed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
and rule 77(b)(ii)
and/or in the alternative,
rule 77(b)(iii)
Personal Injury Commission
the application for a panel review of the single merit review decision of
Merit Reviewer Plibersek is dismissed.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Back Chun Lim (the claimant) and GIO (the insurer) about
statutory benefits payable for treatment and care
under Division 3.4 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) and/or expenses payable under
Part 8 of the MAI Act.
claimant was injured in a motor accident on 12 March 2020.
claimant lodged an application for personal injury benefits on 9 April
claimant requested payment of certain interpreter fees by the insurer. The
interpreter fees are said to have been incurred by
the claimant in connection
with receiving treatment and/or making the claim.
insurer declined payment of the interpreter fees.
claimant sought a merit review of the insurer’s internal review decisions
regarding payment of interpreter fees.
28 October 2022 Merit Reviewer Plibersek determined there was no jurisdiction to
review the dispute.
claimant applied to the Personal Injury Commission (the Commission) for a review
panel to reconsider the merit review.
5 December 2022 the President’s delegate decided there was reasonable
cause to suspect an error in the Merit Reviewer’s
Commission's President constituted a Review Panel (the Panel) to review the
Merit Reviewer's decision.
BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE
the application for personal injury benefits the claimant notified the insurer
that they required a Korean interpreter to assist
them through the claims
insurer accepted liability to make payment of statutory benefits for the first
26 weeks after the accident. The claimant’s
entitlement to statutory
benefits ceased on 12 September 2020.
of the following invoices for interpreter fees is in
Invoice no.
Reason for interpreter fees
8 April 2020
Tele (video) conference with Mr Cheng, law clerk employed by the
claimant’s solicitors
22 June 2020
Tele(video) conference with law clerk Mr Cheng
17 July 2020
Telephone attendance with Ms Lai, law clerk (not admitted to practice until
11 November 2022) employed by the claimant’s solicitors
20 July 2020
Telephone attendance with “Denis from Dr Paul Rope”
5 August 2020
Tele(video) conference with law clerks Ms Lai and Mr Cheng,
7 August 2020
Tele(video) conference with law clerk Mr Cheng
11 August 2020
Tele (video) conference with Dr Lam, general practitioner
15 September 2020
Onsite attendance with Dr Lam
29 September 2020
Onsite attendance with Dr Lam
24 November 2020
Onsite attendance with Dr Lam
8 December 2020
Onsite attendance with Dr Lam
insurer declined payment of the above invoices on the basis the costs of an
interpreter are not costs of treatment and care. In
relation to interpreter fees
incurred after the claimant’s entitlement period ended on 12 September
2020 the insurer, further
and in the alternative, declined payment on the basis
the expenses are not authorised by the Motor Accident Guidelines (the
Guidelines)
pursuant to s 3.28(3).
THE DECISION UNDER
interpreter fees fall into two categories:
(a) fees in relation to conferences with law clerks employed by the
claimant’s solicitors, and
(b) fees in relation to consultations by the claimant with his general
practitioner.
is also a fee for an interpreter to telephone “Denis from Dr Rope’s
rooms”. The purpose of this call is unclear.
so far as the claim for interpreter fees is made under s 8.10 of the MAI Act,
the Merit Reviewer found that:
(a) section 10 provides for an entitlement to costs and expenses incurred by a
claimant “in connection with the claim”;
(b) the reference to “claim” in the context of s 8.10 is a reference
to claims for statutory benefits under Part 3 of
the MAI Act;
(c) statutory benefits under Part 3 of the MAI Act are about “weekly
payments” and “treatment and care”;
(d) the invoices for interpreting services are neither weekly payments nor costs
of treatment and care and therefore are not statutory
(e) the claimant does not have an entitlement to recover costs in the subject
dispute under s 8.10, and
(f) in conclusion the Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine the
so far as the claim for interpreter fees is made under s 3.24 of the MAI Act the
Merit Reviewer found interpreter services do not
come within the definition of
“treatment and care” and therefore there is no entitlement to
recover interpreter costs.
relation to whether interpreter fees incurred after the claimant’s
entitlement period ended are payable under s 3.28(3) of
the MAI Act the Merit
Reviewer found:
(a) there was no entitlement to recover interpreter costs on the basis Part 5.16
of the Guidelines had not been satisfied, and
(b) therefore ss 3.28(1) and 3.28(3) do not apply to allow payment of
interpreter fees incurred more than 26 weeks after the date
of the motor
THE CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS
claimant submits the Commission has jurisdiction to determine the dispute under
any of the following:
(a) clause 1(i) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act – whether the cost of
treatment and care provided or to be provided to the claimant
is reasonable for
the purposes of s 3.24(1) (Entitlement to statutory benefits for treatment
(b) clause, 1(aa) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act – whether for the purposes
of s 8.10 (Recovery of costs and expenses in relation
to claims for statutory
benefits) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant are reasonable and
necessary, and/or
(c) clause 3(n) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act – any issue of liability for
a claim, or part of a claim, for statutory benefits
not otherwise specified in
this Schedule.
claimant relies on a decision of
ALV v NRMA Insurance
(Merit Review)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 105
to support their contention that interpreter fees are
payable pursuant to s 8.10 of the MAI Act. As to whether such costs are
and necessary the claimant submits:
(a) the claimant speaks English as their second language;
(b) the legal service provider is not able to deliver the service in the
targeted language of the claimant, as no staff speak Korean
“professionally”, and
(c) “it is unreasonable and unnecessary for the insurer to deny the cost
of the interpreter fees, which is a result of language
barrier towards the
relation to s 3.24 of the MAI Act the claimant submits:
(a) it is reasonable and necessary for the claimant to seek treatment and care
with the presence of a NAATI-accredited Korean speaking
interpreter;
(b) the claimant was required to consult their general practitioner, Dr Lam,
every 28 days in order to furnish ongoing Certificates
of Fitness and as
recommended by Dr Lam and other treatment providers, and
(c) Dr Lam is of the opinion that continuing care will improve the recovery of
the claimant from injuries arising from the motor
THE INSURER’S SUBMISSIONS
insurer maintains:
(a) the Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine the dispute in so far
as interpreter fees are claimed under s 8.10 of
the MAI Act, and
(b) in so far as interpreter fees are claimed under s 3.24 of the MAI Act
interpreter fees do not fall within the definition of treatment
prescribed by s 1.4 of the MAI Act.
and in the alternative, having regard to the claimant’s non-compliance
with directions issued by the Panel (discussed
further below) the insurer
submits this application for review should be dismissed.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
3.24(1)(a) of the Act relevantly provides:
“(1) An injured
person is entitled to statutory benefits for the following expenses (treatment
and care expenses) incurred
in connection with providing treatment and care for
the injured person—
(a) the reasonable cost of treatment and care”.
s 3.24(2) statutory benefits are not payable for the cost of treatment and care
“to the extent that the treatment and
care concerned was not reasonable
and necessary in the circumstances or did not relate to the injury resulting
from the motor accident
concerned”.
and care’ is defined under s 1.4(1) of the MAI Act as
“‘treatment and care’ means the
(a) medical treatment (including pharmaceuticals),
(b) dental treatment,
(c) rehabilitation,
(d) ambulance transportation,
(e) respite care,
(f) attendant
care services,
(g) aids and appliances,
(h) prostheses,
(i) education and vocational training,
(j) home and transport modification,
(k) workplace and educational facility modifications,
(l) such other kinds of treatment, care, support or services as may be
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this definition,
but does not include any treatment, care, support or services of a kind
declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition.”
8.10 of the MAI Act provides the following in respect of recovery of costs and
expenses in relation to claims for statutory
claimant for statutory benefits is (subject to this section) entitled to recover
from the insurer against whom the claim
is made the reasonable and necessary
legal costs, and other costs and expenses, incurred by the claimant in
connection with the claim.
Other costs and expenses include the cost of medical
and other tests and reports.
(2) The Regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the
maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section
(including any matters for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and necessary
legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
Regulations or the Commission.
(4) The Commission can permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant
but only if satisfied that:
(a) the claimant is under a legal disability, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs incurred
by the claimant”.
information provided by the claimant is insufficient to enable the Panel to
determine the dispute, including that insufficient
information was provided to
(a) a determination as to whether the interpreter fees were both reasonable and
necessary, as required by s 3.24(2) (if the Panel
prima facie determined
interpreter fees are costs of treatment and care), and/or
(b) a determination as to whether interpreter fees
incurred after the claimant’s entitlement period ended on 12 September
were none the less payable under s 3.28 (if the Panel prima facie
determined interpreter fees are costs of treatment and care).
claimant’s submissions were deficient, including that they:
(a) did not clearly identify which interpreter fees are claimed as costs of
treatment under s 3.24 and which interpreter fees are
claimed as costs of the
claim under s 8.10 of the MAI Act, and
(b) did not address how they say the Guidelines authorise payment of the
interpreter fees incurred after the claimant’s entitlement
period ended on
12 September 2020.
claimant’s evidence was also deficient. Several contentions are made in
the claimant’s submissions, including contentions
as to opinions said to
be held by treatment providers. However, no evidence has been provided in
support of such contentions.
Importantly,
the claimant has the onus of proving the requirements of ss 3.24(2) and 3.28(3)
of the MAI Act and cl 5.16 of the Guidelines
are satisfied.
directions issued to the parties by the Panel on 19 January 2023 the claimant
was directed to:
(a) clarify the parameters of the dispute (directions 10, 11 and 12(a)(i));
(b) provide further particulars as to the nature and purpose of the legal
services provided to the claimant in respect of which interpreter
claimed (direction 12(a)(ii));
(c) provide further particulars as to the nature of the interpreter attendance
with “Denis from Dr Rope’s rooms”
(direction 12(a)(iii));
(d) particularise the nature and purpose of each consultation with Dr Lam in
respect of which interpreter fees are claimed (direction
12(a)(iv));
(e) address relevant matters in cl 5.16 of the Guidelines to the extent
interpreter fees incurred after the entitlement period ended
are claimed under s
3.28 of the MAI Act;
(f) provide a copy of the claimant’s bill of costs/work in progress (WIP)
printout for the period 1 April 2020 to 8 August
2020 (direction 13(a)), and
(g) provide any further medical or other evidence, including any statement of
the claimant in support of the claimant’s contentions
under ss 3.24, 3.28
and 8.10 of the MAI Act and cl 5.16 of the Guidelines (direction 13(b)).
to the guiding principle in s 42 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act
(the PIC Act) the claimant and their solicitors are both under a
duty to cooperate with the Commission, including by complying with
directions.
Accordingly, compliance with the directions issued by the Panel on 19 January
2023 is mandatory.
claimant has failed to comply with the directions of 19 January 2023. None of
the information required by the directions has been
provided. No extension of
time to comply with the directions has been sought by the claimant and no
explanation as been offered by
the claimant for their failure to comply with the
directions. Accordingly, the claimant and their solicitors are in breach of the
directions and in breach of their duty under s 42 of the PIC Act.
to s 54 of the PIC Act the Commission may at any stage dismiss proceedings:
(a) if it is satisfied that the proceedings have been abandoned, or
(b) if it is satisfied that the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious or
otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance, or
(c) for any other ground of dismissal specified in the Commission
grounds specified under Rule 77 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
(the PIC Rules) for the purpose of s 54(c) of the
PIC Act include:
(a) the applicant has failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a
direction given by the Commission or the President; or
(b) the applicant has failed to prosecute the proceedings with due despatch.
to PIC Rule 127(1)(d) section 54 applies to panel review proceedings.
to PIC Rule 127(2) “a function given to the Commission in section 42 of
the PIC Act is to be read as being given to
the panel conducting the panel
review proceedings”.
to PIC Rule 127(3) “a function given to the Commission in section 54 of
the PIC Act is to be read as being given to
the President”.
to PIC Rule 9:
“A non-presidential member or merit reviewer to
whom applicable proceedings are referred may make any order relating to the
procedure to be followed in the proceedings, including an order striking out the
proceedings or any step in the proceedings, that
could be made by the
President”.
to Rule 5(2)(e) applicable proceedings for the purpose of PIC Rule 9 include
panel review proceedings.
to PIC Rule 5 “panel review proceedings"
“proceedings before a panel under enabling legislation for an appeal
against, or a review of, a decision made in medical
assessment proceedings or merit
review proceedings”. Accordingly, these proceedings are panel review
proceedings for the purpose
of s 54 of the MAI Act and PIC Rule 127.
Accordingly:
(a) pursuant to PIC Rule 127 the Panel has power to issue directions to the
parties and for compliance with the directions by the
parties to be compulsory
under s 42 of the PIC Act, and
(b) pursuant to PIC Rules 127 and 9 the Panel has power to strike out the
proceedings or to take any step in the proceedings that
could be made by the
President. This includes the power to dismiss the proceedings under s 54(c) of
the PIC Act and PIC Rule 77.
claimant has failed to comply with the directions issued by the Panel on 19
January 2023, without reasonable excuse. As a result,
the claimant has failed to
prosecute the proceedings with due despatch.
the circumstances the Panel has determined that pursuant to s 54(c) of the PIC
Act and PIC Rule 77(b)(ii) and/or (iii) the proceedings
For the reasons set out above the proceedings are dismissed on the basis:
(a) the applicant has failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a
direction given by the Commission or the President (PIC
Rule 77(b)(ii)),
(b) the applicant has failed to prosecute the proceedings with due despatch (PIC
Rule 77(b)(iii)).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter