URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/271.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Grech v Combat Sports Authority of NSW [2025] NSWCATAD 271; (6 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Grech v Combat Sports Authority of NSW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 271
Hearing Date(s):
10 October 2025
Date of Orders:
6 November 2025
Decision Date:
6 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
R Block, Senior Member
The decision under review is affirmed.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – combat sports - administrative review –
industry participant and promoter registration - fit and
proper person
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Combat Sports Act 2013
Combat Sports Regulation 2014
Cases Cited:
Austin v Commissioner for Fair Trading & Commissioner of Police
NSWCATAP 179
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
v Repatriation Commission
[1992] HCA 47
Combat Sports Authority of NSW v
[2022] NSWCATAP 387
Grech v Combat Sports Authority of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCATAD 73
McDonald v Guardianship Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
NSWCATAP 10
YG and GG v Minister for Community Services
[2002] NSWCA
Texts Cited:
Combat Sports Authority of NSW - Code of Conduct for Industry Participants
and Promoters
Combat Sports Authority of NSW – Fit and proper person
Principal judgment
James Grech (Applicant)
Combat Sports Authority (Respondent)
Representation:
Crown Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00260949
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
31 March 2025, James Grech (the
) made an application to
the Combat Sports Authority of New South Wales (the
to be registered as an industry participant in the classes of Trainer
(Amateur Boxing) Second (Amateur Boxing) classes pursuant
Combat Sports Act 2013
12 June 2025, the Respondent refused the application on
the basis that the Applicant was not a fit and proper person to
be registered
under the Act due to previous contraventions of the Act as found
in the Tribunal’s decision of 31 March 2025 which affirmed
decision of the Respondent that the Applicant was not fit and proper to be
registered in any class of registration.
conducting an internal review sought by the Applicant, on 7 July 2025, the
Respondent affirmed their decision to refuse registration
Applicant applied to the Tribunal on 8 July 2025 for an administrative review of
the Decision.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to review an administratively reviewable decision
pursuant to s 55 of the
Administrative Decisions Review
). The decision to refuse to
register the Applicant is a reviewable decision in accordance with s 77(1)(d) of
Material before the Tribunal
hearing was held in person on 10 October 2025, during which the Applicant gave
oral evidence and was cross-examined.
Applicant tendered material which included (i) a clean criminal history check
dated 14 May 2025 (ii) a valid first aid certificate
dated 11 May 2023 (iii) a
certificate as a finalist in the citizen of the year award by Shellharbour City
Council (iv) evidence of
fund raising for local childrens’ and
families’ charities; and (v) two character references.
Respondent tendered material which included submissions and a copy of the
Respondent’s Code of Conduct, together with previous
correspondence and
determinations.
parties made oral submissions at the hearing, and no witnesses were
Issue for determination
issue in these proceedings is whether the Respondent’s decision to refuse
to register the Applicant on the grounds that
he is not a fit and proper person
pursuant to s 25(2)(a) of the Act, should be
Legislative Framework
63 of the ADR Act requires that in determining the application for review,
the Tribunal is to decide the "correct and preferable"
decision and it "may
exercise all of the functions that are conferred or imposed by any relevant
legislation on the administrator
who made the decision".
determining the application, the Tribunal may affirm, vary or set aside the
decision and make a decision in its place, or set aside
the decision and remit
the matter for reconsideration by the Respondent in accordance with any
directions or recommendations of the
review is to be conducted ‘without any presumption as to the correctness
of the decision’:
McDonald v Guardianship Administration
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] 1 VR 521
. On review the Tribunal may exercise all
of the functions vested in the Respondent.
Tribunal must consider the material that is available before it,
may include material that postdates the reviewable decision
YG and GG v Minister for Community Services
standard of proof applicable to this review by the Tribunal is the balance of
probabilities. There is no burden or onus of proof
on either party as
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
) at [28]-[34].
regulates the conduct of professional and amateur combat sports in NSW.
Its objects, as set out in s 3, are:
(a) to promote the health
and safety of combat sport contestants,
(b) to promote the integrity of combat sport contests,
(c) to regulate combat sport contests on a harm minimisation basis,
(d) to promote the development of the combat sport industry.
s 20 of the Act, industry participants (defined in s 6(1) of the Act to include
trainers and managers, amongst others) are prohibited
from carrying out any
activities as such, unless they are registered with the Respondent. Section 21
further prohibits a person from
holding out that they are an industry
participant unless they are registered in the applicable class.
s 25(1)(b) of the Act, the Respondent may register an applicant as an industry
participant if they are satisfied that the applicant
is a fit and proper person
to be registered as an industry participant, and if they satisfy any further
requirement per the
Combat Sports Regulation
Regulations
18(c) of the Regulations provides that for the purpose of s 25(1)(e) of the Act,
an applicant must have undertaken first aid
25(2)(a) of the Act provides that the Respondent must refuse to register an
applicant as an industry participant if it is
not satisfied of the matters
specified in s 25(1) of the Act.
Applicant is a boxing coach and has been involved in boxing for the last 19
years. A former competitor, the Applicant has been
a promotor, trainer and
second, and opened a small family-operated business, Grechys Boxing and Fitness
Applicant contravened s 92(b) of the Act by providing a first aid certificate to
the Respondent, which he knew to be false or
misleading, in December 2021.
Applicant was further found to have contravened ss 20(1) and/or 20(2) of the Act
by (i) participating as a trainer during a combat
sports contest whilst
unregistered, on 10 April 2021 (Illawarra Stadium, Berkeley) and 5 December 2021
(PCYC Hawkesbury); and (ii)
carrying out activities as a Trainer-Amateur Boxing
whilst unregistered by supervising the training or instruction of combatants
his capacity as owner of Grechys Boxing and Fitness during the period 4 December
2020-31 March 2022.
Respondent cancelled the Applicant’s registration due to the
Applicant’s contraventions of the Act, and on the basis
considered that the Applicant was not a fit and proper person to be registered
as an industry participant.
Applicant sought a review of that decision, which was affirmed by the Tribunal
on 31 March 2025:
Grech v Combat Sports Authority of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCATAD 73.
The Applicant then lodged a fresh registration application
with the Respondent that same day, seeking registration as a Trainer and
That application was refused by the Respondent, a decision which was
subsequently affirmed upon internal review (the
). That Decision
is the subject of these proceedings.
Applicant’s
Applicant submits the correct and preferable decision was for the Respondent to
grant his fresh application for registration as
a Trainer and Second. His
grounds for this review include the following:
(a) That he had already provided a valid first aid certificate to the
Respondent.
(b) That he was advised by an officer of the Respondent that if he held a valid
first aid certificate AND provided a clean police
check, he would be entitled to
be registered.
(c) That he accepted responsibility for his previous actions, and was extremely
remorseful and committed to never contravening the
(d) That he has suffered, and continues to suffer, adverse personal and
financial consequences through the Respondent’s refusal
to grant the
registration sought.
(e) That he is a respected and active contributor to his local community,
raising significant funds for sick children and families,
and providing free
programs for students with additional needs.
(f) That he has not received any complaints or negative industry feedback, and
is committed to responsible practice and adherence
to all applicable
regulations.
(g) That he has not been provided with any pathway or timeline for resolution,
leaving him in limbo.
(h) That four years have elapsed since his contravention, and his positive
changes and subsequent rehabilitation should be taken
into account.
the hearing, the Applicant acknowledged that he had been slow to take ownership
and accountability of his past infractions, and
expressed deep remorse and
appears that the Applicant genuinely understood that all that was needed to
regain his registration was a current first aid certificate
and a clean police
check, even though the Respondent submitted that was an incorrect interpretation
of the Applicant’s conversation
with the Respondent’s officer.
Applicant repeatedly referenced his lodgement of the false first aid certificate
as ‘the incident’ despite being reminded
that his registration was
terminated and then refused, due to a pattern of non-compliance and multiple
contraventions, in addition
to that false first aid certificate.
Applicant conflated his circumstances to the matter of Ryan Waters, however the
Respondent submitted that the facts of that matter
differed significantly in
terms of Mr Waters’ remorse and accountability, together with the fact
that 18 months elapsed until
his registration was reinstated.
Applicant provided a list naming fourteen referees, however only provided two
written references, and admitted that the referees
had not been apprised of his
contraventions prior to the provision of such references. The Tribunal noted
that for a reference to
have significant impact, the referee would need to
address the conduct of the Applicant in the context of their knowledge and
of his character generally. The Applicant submitted that he was too
ashamed and embarrassed to tell his referees what he had done.
Applicant submitted that he has been rehabilitated in the sense that he is fully
aware of his obligations under the Act and is
committed to never ‘cutting
corners’ again.
Respondent’s case
Respondent submitted that they made the correct and preferable decision in the
circumstances, and that their Decision should be
affirmed by the Tribunal, for
the reasons briefly outlined as follows:
(a) The Applicant engaged in a sustained pattern of non-compliance with the Act,
which endangered the health and safety of combatants,
and undermined the
objectives of the Act.
(b) The Applicant evinced contumelious disregard for the requirements of the
(c) The Applicant has produced no evidence to demonstrate any attempt at
rehabilitation or reform to his character since March 2025,
such as to justify
his re-registration after such a short period of time.
(d) Whilst the false first aid certificate was lodged in 2021, the contravention
was not identified and investigated until 2024.
At this time, additional
instances of non-compliance were identified in respect of the Applicant’s
participation in events
unregistered, culminating in the termination of the
Applicant’s registration in October 2024.
(e) The Tribunal, upon review of that termination decision, found that the
Applicant’s conduct was extremely serious and involved
dishonesty and a
pattern of non-compliance with the Act, showing that the Applicant was not
possessed of sufficient moral rectitude
and integrity to hold registration
pursuant to the Act.
(f) The Tribunal further found that his displays of remorse, fundraising and
other worthy community contributions, did not displace
the seriousness of his
conduct or the risk he had posed to combatants.
(g) The Applicant did not accept responsibility for his actions, and continued
to push a false narrative regarding his previous contraventions,
the hearing, the Respondent submitted that this was not an instance of one
contravention or an isolated incident four years earlier,
but a pattern of
conduct that supported a finding that the Applicant lacked integrity and was not
a fit and proper person. The Respondent
submitted that the Applicant’s
language, even throughout the hearing, suggests that he has not taken
responsibility for the
non-compliant conduct, outside of the false first aid
certificate.
Respondent submitted that the Applicant had been dishonest throughout their
previous investigation, and made unsubstantiated complaints
and allegations
against their officers. The Respondent noted that having a current first aid
certificate and a clean police check
were required, but did not serve alone as
minimum or automatic entry requirements for the grant of registration.
Respondent submitted that the Applicant had persisted with a false account up
until March 2025, and had consistently shown a willingness
to circumvent the
requirements of the Act where compliance was not convenient. The Respondent
contended that the Applicant had not
provided any evidence to suggest this
pattern of behaviour would cease.
Respondent made submissions prior to, and during the hearing, that the Applicant
appears to have been involved, as recently as
August 2025, in promoting a boxing
event at his gym without registration, as his name and number were recorded on
the Boxing Australia
(NSW) website as the relevant contact. The Applicant
submitted that his wife was the registered promoter and he did not know why
name and number were used as the contact for that event. The Respondent elected
not to press that matter further.
Respondent could not provide a timeline or pathway for when the Applicant might
be eligible for registration, however submitted
that lodging an application the
very day the Tribunal affirmed the previous decision against him, was clearly
Respondent submitted that if the Applicant is found by the Tribunal to be fit
and proper, the public interest is still not served
by his re-registration in
the absence of any compelling rehabilitation.
Consideration
safety and harm minimisation
per s 3(a) and (c) of the Act, two of the overriding objectives of the Act are
to ensure the health and safety of combatants, and
to regulate combat sports
contests on a harm minimisation basis. The requirement to hold a current and
valid first aid certificate
is directly relevant to ensuring that a trainer
and/or a second is properly equipped to monitor and make decisions regarding the
contemporaneous health and safety, and harm minimisation of combatants.
is a matter of fact that the Applicant provided the Respondent with a false
first aid certificate in 2021, but has since provided
the Respondent with a
valid first aid certificate, and had previously held a number of valid first aid
certificates.
is also a matter of fact that the Applicant has accumulated 19 years of
experience in a variety of capacities, including as a combatant,
trainer, corner
and boxing gym operator.
Accordingly,
I do not consider that the re-registration of the Applicant would conflict with
the s 3(a) and (c) objectives, and I
find that the Applicant has the requisite
knowledge and training to reasonably facilitate the health and safety, and harm
minimisation,
of combatants.
Whether the Applicant is a fit and
proper person to be registered
key issue in these proceedings is whether the Applicant is a fit and proper
person such that he can be registered as a Trainer
and/or Second.
25(1)(b) of the Act provides for the Respondent to exercise a discretion in
deciding whether to register an applicant if they
are a fit and
proper person to be registered. Section 25(2) of the Act provides that the
Respondent “must refuse to register
an applicant” if they are not
satisfied of the matters in s 25(1) of the Act. This ties in with the objectives
expressed in
s 3 of the Act, notably s 3(b) to promote the integrity of combat
sports contests.
does not provide a definition of what is a ‘fit and proper
person’. A number of cases
however have given consideration
to the term, and
provide useful guidance.
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
; (1990) 170 CLR 321 at 380,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ explained that "The expression "fit and proper
person", standing alone, carries
no precise meaning. It takes its meaning from
its context, from the activities in which the person is or will be engaged and
ends to be served by those activities. The concept of "fit and proper"
cannot be entirely divorced from the conduct of the person
who is or will be
engaging in those activities. However, depending on the nature of the
activities, the question may be whether improper
conduct has occurred, whether
it is likely to occur, whether it can be assumed that it will not occur, or
whether the general community
will have confidence that it will not occur. The
list is not exhaustive, but it does indicate that, in certain contexts,
(because it provides indication of likely future conduct) or
reputation (because it provides indication of public perception as to
future conduct) may be sufficient to ground a finding that a person is not fit
and proper to undertake the activities in question."
question whether a person is fit and proper is ultimately a value judgement as
to the weight given to the competing factors under
consideration. As per Nakad
at [32] “to be satisfied that a person is a 'fit and proper' person to
engage in certain activities
is an 'evaluative conclusion' or opinion based on
primary facts”.
is no onus of proof in merits review cases as noted in
Bushell v Repatriation
[1992] HCA 47.
As per Nakad at [34] “The Tribunal must
decide what the correct and preferable decision is having regard to any relevant
Sports Authority of NSW v Fisher
[2022] NSWCATAP 387
[50], the Appeal Panel noted “In our view, the objective of
maintaining public confidence in the combat sports industry
is a relevant factor
in deciding whether or not an applicant is a ‘fit and proper
person’”. The Respondent submits
that the Applicant should not be
found to be a fit and proper person, but in the event the Tribunal determines
otherwise, the Applicant’s
registration should still be refused on the
basis that it would undermine public confidence in the combat sports
v Commercial and Private Agents Board
(1979) 22 SASR 70
Walters J said
(at p 76) “In my opinion what is meant by that expression is that the
Applicant must show not only that he is
possessed of a requisite knowledge of
the duties and responsibilities devolving upon him as the holder of a particular
licence ...
but also that he is possessed of sufficient moral integrity and
rectitude of character as to permit him to be safely accredited to
... as a person to be entrusted with the sort of work which the licence
Respondent’s material included the Respondent’s Code of Conduct, as
well as a copy of their
Fit and proper person guideline
April 2023) (the
decision as to whether a person is a fit and proper person “involves
considering their overall suitability to carry out
a proposed activity” as
per section 5 of that Guideline. Factors which will be relevant include the
person’s particular
conduct, any positive considerations, the
applicant’s knowledge of the rules applicable to the registration sought,
as the overarching objectives of promoting the integrity and maintaining
public confidence in the industry.
6 of the Guideline includes additional factors which will be relevant, such as
whether the applicant is an honest person,
has a pattern of offending behaviour,
has committed an offence in the course of their registered activity, and/or has
a history of
non-compliance.
factors, per s 7 of the Guideline, include a demonstration of remorse and
insight and elapsed time, as well as other factors.
assessing the Applicant’s fresh registration application and reviewing the
refusal thereof, the Respondent relied on the
fact that the Applicant had not
yet had an opportunity to rehabilitate, no time had elapsed since the
Tribunal’s determination,
and the Applicant had not yet displayed
sufficient remorse or insight into his conduct.
at the time of hearing the Applicant’s application, it was clear that the
Applicant has since gained some insight into his
conduct, and is extremely
remorseful about his past dishonesty.
Conversely,
it was also apparent that the Applicant considered sufficient time had elapsed
because he was counting it from the time
of the first aid certificate offence
perpetrated in 2021, rather than the time where he was investigated and
sanctioned, in 2024.
the Applicant had to be continually reminded throughout the hearing, that this
was not one isolated incident (the first aid
certificate) as he persisted in
characterising the matter, but rather a pattern of non-compliance involving
several breaches (training
combatants whilst unregistered) of the registration
provisions. The Applicant expressed regret that he had ‘cut corners’
when it was inconvenient to comply with the Act, whilst the Respondent expressed
concern that the impulsive nature of these infractions
suggests a likelihood of
recurrence.
was made plain in the Tribunal’s decision of 31 March 2025. At the hearing
before me, the Applicant said he had not read
that decision, a fact which
indicates an unwillingness on his part to fully take on board his past
contraventions.
the Applicant’s interactions with the Respondent with regard to the
previous investigation and proceedings, the Applicant
presented as honest and
accountable in these proceedings. He acknowledged that his infractions did not
emanate from ignorance of
the applicable legal and regulatory requirements or
any inexperience, but rather a lack of commitment to compliance with his
obligations.
He further acknowledged that he had not apprised his referees of
his previous infractions, due to shame and embarrassment, and accepted
those references would therefore not carry the weight he had hoped.
terms of positive considerations, I find that the Applicant has displayed
genuine contrition, insight and ownership of some of
his past conduct, and
understands the consequences of any future non-compliance. This does suggest
there has been some rehabilitative
progress, in the months since the Tribunal
last gave consideration to the Applicant’s suitability for
registration.
Applicant is in this position because he exhibited an impulsive and possibly
disdainful disregard for compliance with requirements
which were known and
understood. There was an inference from the matters raised, though not pressed,
by the Respondent, that the
Applicant may still be acting to circumvent the
strict limitations of his unregistered status through his continuing proximity
his family gym. I make no findings in this regard.
agree with the Respondent that the Applicant should have allowed more time to
elapse between the events of 2024 and the Tribunal’s
determination against him, and his fresh application. This was explained by the
Applicant’s desperation to return
to his business, and his belief
(mistaken or otherwise) that his registration would be successful upon
presentation of a current
first aid certificate and a clean police check.
is a sense from the Applicant’s submissions that he considers registration
to be a right or entitlement, however it should
rather be considered a
privilege. The objects of the Act, and the underlying Guidelines, place great
importance on the honesty and
integrity of participants in the industry.
Accordingly, the Respondent has a discretion to weigh up competing factors in
their determination
of a person’s suitability for participation in the
remains compelling support for the previous decisions of the Respondent and the
Tribunal, based on the combination of the Applicant’s
past conduct, as
well as his previous dishonesty and lack of accountability in relation thereto.
[80] of Fisher, the Appeal Panel stated: “It is well established that any
hardship that would be occasioned by a decision
not to grant a licence is not
relevant to the assessment of a person’s fitness and proprietary”.
Similarly, in
Austin v Commissioner for Fair Trading & Commissioner of
[2016] NSWCATAP 179
, the Tribunal noted “that financial
disadvantage or hardship is not relevant to the assessment of a person’s
and propriety.”
the consequences and hardship he has suffered as a result of his past conduct
are not, and cannot be, factors in my decision,
I do believe they comprise
factors in his rehabilitation, and his commitment to future
compliance.
were a number of competing factors informing this decision, as summarised in the
following paragraphs.
find that the Applicant’s remorse, honesty and accountability during the
course of these proceedings demonstrate some measure
of rehabilitation and
commitment to future compliance. I further find that his charity work and
contribution to his local community
demonstrate positive aspects to his
I find that these matters are, on balance, outweighed by (i) the lack of time
which has elapsed since the Applicant embraced
an honest and remorseful approach
to his past conduct (ii) the Applicant’s demonstrated and persistent lack
of insight into,
or acknowledgement of, the relevance and materiality of his
past history of non-compliance, separate to the falsified first aid certificate;
and (iii) the serious nature of the Applicant’s pervasive lack of
integrity in relation to his obligations under the Act, Regulations
and Code of
Conduct, displayed throughout the period 2021-2024.
Applicant’s failure to disclose his past infractions to his referees means
that I am unable to ascribe significant weight
to the two references
I consider that there is little to no risk that the Applicant would submit
another falsified first aid certificate, I do not
feel confident drawing that
conclusion about the Applicant’s likelihood of future non-compliance with
the provisions of the
Act, Regulations or Code of Conduct generally, at this
point in time.
the reasons noted above in relation to the assessment of fitness and
propriety in respect of the Applicant, the Tribunal finds
that the Applicant is
not a fit and proper person to be registered as a Trainer or Second under
the Act, and therefore the Tribunal
is of the view that
the correct and preferable decision is
to affirm the decision under
decision under review is affirmed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (279 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter