URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V BUKSH [2013] NSWNMT 22 (23 October 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 045/2012
CITATION: HCCC V BUKSH
[2013] NSWNMT 22
INQUIRY INTO A
COMPLAINT AGAINST A NURSE
Complainant
Health Care Complaints
Nazir Razeem BUKSH
Lynch (Deputy Chairperson)
Bradley Warner (Nurse Member)
Kirkwood (Nurse Member)
Babette Smith (Lay Member)
Date and Place
26 June 2013, Sydney
Date of Order and Reasons for
23 October 2013
Representation
Complainant Samantha King, solicitor, for the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Respondent No appearance
Reasons for Decision
is a complaint about a nurse which has little to do with nursing. On 26 June
2013 the Tribunal conducted an enquiry into 3 complaints
brought by the HCCC. A
copy of the formal complaints appears at Annexure A.
summary, the complaints arise from the fact that the respondent, Mr Nazir
Raksheem Buksh, a registered nurse, was convicted of
3 serious offences in
the District Court of New South Wales on 30 August 2011 and was sentenced to a
term of imprisonment of 12 years
commencing on 21 October 2010 with and
effective non-parole period of 8 years. The effect of the
sentencing imposed by his Honour,
Judge Keleman DCJ, is that the
respondent will become eligible for release to parole on 20 October 2018. His
sentence will cease
on 20 October 2022. The respondent’s registration as a
nurse was suspended on 20 December 2010.
convictions involved 3 sexual assaults on a 19-year-old victim, referred to as
"the victim”
, in circumstances where she was heavily intoxicated
from the effects of a high level of alcohol consumption.
Tribunal has not had the opportunity to explore the nature of any of the earlier
written expressions of remorse from the respondent
in some of the documents
tendered by the HCCC but accepts, as did Keleman DCJ, that his plea of guilty
and his expressions of contrition
to Dr. B. Westmore, were genuinely
respondent declined the opportunity to participate in the Tribunal's enquiry
into the complaints against him. He notified the
Tribunal of that fact by
letter dated 22 February 2013 (Ex .B). Accordingly the enquiry proceeded ex
parte with the benefit of assistance
from counsel for the HCCC, Ms
consequence of this decision by the respondent is that the Tribunal was not able
to explore to what extent, if any, there may
have been any material changes in
the respondent’s make-up which could affect the findings we have to
COMPLAINT 1
material tendered on behalf of the HCCC include certificates of 3
convictions pursuant to section 178 of the Evidence Act certified
Deputy Registrar of the District Court which demonstrate that the
allegations particularised in support of Complaint 1 are
convictions are for 3 counts of aggravated sexual assault on the victim by the
respondent. He had sexual intercourse by digital,
anal and vaginal penetration
of the victim knowing that she was not consenting to such intercourse and in
certain circumstances of
aggravation. They were that he caused actual
bodily harm to her in respect of the first conviction relating to digital
penetration
and in respect to the other 2 convictions, that he had
deprived the victim of her liberty in the course of the
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that each of the allegations raised in
each of the particulars of Complaint 1 has been proved
to the necessary
standard, on the balance of probabilities and in light of the decision in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
basis upon which the offences were established in the District Court were
the respondent's pleas of guilty to each of the charges
he faced and a
Statement of Agreed Facts which sets out in detail the circumstances in which
the offences occurred on 17 October
2010. It had been agreed to by both
the respondent and the DPP. A copy of the full Statement of Agreed Facts appears
at Annexure
COMPLAINT 2
2 alleges that the practitioner was otherwise not a suitable person to hold
registration as a registered nurse in that he
is not of good character. The
particulars in support of that complaint identify a series of facts all of which
are established to
our satisfaction from the Statement of Agreed Facts. They
reveal a pattern of conduct whereby, over several hours, the respondent
subjected the victim to a series of sexual assaults against her will
despite her protests and with significant adverse physiological
psychological consequences to the victim which required her subsequent
hospitalisation. The fact that the victim was detained
by the respondent against
her will during the assaults, aggravated the seriousness of the sexual
assaults upon her.
brutality of the respondent's assaults upon the victim and the circumstances in
which they were committed demonstrate a deficiency
in his character which
we find is incompatible with the necessary traits of character which are
essential to all those persons engaged
in the honourable profession of
assaults were prolonged and occurred between about 1 AM and 6 AM on the morning
in question when the victim was likely to have
been suffering a significant
impairment of her faculties due to her intoxication by alcohol and when she was
detained against her
will. She was physically assaulted by the respondent
in the course of the sexual assaults by slapping her face and
despite her
complaints of suffering pain.
evidence of the conduct which stains the respondent’s character is
confined to the assaults which occurred on 17 October
2010. Notwithstanding
that, the Tribunal considers that his conduct on that day demonstrates such
gross and underlying defects in
his character that they deprive him of the
condition of good character.
Tribunal finds that the respondent lacks good character. The conduct engaged in
by the respondent towards the victim on the day
of the offences in October
2010 is starkly inconsistent with the conduct expected of a person of good
character. The respondent has
not availed himself of the opportunity to seek to
demonstrate any significant change in his character before the Tribunal
date of the offences. Accordingly the Tribunal has found that the
deficiencies of character reflected by his abuse of the victim,
have not been
overcome since that time.
question for the Tribunal's determination which arises in Complaint 2 is whether
or not the respondent is presently not a suitable
person to hold
registration as a registered nurse because, as we find, he is not of good
character. Section 55 of the National Law
identifies a number of criteria
for consideration as to whether or not a person is unsuitable for general
registration in a health
profession. They include whether
regard to the individual's criminal history to the extent that is relevant to
the individual's practice of the profession,
the individual is not, in the
Board's opinion, an appropriate person to practice the profession or it is not
in the public interest
for the individual to practice the profession"
and whether
" the individual is for any other
reason–not a fit and proper person for general registration in the
profession; or unable
to practice the profession competently and
(Section 55(1)(b) and (h)).
Tribunal finds that the respondent's criminal acts of sexual violence towards
the victim are such as to disqualify him from the
practice of nursing in the
public interest. Potential patients of the respondent who might fall under his
nursing care in the event
he was permitted to practice, would be exposed to
significant jeopardy because we find that his conduct giving rise to the
convictions,
shows that he lacks the vital trust that is expected of all
nurse practitioners in the care and treatment of patients, particularly
vulnerable females, who are entitled to be treated with dignity and respect.
The proven conduct which led to the convictions, leads
us to find that the
respondent is not a fit and proper person to maintain registration as a
have considered the level of criminality of the respondent’s offences with
a number of other cases where health practitioners
have been convicted of
HCCC v Meyer
[2008] NSWMT 22
HCCC v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
, the respondent had been convicted for possession of child
pornography. In the particular circumstances of both cases, the medical
practitioners were found not to demonstrate a lack of good character
notwithstanding their convictions. In
HCCC v Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
conviction of a nurse practitioner for possession of child pornography was found
to demonstrate lack of good character in the
particular circumstances of that
case. Each case has to be assessed according to its own facts. We consider the
gravity of the respondent’s
crimes, reflected by the Agreed Facts, the
sentencing remarks of Keleman DCJ and the substantial terms of imprisonment
the respondent, are such that the defects shown in the
respondent’s character are fundamentally inconsistent with a person
good character.
Tribunal also finds that the respondent currently is not a fit and proper person
to engage in the practice of nursing. It further
finds that he is unable to
practice the profession of nursing safely in circumstances where he has shown
such a brutal disregard
for the victim in her state of elevated vulnerability.
Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges that the respondent's crimes were committed
outside the practice of nursing, they reveal such a callous disregard for
the victim's welfare by the respondent as to preclude him
from the privilege
afforded to nurse practitioners to safely and confidently care for patients
suffering illness or disability. In
so doing, we have had regard to the
following principles identified by the Court of Appeal in a disciplinary case
against a solicitor,
Prothonotary of Supreme Court of NSW v P
NSWCA, Unreported – 18/9/03 – per Young CJ in Equ. with whom Meagher
JA and Tobias JA agreed. In that case his
“(1)The onus is on the claimant to show that the
opponent is not a fit and proper person. It is a civil onus: Re Evatt; Ex parte
NSW Bar Association (1967) 67 SR (NSW) 236. However Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, 362 shows the particular standard that must be applied when
working out the civil onus of proof.
(2)An order striking off the Roll should only be made when the probability
is that the solicitor is permanently unfit to practice:
Prothonotary v Richard
(NSWCA 31.7.1987 per McHugh JA) and see NSW Bar Association v Maddocks (NSWCA
23.8.1988 ).
(3)The fact that the opponent has a conviction for a serious offence is
not necessarily sufficient reason for an order striking that
person off the
Roll; see Ziems v Prothonotary
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
(4)The fact of conviction and imprisonment is, however, far from
irrelevant and may be regarded as carrying a degree of disgrace itself.
Ziems case at 288.
(5)The Court needs to consider the conduct involved in the conviction and
see whether it is of such personally disgraceful character
that the opponent
should not remain a member of an honourable profession: Re Weare
[1893] 2 QB
, 446; ; Barristers' Board v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253
(2000) 112 A Crim R 438 (QCA)
(6)The fact that the opponent pleaded guilty to the charge will usually be
counted in her favour: NSW Bar Association v Maddocks.
Though we do not assume
that all pleas of guilty necessarily show remorse, it is significant that in the
instant case Keleman DCJ
said that it did.
(7)Conduct not occurring in the course of professional practice may
demonstrate unfitness if it amounts to incompatibility with the
qualities essential for the conduct of practice. There may not even have been
any criminal conviction with respect to that
conduct. This is particularly so
where the conduct over a long period shows systematic non-compliance with legal
and civic obligations:
NSW Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
NSW Bar Association v Somosi (2001) 48 ATR 562.
(8)The concept of good fame and character has a twofold aspect. Fame
refers to a person's reputation in the relevant community, character
the person's actual nature: McBride v Walton (NSWCA 15.7.1994 per Kirby P);
Clearihan v Registrar of Motor Vehicle Dealers
(1994) 117 FLR 455
(9)The attitude of the professional association is that the application is
of considerable significance.
(10)The question is present fitness, not fitness as at the time of the
crime: Prothonotary v Del Castillo
[2001] NSWCA 75
at para 71.”
regard to those principles, the Tribunal is satisfied that complaint 2 is
proved to the required standard.
3 alleges unsatisfactory professional conduct by the respondent and in
particular, a failure by the respondent to notify
the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia within 7 days that on or about 21 October he was charged with
offences punishable by
12 months imprisonment or more. That obligation arises
under section 130 (1) of the National Law.
Tribunal considered the evidence tendered in support of this Complaint and
questioned whether it was adequate to establish the
alleged failure. As Ms King,
on behalf of the HCCC, properly conceded, the evidence tendered by
the complainant does not include
sufficient evidence to sustain that
complaint. Accordingly, the Tribunal is not satisfied that it is
established and it is dismissed.
[2012] NSWCA 90
, referring to a prior Court of Appeal case,
the Court, constituted by McFarlane JA, Barrett JA and Tobias AJA held at
“20 Essential to a proper assessment of a tribunal's
discretionary judgment in a disciplinary jurisdiction in accordance with
criteria is a clear understanding of the nature of the jurisdiction and an
appreciation of the purpose of orders made in exercise
of it. These matters were
explained by Basten JA in Director-General, Department of Ageing, Disability and
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
. His Honour
made several important points:
specific purpose for which orders are made is protective in the public interest
and is not punitive with respect to the individual.
is not to deny that such orders may be punitive in effect and that punitive
effects may be relevant in formulating a protective
punitive effects may be directly relevant to the need for protection so that, in
a particular case, there may be a factual finding
that the harrowing experience
of disciplinary proceedings, together with the real threat of loss of a
livelihood, may have opened
the eyes of the individual concerned to the
seriousness of his or her conduct so as to diminish significantly the likelihood
repetition and to produce a level of insight into his or her own
character or misconduct which did not previously exist.
21 The task of the Tribunal (and of this Court on appeal) centres not
on punishment as such but on the protection of the public
and the maintenance of
proper professional standards.”
found that the respondent lacks good character and is not a suitable person to
hold registration as a nurse, it follows that
the Tribunal must determine that
the nurse’s registration must be cancelled. The protection of the
community mandates such
view of our finding pursuant to s. 149C(1)(c) and s. 149C(1)(d), the Tribunal
has also determined that the respondent may not apply
for a review of the
cancellation order for a period of 10 years from the date of his suspension on
20 December 2010 pursuant to s.
National Law
view of the length of the respondent’s sentence and our finding that his
conduct leading to his convictions renders him probably
permanently unfit to
ever practice nursing, we have determined that such a prolonged period is
appropriate in the circumstances of
HCCC sought an order that the respondent pay its costs in the sum of $4,247.50
pursuant to Clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law
. In accordance
with established authority, we make such an order in that amount which we
consider reasonable.
respondent’s registration is cancelled.
respondent is not to seek review of the order for cancellation until 20 December
respondent is to pay the complainant’s costs in the sum of
L. KIRKWOOD
Dated: 23 October 2013
IN THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL No. of
CONSTITUTED UNDER SECTION
165 OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
In the matter of
Nazir Razeem Buksh
, a person registered under the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
The Health Care Complaints
of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Nursing and
Midwifery Council
of New South Wales
in accordance with
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Nazir Razeem BUKSH
(‘the practitioner’), of Parklea Correctional Centre, 66 Sentry
Drive Parklea, New South Wales 2768, being a
registered under the
National Law:
Background to the Complaints
all relevant times including October 2010 the practitioner was a registered
nurse and practiced in that capacity as a clinical
nurse manager at the aged
care facility, Regis Wentworth Manor, Rose Bay, NSW.
21 October 2010 the practitioner was charged with two counts of aggravated
sexual assault, one count of take/detain person with
intent to obtain advantage
occasion actual bodily harm and one count of sexual intercourse without consent.
The charges concerned
the practitioner’s conduct toward a 19 year old
woman he had previously not known during the early hours of the morning of
October 2010.
5 May 2011 before the Local Court at Parramatta the practitioner pleaded guilty
to three offences of aggravated sexual intercourse
without consent contrary to
s61J of the
Crimes Act.
practitioner was committed for sentence in the District Court of New South Wales
where on 30 August 2011 he was convicted of three
offences of sexual intercourse
involving digital, anal and vaginal penetration respectively, without consent,
and knowing the victim
was not consenting to the sexual intercourse, in
circumstances of aggravation as he did occasion actual bodily harm to the victim
and deprived her of her liberty before the commission of the offences.
following additional offences were admitted by the practitioner in a
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
were taken into account by his Honour on 30 August 2011
in regard to the third offence of aggravated sexual intercourse without
(a) The practitioner admitted without entering a plea to aggravated sexual
assault – deprivation of liberty – fellatio
– section 61J
(b) The practitioner admitted without entering a plea to aggravated sexual
assault – deprivation of liberty – cunnilingus
– section 61J
Crimes Act.
practitioner was sentenced to a total effective sentence of twelve years
imprisonment and effective non parole period of eight
imprisonment.
COMPLAINT ONE
Pursuant to s 144(a) of the National Law the practitioner has been convicted
of a number of criminal offences.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
30 August 2011 the practitioner was convicted of three criminal offences namely
aggravated sexual assault pursuant to s61J(1) of
, in that on 17
October 2010 he had:
(a) sexual intercourse by digitally penetrating the victim’s vagina
without consent, and knowing the victim was not consenting
to the sexual
intercourse, in circumstances of aggravation as he did occasion actual bodily
harm to the victim
(b) sexual intercourse by anal penetration, without consent, and knowing the
victim was not consenting to the sexual intercourse,
in circumstances of
aggravation as he deprived the victim of her liberty before the commission of
the offence
(c) sexual intercourse by
vaginal penetration without consent, and knowing the victim was not consenting
to the sexual intercourse,
in circumstances of aggravation as he deprived the
victim of her liberty before the commission of the offence.
COMPLAINT TWO
Pursuant to s144(e) of the National Law the practitioner is otherwise not a
suitable person to hold registration as a registered nurse
in that he is not of
good character.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
30 August 2011 at Parramatta District Court, the practitioner was convicted of
three counts of aggravated sexual assault under
s61J(1) of the
arising out of the following underlying conduct:
(a) on or about 9pm on 16 October 2010 outside the Parramatta train station the
practitioner met the victim for the first time after
the victim asked him for a
cigarette. The victim had been drinking alcohol since the early
(b) the practitioner and the victim caught a train to Blacktown where they went
to a bar and the practitioner purchased a number
of alcoholic drinks that he,
the victim and her friend consumed
(c) on or about 12.30am on 17 October 2012 the practitioner and the victim
travelled to the practitioner’s apartment in a taxi
(d) in the foyer of the practitioner’s apartment the practitioner forcibly
led the victim toward the lifts and said to a passerby
very drunk’
(e) at his apartment the practitioner placed his erect penis in the
victim’s anus. The victim felt pain in her anus, cried
‘its hurting, stop it’s hurting.’
The practitioner did
(f) the practitioner also grabbed the victim’s hair and forced her head
toward his erect penis and said
‘just do it bitch, just do it, just
take it, just suck it.’
The victim sucked the practitioner’s
penis, cried and said
(g) the victim left the practitioner’s unit during the early hours of 17
October 2010 and attended Westmead Hospital where
a large blood clot was found
inside her vagina and bruising to the left lateral vaginal wall was
(h) the victim felt pain in her anal region and suffered bruising to her chest,
arm and upper leg including suction bruising (love
bites) to the
(i) at the sentence hearing conducted at the Parramatta District Court on 30
August 2012 the practitioner provided the following
admissions in regard to the
charges relating to aggravated sexual assault, in that he:
penetrated the victim’s vagina and in so doing bruised the vaginal wall
causing extensive bleeding
vaginal and anal intercourse with the victim without her consent and knowing
that she was not consenting, in circumstances where
he deprived her of her
liberty before the sexual assault took place
cunnilingus on the victim and forced her to perform fellatio on him, without her
consent and knowing that she was not consenting,
in circumstances where he
deprived her of her liberty before those acts took place.
underlying conduct which gives rise to the convictions as admitted by the
practitioner are set out in the
Agreed Facts on Sentence
attached to the
Certificate Pursuant to s35A
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
and was placed before the District Court of New South Wales on or
Court. Those
Agreed Facts on Sentence
Certificate
are attached to this
Notice of Complaint and marked with the letter
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 139B(1)(b) of the National Law in
that he contravened s130(1)
of the National Law.
PARTICULARS OF COMLAINT THREE
practitioner failed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
within seven (7) days that on or about 21 October 2010
he was charged with
offences punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more.
DATED this day of 2012
.................................................
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
AGREED FACTS ON
DPP v NAZIR BUKSH
DC File No:
2010/00350253
On Saturday 16 October 2010 the victim, 19 year old XXXX, met up with
some girlfriends and they travelled together from Parramatta
train station to
Central train station, arriving in the city at about midday. The group stayed
in the city for a couple of hours
and during this time the victim consumed a
number of alcoholic beverages.
The victim and her girlfriends arrived
back at Parramatta train station at about 3 or 4pm. They then travelled to a
house in Northmead
where they consumed more alcoholic beverages. At about 7pm
the victim and her girlfriend Ashlea went to the Hotel Parramatta to meet
up with Ashlea’s boyfriend, Alan. The victim consumed a couple of
schooners of VB beer at the Hotel Parramatta and was
feeling “pretty
drunk”. The victim wanted to go home at this stage to see her boyfriend
and young child. However, her
girlfriend Ashlea convinced her to stay and said
she would pay for the victim to get a taxi home later.
At about 9pm the
victim, Ashlea and Alan walked to Parramatta train station to catch a train to
Blacktown. As they approached the
train station the victim saw the offender, a
person previously unknown to her, standing outside. The victim asked the
offender if
he smoked and if she could have a cigarette. The offender said yes
and gave the victim a cigarette. The victim took the cigarette
and lit it once
she was on the train platform. A train arrived after a short period and the
victim and her friends boarded the train
heading to Blacktown. The offender
followed the group onto the train platform and then onto the train. He sat down
and began to
converse with the victim and her friends. At Blacktown train
station the victim and her friends got off the train and the offender
with them. They headed to Blacktown Workers Club, however the victim was too
drunk and she was refused entry into the club.
The group then headed to a nearby
club called 'The Basement' on Main Street in Blacktown. At this club the
offender purchased several
alcoholic drinks for himself, the victim and her
girlfriend Ashlea. These drinks included a number of "shots" of Tequila which
victim consumed as well as vodka based mixed drinks.After about an hour the
decision was made to leave and go to the nearby taxi
rank to try and find a taxi
to take the victim to her boyfriend’s house. The victim was very drunk by
this stage and having
difficulty standing up by herself, the offender had to
number of taxis refused to pick her up. Eventually, at about 12:30am in the
morning, a taxi driven by Santokh Singh stopped and
the victim’s friends
put her into this taxi. The offender got into the back seat of the taxi after
the victim, saying that
he was going to pay for the taxi and would make sure
that the victim got home safely. The offender told the taxi driver to head
towards Campbell Street in Parramatta.
The victim has little recollection
of the taxi ride and thinks she must have passed out on the journey. The victim
does remember
that at one point she tried to open the door to get out. The taxi
driver confirms that when he was stopped at a set of red traffic
lights, the
victim opened the door and got out of the taxi. The victim stumbled and fell
onto the road outside the taxi, she was
lying on the road and couldn’t get
up. The offender helped the victim up and back into the taxi. They then
continued the
journey to the offender’s apartment block located at 15
Campbell Street in Parramatta. The offender paid for the taxi fare
the victim out of the taxi.The offender then led the victim into the lobby of
his apartment block. CCTV footage obtained
from the apartment block depicts the
offender leading the victim into the building and towards the lifts. The victim
is virtually
paralytic and can’t walk, the offender is seen to be forcibly
leading her towards the lifts.
A witness, Lucia Olmo, who had been visiting
her family in the apartment block at 15 Campbell Street, was leaving at about
the morning. As she was walking through the lobby she saw the victim
lying down on the tiled floor of the lobby with the offender
standing over her
trying to pick her up. The witness describes the victim as being uncoordinated
and lying on her back with her
arms flopping about. The witness stopped to see
what was happening, and the offender waved her away saying “she is very
The witness saw that the victim, now sitting up on the floor, was
clearly in a drunken state and appeared to be semi-conscious.
The victim said
“can you help me?” several times. The offender again said
“she is very drunk” and gestured
the witness in a way that she
interpreted as meaning there was nothing wrong and he had the situation under
control. The offender
picked the victim up off the ground, by placing his arms
around her torso, and then shuffled her along towards the lifts. The CCTV
footage obtained clearly depicts the victim attempting to prevent herself from
being dragged into the lift and the offender forcibly
pulling her by the arms
into the lift. The offender took the victim up to the sixth floor and into his
apartment 6D.
The victim has no memory of getting out of the taxi or
entering the offender’s apartment block or his apartment. The
first memory is of being in a room with tiles on the floor. She
saw that there was blood smeared on the tiles. The victim was trying
away and the offender was saying “No, just come here” and was
pulling her back onto the bed. The victim recalls
crying and saying that she
wanted to go home and see her daughter and boyfriend. The offender reacted to
this by hitting the victim
in the face splitting open her lip.
– Aggravated Sexual Assault – section 61J
The victim then remembers the offender having anal sex with
her. He was behind her and she was on her knees on the bed. The victim
feel pain to her anus and knew that the offender’s penis was inside her
anus. The victim was crying saying “It’s
hurting, stop it’s
hurting.” The offender did not stop. The victim cannot recall how long
this sexual assault took
place for, but does recall the offender kissing her and
slapping her around the face.
No 1 - Form 1 offence – Aggravated
Sexual Assault – section 61J
The next thing
the victim remembers is the offender sitting in a chair at the end of the bed
and grabbing her by the hair saying “Just
do it bitch, just do it, just
take it”. The offender forced the victim’s head down towards his
erect penis and said
“just suck it.” The victim was crying saying
“I am”. The victim sucked the offender’s penis for a
minutes. The victim does not remember anything else that happened inside the
offender’s apartment. Police have obtained
CCTV footage which shows the
offender escorting the victim out of his apartment complex shortly before 6.00am
on the morning of 17
October, 2010.The next memory that the victim has is of
running down Argyle Street in Parramatta in the early hours of the morning.
victim was crying and dishevelled. The victim only had her tights on and a
green and yellow t-shirt that she did not recognise
(this t-shirt belonged to
the offender), she was not wearing shoes, her underpants or her bra. The victim
also did not have her
handbag or her mobile telephone.The victim was sore. Her
face hurt on the right side down her cheek to her chin and especially around
mouth. She had some blood on her mouth and on her feet. The victim also felt
sore around her arms, legs, vagina, and anus.
The victim arrived at her home in
Westmead at about 6:30am on 17 October 2010. Her father opened to door to her
knocking. The victim’s
father, observed that his daughter had bruises
under her arms and around her neck. He also observed that she was upset and
disorientated.
The victim told her father that “I got away... I ran
away.... There was all this blood... I have been raped and molested...
wouldn’t let me go.” The victim’s father took her inside to
the living room and went to get her mother. The
victim’s mother asked
what happened and the victim replied “I don’t know, I don’t
know where I came from.
I got raped and bashed.” The victim told her
mother that she couldn’t remember what had happened, but “he made
suck his dick mum and he was saying just do it bitch”. The victim also
kept going on about the blood everywhere, although
she didn’t know where
the blood came from. The victim told her parents she didn’t know where
her handbag and mobile
phone were. The victim’s father called the police
who arrived about 5 minutes later. The senior police officer who arrived,
Tracy Brickwood, spoke to the victim about what had happened. The victim agreed
to be taken to Westmead Hospital for treatment
and a sexual assault
examination.
Medical Evidence
The victim was examined
at Westmead Hospital by a nurse and a sexual assault examination was performed.
The following injuries were
noted (and photographs taken of same):
Tenderness to
the left side of the scalp
Pain on the left
side of the mouth
Pain to the
upper left teeth
A small bruise
to the lower lip – the lips were dry with some dried blood present
A suction bruise
(love bite) to the left side of the neck (swabbed for saliva/DNA)
suction bruises (love bites) on the right side of the neck (swabbed for
saliva/DNA)
Chest and Back
tenderness to the upper right chest area below the collarbone
Scratches to the
right breast, the nipple was red and sore (swabbed for saliva/DNA)
Bruise to the
right upper chest near the underarm
Scratch to the
left side of the upper back
Upper Limbs
A large bruise
to the inner upper, right arm which was very painful, and a small bruise just
A number of
bruises on the elbows
A small blue
bruise on the lower part of the upper, left arm
A bruise on the
outer aspect of the left shoulder
A number of
small bruises on the hands
Lower Limbs
A scratch on the
outer, upper, left thigh
Bruises on the
mid, outer, left thigh
Scratches and
bruises to the right knee and left knee
A bruise to the
right mid shin
Bruises to the
shin and calf of the left leg
A bruise on the
top of right foot
A bruise and 2cm
laceration on the top of the left foot.
In addition, there was dried
blood noted on the external genitalia. The victim did not have her menstrual
period at the time of the
sexual assaults. On examination a large blood clot
was found inside the vagina and this was removed. An examination by a Doctor
revealed an area of bruising on the left lateral vaginal wall. The victim
continued to bleed from her vagina as a result of this
injury and she was
hospitalised for a number of days after this incident until the bleeding
The victim also said she had pain in the anal region and this area
was examined with no obvious bleeding observed. The nurse who
performed the
sexual assault examination took a number of swabs from the vaginal and anal
regions, and a number of skin swabs for
saliva, which were sent to DAL for DNA
testing. Some foreign hairs were found in the external genital in the dried
The DAL results indicate that one spermatozoon was detected on the
low vaginal swab and the extra high vaginal swab. Semen was not
detected on the
high vaginal and vulval smears, the anal swab and smear, the outer and lower
mouth swabs and the “blood on
genital” smear. The offender’s
DNA profile was recovered from a right neck skin swab taken during the SAIK.
A blood and urine sample was collected from the victim for drug and
alcohol testing at about 11am on 17 October 2010. The results
from DAL indicate
the victim’s blood alcohol level at this time was 0.169
grams/100mls.
An expert certificate has been obtained from Dr William
Allender in which he opines that at a blood alcohol concentration level of
in 100 milliliters or above, all people would be under the influence of alcohol
to the extent that there would be significant
impairment of their faculties. Dr
Allender opines that there would be a marked slowing of reflexes and cognitive,
motor and visual
functions such as reaction skills, tracking ability, motor
co-ordination, perception, judgment and decision making, would be significantly
Crime Scene Warrant
On 20 October 2010
police identified the specific unit occupied by the offender, being unit 6D of
15 Campbell Street in Parramatta,
and executed a Crime Scene Warrant at these
premises. The offender was not present during the execution of the
Police observed evidence of someone having bled quite
considerably in the apartment. A number of swabs of blood stains found around
the apartment were taken, including on the tiles in the living room and on the
bed mattress. There was also evidence of blood staining
“head” found in the shower recess inside the bathroom.
located the victim’s mobile telephone inside the unit. Police also
located the singlet top and underwear that had been
worn by the victim on the
night of the incident. These items were soaked in blood and were originally
found on the grass below the
apartment 6D by the
Arrest of the offender
10.30am on Thursday 21 October, 2010 the offender was spoken to by police at his
workplace, the Wentworth Manor Nursing Home
in Rose Bay. The offender admitted
that he had been with a girl named XXXX on Saturday night. He was then
arrested, cautioned and
taken to the Surry Hills police station for
questioning.The offender agreed to participate in an electronically recorded
with police, a summary of which is set out below:
The offender
said he had been drinking during the day, he drank 10 or 12 glasses of scotch
and then drank a couple of beers at the
Parramatta Hotel before meeting up with
victim and her friends at the train station.
The offender
acknowledged that the victim was drunk and he had to assist her to walk to the
taxi rank as she could not walk straight.
The offender admitted that the
victim wanted to vomit in the taxi.
The offender
asserted that he did not force the victim to walk into his apartment block. The
offender said he may have been helping
her to walk along but he didn’t
force her. The offender denied that he took the victim into his apartment
against her will.
The offender
said he did not force the victim to have sexual intercourse against her wishes
and it was not his intention to take her
into his apartment to have sex with
The offender
claimed that the victim initiated the sexual activity, and said she was lying
down on the bed and then she gave him a
hug and they started
The offender
denied saying words to the affect of “shut up and suck my cock or
I’ll hit you”.
The offender
denied hitting or punching the victim in any way.
The offender
admitted that he gave the victim “a hickey” and said this was
probably on her neck and on her breast.
The offender
denied that the victim said “no” at any point during the sexual
activity. The offender said that the victim
was conscious during the sexual
activity, although not full alert as she was drunk.
The offender
admitted that acts of oral intercourse took place and said “I went down on
her and she put her mouth on my penis”.
Form 1 offences –
Aggravated Sexual Assault – section 61J
The offender
admitted that he put his penis into the victim’s vagina. [
– Aggravated Sexual Assault – section 61J
The offender
admitted that he digitally penetrated the victim’s vagina and put two or
three fingers inside her vagina. [
Offence 1 – Aggravated Sexual Assault
– section 61J
Crimes Act]
The offender
said he could not remember if he had anal intercourse with the victim, although
he admitted it could be possible and
he does like anal intercourse.
The offender
said he did not use a condom at all during the sexual activity.
The offender
said that he only ejaculated once during the night and he thinks it was outside,
probably on the victim’s stomach.
The offender
acknowledged that there was blood on the mattress and in the passage way of his
apartment which he cleaned up with
a mop the next day. The offender said that
the victim had told him she had her periods and this is why she was bleeding
vagina. The offender said the first time he saw the blood was on his
fingers as he was digitally penetrating her.
The offender
acknowledged that the victim had left behind her mobile phone, her handbag and
items of clothing which were covered in
blood. The offender said he had thrown
away the handbag and items of clothing.
Aggravated Sexual Assault
The offender admits that he digitally penetrated the
vagina of the victim and in doing so bruised the side wall of her vagina causing
extensive bleeding.
The offender admits that he had vaginal and anal
intercourse with the victim without her consent and knowing that she was not
consenting,
in circumstances where he deprived her of her liberty before the
sexual assaults took place.
The offender admits that he performed
cunnilingus on the victim and forced her to perform fellatio on him, without her
consent and
knowing that she was not consenting, in circumstances where he
deprived her of her liberty before these acts took place.
____________________________
______________________________
Rachel Swift
DPP Solicitor
ODPP Parramatta
______________________________
Solicitor for
the offender
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter