URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2016/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Mullen [2016] NSWNMPSC 1 (17 May 2016)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
NEIL JAMES MULLEN
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001287060 (NSW)
STATEMENT OF DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDER APPLIES
________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Mullen
[2016] NSWNMPSC 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Seneil Shah, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Neil James Mullen
(Respondent) – represented by Laura Toose,
Solicitor, NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association.
Mark Paul (Chairperson)
Lucy Burns (Nurse
Kurt Andersson-Noorgard (Nurse Member)
Gray (Lay Member)
28 April 2016
17 May 2016
DATE OF ORDERS:
17 May 2016
ORDERS (in summary):
The Practitioner is
cautioned and reprimanded. The practitioner’s registration is subject to
a condition for mentoring
CATCHWORDS:
Care level observations, record keeping, practice of
non-compliance with policy, mental health facility
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law)
– s139B(1)(a), s139B(1)(e), s171(2),
clause 6(2) of Schedule 5D, clause 7 of Schedule 5D
1. On Thursday, 28 April 2016 this Professional
Standards Committee enquired into a complaint made by the Health Care Complaints
concerning Neil James Mullen, a registered nurse, registration number
NMW0001287060.
2. The Complaint, dated 2 December 2015, is of unsatisfactory
unprofessional conduct under s139B of the National Law. The Complaint
RN Mullen’s conduct on the nightshift of 30 and 31 July
3. RN Mullen was the nurse in charge of the Eloura West Unit of the
Acute Mental Health Ward at Shellharbour Hospital. There were
nine patients
that night on the ward, accommodated overnight in six rooms. Some of the
patients were sharing sleeping accommodation.
RN Mullen had responsibility to
undertake observations throughout the night: at 10 minute intervals for four
patients, 30 minute
intervals for another four patients and 120 minute intervals
for the ninth patient. RN Mullen failed to ensure those observations
undertaken as required, and of those observations that were undertaken few were
completed in the manner required.
4. During the early morning, most likely
between the hours of three and four, a patient in one of the shared rooms killed
patient residing in that room. The death of the patient was tragic,
but the causes and circumstances are not for this Committee.
5. Despite RN
Mullen recording that he had undertaken observations at 4:35am and 6:26am, the
death of the patient was not discovered
until shortly after RN Mullen had
completed his shift, after 7am, and had left the hospital.
6. Whilst the
death of the patient exposed RN Mullen’s failure to undertake appropriate
and thorough observations, RN Mullen’s
conduct would warrant censure in
any event. For the reasons explained below the Committee has decided that RN
Mullen be reprimanded
for his conduct and cautioned as to his conduct in the
future. In addition, the Committee has decided it be a condition of RN
practice as a nurse that he be mentored for 12 months.
7. RN Mullen, by his written statement, admitted the Complaint as
alleged, along with the particulars. On the documentary material
presented to
the Committee and after hearing from RN Mullen the Committee was satisfied to
accept his admission of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Although the
Committee may not have needed to enquire into the complaint (see s171(2) of the
National Law)
the Committee heard evidence of the events on that night in order
to understand the nature of RN Mullen’s conduct and to consider
orders under s146B of the National Law were required.
8. In light of the
admission made, the Committee proposed, and the parties accepted, that there was
no need for the Committee to first
make findings as to any unsatisfactory
professional conduct and before considering whether and what action the
Committee might take
under s146B of the National Law.
Suppression
9. On 28 April 2015 the Chairperson of the Committee made a suppression
order with respect to the names of the patients on the ward
that night in
accordance with clause 7 of Schedule 5 of the National Law. Their names (listed
in an Annexure) and any information
that may identify them are not to be
published. That Annexure will be attached only to the original reasons for the
decision held
by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
10. The Annexure
identifies each patient by the title Patient A through to Patient I. It was
Patient B who died at the hands of Patient
Evidence before the
11. In support of the Complaint the HCCC tendered three folders
which contained a number of tabbed documents:
Complaint supported by particulars, and Schedules A, B and C;
of RN Mullen’s registration;
of complaint from the Local Health District with an investigation report;
number of statements relating to the investigation report;
and report of Ms Christine Muller as an expert;
Correspondence
with RN Mullen;
footage of Eloura West Unit for the shift with recorded events;
of Mr Mullen’s employment with the Local Health District;
room allocation on the night;
150 Proceedings on 3 November 2014 and 23 March 2015;
policies and guidelines;
Level Observation charts for each of the patients; and
records for Patient A and Patient B.
These three folders were accepted by the Committee and marked
HCCC 1. Throughout this decision the documents within HCCC 1 are referred
their Tab number.
12. On behalf of RN Mullen Ms Toose tendered a folder
containing:
statement of RN Mullen of 30 March 2016;
curriculum vitae;
list of his continuing professional development courses; and
reports provided by Dr Irwin Pakula and Kim Capp.
13. In his statement RN Mullen referred to a written
reflection he had provided for the s150 proceedings on 3 November 2014 and
in Section C of Tab 25. By his statement RN Mullen had accepted the
complaint; he confirmed that position when giving evidence.
14. Whilst all of
this material was useful for the Committee what was particularly important were
the records of the observations
undertaken or said to have been undertaken on
the night along with RN Mullen’s reflection on his conduct and the oral
he gave of his present approach to his practice as a nurse.
15. At the commencement of the proceedings the HCCC provided
amended versions of Schedules A, B and C to the Complaint as the originals
schedules contained some errors arising from transposition of data:
A corrected the frequency of care level observations for Patient A from 10
minutes to 30 minutes, with no change to the frequency
of 120 minutes for
Patient B. With respect to four of the other patients the frequency was changed
from 30 minutes to 10 minutes,
and for the other three patients the frequency
was changed from 10 minutes to 30 minutes.
Schedule B contained a summary
from records of the times during the shift when the CCTV footage indicated
observations appeared to
have been undertaken. There was a transposition of the
times allocated to Patient A and Patient B at 23:30 and for the period between
02:50 to 03:45.
Schedule C repeated the data from Schedule B, but with the
removal of the times of apparent observations which were said not to have
properly undertaken, and with the correlative transpositions
16. Ms Toose on behalf of RN Mullen accepted the amended
schedules as accurately recording the required frequency of observations,
times of apparent observations, and whether observations were done properly or
not. There was no objection to the Committee
proceeding on the Complaint with
the amended Schedules in place of the original schedules. During his evidence
RN Mullen accepted
the amendments as accurate. The amended Schedules A, B and C
were placed under Tab 1 of HCCC 1.
17. If it be the case that the
substitution of the amended schedules amounted to another Complaint (for the
reason the Schedules were
referred to within the particulars of the Complaint)
then the Committee proceeds in accordance with clause 6(2) of Schedule 5D of
National Law.
18. On the night of 30 and 31 July 2014 RN Mullen was the nurse
in charge of the nightshift. He was assisted by a just graduated
nurse on the last night of her first rotation along with a Health and Security
Assistant. Nine patients were in residence
for the night. The medical
practitioners for each of the patients had at earlier points in time specified
the observations that
were to be undertaken of patients under their care. At
the time, the frequency and level of those observations were governed by
internal policy of the Local Health District (Tab 32).
19. The required
frequencies of care level observations were: for patients classified as Level 2,
visual observations at 10 minute
intervals; as Level 3, at 30 minute intervals;
and Level 4 at 120 minutes. Those frequencies of observations were only be
by a medical officer (after consultation), though the frequency of
observations could be increased at the initiative of the nurse.
policy required that the observations be recorded by way of a care level
observation form for each patient (at Tab 34 through
to Tab 42 inclusive). The
forms required the recording, at the nominated intervals, of a patient’s
‘behaviour/affect’
and their ‘breathing’. The recorded
observations were to be initialled by the person making the observation. Though
perhaps primarily seen as a tool for preventing self-harm, care level
observations also had the function of identifying risk of harm
21. The Complaint is that, though it was his responsibility, RN
Mullen failed to undertake, at the required frequency, the required
observations
or arrange for the observation to be undertaken. In those cases where the
observations were apparently undertaken they
were not undertaken properly in
that there was no accurate recording of the behaviour/affect of each patient or
the whether the patient
was breathing. Additionally, the patient care level
observation forms were completed as if all the observations had been undertaken
at the requisite times when that was not the case.
22. The HCCC alleged that
not undertaking the observations was either a failure to do what was required,
or alternatively a reduction
by RN Mullen of the required frequency of
observations without first consulting with a medical practitioner. As explained
there was an aspect of both in RN Mullen’s conduct.
HCCC presented the Complaint as being singular though made out by a number of
particulars. RN Mullen’s conduct on the
night with respect to the
observations was all of a similar nature. There is nothing that is illuminated
or gained by seeking to
parse the conduct. It remains that RN Mullen failed to
undertake the patient care level observations which he knew as a nurse he
have undertaken.
24. The Committee finds proved that the conduct
of RN Mullen on the nightshift of 30 and 31 July 2014 in not undertaking
observations and as required, was conduct that demonstrated the
knowledge, skill or judgements possessed, or the care exercised by
RN Mullen in
his practice of nursing was significantly below the standard that was expected
of a nurse of his level of training and
experience within the meaning of s139B
(1)(a) of the National Law. Further the Committee finds proved that
RN Mullen’s conduct
in wrongly completing the care level forms was
unsatisfactory professional conduct because it was improper conduct relating to
practice as a nurse s139B(1)(e) of the National Law.
25. Some of the
material in HCCC 1 touched upon the conduct of the other registered nurse on
duty and also the Health and Security
Assistant. Their conduct is not before
this Committee, and no findings are made in respect of them.
Consideration
of powers to be exercised
26. The complaint having been proved the Committee
considered whether it should exercise any power conferred by s146B of the
27. The Committee is to give paramount consideration to the
health and safety of the public, but also has a role in maintaining public
confidence in the profession of nursing and maintaining the reputation of the
profession; HCCC v Litchfield (1997) 41 NSWLR 630.
As well as ensuring that the
practice of nursing by RN Mullen protects the health and safety of the public,
the decision of the
Committee may have a general deterrent effect for other
members of the profession and also demonstrate to the public that it can
confidence in the standard of care provided by nurses.
28. Attending to
that task requires a close review of how RN Mullen viewed his conduct on the
night, his present understanding of
his conduct, and what that may mean for his
practice of nursing in the future.
29. RN Mullen answered questions in a
careful and considered manner. His responses were brief, but to the point.
There was no doubt
he was deeply affected by the death of the patient. The fact
that he feels responsible for what happened is a measure of the seriousness
which RN Mullen takes his responsibilities as a nurse.
30. The Committee
formed the view that RN Mullen had a deep appreciation of his responsibilities
as a nurse and was acutely aware
of his failings on that night. When questioned
he did not deflect responsibility. He explained how his behaviour might be
understood,
but he did not do so in a way to excuse his conduct.
Mullen said he thought there were some practical difficulties in carrying out
the care level checks as directed by the medical
practitioners and is required
by the policy. To carry out checks every 10 minutes during the night meant
disturbing the sleep of
many of the patients and not just those that were to be
observed. The security door to the corridor outside the rooms was heavy
noisy when opened. The corridor was lit and there was a motion alarm that would
sound when walking in the corridor. Entering
the room of a patient requiring 10
minute observations would necessarily have an impact on every patient in that
room, including
anyone that might be on a less frequent level of observation.
Confirming that a patient was breathing might be a short or a longer
observation. Although a torch could be used to observe breathing it might be
necessary to wait for some movement. With four patients
requiring ten minute
care level observation this could be difficult in terms of time. It was quite
possible that at the conclusion
of one round of observations it would be
necessary to start again.
32. RN Mullen gave evidence that as it was the
first rotation for the other registered nurse he was reluctant to have her do
the observations
and he felt somewhat protective of her in visiting the ward on
her own, especially if problems arose. She had also been told never
the ward by herself. RN Mullen gave evidence of patients who had objected to
being checked at the required levels of
observation. He had, in the past,
experienced verbal abuse or threatening behaviour, and on a few occasions an
aggressive physical
response. He said that he had come to the view that waking
patients was not to their benefit and might even have adverse health
because of disruption to their sleep. On his own admission he reduced the
frequency of his inspections to a level that he
thought was
sufficient.
33. RN Mullen’s adoption of a lesser frequency of
observation probably developed from the adverse reactions of some patients
disturbed, and perhaps also from complacency arising upon his experience that
reducing the frequency of observations did not,
apparently, result in any
obvious harm – the nights were quiet.
34. That was a profoundly flawed
assessment. It was clear from RN Mullen’s evidence that he realised in
July 2015, and now
still acknowledges, that the fault was his: he had allowed a
habit of passive checking to displace his responsibility to undertake
monitoring.
35. At one stage RN Mullen had informally raised with local
management the difficulties of undertaking care level observations with
frequency required under the policy. The response, not unsurprisingly, was that
the observations had to be undertaken.
36. A practice had developed, followed
on the night, of recording on the patient care observation sheet that the
observations had
been undertaken at the required frequency even when that has
not happened. Moreover, a positive record was made that the patient
breathing even when breathing by the patient had not been confirmed. RN
Mullen’s completion of the care level observation
records was wrong and
misleading and a serious departure from the standard expected.
37. Patient A
had killed Patient B sometime between 03:00 and 04:00. Yet the care level
observation form recorded that Patient B
was in bed and breathing at each of the
half hourly observations from 04:00 through to 07:00.
38. Further, the only
observations that were made happened at 04:35 and 06:26. How was it that the
death of Patient B was not discovered?
It seems that the patient had a habit of
sleeping with a blanket over his head. The assumption was made, on no evidence
that if Patient B was observed to be in bed under a blanket then he was
asleep and breathing.
39. RN Mullen gave evidence he now fully accepts and
understands that record keeping is not done simply for the sake of record
The records are meant to be a record of what happened so that there is
a record for others to use in the care of the patient. If
the observations were
undertaken and recorded as required then the problems of practicality raised by
RN Mullen, to the extent they
existed, would have become obvious, perhaps
leading to some review of the requirements or a change in procedure.
was apparent from the evidence given by RN Mullen but also from his statements
in the s150 proceedings on 3 November 2014 and
23 March 2015 that RN Mullen now
has a clear understanding of what he did wrong and how it was that he allowed
that fault to develop.
He says he is now ‘hyper-vigilant’ about
record keeping. In the Committee’s view, that attitude has come from
Mullen’s understanding and acceptance of his role in what occurred on that
night. It is clear he has reflected deeply on
what happened and has learned
from his mistakes.
41. RN Mullen was first registered as a nurse in March
1987 and has been practising as a mental health nurse from 1995. He began
working with the Local Health District in adult acute mental health in 1996.
Therefore he had approximately 20 years of experience
in the sort of work he was
doing on that night and the responsibilities that entailed. At various times he
had acted as Nursing
Unit Manager and was often the nurse in charge on his
shift. His referees report he has always demonstrated an excellent grasp of
ability to understand and carry out the required clinical skills of a
psychiatric nurse, and that he works in a quiet and confident
42. As was also evident to the Committee, one referee reported that RN
Mullen takes his work seriously and does not shirk his responsibilities.
he obtained his most recent employment (after resigning from the Local Health
District) he was open with his new employer in
saying that he was the nurse in
charge on the shift and that he was responsible for the required checks not
being carried out in
accordance with the care level policy.
resigning from the Local Health District, RN Mullen has been working at a
private mental health facility on a casual basis,
by choice, about 2 or 3 shifts
a week sometimes on a ward but most often in admissions. That is the way he has
chosen to practice.
44. RN Mullen has had some periods of absence from work
through illness arising from his reaction to the events of the night. He
been under the care of his general practitioner, received 10 sessions of
counselling with a psychologist and sees his psychiatrist
on a six weekly basis.
There was no evidence of any incapacity that may affect his ability to practice
as a nurse nor was there any
evidence that any incapacity may arise in the
45. The Committee was struck by RN Mullen’s acknowledgement
that he had difficulty in raising his concerns about the views he
had about care
for the patients, knowing that if he had done refinements may have been made to
the observation system which would
have resulted in better care for the
patients. He said that he had become complacent. In his new workplace he has
made a point
of participating in processes for the reevaluation of care level
observations. He says he now has the confidence to raise issues
46. It was of concern to the Committee that when RN Mullen informally
spoke to management about the need for the frequency of observations
told to continue as required, he did not report that he and others were
improperly completing the care level observations
sheets. As RN Mullen said,
‘The record lost its significance as a meaningful document’. In
place of compliance with
policy RN Mullen substituted his own informal
assessment of what was necessary for a peaceful night on the ward. It was not a
of him trying to meet the required frequency but failing. Instead he was
following his own schedule of what he thought was appropriate
care or what felt
like appropriate care, although without approval from a medical practitioner and
in disregard of the policy.
47. The Committee is satisfied that RN Mullen now
knows the value and function of record keeping, and is alive to the dangers of
complacency
and the importance of speaking up.
48. The HCCC proposed a
condition that RN Mullen not practice as a mental health nurse, or if that
condition was not imposed that
there be a condition requiring RN Mullen to
practice under supervision and not be in charge on a shift. RN Mullen’s
were not of a kind particularly or uniquely related to mental health
nursing. Supervision would not guard against a recurrence of
similar conduct.
It was not his practice of mental health nursing that was of concern, but rather
allowing complacency to displace
49. The Committee
found RN Mullen to be a capable and competent nurse, particularly in the field
of mental health. It was clear from
the way he gave his evidence and also in
his referees’ reports that aside from the practices identified above, RN
the knowledge, skill and judgment to practice as a nurse at and above
the standard reasonably expected of a nurse with his equivalent
training and experience. In the protection of the public the Committee does not
see the need to restrict RN Mullen’s
50. However, it is
important that RN Mullen be reprimanded so as to record the Committee’s
disapproval of his lax conduct with
respect to undertaking and recording
observations and his practice more generally.
51. The Committee has decided
to caution RN Mullen against complacency, and also against substituting his
judgment in place of established
regimens for patient care.
52. The Committee
does not believe there is any risk of a repeat by RN Mullen of the type of
conduct the subject of these proceedings.
However, the Committee considers that
RN Mullen’s practice as a nurse would benefit from mentoring in order to
guard against
complacency. Mentoring would reinforce what RN Mullen has
learned, and give the public confidence in the profession. It is appropriate
impose a condition on RN Mullen’s practice to provide for that mentoring.
53. This Statement of Decision is to be given to the HCCC, RN Mullen and the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales.
54. In accordance with
section 146B(1)(a) and (b) of the National Law the Committee orders:
Mullen is cautioned.
RN Mullen is reprimanded.
RN Mullen’s
registration be subject to the following conditions:
1. RN Mullen must engage
in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12 months with a registered
nurse (Division 1) who does
not have conditions on their practice and is not
employed by or associated with a current employer. The mentor must be approved
by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales, and the 12 month period
is to commence from the date of such approval.
2. RN Mullen must:
(a) Within three months of this Professional Standards
Committee decision provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales
with the name, contact details and resume of the registered nurse who has agreed
(i) as mentor; and
(ii) as specified in the
conditions.
(b) Authorise the mentor:
(i) to notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South
Wales of any breach of the conditions including any failure to attend
meetings; and
(ii) to exchange information with the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales in relation to his compliance with conditions;
(iii) provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales a
copy of the conditions signed by him and by the mentor indicating
awareness of
the conditions and authorisation.
3. RN Mullen must submit a mentoring plan developed in
consultation with the mentor within four weeks of the mentor being approved
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales. The plan must
(a) specific objectives and outcomes of the mentoring
relationship which must relate to, but are not limited to – the signs
complacency, the importance of record keeping, and the manner of dealing with
any conflict between RN Mullen’s view of the
appropriate care of a patient
and what is required by policy, practice or procedure;
(b) time frames for
completion of identified activities and outcomes and objectives;
(c) evidence
which will demonstrate objectives and outcomes have been met; and
schedule of meetings with the mentor.
4. RN Mullen must meet with his mentor face to face (or as
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales) at least
a month for at least 30 minutes.
5. RN Mullen must provide the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with a mentoring report which is
cosigned by the approved
mentor addressing:
(a) progress towards or achievement of specified objectives and
(b) any challenges or issues affecting progress and a plan to deal
with these; and
(c) any changes to practice resulting from mentoring.
6. The mentoring report must be provided to the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales at three monthly intervals for the
Further orders
The Nursing and Midwifery Council of New
South Wales is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Part 8, Division
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
Sections 125 to
127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) are to apply whilst
RN Mullen’s principal place
of practice is anywhere in Australia other
than in New South Wales, so that the appropriate review body in those
circumstances is
the relevant National Board.
Chairperson
Date: 17 May 2016
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (427 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter