URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ANG, Kooi-Gan [2024] NSWMPSC 2 (16 February 2024)
Our Ref: QM2023/15687: 108307/23
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Kooi-Gan Ang
MED0001184466
Dates of Inquiry:
9 and 10 October 2023 and 5 February 2024
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul - Chairperson
Dr David William Lethbridge King
Dr Jon Joseph Fogarty
Ms Deborah Telford
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Appearance for Dr Kooi-Gan Ang:
Ms Amber Kelly
Ms Nikki Williams and Ms Clucas
Mr Stephen Barnes
Mr Andrew Davey (Unsworth Legal)
Date of decision:
16 February 2024
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
reprimand Dr Ang
Publication of decision:
A non-publication direction was made concerning the identity of the
patients listed in Schedule A to the Complaint
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Kooi-Gan Ang
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Introduction
1. Our inquiry concerns the conduct of Dr Kooi-Gan Ang
between 14 July and 30 July 2021: Did Dr Ang inappropriately
charge a consultation
fee in contravention of the Australia COVID-19 Vaccine
Roll Out Program (the “Program”)? The allegation of the Health
Complaints Commission is that Dr Ang was aware or ought to have been aware
that it was inappropriate to charge such a consultation
fee. The Commission
alleges that Dr Ang’s conduct in doing so amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s139B(1)(l)
of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (the “National Law”) in that the conduct was improper
or unethical.
2. Dr Ang admits that he charged a consultation fee
related to his practice of medicine, which Dr Ang described as a “new
fee”. There was evidence to support Dr Ang’s
admissions and those matters are accepted by the Committee. Dr Ang did
admit the allegation that his conduct was unethical or improper.
issue for our decision was whether Dr Ang’s conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct as being improper
or unethical within the
meaning of s139B(1)(l) of the National Law. We have found his conduct to have
been improper and we have
decided to reprimand Dr Ang.
4. The Complaint made by the Commission is dated
2 June 2023 and signed by Sarah Connors, Manager, Legal Services, as
the delegate
of the Health Care Complaints Commission (Attachment A). As
background the Complaint says Dr Ang was first registered in New South
Wales as a medical practitioner in 1999. In 2002 he became a Fellow of the
Royal Australian College of General Practitioners and
has since held specialist
registration in general practice. In 2021 Dr Ang operated two practices
(Blessed Health Care at 4 Anglo
Road Campsie, and Blessed Health Care
Medical and Specialist Centre at 69 Evaline Street, Campsie). On a day to
day basis Dr Ang
worked at Blessed Health Care Medical and Specialist
5. The particulars of the Complaint are that:
(a) between 14 July and 30 July 2021,
Dr Ang, as owner of the practices, inappropriately charged a consultation
fee to the patients
as listed in Schedule A to the Complaint prior to
administering a dose of the Pfizer COVID‑19 vaccination; and
conduct was in contravention of the requirements of the Australian
COVID‑19 Vaccine Roll Out Program (“the Vaccine
Program”) of
which Dr Ang was aware or ought to have been aware from the information
provided to him during the Vaccine Program
including but not limited to, the
COVID‑19 vaccine Roll-Out through General Practice Onboarding Pack
Version 3, dated 28 May
6. The Complaint includes a Schedule A being a list of
the patients attending either of the two practices in the relevant period and
who paid a consultation fee and received the Pfizer vaccination. Dr Ang
saw the patients who attended the Blessed Health Care Medical
and Specialist
Centre, and the other patients were seen by his colleague at Blessed Health
7. Pages first marked 1 to 9 of the Schedule A record the patient
names, a chart number, the date of visit and the fee charged and
paid. These
are the patients seen by Dr Ang at Blessed Health Care Medical and
Specialist Centre. The second part of the Schedule
A, marked pages 1 to12,
lists the chart number, patient name, and the consultation fee charged and paid,
but not the date of visit.
This second group of patients were seen by
Dr Ang’s colleague at the Blessed Healthcare Practice.
Complaint is at Attachment 1 but with the names of the patients
9. Dr Ang told us that the details in the Schedule A are
accurate. The information in the Schedule A was not contested by the
Commission.
We accept the information set out in Schedule A to the
10. For the assistance of our inquiry the Commission provided an
aide memoire being a combined numbered list of the patients by chart
patient name and the amount charged and paid, and later refunded. It appears
from the aide memoire that there were 717 such
patients in total, of which 332
were seen by Dr Ang in the period 15 to 29 July 2021, and the others seen
by his colleague.
Non-publication order
11. At an earlier stage in the
proceedings the Committee made an order that no information be published that
would identify the names
of the patients listed in the Schedule A. That
order was continued at the hearing of the inquiry and expanded to include the
of any of the patients contained in material provided to the Committee,
such as the aide memoire.
Our inquiry
12. We undertook our inquiry on 9
and 10 October 2023, and 5 February 2024. Amber Kelly, Solicitor
Advocate, appeared for the Commission
with the assistance of Nikki Williams
and then Ms Clucas. Stephen Barnes, instructed by Andrew Davey of Unsworth
Legal, appeared
for Dr Ang.
13. The Commission tendered a bundle of
documents which included:
(a) seven complaints about the alleged
(b) materials and a transcript relating to a proceeding under s150
of the National Law and details of conditions then
(c) correspondence between the Commission and Dr Ang, including
the billing policies for Dr Ang’s medical practices;
(d) documents
(e) Dr Ang’s curriculum
(f) Recent CPD records and a completed s164G form;
(g) Medicare
provider report for Dr Ang 1 April 2021 to
20 August 2021;
(h) Code of Conduct for Doctors – Medical
Board AHPRA;
(i) the Australian COVID-19 Vaccination Policy, and
(j) Information for COVID‑19 Vaccination Providers;
14. The bundle included a form of the Complaint dated 12
January 2023 which we substituted for the Complaint dated 2 June 2023. With
that change we received the bundle of documents without objection and marked it
15. The Commission also tendered:
(a) COVID‑19 Vaccine Roll-out through General Practice
Onboarding Pack 28 May 2021 Version 3 –
(b) email dated 29 September 2023 between the National
COVID‑19 Vaccine Program Division and Ms Williams of the Commission,
with an attached printout – Exhibit C; and
(c) Supervision Reports
concerning Dr Ang for the periods 1 January 2023 to
31 March 2023, 1 April 2023 to 30 June 2023 and
2023 to 30 September 2023 – Exhibit D.
16. There were no objections, and we received the documents
marked exhibits as above.
17. On behalf of Dr Ang Mr Barnes
tendered a folder of documents containing Dr Ang’s statement of
8 June 2023 (Tab 1), some
references (but not the letter and reference
at Tabs 8 and 9 of the folder), and Supervision Reports for Dr Ang for
the period from
January 2022 to December 2022.
18. Dr Ang gave
evidence and answered questions from Mr Barnes, the Commission, and the
Circumstances of the Complaint and findings as to
Dr Ang’s conduct
19. It is not contested that Dr Ang charged
a consultation fee contrary to the Vaccine Program, and we make that finding.
is whether doing so amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Before considering that issue we set out our findings as to
the background and
circumstances of Dr Ang’s conduct. These findings arise from the
evidence given and the various documents
and were not relevantly disputed by the
Commission or Dr Ang.
20. Dr Ang graduated from the University of
Tasmania and began his career as a medical practitioner as an intern at the
Ballarat Base
Hospital. He was first registered in New South Wales as a medical
practitioner on 6 January 1999;
21. Dr Ang became a Fellow of
the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners in June 2002 and has since
held a specialist registration
in general practice. He worked in various
positions and roles until he established Blessed Health Care located at 4 Anglo
Campsie, where he practised as a general practitioner until 2015. Since
then, a colleague of his has filled the role of the general
practitioner at
Blessed Health Care;
22. In 2016 Dr Ang established Blessed Health Care
Medical and Specialist Centre at Campsie at 69 Evaline Street, where he has
to practise.
23. Dr Ang acknowledges that he was and is the
practitioner responsible for the decisions made in running both practices. He
discuss matters with his colleague, but Dr Ang accepts he has the
ultimate authority and makes the significant decisions.
24. From about 2019
to the present Dr Ang has operated both practices on a “mixed
billing” basis, meaning patients were
either bulk-billed or charged a fee.
In 2021 all new patients were charged a private fee for an initial consultation
and thereafter
would be bulk billed;
25. Dr Ang says in his statement,
Exhibit 1, paragraph 20:
The reason for the initial private fee was because those
consultations were frequently lengthy and required a thorough assessment
patient including past medical, social, and family histories.;
26. Dr Ang said the consultations ordinarily included
such things as a detailed patient history, taking a family history, questions
and weight measurements, identifying the need for
any management plans,
that may have been available
and similar matters.
27. Dr Ang told us
that these initial consultations were sometimes charged by reference to Medicare
Item 36 being a long consultation
of at least 20 minutes, although quite often
the initial consultations extended to 30 minutes or so. When responding to our
on the need for the initial consultation it was apparent that
Dr Ang saw the initial consultation as forming a sound basis for the
intended ongoing doctor/patient relationship that would follow.
28. In April
2021 he began to provide a COVID-19 vaccination service adminisitering the
AstraZeneca vaccine. Few of his existing
or new patients were interested in an
AstraZeneca vaccination. When seeing an existing or new patient he would speak
to them about
providing the AstraZeneca vaccination, but only a limited number
asked to be vaccinated.
29. Dr Ang decided it was better to administer
the AstraZeneca vaccination at a clinic on a Friday or Saturday rather than at
conclusion of a consultation with any existing or new patient. Dr Ang
bulk billed Medicare patients for receiving the AstraZeneca
vaccination at the
clinics. Any non‑Medicare patient receiving the AstraZeneca vaccination
at a clinic was not charged and
there was no bulk billing for those
30. Dr Ang was aware from that time that the bulk-billed fee
covered the vaccination and any consultation appointment necessary for
to receive their vaccination.
31. Many of his patients were asking about the
Pfizer vaccine so when it became available, Dr Ang consulted his colleague
and decided
to participate in the Vaccine Program.
32. Exhibit C records
that on 26 June 2021 Blessed Health Care at 34 Anglo Road, Campsie,
applied to join the Vaccine Program;
33. Although it is uncertain whether
Dr Ang lodged that application himself (he says he cannot recall),
Dr Ang agrees that the application
was at his behest and that it was made
in respect of both Blessed Health Care and Blessed Health Care Medical and
Specialist Centre;
34. There is uncertainty about what that application
involved, and whether a specific declaration was made by Dr Ang or by
on his behalf, that the obligations under the Vaccine Program were
understood. Dr Ang cannot recall doing so and Exhibit C is not
explicit on
the point. We do not make a finding in that regard.
35. When it came to the
Pfizer vaccination Dr Ang decided that, unlike AstraZeneca it was not
necessary to arrange clinics but that
the Pfizer vaccination could be given at
the time of initial consultation;
36. It was agreed by both Dr Ang and
the Commission, and we accept, that all the patients listed in Schedule A
were non-Medicare patients,
all had contacted one of the practices for the
Pfizer vaccination, all were new patients, and all were charged and paid the fee
out in Schedule A.
37. Nearly all the patients seen by Dr Ang were
charged $225, although a few were charged less. A large proportion of those
by Dr Ang’s colleague were charged $225, a significant number
$250 and the balance of other amounts ranging from $40 to $200.
(Exhibit A, Tab 7, page 59, annexed as Attachment 2) was put on the door of the
Blessed Health Care practice setting out
the fees For Initial Consultation
including Vaccination. Dr Ang accepted responsibility for the sign being
placed on the door and
he knew at the time it was there.
39. Dr Ang says
that as the patients seeking the Pfizer vaccination were new patients, they were
“required by the practices
to have an initial consultation which was
privately-billed” (Exhibit 1, Tab1, paragraph 19).
40. When we asked
what he meant by ‘required’ Dr Ang explained it was his
decision to continue the existing practice of
an initial consultation for new
patients by requiring and charging an initial consultation for those seeking the
Pfizer vaccination.
When these patients called or visited either practice for
the Pfizer vaccination they were treated as new patients, booked for an
consultation, and told the fee.
41. From Schedule A the numbers of
non-Medicare patients seen by Dr Ang who were charged the initial
consultation fee were initially
small, but then increased
significantly:
(a) Six on Thursday 15 July 2021:
(b) None on Friday 16
(c) One on Saturday 17 July;
(d) None on Sunday 18
(e) Seven on Monday 19 July;
(f) Nine on Tuesday 21 July;
on Thursday 22 July;
(h) None on Friday 23 July;
(i) 63 on Saturday
(j) 58 on Monday 26 July;
(k) 64 on Tuesday 27 July;
Wednesday 28 July; and
(m) 24 on Thursday 29 July.
42. The total from Schedule A is 326. From the aide memoire
the number is 332. This discrepancy, if it be one, is not a relevant
difference.
43. Dr Ang usually worked Monday to Saturday, and not
Sunday. On the days listed above Dr Ang said he was also seeing other
and not only for vaccination. It is apparent from Exhibit A, Tab 18B
(a schedule of all patients seen), that on 15 July Dr Ang saw
an additional
five patients for vaccination, and an additional seven on 16 July, which
confirms Dr Ang’s evidence on this point.
explained that the reference to Item 36 appearing on the sign is to the Medicare
item number for a long consultation of
20 minutes or more. It was
Dr Ang’s evidence that in the normal course the new patient initial
consultation would take at
least 20 minutes if not longer.
number of non‑Medicare Pfizer vaccination new patients increased it became
increasingly difficult for Dr Ang to undertake
new patient consultations in
the usual way. For example, seeing each of the 43 new patients on 20 July for
the usual 20 minute initial
consultation would take over 14 hours.
46. Dr Ang acknowledged there were not enough hours in the day to
undertake that work and to administer the vaccination for so many
new patients
as well as seeing existing patients for vaccination or other reasons. He found
himself having to work very long hours
and use nursing staff and a medical
student to assist with patient assessment. In response to our questions, he
agreed that the
times for the initial consultations soon dropped to 10 or even
five minutes.
47. When asked by us Dr Ang agreed that the initial new
patient consultation was not clinically necessary as a preliminary to administer
the vaccination. He also accepted that the patients seeking the vaccination
were not seeking to become ongoing patients of his practice.
He agreed that
requiring these patients to have and pay for the new patient consultation was a
condition imposed by the practices
before receiving the Pfizer
vaccination.
48. Dr Ang continued the practice of requiring payment for
a new patient consultation up until he received a phone call during the
morning on Thursday 29 July from the National COVID Vaccine Taskforce. He
was told he was unable to charge the new patient
consulting fee as part of
providing the vaccine. The next day he received a letter from the National
COVID Vaccine Taskforce confirming
the telephone call and advising him what
actions he had to take (Exhibit A, Tab 18C, page 323).
49. Dr Ang told
us that until the telephone call he had no idea that what he was doing was not
permitted by the Vaccine Program. He
may have been contacted by the media about
the fee before the telephone call from the National COVID Vaccine Taskforce, but
receiving the telephone call he had no idea that what he was doing might
somehow be inappropriate or wrong.
50. Once he received the call Dr Ang
stopped the practice and set about returning the fees to all the patients listed
in Schedule
51. Dr Ang cannot now recall seeing or reading the
Onboarding Pack at about the time the application was made for the Vaccine
Dr Ang was aware of much of the information in the Onboarding
Pack but cannot recall if he saw that information in the Onboarding
elsewhere. He says he did consult other sources relating to the vaccination
programs. We are not able to determine this
issue. We make no finding as to
whether Dr Ang did or did not read the Onboarding Pack at the
52. Dr Ang told us he now accepts that had he read the Vaccine
Program he would have known he was not permitted to charge the new
consultation fee to those seeking the vaccination. And he also told us he would
not have done so.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
53. The Complaint
is that Dr Ang’s conduct in charging the consultation fee to the
patients amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct because it was improper
or unethical conduct as defined by s139B(1)(i) of the National Law.
Commission does not allege that the conduct was unethical, only that it was
improper. On that basis we do not consider or
make any finding on the question
of whether the conduct alleged was unethical.
55. The test of whether conduct
is improper is an objective test by reference to professional
What is improper includes conduct that is inappropriate, abnormal, or irregular
when judged against codes of
Submissions – the
56. The Commission provided us with written and oral submissions.
In essence the Commission’s position was that Dr Ang’s
was improper because he ought to have known that by the terms of the Vaccine
Program he was not permitted to charge for or
impose a condition on the
administering the vaccination.
57. Dr Ang was the principal of the two
practices and the one ultimately responsible for making decisions about their
Whether or not he personally completed the electronic application to
participate in the Pfizer Program, he nevertheless made the
decision for both
practices to participate in the Vaccine Program.
58. It is reasonable to
expect that a medical practitioner making a decision about whether to
participate in such a Vaccine Program
would make an effort to find out the
conditions of the Vaccine Program before proceeding. Had he done so he would
have seen the
statement on page 9 of the Vaccine Program that:
* New * vaccination providers cannot charge to administer the
COVID‑19 vaccine. The vaccine is free and the consult appointment
patients to receive the vaccine is also free. People who are not eligible for
Medicare should not be charged for a COVID‑19
consultation.
59. He would also have seen information on where to ask
questions or clarify any issues. A query about whether to charge the new
patient fee to those seeking the vaccination is a question that could easily
have been asked and answered.
60. Dr Ang had participated in three
Australian Government Department of Heath training programs for COVID-19
Vaccination (Exhibit
A, Tab 14A, pages 147 to 149) from which an attendee would
have understood there were conditions relating to the programs and it
participants to keep themselves informed. The certificate for each contains a
It is the responsibility of the certificate holder to ensure
that they complete any additional updates if and when they become
61. The Commission submitted that it was reasonable to
expect that a medical practitioner would keep themselves informed of matters
do with their practice. In our view the publication Good medical practice: a
Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia (Exhibit
A, page 460) (the
Code) provides a professional standard for judging the conduct. The Code is
dated 1 October 2020 and is issued
under s39 of the National Law. The
Commission drew our attention to the statement at section 2.1 of the Code that
doctors have a
duty to keep their skills and knowledge up to date.
Code also provides that practitioners have a responsibility to contribute to the
efficiency of the healthcare system (at 7.1)
and address healthcare inequity (at
7.3). Charging a fee for a consultation that was not necessary for vaccination
may have acted
as a barrier to vaccination, and in that way undermined
healthcare equity as only those who could afford the fee received vaccinations
from Dr Ang.
63. The Code encourages openness and good communication (at
4.1). Though there were some complaints, many patients may have assumed
consultation fee was an obligatory step in obtaining vaccination when that was
not the case. The fee was Dr Ang’s decision.
Additionally, it was
misleading to imply, as appeared on the sign (Exhibit A, page 59), that only the
vaccination, and not the consultation,
was free. Had Dr Ang kept himself
informed he would have been aware of those issues and the patients would not
have been charged
64. For the reasons above, and as explained in
more detail in written submissions, the Commission alleged Dr Ang’s
conduct was
improper as being contrary to the professional standards expected of
medical practitioners, and that Dr Ang failed to meet those
Submissions - Dr Ang
65. On behalf of Dr Ang
Mr Barnes submitted that the conduct alleged by the Commission was not
improper or unethical. Dr Ang had
simply made an “honest
mistake” in requiring non‑Medicare patients seeking the Pfizer
vaccine to pay the new patient
fee when that was contrary to the terms of the
Vaccine Program.
66. Mr Barnes submitted that an honest mistake could not
amount to improper or unethical conduct under s139B(1)(l) of the National
Dr Ang had done no more than continue his existing arrangements for the new
patients. That he stopped the practice immediately
when told it was wrong and
then refunded the payments demonstrated his mistake was an honest
67. Mr Barnes submitted the provisions of the Code of Conduct for
Australian Doctors referred to by the Commission were ‘very
statements’ and were not to be relied upon, because “any mistake
made could conceivably be regarded as non-compliance
with such general
statements”.
Did Dr Ang’s conduct amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct?
68. The conduct to consider is Dr Ang’s in
charging new non‑Medicare patients seeking the Pfizer vaccination a fee
a new patient consultation. Was it improper conduct? The Commission says
Dr Ang’s conduct was improper because he ought to
have known he was
not able to make any kind of charge or impose a condition for administering the
vaccination. Dr Ang said his conduct
was an honest mistake.
view the conduct is to be assessed objectively by reference to professional
standards. To analyse the conduct by reference
to “honest mistake”
negates that objective assessment. Conduct may be improper even if arising from
an honest mistake.
70. Dr Ang acknowledged that had he read the
Onboarding Pack he would have understood it would be wrong to charge a new
patient fee
for a consultation as a precondition for providing a vaccination,
and he would not have done so.
71. In our view, medical practice involves
understanding the principles of public health including health education, health
disease prevention and control and screening in general and as set
out in the Code of Conduct. Dr Ang was aware that the Vaccine
Program was
designed to support a nation‑wide vaccination Vaccine Program and decided
to participate in the Vaccine Program
to support that objective.
component of the principle was that the vaccines be made available for free to
all Australian citizens, permanent residents
and most visa holders and that
charges should not be levied to consumers for COVID‑19 immunisations.
73. This was not a controversial issue as Dr Ang knew even before he
began participation in the Pfizer Program that there was to be
no charge for
vaccination (Exhibit A, Tab 10, at lines 12 to 14 concerning the AstraZeneca
vaccination). This was one of the reasons
why he had arranged for his patients
to attend a vaccination clinic when administering the AstraZeneca vaccination,
rather than as
part of another consultation, as he would bulk-bill for these
clinics knowing that the patients would not be charged.
74. In making
application to participate in the Pfizer Program it was, in our view, incumbent
on Dr Ang to at least check if he was
able to charge a new patient fee to
those seeking vaccination under the Vaccine Program. Dr Ang is expected to
meet the professional
standard of keeping his knowledge up to date.
75. This was not a case of simply missing out on some information but of
Dr Ang choosing to participate in the Vaccine Program, an
application being
made, and Dr Ang already being aware of the need to keep up to date with
COVID information, as he had with AstraZeneca.
Dr Ang was choosing to
participate. The Vaccine Program was new, a significant public initiative, being
rolled out during a pandemic,
and he was in an area where he agreed he expected
significant demand. These factors should have prompted him to find out his
obligations
and in particular whether he could charge as he had decided he
would. The information he required was readily available and there
means for him to find out.
76. In these circumstances Dr Ang ought to
have made himself aware of the conditions of the Vaccine Program’s
requirements so
that he could properly participate in the Vaccine Program. His
failure to do so was improper.
77. For the reasons set out above we find the
subject matter of the Complaint proved. Dr Ang’s conduct was
improper and is
unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(l) of the
National Law.
Protective orders
78. Having found the subject-matter of
the Complaint proved our task is to consider the need for protective orders. If
need, what is the least serious outcome for Dr Ang that is
reasonably necessary to protect the public? Our task is protective, not
79. Both Ms Kelly for the Commission and Mr Barnes for
Dr Ang were heard on the question of whether it was appropriate to make any
protective orders necessary for the protection of the public, and if so of what
80. The Commission sought a reprimand while Mr Barnes submitted
that there was no risk the conduct would be repeated and the profession’s
reputation would be sufficiently protected by cautioning Dr Ang.
our view there is a need for protective orders. The public are rightly
concerned with any improper conduct by medical practitioners,
particularly in
circumstances where a practitioner, in times of a pandemic, was apparently
breaching conditions of a government vaccination
program by charging patients
for what was publicised as free vaccination. What happened and how the conduct
is viewed is significant
for the public and the profession.
82. We informed
the parties that we were considering a caution or reprimand and/or imposing a
condition requiring Dr Ang to be mentored
83. Mr Barnes asked the Committee to deliver its decision on
the question of unsatisfactory professional conduct before proceeding
consideration of protective orders. The Commission did not oppose the request
and we agreed.
84. We delivered an interlocutory statement of decision
(generally as set out above) finding unsatisfactory professional conduct.
5 February 2024 we heard the parties on protective
Protective orders – further hearing
85. The Commission
submitted that a reprimand was the appropriate protective order to be made and
no additional action was necessary.
A formal reprimand would be a public
statement that Dr Ang’s conduct was improper and warranted
condemnation. The Commission
submitted that the evidence before us did not
support the conclusion of a risk Dr Ang would repeat similar conduct; the
was to the contrary. The Commission did not seek mentoring or any
ongoing supervision or education.
86. On behalf of Dr Ang,
Mr Barnes conceded that while a caution was open a reprimand was
appropriate given our findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and in
light of Dr Ang’s evidence that he ought to have known it was
improper to charge the new patient
fee to those seeking vaccination.
Mr Barnes submitted that given Dr Ang had acknowledged his behaviour
was improper there was no
risk of a similar occurrence by
87. In our view, for the reasons set out below, a
reprimand is the appropriate protective order to make. The reprimand will
as a rebuke for Dr Ang’s improper conduct and send a message
to the profession and the public that conduct of this kind is
unsatisfactory
professional conduct and should not be repeated. Under the National Law a
reprimand is recorded on the public register.
That publication is a
demonstration to the public of the concern that we have about the conduct, and
the reprimand also operates
as a message to other
practitioners.
88. Dr Ang provided us with several references all to his
good character, dedication to his patients and similar matters. We accept
references. However, we are concerned that some of the references revealed a
lack of appreciation that Dr Ang’s conduct
was improper and amounted
to unsatisfactory professional conduct. If a reprimand is to have an educative
function for the profession,
it is appropriate we comment on those
89. One of the referees sought to excuse the conduct with the comment
that “we all make mistakes” and that “the
error [... was...]
due to a one off, transient error of judgment”. Another says, “the
mistake was made unintentionally:
and he has rectified his mistakes
accordingly”.
90. Those characterisations of Dr Ang’s
conduct do not accord with the Complaint particulars and the findings we have
This is not a case of a mistake, honest or otherwise. Dr Ang chose
to participate in the vaccination program without finding out
his obligations.
He charged the new patient fee without giving any thoughtful consideration to
whether charging the fee was necessary
to administer the vaccination and the
impact of doing so might have on patients seeking vaccination. That Dr Ang
repaid the fees
promptly after becoming aware he should not have charged those
fees does not lessen his conduct.
91. One referee sought to excuse
Dr Ang, saying he had a “bustling practice amid a pandemic and
lockdown period with people
lining up outside his door all arguing that they
qualified for the Pfizer COVID vaccine”. In our view, those circumstances
are further reasons Dr Ang ought to have been prompted to carefully
consider his decision instead of simply continuing his existing
Dr Ang’s conduct was not an error of some kind but a decision to
proceed without considering his obligations.
92. Another referee, a health
practitioner, took the view that the question of the cost for the vaccine was
only a “billing
or admin issue” and that the National Law should be
limited to “professional practice itself” and not “clinical
billing and administration”. That view is a fundamental misunderstanding
of the operation of the National Law when it comes
to the assessment of what is
improper. Any conduct that relates to the practice or purported practice of the
profession is relevant,
s139B(1)(l) of the National Law.
93. A referee
suggested Dr Ang should be excused because the vaccine rollout program was
“controversial and confusing”,
and the rules were frequently changed
resulting “in poor communication between residents and health
practitioners.”
Even if those observations be correct Dr Ang’s
conduct was not affected. Dr Ang has acknowledged he ought to have checked
his obligations at the outset and it would have been straightforward to do so.
Dr Ang always knew patients were not to be charged
for vaccination.
94. Another thought of the Complaint that “there must be some
misunderstanding, and people make mistakes and there is no perfect
being”. As we have found, this is not a case where perfection was being
required of Dr Ang. This is not a case of a
misunderstanding or mistake,
but instead it was a failure by Dr Ang to do what he should have done.
95. Our comments in this context are not directed to those individuals but
more generally to the profession to make it clear the importance
practitioners being aware of their obligations and considering matters from the
perspective of the patient.
Additional protective orders?
96. It is to
Dr Ang’s credit that he has accepted our findings and acknowledges
the appropriateness of a reprimand. As for
the need for a condition requiring
mentoring or the like we have come to the view such a condition is not
97. On 12 August 2021 conditions were placed on
Dr Ang’s registration under s150 of the National Law. Those
conditions required
Dr Ang to report certain matters to the Medical
Council, be supervised, complete a clinical ethics course, and submit to an
of his medical practice (Exhibit E – letter Medical Council of
NSW to Dr Ang 12 August 2021 2022?). On 2 August 2022
Council advised Dr Ang that the audit was complete, and the relevant
condition was removed from the register (Exhibit F – letter
Council of NSW to Dr Ang 2 August 2022). By letter of
1 June 2023 to Dr Ang (Exhibit G) the Medical Council
confirmed that
the clinical ethics course had been satisfactorily completed.
98. In a recent report (Exhibit 1, pages 33-35) Dr Ang’s
supervisor expressed the view that Dr Ang “has insight into the
conduct that was subject of the complaint” and “that no ongoing
supervision was required”. That assessment was
not disputed by the
Commission. We accept those observations.
99. In our view the conditions
imposed on Dr Ang and the process of these proceedings has brought home to
Dr Ang a sound understanding
of how it was that his conduct was improper.
In our view the conditions have done their work and there is no necessity for
any ongoing
conditions of those that have been in place or otherwise. However, a
reprimand is appropriate.
Determination
Pursuant to s146B(1)(a) of the National Law we reprimand
Dr Ang for his conduct as set out in the Complaint of 2 June 2023
particulars.
Appeal and review rights
Dr Kooi-Gan Ang has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of the date of
these written reasons.
Distribution of decision.
We provide a copy of this written statement of our decision to Dr Kooi-Gan
Ang, the Health Care Complaints Commission, the National
Board, and the Medical
Council of NSW, noting the provisions of s171E(4) of the National Law.
Mark Paul- chairperson
16 February 2024
NSWCATOD 133
HCCC v Kesserwani
[2020] NSWCATOD
HCCC v Parmenter
[2013] NSWCATOD at [50]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (825 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter