URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keech v Gaocrew Pty Ltd t/as Richardson & Wrench [2000] NSWFTT 17 (11 July 2000)
Keech v Gaocrew Pty Ltd t/as Richardson & Wrench
[2000] NSWFTT 17
File No. CM 1999/7425
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Gaocrew Pty
Ltd t/as Richardson & Wrench
APPLICATION
: Assessment of
commission payable
APPEARANCES
: Applicant in
Respondent represented by Messrs Koch & Glaser,
: 18 May 2000
Legislative Provisions:
Property Stock and Business Agents Act
Consumer Claims Act, s 13
Whether the
Applicant remained bound to his contract with the Respondent agent up to and
including the time of disposal of his property
by auction through another
Cases cited:
[1959] HCA 8
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of
[1977] HCA 40
[1978] 52 ALJR 20
The Applicant has made out a breach of the contract
sufficiently serious to deprive the Respondent of any entitlement to
commission.
Commission, agency agreement
In respect of a real estate Selling Agency Agreement dated 16 June 1999
between Mr Keech and Gaocrew Pty Ltd, the Fair Trading Tribunal
determines that
the commission assessed as payable under section 42A of the Property Stock &
Business Agent’s Act Mr Keech
to Gaocrew Pty Ltd is nil.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Mr Keech is an applicant for orders under the Fair Trading Tribunal Act for
relief from the payment of the sum of $32,700.00 claimed
by the respondent Real
Estate Agency with whom he contracted in respect of the sale of his property at
North Avoca.
Under the provisions of
section 42A
Property Stock and Business
Agents Act 1941
, a party aggrieved by a claim by a licensed real estate agent
may apply to the Tribunal for the determination, as to whether :
the licensee has an entitlement for the
whole or any part of the amount; or
whether the whole of any part of the
amount is reasonable or both.
Short Facts
The Applicant was the owner of the property Avoca, on 16 June 1999, when he
signed an Auction Agency Agreement appointing the Respondent
as his agent for
the purposes of the sale of the property.
On 20 June 1999, the Respondent
was approached by a real estate agency seeking to purchase the business of the
Respondent, trading
as Richardson and Wrench.
On 25 June 1999, the
Respondent and the buyer, Terrigal Real Estate P/L t/as LJ Hookers, agreed on
the sale of the Respondent’s
rent roll, equipment and presumably the
interest of the lease for the site, ground floor, Terrigal Esplanade,
On the 2 July 1999, contracts for the purchase of the business
were exchanged between the Respondent and Terrigal Real Estate t/a
L.J. Hookers.
On or about 6 July 1999, one of the Respondent’s directors, Mr
Koch contacted the Applicant and invited him to come to the office
in order to
brief him on the sale of the business.
On 19 July 1999, the sale of the
real estate agency business was settled.
The following day, Terrigal
R.E Pty Ltd commenced refurbishing the premises, converting it to the LJ Hooker
Corporate image.
Respondent’s directors, Ms. Glaser, to express his concern about the
to the business.
On 29 July 1999, the Applicant entered into a
Selling Agency Agreement with Ray White Real Estate. This Agency subsequently
the sale of his house.
Applicant’s Submission
The Applicant argued that the Respondent had engaged in misleading or
deceptive conduct, or conduct that was likely to mislead or
deceive, contrary to
the provisions of the Fair Trading Act. As evidence of this conduct, the
Applicant relied on the timing of
the disposal of the business of the Richardson
and Wrench Franchise within days of him entering the Agency
The Applicant argued that there was a total failure of
consideration and a fundamental breach of contract as the Respondent did not
have an office or premises from which it could properly or adequately fulfil its
obligations under the agency agreement in marketing
the property.
The Respondent’s submissions
The Respondent agent argued that, while it disposed of the business and
occupation lease of the site at which it operated its franchise
as Richardson
and Wrench, it did not dispose of its rights under the Agency Agreement executed
on 16 June 1999.
Indeed, the Respondent argued that not only did it
have the benefit of the agency agreement, but actively sought a purchaser for
Applicant, in pursuance of the agreement.
At points 7, 8 and 9 (in
page 2) of the Respondent’s written submissions the Respondent gives
details of contacts made with
a prospective purchaser of the property.
The Respondent asserts that adequate disclosure was made orally to the
Applicant on 6 July 1999, concerning the disposal of the business,
including the
fact that the business’ principals were taking a two week holiday and not
returning to work until 6 August 1999
at which stage they were to recommence
promotion of the auction of the property. (see point 14, page 3,
Respondent’s submissions).
The Respondent argues that it was
always fully capable of fulfilling its obligations and at all times
“had an office from which it could operate”.
Respondent says that the Applicant actively sought to avoid his obligations
under the Agency Agreement and did not purport to
terminate the Agency
The key issue is to determine whether the Applicant remained bound to his
contract with the Respondent agent up to and including the
time of disposal of
his property by auction through another agent.
Should the Tribunal find
that the contract between the Applicant and the Respondent executed on 16 June
1999, subsisted, then the
Tribunal will proceed to a review of the quantum of
commission, if any, payable under such agreement.
The relevant
provisions of section 42A Property Stock Business Agents Act 1941, are:
Without limiting the
Claims Act 1998
, the person served with the statement of claim in accordance
with subsection (1) or the person receiving or obtaining an itemised
provided in subsection (3) may, in accordance with
of that Act, apply
to the Tribunal for the determination of a consumer claim within the meaning of
that Act in relation to:
The entitlement of the
licensee to the whole or any part of the amount specified in the statement of
claim or the itemised account,
Whether the whole or any
part of the amount is reasonable, or both.
Without limiting the
Claims Act 1998
, the person served with the statement of claim in accordance
with subsection (1) of the person receiving or obtaining an itemised
provided in subsection (3) may, in accordance with
of that Act, apply
to the Tribunal for the determination of a consumer claim within the meaning of
that Act in relation to:
the entitlement of the
licensee to the whole or any part of the amount specified in the amount
specified in the statement of claim
of the itemised account
Whether the whole or any
part of the amount is reasonable.
Without limiting the
Consumer Claims Act 1998
, the Tribunal has
The terms or conditions of any
agreement or contract entered into between the licensee and the applicant,
The amount being more or
less than the maximum amount (if any) of remuneration to which a licensee is
entitled under this Act.
The Respondent says that the
fact that the Respondent vacated its business premises on the ground floor of
the building in which it
operated, had no effect on its entitlements under the
At first blush this is a persuasive argument in that the
Respondent says that the benefits of the Agency Agreement were not onsold
L J Hooker franchise. As a consequence, the parties to the contract remained
unaltered with each obligated to the other.
The Applicant however, says, to the
contrary, that the Respondent was not in a position to fulfil its obligation
once it moved out
of the premises on the ground floor of Terrigal Esplanade,
Terrigal and ceased to actively use the Richardson and Wrench franchise
was a “total failure of consideration and a fundamental breach of the
In oral evidence, the Respondent agent confirmed that
no notice was given in writing either before or after the sale of the business
to the Applicant. In respect of the evidence that the Applicant continued to
receive service, the Respondent gives uncorroborated
evidence of contacts
between 15 June and 20 June 1999, between the Respondent and prospective
purchasers, with a view to setting
up a chain of sales which might result in the
sale of the Applicant’s property. However, there is no evidence to
substantiate
these efforts and indeed, no suggestion that these efforts came to
In relation to the evidence of the retention by the Respondent
of the rights under the agency agreement, the Respondent alleged that
principals of the Respondent, Mr Koch and Ms Glaser would “remain as sales
people operating under the Gaocrew Corporate
License and would only operate
under the banner of LJ Hooker”, while at the same time alleging that the
Respondent retained
all existing listings. The contract between the Respondent
and the LJ Hooker purchaser was not in evidence either at hearing or
submissions.
The Respondent has contended that the
vacation of the ground floor site where-at it conducted its business when the
contract of 16
June 1999 was entered, did not disturb the legal obligations of
the Applicant.
Mr David Koch, in correspondence with the
Applicant’s solicitor, wrote to Stoikovick Banfield Macri Solicitors for
the Applicant
on 6 August 1999. Therein, Mr Koch stated
“... we have
been advised that the agency agreement is binding....”
. This letter
was sent on a letterhead of LJ Hooker Terrigal Property Management.
bottom of the letter discloses that the business was owned by Terrigal Real
Estate Pty Ltd. This was the purchaser of the Respondent’s
The suggestion that the Respondent was wholly independent of LJ Hooker
and entitled to the benefits of the contract, being the agency
agreement, does
not sit well with the fact that some agreement clearly operated where LJ Hooker
would participate with the Respondent
in attempting to sell the property [refer
point 4 page 2 Respondent’s submissions]
From the Applicant’s
perspective, he entered a contract to sell his property with a known Real Estate
Agency trading as a member
of a well recognised franchise, Richardson and
Wrench. Within four days of execution of his agency agreement, negotiations
between the proprietors of the business and a new and apparently
unrelated company for the sale of the rent roll and occupation of
floor site of the franchise. This was not disclosed to the Applicant until
negotiations commenced and after the
date of exchange of contracts for sale of the business.
It does not
appear, either on oral evidence or written submissions, that the full
relationship between LJ Hooker and the Respondent
were even then made clear to
the Applicant.
There was a clear opportunity available to the Respondent
to disclose in writing the full nature of the arrangements proposed for
handling of the applicant’s agency agreement from the date of settlement
of the sale. This was not done.
The terms of the sale of business
contract was not in evidence and the Tribunal may draw an inference from the
failure to produce
such evidence.
[1959] HCA 8
Indeed, in accepting the submissions of the Respondent,
(Point 17 page 3 Respondents submission) Ms. Glaser on behalf of the Respondent
had advised the Applicant
“...there would be two separate offices of LJ
Hooker and four additional sales people who would be able to direct potential
purchasers to the property”.
Subsequently in correspondence with the
Applicant’s solicitors Mr Koch wrote on the letterhead of LJ Hooker and
not Goacrew.
In this case, the Applicant entered a contract with the Real
Estate Agent, which was occupying a ground floor site, trading under
the name of
a large franchise. The name of the franchise was disclosed on the Selling
Agency Agreement.
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of
[1977] HCA 40
[1978] 52 ALJR 20
, the court found that BP had been induced to
enter a contract to establish an oil refinery. The Council sought to avoid
preferential
arrangements offered to BP, as the company within the BP Group
which was to occupy the site. BP argued that it was an implied term
agreement that preferential benefits were to be conferred upon any company in
the BP group of companies.
The requirements for implication of a term
were set out in the judgement at page 26. The case provides that terms may be
in a contract if certain conditions are established. The core element of
the decision was the implied term propounded by BP was ”
necessary to
give business efficacy to the
The term which
is at issue in the instant contract is whether the Respondent would remain a
member of a Real Estate Franchise Group
and in occupation of the site from
whence the Respondent conducted its business at the date of commencement of the
agency agreement.
The contract itself bears on its face a reference not
only to the Respondent corporate identity but also its business name
“Richardson
and Wrench”. The business address at which the
franchise was conducted is also noted.
The Tribunal is satisfied that
the Applicant believed he was entering an agreement to provide services with a
known entity operating
under a disclosed franchise arrangement conducted out of
a known site. The Tribunal finds that this constituted an essential term
The changes in circumstances of the contracting party were
sufficiently great that the obligations of the Agent under the contract
longer be effectively carried out on the settlement of the sale of the business
on 19 July 1999. This was due to the fact
that the Respondent was no longer in
occupation of the ground floor site and it was not operating as a franchisee of
Richardson and
The clear implication from the correspondence on
LJ Hooker letterhead to the applicant’s solicitors of 6 August 1999, is
there was some form of sub-agency agreement made with LJ Hooker which would
allegedly provide services including salesmen and referral
of contacts to the
respondent. This uncertainty compounds the breach of the implied terms of the
Selling Agency Agreement.
There is little evidence that the nature and
implications of this arrangement were clearly disclosed to the Applicant and as
this contributed to alterations to the terms of the retainer without the
consent of the applicant.
The Respondent had open to it the opportunity
to seek a replacement Selling Agency Agreement when the Applicant visited the
on 6 July 1999.
The Tribunal finds that it was an implied term
of the contract that in entering the contract as a franchisee of a large
the Respondent would retain the benefits of the franchise and
continue to occupy the site at which it was resident at the date the
was entered.
Upon this basis the Applicant has made out a breach of the
contract sufficiently serious to deprive the Respondent of any entitlement
commission.
If,however, in the alternative it was found on review that
the Respondent, in spite of the substantial changes in its trading arrangements,
still had the benefit of the contract on foot, the Tribunal is entitled by
Consumer Claims Act
to make orders which are “fair and
equitable”.
In this instance, the lack of transparency and
disclosure are such that, under section 42A (4) & (5) of Property Stock
Agent’s Act, the entitlements of the agent to commission
should be set no higher than the cost of recovery for any advertisements
advertising the Applicant’s premises between the 16 June 1999 and 19 July
1999, being the date of settlement of the
sale of the Respondent’s
There is no evidence as to the cost of any such
advertising.
In all the circumstances, the Applicant is entitled to
1. In respect of a real estate Selling Agency Agreement dated 16 June 1999
between Mr Keech and Gaocrew Pty Ltd, the Fair Trading
Tribunal determines that
the commission assessed as payable under section 42A of the Property Stock &
Business Agent’s
Act Mr Keech to Gaocrew Pty Ltd is nil.
Ian McDonell
Deputy Chairperson
Fair Trading Tribunal
11 July 2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter