URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/581.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Townsend v Rice Construction Group Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 581; (29 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Townsend v Rice Construction Group Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 581
Gary Townsend
RESPONDENT:
Rice Construction Group Pty Ltd
DATE OF DECISION:
29 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; claim for lump
sum compensation relating to right upper extremity, thoracic spine, and pelvis;
respondent disputed the applicant
sustained injury to the thoracic spine and
maintained applicant not credible given subsequent versions of injury all
inconsistent
with hospital presentation immediately after accident;
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
Kumar v Royal Comfort Bedding Pty
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
Onassis v Vergottis
Watson v Foxman
considered; inconsistencies/omissions in evidence both
factual and medical;
applicant failed to discharge onus;
award respondent in respect of the claim of injury to the thoracic spine; matter
referred to
Medical Assessor to assess whole person impairment (WPI) of the
right upper extremity (elbow) and pelvis.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
applicant sustained an injury to his right shoulder and pelvis on 4 February
for the respondent in respect of the thoracic spine.
matter be remitted to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor for
assessment as follows:
Date of injury:
4 February 2021;
assessment: whole person impairment, and
system/part: right upper extremity (shoulder), and pelvis.
to be referred to the Medical Assessor are to include:
(a) Application to Resolve a dispute and attachments, and
(b) Reply and attachments.
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
is no dispute Mr Gary Townsend (the applicant) sustained injuries when he fell
off scaffolding on 4 February 2021 (incorrectly
pleaded as 3 February 2021)
whilst employed by Rice Construction Group (the respondent). The
respondent’s insurer accepted
now claims lump sum compensation with respect to a 17% whole person impairment
(WPI) comprising 7% for the thoracic spine, 6% for
the right upper extremity
(shoulder) and 5% for the pelvis.
respondent’s insurer assessed the claim and declined to make an offer of
settlement on the basis that its qualified opinion
assessed impairment below
threshold for the right shoulder and pelvis and considered the applicant had not
sustained “injury”
to the thoracic spine in the fall. The claim for
thoracic injury was formally declined on this basis.
dispute resulted in the Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD) filed with the
Personal Injury Commission (Commission).
matter underwent the usual case management pathway proceeding to arbitration
following conciliation impasse. Mr McEnaney of counsel
instructed by Mr Kasturi
represented the applicant. Ms Warren of counsel instructed by Mr McTackett
represented the respondent. Mr
Tanilon was the insurer representative. There was
no cross examination of the applicant. The ARD, the Reply and submissions of
were considered in decision making.
DETERMINATION
sole issue for determination is whether the applicant sustained an injury to his
thoracic spine on 4 February 2021.
agreed subject to findings, the matter was to be remitted to the President for
referral to a Medical Assessor.
RELEVANT LAW
law relevant to this application is found in the
Workers Compensation Act
(the 1987 Act).
Applicant’s position
liability for injury to the pelvis and right shoulder has been accepted, in the
interests of brevity, these reasons will focus
on the evidence as it pertains to
the thoracic spine only.
Statement evidence
his statement dated 17 July 2025,
the applicant nominates that prior to his accident on
3 February 2021 he was
fit and healthy and had never suffered injury or experienced symptoms in his
thoracic spine.
recounts two accidents. The first was on 3 February 2021 (subject to this
dispute) (but actually 4 February 2021). On that day
he was on a construction
site and drilling into a wall when a supporting plank on his scaffolding moved
and caused him to fall 2m.
He landed heavily on his right side which resulted in
injury to the thoracic spine, right shoulder, pelvis and multiple rib fractures.
He ultimately underwent right rotator cuff surgery in
August 2022.
successfully returned to work but suffered another accident (not part of this
claim) in April 2022. On that occasion he was electrocuted
when his telehandler
touched powerlines. He suffered significant injuries including a hematoma in the
brain, severe burns as well
as “fractures to the T7 and L4 and widening of
the T6/7 and T7/8 facet joints.”
statement continues by informing that the ribs “repaired themselves”
but the thoracic spine is sore with restriction
in movement requiring alteration
in activities of daily living. It has impeded his hobbies. Pain is now managed
with medications.
The injuries have significantly impacted his personal, social
and work life.
Treating medical evidence
above statement is silent on treatment following the injury. Both counsels
informed the applicant was
initially transported by ambulance to the Tamworth Base Hospital and then to the
John Hunter Hospital
the following day.
records confirm paramedics attended the accident site on 4 February 2021 and
the mechanism of the fall.
Pain was primarily reported to be in the right pelvic region behind the hip
joint, the upper right flank
region with significant bruising worsening on
inspiration. There was also pain and bruising of the left knee and a laceration
the right elbow. A cervical collar was applied. Attempts to apply a pelvic
binder were hindered due to diaphoresis (excessive sweating).
transferring the applicant from the Tamworth Hospital to John Hunter Hospital
recorded a fracture of the pubis rami and
right rib area following a fall 3m of
a ladder onto concrete.
notes from the Tamworth Hospital
recorded the main complaints, as right side chest wall and hip pain. Early
evaluation of the head, chest, abdomen, pelvis, right
upper limb, left lower
limb, thoraco lumbar spine were documented and it was reported “no midline
or paramidline
tenderness”.
notes by R Hume (Senior Resident Medical Officer) (SRMO) on the same day
confirmed the applicant was sent for imaging of the
right elbow and left knee,
ribs and pelvis and specifically highlighted that rib fractures were not
radiologically reported but “can
be seen” and that the report will
be “amended”. The SRMO reported “no cervical or thoracolumbar
spinal injury”
and “no thoracic or intra abdominal
the same evening, the applicant was assessed by orthopaedic Registrar
Alawattegama
who recorded the fall
off the ladder with injuries identified as right superior and inferior pubic
rami fractures, right sacral ala
fracture and right ilium fracture with
undisplaced 4
rib fractures. Neck pain was
denied by the applicant and it was recorded that there was no “T/L spine
bony tenderness”.
Physiotherapy
notes of the Tamworth Hospital refer to treatment predominantly to the right
shoulder, ribs, hip/pelvis and left
Hunter Hospital Discharge Referral dated 12 February
refers to LCI pelvic ring
injury with nondisplaced fractures of the right superior and inferior pubic rami
and rib fractures. X-rays
of the pelvis confirmed nondisplaced fractures. X-rays
of the ribs confirmed minimally displaced fracture of the right 5
notes from MYGP Tamworth establish that the applicant has been a long-term
patient of the clinic since at least 2018. Consultations
regarding the 4
February 2021 injury commence on 9 March 2021. There is no complaint recorded
relating to thoraco lumbar spine symptoms.
Symptoms in the right shoulder are
recorded initially on 21 April 2021 (“and not picked up
with pain in
pelvis and ribs recorded at consultations prior. A certificate for pre-injury
duties was issued on 11 February
medical evidence
Bodel has been qualified in relation to both accidents, each the subject of
their own litigation. In his report dated 13 December
2023 following a
face-to-face assessment for public liability proceedings arising from the second
accident, he recorded the applicant
suffered an electrocution injury which
resulted in him being “thrown
from his machine on
24 April 2022 (not the injury the subject of these proceedings). He summarised
the injuries as (unedited):
“• Electrical burns
requiring plastic surgical repair.
compression fracture of the T7 vertebral body with a 40% compression of the
vertebral body.
Anterior wedging
of the T6 vertebral body up to 25% loss of the vertebral body height according
to the medical record.
Compression
fracture of the L4 vertebral body with approximately 15% vertebral body height
The medical
conclusion at Royal North Shore Hospital where he attended for treatment was
that these were acute fractures at T7 and
The T6 fracture
was thought to be ‘chronic’.”
Bodel recorded the past injury in 2021 when the
“fell off a roof... he did have a fracture in the
mid thoracic region...that is the old fracture which is referred to in the
reports above.”
Bodel concluded the applicant suffered fractures of the T7 and L4 in the
electrocution injury with ongoing pain and stiffness and
considered him unfit
for work. His examination findings revealed tenderness in the mid-thoracic
his report dated 10 April 2024
completed after a telehealth assessment, (and for the purposes of this claim),
he recorded following the fall from the scaffold the
applicant reported pain in
the back, pelvis, right shoulder and right side of the chest wall. He noted an
X-ray dated 4 February
2021 revealing fractures of the T6, T7 and T8 vertebra
with anterior wedging at those levels reported as “chronic” and
the degree of compression was not identified. Dr Bodel qualifies he did not see
the investigation and so could not determine
whether the fractures were
“fresh or old” but confirmed the applicant did not recall any
particular problem in the past.
in 2024 included pain in the inter scapular region of the thoracic spine and
lower back. He diagnosed “probable wedge
compression fractures in the mid
thoracic region.”
Dr Bodel reported “it is probable that he has
had additional structural damage to the thoracic region in the subsequent
electrocution.”
regards impairment he reported (unedited):
“The two fractures
at T6 and T7 which are measured as 40% for the T6 and 25% in accordance with the
WorkCover Guidelines are
added which makes it a 65% wedge compression fracture
which would place assessment those areas in the thoracic spine as DRE thoracic
category IV rating. I believe that is in part due to the subsequent injury and I
would estimate that it is likely that the description
of the thoracic spine
injury that occurred with the fall on 03 February 2021 would place him in the
DRE thoracic category II rating
with a 5% Whole Person Impairment....
He does however have an interference in activities of daily living because of
the injury to the thoracic spine that occurred on 03
February 2021 and I would
indicate a 2% loading in accordance with Item 4.34 and Item 4.35 on Page 28 of
the Fourth Edition Guidelines
giving a 7% Whole Person Impairment overall for
the thoracic spine...
There is no indication clinically of any pre-existing abnormality or
condition in those injuries prior to this injury that occurred
on 03 February
2021 and no basis for a deduction for pre-existing
impairment.”
supplementary report dated 26 February
was generated following
review of additional evidence (not particularised) but which ultimately did not
cause a change to the previously
assessed whole person impairment. Specifically
in regards to the thoracic spine, the report states
(unedited):
“As I have indicated previously, I think it is
unlikely that the spinal fractures are causally related to the event on 3
2021. I have based that assertion on the fact that although fractures
were seen at the time of the injury in the mid-thoracic region,
it was deemed
that they were “old”. They may have been an aggravation of those,
but there does not appear to be any medical
evidence that I can be absolutely
certain about indicating that there were no fractures prior to that date of
injury. The reporting
of the films said that they were old and chronic and
therefore not caused by the fall. I accept that it is a possibility that they
were, but I cannot be absolutely certain that it is probable that they
I tend to agree with Dr Nair that the particular fractures at that level in
the thoracic spine are not caused by
further supplementary report dated 21 March 2025 was generated in response to
additional evidence (again not particularised) although
it does appear that Dr
Bodel inspected films of the thoracic spine. He again indicated that he saw no
reason to alter his previously
assessed whole person impairment.
Respondent’s position
Nair, orthopaedic surgeon was qualified by the respondent. In his report dated
23 July 2024
he recorded a
history of both accidents and on examination of the thoracolumbar spine noted a
20% global reduction in range of motion.
He accepted that the applicant suffered
an injury to his right shoulder and right side of the pelvis but on review of
the evidence
and examination was not satisfied the applicant sustained an injury
to the thoracic spine on 4 February 2021. He also considered
the applicant had
not sustained an injury to the thoracic spine as a result of the electrocution
injury in April 2022 and reported
(unedited):
“There is no
evidence of a thoracic spine injury. I scrutinised the discharge summaries from
the John Hunter Hospital. There
was no mention of thoracic spine injuries of
note. Indeed, he does not have symptoms in his thoracic spine. Wedging of the
vertebrae is often physiological.”
Submissions
summary, counsel for the applicant submitted:
(a) the applicant is credible. He has suffered significant injury on 4 February
2021 falling from a height of more than 2m and landing
predominantly on his
right side. Ambulance records record injury to the right flank which could be
inferred to be the region of
the thoracic spine;
(b) the hospital notes also refer to injury to the right flank and it can be
inferred that this means the thoracic spine especially
given the trauma
sustained to the ribs and right pelvis;
(c) the applicant may not have made any specific complaint of thoracic spine
pain but it cannot be ignored that he was heavily medicated
to control symptoms
associated with significant fractures arising from the trauma of the fall;
(d) the fall was significantly violent and the initial focus on the fractures
explains the absence of complaint to the thoracic spine;
(e) whilst the hospital notes refer to nil tenderness of the thoracic spine this
of itself does not mean that injury did not occur.
Tenderness is not indicative
of injury. There is no record in the notes of range of motion testing that
would elicit any tenderness
or pain on movement and there should be limited
reliance placed on the specific entries relating to the thoracic spine on
hospital presentation;
(f) the lack of complaint of thoracic spine symptoms should be of little
significance. There were also lack of right shoulder complaints
but ultimately
this was accepted as an injury by the respondent. Delayed reporting does not
mean that the injury did not occur as
stated, particularly given the violent
nature of the fall;
(g) the hospital notes should be treated with caution. Initial radiology reports
recorded nil fractures initially which were inconsistent
with clinical
presentation. It was only after the report was queried that a correction made
identifying the fractures. This therefore
demonstrates there were mistakes made
in initial diagnosis and assessment at the hospital;
(h) it is a matter of commonsense that given the applicant suffered injury to
his right flank and right pelvis after falling from
a height of 2m that he would
have suffered injury to his thoracic spine, and
(i) all areas claimed should be referred to a Medical Assessor for assessment of
whole person impairment.
summary, counsel for the respondent submitted:
(a) the respondent accepts injury to the pelvis and right shoulder;
(b) the onus is on the applicant to establish injury. His statement is
inconsistent and unsupported with the contemporaneous records
and examinations
of the paramedics and various staff at Tamworth and John Hunter Hospitals. More
likely than not, the passage of
time has resulted in subconscious
construction/reconstruction of the nature of his two injuries;
(c) the applicant’s qualified evidence is based on the applicant’s
skewed recollection of events rendering it of little
probative value, greater
weight should be afforded to the contemporaneous hospital notes;
(d) the applicant’s own qualified evidence does not support
fracture/injury to the thoracic spine resulting from the 2021 accident.
has indicated he has agreed with Dr Nair’s assessment relating to thoracic
spinal injury. Further Dr Bodel was qualified
initially in regard to the second
accident (electrocution) where he nominated the applicant suffered serious
injury to the thoracic
spine. His 2024 assessment (relating to this claim) makes
no allowance for any injury suffered to the thoracic spine in the second
accident and postulates all of the thoracic spinal symptoms (apart from the
fractures) relate to the injury subject to this claim.
He has not explained his
conclusions, and
(e) the applicant has not established on the balance of probabilities that he
sustained an injury to the thoracic spine on 4 February
APPLICATION OF THE LAW, FINDINGS AND REASONS
4 of the 1987 Act states that injury means personal injury arising out of or in
the course of employment. Further s 9A of
the 1987 Act requires employment to
also be the substantial contributing factor for compensation to be payable
(except in cases of
disease injury) where it must be established that employment
is the main contributing factor.
establish injury, the evidence must demonstrate sudden or
identifiable
pathological change
The word “injury” refers to both the event
and the pathology arising from
Further, the issue of causation must be determined based on the facts in
each case and the application of the commonsense evaluation
of the causal chain
Onus of proof
onus of establishing injury falls on the applicant and the standard of proof is
on the balance of probabilities. On this note,
it is not necessary that I be
satisfied to a degree of certainty but, by the same token, it will not be
sufficient if I be merely
satisfied that it is possible that the injuries were
suffered in the manner alleged. When making findings, the Court of Appeal has
identified that a tribunal of fact must be “actually persuaded” of
the occurrence or existence of the fact before it
can be found.
weight of contemporaneous evidence and reliability of memory
circumstances where there is a conflict between the contemporaneous evidence and
recall of events the following is instructive:
Witnesses, especially those who are emotional, who think that they are morally
in the right, tend very easily and unconsciously
to conjure up a legal right
that did not exist. It is a truism, often used in accident cases, that with
every day that passes the
memory becomes fainter and the imagination becomes
more active. For that reason a witness, however honest, rarely persuades a Judge
that his present recollection is preferable to that which was taken down in
writing immediately after the accident occurred. Therefore,
contemporary
documents are always of the utmost
importance.
(ii) ...human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for
a variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility
increases with
the passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and
the processes of memory are overlaid,
often subconsciously, by perceptions or
self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said
or could have
been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little
more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again
subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human
experience.”
when making findings of fact in relation to credibility I have
(a) the consistency of the applicant’s evidence with what is agreed, or
clearly shown by other evidence to have occurred, and
(b) the internal consistency of the applicant’s evidence throughout the
course of the litigation.
Did the applicant suffer an injury to his thoracic spine?
is complicated by the proximity of the thoracic spine to the right flank.
is fair to say, that the respondent relies heavily on what is not in the
evidence, namely the absence of contemporaneous complaints
relating to the
thoracic spine to treating doctors for several years post the 2021 injury
especially in circumstances where contemporaneous
hospital assessments following
the trauma specifically reported no injury to the thoracolumbar spine. The
matter also becomes
complicated as Dr Bodel has reported the applicant sustained
significant injuries in the 2022 accident to his thoracic spine yet
subsequent report maintains the 2021 accident (the subject of this claim) to be
responsible for the applicant’s presentation
in the thoracic spine without
any cogent explanation.
considered the evidence and submissions above, I find the applicant has not met
the onus and established on the balance of
probabilities with a degree of actual
persuasion or affirmative satisfaction that he sustained an injury, i.e., a
“physiological
change or disturbance” in his thoracic spine as
defined in s 4 or s 4b (II) of the 1987 Act as a result of workplace events
February 2021. This is because:
(a) I have given careful consideration to the applicant’s submission that
the alleged injury to the thoracic spine was overlooked
or underestimated by the
applicant and all of the doctors who have examined him (other than Dr Bodel)
because their focus was on
the fractures of the pelvis and ribs which was the
reason for the hospital admission. I also note the submission that symptoms may
have been obscured by the significant pain control offered to the applicant. An
equally plausible explanation is that as submitted
by the respondent, that is,
the lack of attention to the thoracic spine, is because there was in fact no
injury to that region. I
so find. This is particularly so given that the
applicant never gave any history of having suffered pain at the thoracic spine
the time of the initial injury or shortly thereafter, with such complaints
initially raised with Dr Bodel for the purposes of his
public liability
proceedings;
(b) I am very mindful of the case law that requires a decision maker to treat
clinical notes with caution given the primary concern
is with treatment which
could account for a lack of precise recording of symptoms arising from any work
related event.
applicant’s counsel questioned the accuracy of the hospital notes and
cautioned on over reliance, especially given the
initial radiology report of the
ribs revealed no fracture which was clearly inconsistent with physical
assessment ultimately resulting
in the report being corrected. There was also a
lack of reporting of the right shoulder symptoms despite liability being
subsequently
accepted by the respondent. However, I find the hospital notes
refer to examination/assessment of the thoracolumbar spine and on
no less than
three occasions specifically record there to be no injury or tenderness to the
area. This is not a case where there
has been an omission in documenting
thoracic spine symptoms but rather there were specific enquiries made which
established there
was no injury or complaint;
(c) counsel maintains that observation by hospital staff of the mere “lack
of tenderness” in the thoracic spine is insufficient
to assess injury to
the area and this properly should be tested by range of motion and movement. I
disagree. Commonsense would suggest
that if there were symptoms complained of
in the thoracic spine, further assessment would likely have been undertaken
given that the records show that a comprehensive head to toe
assessment was undertaken including assessment of the head, neck, upper
spine and lower limbs;
(d) whilst there was no tenderness noted in the thoracic spine at the hospital
arising out of the 2021 accident, Dr Bodel in his
2023 attributed such
tenderness to the 2022 accident. He did not however make such assessment in his
2024 report as this was a telehealth
assessment;
(e) the submissions that perhaps symptoms in the thoracic spine were
disguised/masked due to medication is not advanced nor supported
by either the
applicant’s statement or any medical evidence;
(f) it was advanced that given the nature of the fall/trauma it is commonsense
the applicant suffered an injury to the thoracic spine.
I reject this as whilst
I accept the fall was significant, the absence of injury to the cervical or
lumbar spine, invokes a commonsense
conclusion which does not allow for a
finding that the thoracic spine would have been injured in isolation;
(g) the injury to the flank is noted but this appears to largely reflect the
area between the rib cage and hip. Counsel for the applicant
inferred this could
also refer to the thoracic spine given its proximity. Had the flank included the
thoracic spine, the specific
examination, assessment and documentation of the
thoracic spine would have been redundant. The records however establish that it
was assessed in isolation. It follows and I find an inference cannot be drawn
(h) counsel highlighted mistakes were made in diagnosis at the hospital
specifically referring to the failure to identify the rib
fractures on
radiological investigation and so it can be inferred mistakes were made in
relation to the thoracic spine. I note that
the radiological report was
corrected following physical assessment of the ribs by the SRMO at which time
the thoracic spine was
also assessed and recorded to have no injury. I accept
that errors were made by the radiologist but that does not automatically suggest
that errors were made by the treating physicians attending upon the
(i) the reports of Dr Bodel have not advanced the matter. His first assessment
suggested the applicant was totally unfit on account
of injuries which included
fractures and wedging of the thoracic spine at the T4, T6 and T7 levels after
the applicant was thrown
off his machine in the 2022 accident. His subsequent
assessment for the purposes of this claim makes no deduction for injuries that
occurred when being thrown off the machine (despite articulating them
specifically in his earlier report) suggesting the entire presentation,
impairment and restrictions in activities of daily living arising from the
thoracic spine was attributable to the 4 February 2021
accident. He acknowledges
chronic pathology in the thoracic spine but makes no deduction. (Clearly the
impact of pre-existing pathology
and any subsequent injury is the domain of a
Medical Assessor, although I raise this as I have found his reports and
specifically
his conclusions to be internally inconsistent and overall fail to
engage with the chronology of events). Dr Bodel agrees with Dr
Nair that the
fractures at various levels in the thoracic spine were not the result of the
2021 workplace injury yet maintains the
applicant did suffer an injury (outside
of the fractures) to the thoracic spine, which is not supported by the
contemporaneous medical
(j) the applicant was assessed by Dr Bodel in 2024 for his 2021 injury. Three
years elapsed with a significant accident in 2022 including
electrocution in the
interim. The applicant reported to Dr Bodel he had ongoing pain in the thoracic
region post the 2021 accident
but this is not supported by either the hospital
nor general practitioner records. I find the variations in the history of injury
during the progress of the claim likely due to subconscious
construction/reconstruction of events due to the passage of time and
diminishing credibility of the applicant. I further find the applicant’s
representations on causation to be inconsistent
and misaligned with the
contemporaneous hospital records and treating doctors’ notes which I
(k) I acknowledge the opinion of Dr Nair. I agree with applicant’s counsel
that the report lacks detail, however, to the extent
of any overlap, it is
consistent with the history obtained by paramedics, hospital staff and the
general practitioner.
these reasons, I find in favor of the respondent in respect of the allegation of
injury to the thoracic spine.
now make the findings and orders set out in page 1 of the Certificate of
Determination.
Folio 74 to 79
Folio 43 to 47
Folio 22-24
Cleaning Services Pty Ltd v Petkoska
[2000] HCA 45
Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v May
Castro v State
Transit Authority (NSW)
[2000] NSWCC 12
Lyons v Master
Builders Association of NSW Pty Ltd
(2003) 25NSWCCR 442 at
Kooragang Cement
Pty Ltd v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
; 10 NSWCCR
Cosmopolitan Homes
[1968] 2 Lloyds Rep 403
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Mastronardi v State of New South Wales
[2009] NSWCA 270.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter