URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Payne v Mercy Hospitals NSW Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 69; (8 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Payne v Mercy Hospitals NSW Ltd
[2025] NSWPICPD 69
Michelle Payne
RESPONDENT:
Mercy Hospitals NSW Ltd
Employers Mutual Limited – as agent for the NSW Self Insurance
Corporation
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W28866/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
8 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
name of the respondent, wherever necessary, is amended to “Mercy Hospitals
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 9 April 2025 is revoked.
matter is remitted to a different Member for re-determination.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – where there is no foundation for the
conclusion reached, there is error of law –
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
Minister for Immigration
& Multicultural Affairs v Al-Miahi
[2001] FCA 744
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1970) 45 ALJR 465
Onesteel Reinforcing
Pty Ltd v Sutton
[2012] NSWCA 282
applied – where there is a failure
to deal with a submission, the submission must be substantial and material to
the outcome
Wang v State of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 263
Day v SAS Trustee Corporation
[2021] NSWCA 71
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr J Dodd, counsel
McCabe Partners Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr D Baran, counsel
Bartier Perry Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Payne v Mercy Public Hospital Inc
[2025] NSWPIC 137
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
9 April 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Michelle Payne (the appellant) lodged a claim for weekly payments and treatment
expenses in respect of an alleged psychological
injury, described as an
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation and/or deterioration of a disease
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Act), occurring in the course of her employment with Mercy Hospitals NSW Ltd
(the respondent). The injury was deemed to
have occurred on 1 March 2021. The
respondent was the last employer who employed the appellant in employment that
was said to be
a substantial contributing factor to the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation and/or deterioration of a disease, pursuant to s
16(1)(b) of the 1987 Act.
respondent accepted that the appellant suffered an injury as alleged, but
disputed that the appellant was entitled to compensation
on the basis that the
psychological injury was caused by reasonable action taken by the respondent
with respect to discipline, in
accordance with s 11A of the 1987 Act.
dispute proceeded to arbitration before a Member of the Personal Injury
Commission (the Commission). The Member accepted that
the injury was caused by
reasonable action taken by the respondent with respect to discipline and entered
an award in favour of the
respondent.
appellant appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties indicated that the appeal can be determined on the basis of the written
application and the written opposition, without
the need for an oral hearing.
this appeal was lodged and the timetable for submissions was closed, the Court
of Appeal (Bell CJ, Leeming, Kirk, McHugh and
Free JJA) in
State of New South
Wales v Culhana
a consideration of the effect of the 2011 amendments to s 352(5) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
and determined that a series
of decisions misunderstood the effect of the amendments by applying an unduly
narrow test in determining
errors of fact.
31 July 2025, a Direction was issued by a Delegate of the President requiring
the parties to make any submissions they wished to
make in respect of the
application of
. The appellant lodged submissions in response to
the Direction on 5 August 2025 and the respondent lodged its submissions on 14
2025. A summary of those submissions is included in the summary of the
parties’ substantive submissions below.
have had regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents and
submissions that are before me, and the submissions by
the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined on the basis of these documents. I am
satisfied that I have sufficient information
to proceed ‘on the
papers’ without holding any conference or formal hearing and that this is
the appropriate course in
the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met. The
Member’s decision was not interlocutory in nature, so that leave to appeal
the decision is
not required.
The name of the respondent
proceedings below and the citation of that decision referred to the respondent
as “Mercy Public Hospital Inc”. In
submissions dated 9 May 2025, the
appellant indicated that the correct name of the respondent is “Mercy
Hospitals NSW Ltd”.
In the respondent’s Notice of Opposition to
Appeal Against the Decision of a Member (opposition), the respondent also
that the correct name of the respondent is Mercy Hospitals NSW Ltd and
seeks to have the respondent’s name amended accordingly.
therefore amend the name of the respondent, wherever necessary, to “Mercy
Hospitals NSW Ltd”.
THE EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statements
appellant provided a statement dated 12 May
She described a past history
of adverse personal events for which she was prescribed antidepressant
medication on two occasions.
She said that she commenced employment with the
respondent in 2001, most recently working in the Transitional Aged Care Program
the position of a coordinator, which was a community program to assist aged
people who were returning home from hospital.
appellant stated that in 2016, following one of the personal stressors, she was
placed on a performance management plan for a
period because she was not
concentrating on her work and fell behind.
appellant said that one of the respondent’s clients, who she referred to
as “H”, had been participating in the
Transitional Aged Care Program
on numerous occasions for about six years, and, over time, the appellant became
close friends with
“H”, who would ask staff if the appellant could
visit her. She advised that she would often visit “H” at
her home on
weekends and would help her with showering because “H” was not happy
with being showered by a male worker.
appellant indicated that “H” developed terminal cancer in 2020, so
the appellant visited “H” more frequently.
She said that
“H” was admitted into the program in early December 2020 as a
palliative care client and would attend the
respondent’s premises for pain
management. The appellant described the ongoing friendly and supportive
interactions she had
with “H”, and how “H”’s
condition deteriorated over time, resulting in “H” going into care
at the respondent’s premises.
appellant indicated that she received a telephone call on 22 February 2021 from
one of the nurses, who advised that “H”
was frightened and had asked
for the appellant to come to her room. The appellant stated that she stayed with
“H” throughout
the night because “H” was very unsettled
and disorientated. Shortly before 8.30 am on the following morning
(23 February
2021) she advised Ms Claire Findlay, her line manager, that
she had stayed overnight in her capacity as a friend, and asked whether
permission to stay in the room until the carer and “H”’s
friend arrived at 10 am. She said that she was
due to start work at 8.30 am so
she worked on her laptop until 9.30 am when Ms Findlay came to the room and
directed her to attend
a meeting with Ms Findlay and Mr Patrick Maloney, the
nurse unit manager.
appellant advised that at that meeting, Mr Maloney asked her why she was asked
to sit with “H”, and she explained
that one of the nurses had asked
her to do so. She said that Mr Maloney told her that this amounted to
professional misconduct and
asked her for the name of the nurse. The appellant
said that she was asked whether she had written her name and contact number in
“H”’s file. She denied that she had written her name and
appellant indicated
that Mr Maloney cited professional misconduct, breach of privacy and
confidentiality, and abandonment of duties,
and told the appellant that she was
in a lot of trouble because she could have deprived the carers of their right to
be present if
“H” had passed away. The appellant said that Ms
Findlay advised her that there were concerns about her professional conduct
which did not auger well for her and there was to be a further meeting with Mr
Maloney on the following Monday. The appellant said
that she was told that from
that time, she could no longer visit “H” or have any contact with
her either as a friend
or a client, whether it was in work time or her own time
and she was warned that otherwise there would be
“repercussions”.
appellant indicated that at that stage, she became quite upset and began to cry.
She advised that she asked Mr Maloney if someone
could sit with “H”
and Mr Maloney responded that “[p]eople die by themselves all the
which she said upset
her further. The appellant said that she was offered the assistance of the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP)
and was told to go home and take annual leave
for the day.
appellant said that she attended a second meeting on 25 February 2021, when she
met with Ms Findlay, who told her that she had
spoken with Human Resources. She
said Ms Findlay told her that there were concerns about her professional
misconduct, said that things
did not look promising and that there was to be a
further meeting with Mr Maloney on the following Monday. The appellant stated
she became very upset but continued to work that day and the following day,
which was a Friday.
appellant said that “H” was transferred into a smaller room, and on
Monday 1 March 2021, she was told that “H”
had passed away over the
weekend. The appellant stated that she became anxious and upset, particularly
and be with “H” at that time.
day, she attended a third meeting, this time with Mr Maloney and Ms Findlay and
her support person, Marlene Irving, who was also
quite close to “H”.
She said that Ms Findlay commented that she could not see why a support person
was necessary. She
stated that she explained to Ms Findlay how the friendship
with “H” had evolved and how she would spend a lot of her
with “H”, often when staff said that “H” would ask for
her to visit.
appellant said that Ms Findlay advised her that continuing a friendship with a
client, sending emails from “H”’s
room and giving her private
telephone number to the client amounted to professional misconduct, that the
appellant should have advised
Ms Findlay that she was visiting “H”
in her own time and that she was staying overnight with “H.” The
stated that Mr Maloney denied that he knew that the appellant had
stayed with “H”, and Ms Findlay said that the appellant
should have
reported to Mr Maloney that “H” had problems communicating with
staff at night and that her failure to do
so also constituted misconduct. The
appellant stated that Mr Maloney had been in the room when “H”
reported “H”’s
concerns to the doctor, it was noted in
“H”’s clinical notes, and also Mr Maloney knew she stayed
there when she
spoke to him on one occasion while she was getting herself a cup
appellant indicated that Mr Maloney queried her about the consequences of
abandoning her duties and she confirmed that it was
a matter of instant
dismissal and asked whether she was losing her job. She said that Ms Findlay
advised that they would need to
discuss that with Human Resources.
appellant stated that she was very afraid of losing her job and had been given
no prior warning of this meeting, either orally
or in writing. She said that her
usual general practitioner was on leave, so she consulted Dr Judith Nall-Bird,
general practitioner,
who advised her not to return to work and provided the
appellant with a medical certificate. The appellant advised that she submitted
her resignation to Ms Findlay, Ms Mary-Lou Cusack (the Operations Manager) and
to Mr Maloney because she did not want the allegations
placed on her record of
employment. She said Ms Cusack refused to accept the resignation and indicated
that she could not understand
why the appellant had acted so drastically. The
appellant stated that she had not been told the outcome of the meeting on 1
2021, she had not returned to work, and she felt sad that she had not been
there for her friend.
appellant provided a further statement dated 9 February 2022, which was
consistent with her earlier
She confirmed that on 22
February 2021, while “H” was in the respondent’s palliative
care unit, one of the nurses
(Ms Annette Hill) called her, advising that
“H” was scared and in a frightened state and had asked the appellant
the unit and sit with her. In addition, the appellant stated that she
had known that she was not allowed to strike up a relationship
with a care taker
if she was to receive an inheritance from the care taker but did not know that
it was a criminal offence. She said
that she did not inherit any benefit from
“H” and would do things for “H” in her own time and at
a third statement dated 31 July 2024, the appellant described the ongoing
difficulties she was experiencing as a result of the
conduct of the
respondent’s representatives. The appellant referred to the evidence that
Mr Maloney denied ever knowing of
her relationship with “H” and
pointed out that the friendship was well documented and widely commented on by
staff members,
Statement of Ms Marlene Irving
Irving provided a statement dated 6 May
She advised that she was an
enrolled nurse and had known the appellant for approximately 15 years. She said
that, as a health professional,
she would attend the appellant’s patients.
She advised that the appellant was under some pressure at work prior to the
leading up to her workers compensation claim. She observed that the
appellant’s work was of the highest standard and she would
be upset if her
work was questioned.
Irving stated that she was approached by the appellant, who told her that she
was required to attend a meeting because she had
been accused of being
unprofessional and acting outside of the scope of her role. Ms Irving said that
the appellant was noticeably
upset, so Ms Irving agreed to attend the meeting
Irving advised that she and the appellant attended the meeting with Ms Findlay
and Mr Maloney. She stated that during the meeting
Ms Findlay spoke about
how bad the appellant’s behaviour was, how the appellant had breached the
boundaries with a patient
and how a personal relationship with a patient was not
Irving observed that all of the staff who dealt with “H” developed a
relationship with her. She indicated that she
commented to Ms Findlay that it
was a small town and everybody knew each other, but Ms Findlay told her to be
quiet, or she would
have to leave the meeting. She said that Ms Findlay
repeatedly kept telling the appellant that she had crossed the boundaries by
staying with “H”. Ms Irving said that the appellant queried whether
her employment was to be terminated but neither Mr
Maloney or Ms Findlay
responded to her or provided the appellant with any reassurance.
Ms Mary-Louise Cusack
Cusack, the respondent’s operations manager and Director of Nursing, made
a statement dated 6 May 2021.
advised that the appellant worked under the supervision of her line manager, Ms
Findlay. She stated that she was aware that the
appellant had a close
relationship with the resident “H”, who had passed away recently. Ms
Cusack recalled a conversation
with the appellant in which she informed the
appellant that she would not accept the appellant’s resignation and
invited the
appellant to come to see her and talk with her.
Cusack indicated that when the appellant did go to see her, the appellant was
very upset and emotional, so she advised the appellant
to go away and give some
thought to her decision to resign and not make the decision rashly. She added
that she offered the appellant
EAP counselling and informed the appellant that
it was never the intent of the meeting with Mr Maloney and Ms Findlay to
her employment, which they did not have the authority to do. She said
that she told the appellant that the meeting was only to discuss
appellant what had occurred and why.
Cusack confirmed that the appellant withdrew her resignation in
Mr Patrick Maloney
Maloney, nurse unit manager, provided a statement dated 6 May
He referred to the meeting on
23 February 2021 and observed that the appellant did not appear distressed at
first, but by the end
of the meeting, she had become emotional and agitated. He
denied that he had said that the person who called the appellant to visit
“H” would be in trouble and his intention was to have a conversation
with the person to ascertain why the person had
called the appellant. He said
that at that stage, all he was aware of was that the appellant’s name and
telephone number had
been handwritten on “H”’s notes, which
meant that that information was not recorded in the system. He said that
unclear whether “H” would always ask for the appellant to
Maloney denied that he told the appellant that she was in serious trouble, but
said that he did advise her that bringing patient
information into a clinical
area raised significant privacy concerns and that she did not have permission to
perform her work duties
by a patient’s bedside. He further denied that he
mentioned that the appellant might have to attend court because of the
allegations.
Maloney referred to the conversation relating to the allegation that the
appellant had abandoned her employment. He explained that
the appellant needed
to go home because she was distressed and tired, so that she was unable to
perform her duties. He added that
he had asked the appellant if she had written
her name down as the contact for “H” and the appellant advised him
she had given her telephone to a member of the medical staff, but she did
not identify the staff member.
Maloney advised that he had not had the opportunity to speak with
“H”’s next of kin.
Maloney denied that he continually spoke about professional misconduct, and
asserted that all that he said was that abandonment
of duty could be considered
as professional misconduct. He said that he advised the appellant that visiting
the patient could be
construed as favouritism over other patients but told her
that she could visit a patient in normal visiting hours in her own time.
Maloney denied that he commented that “people die in here all of the
but what he did say
was that sometimes patients wait for the last visitor to arrive, or for visitors
to leave, before the patient
Maloney asserted that during the meeting, Ms Findlay did not make any
“material comment” because he was the one who
organised the meeting
and was asking the questions so that he could ascertain why the appellant was at
the patient’s bedside.
He added that Ms Findlay was there because she was
the appellant’s manager. He said that the appellant did advise that she
had emailed Ms Findlay to tell her that she intended to work from the
patient’s bedside that day.
Maloney said that he stopped the meeting because the appellant was distressed
and crying. He said that he suggested that the appellant
should consult the EAP,
told her to go home and offered to call a taxi, but she declined the offer.
Maloney recalled that, at the meeting on 1 March 2021, the appellant was given
the opportunity to provide her version of events,
which she did, disclosing that
she had stayed overnight with “H”. He said that Ms Findlay advised
the appellant that
maintaining a personal relationship with a patient was
professionally inappropriate and not misconduct. He observed that staff members
providing their contact details to patients put them at risk of burnout because
the patient could call at any time throughout the
day or night.
Maloney confirmed that Ms Findlay told Ms Irving that as a support person, she
was not to make comments. He added that he had spoken
to “H” about
issues with the staff, so it was unnecessary for the appellant to raise that
issue at the meeting. He indicated
that the possibility of termination was not
raised by him or Ms Findlay, it was raised by the appellant when she was asked
understood the seriousness of abandoning her employment. He said that the
appellant queried whether her employment was to be terminated
Ms Findlay indicated that she was not being terminated, however it was a
performance management issue which would need
to be referred to Human
Ms Clare Findlay
Findlay made a statement dated 6 May
She advised that she was
the appellant’s direct manager. She described the appellant’s
duties. She acknowledged that
the appellant fulfilled parts of her role
exceedingly well, however there had been an issue in 2018 in relation to her
she was placed on a performance management program.
Findlay confirmed that she had received an email from the appellant on 23
February 2021 asking whether she could stay with “H”
until 10 am and
then go into her office. She said that the email was sent at 8.25 am.
Findlay said that, when she arrived at work, Ms Cusack enquired of her whether
the appellant was working that day because the appellant
was wearing a T shirt
and thongs. She said that she then came across the email, so she went to the
ward and the appellant was sitting
with “H” in
“H”’s room with her work spread out over the tray table,
appearing dishevelled. She advised
that she then asked Mr Maloney why the
appellant was in “H”’s room and he said he did not know, so
she inspected
the notes, which recorded that “H” had been distressed
and had requested the appellant to be with her and the appellant
came in and
stayed with “H” overnight. She also noted that the appellant’s
name was handwritten indicating that
she was “H”’s next of
Findlay stated that she consulted Mr Maloney (who was in charge of
“H”’s ward) and together they met with the
appellant in a
room. Ms Findlay indicated that the concerns were whether “H” was
receiving the best care, whether somebody
was acting unprofessionally on the
ward, whether the appropriate persons were being contacted on behalf of
“H” and whether
the next of kin were being respected and notified.
Findlay advised that she and Mr Maloney were concerned about the appellant and
were trying to get across to her that what happened
was improper. She said they
simply wanted to get the appellant to her home and calm her down. Ms Findlay
observed that Mr Maloney
handled the meeting very well, and she was surprised
that the appellant took the comments negatively.
Findlay further observed that the appellant was exhausted, emotional and in
tears and it was apparent that she could not function
properly, so they offered
her EAP counselling, a taxi home, or for someone to drive her home, as she could
not have performed her
duties that day.
Findlay stated that, when Mr Maloney mentioned going to court, he was only
trying to make her understand that her staying with
“H” was a poor
decision and they could not allow her to continue with such inappropriate
conduct. Ms Findlay remarked
that the appellant had no reason to speak with
“H” as “H” was not going to be admitted to the
appellant’s
Findlay remarked that the staff members did form professional relationships with
the patients but were not permitted to cross the
line to act as next of kin or
become overly familiar with them. Ms Findlay denied that she advised the
appellant that things were
not “looking good” for the
Findlay referred to the meeting on 1 March 2021. She said that she may have
commented that the appellant did not need a support
person because the meeting
was not a performance meeting. She said that she was happy for the appellant to
have a support person
Findlay provided a summary of the appellant’s explanation about her
relationship with “H” and the reason for
her staying overnight in
“H”’s room. Ms Findlay said that the appellant advised that
she had asked Ms Findlay for
permission to stay in the room, however
Ms Findlay indicated that she would not have given permission for her to
stay in a dying
woman’s room as it was not a private area and others would
be able to see what was on the appellant’s computer screen.
said that Mr Maloney commented that staying with a dying patient was not a
service offered by the respondent to all patients.
Ms Findlay stated that she
advised the appellant that the appellant was a clinician and had attended the
workplace in that capacity
without her manager’s knowledge and that in the
time the appellant spent with “H” she was not caring for her own
patients, which amounted to an abandonment of her duties. Ms Findlay indicated
that she asked the appellant whether she understood
the consequences of
abandoning her duties and the appellant responded that her employment could be
terminated and queried whether
that was to occur.
Findlay referred to comments made during the meeting by Ms Irving and said that
she warned Ms Irving that as a support person she
should remain quiet, or she
would be asked to leave the meeting.
Findlay observed that, at the end of the meeting the appellant appeared
emotional, so she suggested the appellant take a break.
Ms Findlay advised that
that was the last time she had seen the appellant. She said that, on the
following morning, Ms Cusack advised
that she had received a letter of
resignation from the appellant, which Ms Findlay said shocked her because she
had never told the
appellant that she would lose her job. Ms Findlay said that
it was agreed between her and Ms Cusack that Ms Cusack would take over
discussion with the appellant about her ongoing employment.
The respondent’s documentary evidence
addition to the statement evidence lodged, the respondent relied upon the
respondent’s “Managing Misconduct”
Policy Directive and
procedures, and the Position Description for a Transition Aged Care Program
(TACP) Case Coordinator.
document “Position Description” was not the subject of submissions
by the parties and was not referred to by the
Member in her reasons. Nor does it
appear relevant to the issues on appeal.
respect of the Managing Misconduct Policy Directive at 1.2, the document
provides definitions of what constitutes “Misconduct”
(a) “Behaviour or conduct which seriously or repeatedly breaches expected
standards, as identified in relevant legislation
(such as the
Health Services
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
registration standards or codes/guidelines approved by a National Health
Practitioner Board or NSW Health policies (such as the
Code of Conduct);
(b) Refusal to carry out a lawful and reasonable direction given by a line
manager or another member of staff authorised to give
the direction;
(c) Reportable (ie child-related) conduct as defined under the
Ombudsman Act
(including allegations relating to conduct outside the workplace);
(d) Corrupt conduct as defined under the
Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act 1988
(e) Serious wrongdoing that could be the subject of a public interest disclosure
Public Interest Disclosures Act 1994
, ie relating to corrupt
conduct, maladministration, serious and substantial waste, or failure to deal
appropriately with Government
Information;
(f) Criminal charges or convictions that have an adverse impact on the workplace
or the role or performance of the staff member (including
such offences
committed outside the workplace and/or work hours, or prior to appointment to
NSW Health);
(g) Making vexatious allegations, or knowingly making false or misleading public
interest disclosures;
(h) A failure to comply or cooperate with the processes for investigating or
managing misconduct set out in this Policy
Directive.”
mandatory requirements of the Policy Directive were set out on the first page of
the document, and included the requirement that:
“A person who
is subject of a misconduct process must be afforded the right to a support
person being present at any interviews.
Other support may also need to be
offered to all affected persons, where
appropriate.”
Policy Directive at 2.3 provides:
Advising the staff
A staff member who is the subject of an initial review regarding potential
misconduct should be informed that an issue has been raised
as credible details indicating potential misconduct have been identified, and it
is deemed safe and appropriate
to do so (Information Sheet 7). Any verbal advice
should be confirmed in
Policy Directive at 5.3 provides:
Advice to a staff
member who is subject to a misconduct process
Written advice must be provided to the staff member about the allegations
against him or her and about the investigation process.
The advice must contain
sufficient information about the allegations to allow the staff member to
provide a considered
The medical evidence
issue in this appeal is limited to the question of whether the
respondent’s actions were reasonable, which is not a medical
issue. It is
therefore not necessary to summarise the whole of the medical evidence. It is
convenient, however, to note the entries
in the clinical notes recorded by the
appellant’s general practitioners on 1 March 2021 and 10 March 2021.
Dr Judith Nall-Bird, general practitioner
appellant consulted Dr Nall-Bird of the Young District Medical Centre on 1 March
The history recorded by Dr
Nall-Bird was:
“Has been terminated from her job, devastated
Issue with relationship with Palliative patient
Had been warned off seeing her
Feels she can’t challenge the decision
Feels she can no longer work there
‘Abandonment of duties’ when she sat with patient overnight
‘Professional misconduct’ when she took the patient home to see
Good family support and they are aware of the issues”.
Nall-Bird issued the appellant with a medical certificate, certifying that the
appellant was unfit for work from 1 March 2021 to
Dr Diane Larcombe, general practitioner
appellant attended Dr Larcombe, who was from the same practice as Dr Nall-Bird
and who was the appellant’s usual treating
general practitioner. The
clinical note dated 10 March 2021 noted that the
“had meeting as documented in Judith Nall Bird's
notes on 01/03/2021
felt she was going to be fired at end of meeting so she handed in her
resignation which has not been accepted as yet
was spending time with a patient who was also a friend and the patient had
asked [the appellant] to be with her teary +++ throughout
had a witness in [Ms Irving], [Mr Maloney] with her for second meeting with
[Ms Findlay] and [Mr Maloney]
felt she was going to be dismissed on the spot at that meeting
[Mr Maloney] actually said to her ‘lots of people die alone’
implying she did not have to go to a dying friend when
Larcome issued a Certificate of Capacity indicating that the appellant had no
capacity for work from 10 March 2021 to 7 April
LEGISLATION
11A of the 1987 Act relevantly provides as follows:
No compensation for psychological injury caused by reasonable actions of
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury
that is a psychological injury if the injury was wholly or
predominantly caused
by reasonable action taken or proposed to be taken by or on behalf of the
employer with respect to transfer,
demotion, promotion, performance appraisal,
discipline, retrenchment or dismissal of workers or provision of employment
to workers.”
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member noted that the appellant claimed weekly payments as a result of injury in
the form of an aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation
and/or deterioration of a
disease, diagnosed as a major depressive disorder with anxiety, an acute stress
disorder and chronic adjustment
disorder with depressed mood. The Member further
noted that the respondent accepted that the appellant suffered a psychological
but denied liability on the basis that the injury was wholly or
predominantly caused by reasonable action taken or proposed to be
taken by the
respondent in respect of performance appraisal or discipline, in accordance with
s 11A of the 1987 Act.
Member identified the issues in dispute as:
(a) whether the appellant’s employment with the respondent was the main
contributing factor to her injury, and
(b) if so, whether the injury was wholly or predominantly caused by the
respondent’s reasonable actions with respect to performance
appraisal/discipline.
Member referred to the numerous statements made by the appellant. She observed
that the issues arose from the care the appellant
provided to “H”,
who was a long-term friend of the appellant and a resident of the
respondent’s facility. The Member
noted that “H” was not the
appellant’s patient but that the appellant had assumed the role of
ensuring that “H”
was well looked after.
Member provided a detailed summary of the appellant’s evidence contained
in her statements, and the evidence of Ms Findlay,
Mr Maloney, Ms Cusack and Ms
Irving. She summarised the submissions of the parties. The Member reviewed the
legislation and the relevant
authorities applicable to matters falling within
the parameters of s 11A of the 1987 Act. The Member summarised the medical
Member turned to the question of whether the meetings that occurred on 23
February 2021, 25 February 2021 and 1 March 2021 fell
within the definition of
‘discipline’. She referred to
Northern New South Wales Local
Health Network v Heggie
which she said established that the definition was a broad concept that was
capable of extending to the entire disciplinary action,
including the initial
inquiry and investigation. The Member found that the disciplinary process
commenced from 23 February 2021 and
included the meetings on 25 February 2021
and 1 March 2021 and that she was satisfied that the meetings fell within the
of ‘discipline’.
Member observed that the appellant’s first attendance with her general
practitioner in relation to stressors in the workplace
did not occur until after
the three meetings. She remarked that there was no contemporaneous evidence to
show that the appellant
suffered an injury as a result of the conduct of the
respondent’s employees prior to 1 March 2021 and there was no evidence
any incapacity related to her employment prior to that date.
Member reviewed relevant authorities and distilled a summary of what she
considered some of the key principles relevant to the
determination of whether
the actions were reasonable.
Member considered it significant that the appellant admitted that she had stayed
overnight to care for “H” without
permission. She acknowledged that
the appellant had done so, “allegedly” at the request of Ms Hill,
however observed
that the conduct was not approved by the appellant’s
supervisor, Ms Findlay, or Mr Maloney, the nurse unit manager and that
no evidence that Ms Hill indicated to the appellant that she was to stay
overnight. The Member pointed out that “H”
was not one of the
appellant’s patients, but the appellant was a friend to “H”,
and, as the Member described, “the
lines between friendship and
professional conduct became somewhat
observed that the appellant did not report to Ms Hill, Ms Hill was not the nurse
unit manager and did “not appear
to have the jurisdiction to alter rosters
for the respondent”.
Member formed the view that it was correct for the respondent to question the
appellant about her activities involving “H”,
particularly where
there were independent carers who were not advised of the appellant’s
actions and when the appellant’s
direct line supervisor and the nurse unit
manager were also not informed until after the event. The Member said that the
did not establish that the appellant signed in as a visitor or that the
appellant had approval to stay overnight as a visitor. The
Member observed that
those were standard requirements in a care facility, and it appeared that the
appellant had disregarded them
and any potential consequences that might flow
from those actions. The Member provided as an example, the legal complexities
might flow if the appellant was injured, or if something occurred to
“H” when the appellant was present without approval
in her capacity
as a visitor or an employee rostered on for the shift.
Member concluded that the respondent’s actions in questioning the
appellant in respect of staying overnight on this and
previous occasions were
“entirely reasonable and appropriate, given that facilities such as the
respondent’s are subject
to high regulation and
considered that it would be negligent for the respondent to have failed to
investigate the issue and there would have
been significant outcomes if
something occurred which was adverse to “H”, who was not the
appellant’s patient,
while the appellant was with her without approval.
Member referred to the appellant’s submission that she had been
“ambushed”. The Member said that there were
two meetings that had to
be aborted because the appellant was visibly upset, the appellant was offered
the services of EAP support,
and transport home, which she declined. The Member
described the discussion that took place as undoubtedly “uncomfortable and
possibly even unexpected” but considered that the manner in which the
discussions were executed was reasonable. The Member
indicated that she could
not make a finding that the appellant was “ambushed”.
Member further referred to the issue of the potential breach of privacy and
confidentiality. The Member acknowledged that “H”’s
private room but observed that it was accessible by “other staff”
who could have been privy to the information
on the appellant’s computer
screen. The Member considered that the appellant played down that allegation,
submitting that there
were no such breaches or any compromised confidentiality.
The Member observed that a staff member was required to ensure privacy
confidentiality in respect of personal information and that working on a laptop
in a non-secure area does not ensure the safety
of that information. The Member
reiterated that the respondent’s concerns were well-placed and appropriate
and consistent with
“Privacy Legislation”, therefore it was
reasonable for the respondent to discuss this action with the appellant, so that
the respondent’s actions were reasonable.
Member returned to the issue of “abandonment of duties” and remarked
that she did not understand what was meant by
the term and said that the
appellant did not abandon her duties as that phrase was legally defined. The
Member noted that the appellant
continued to work until she was told to go home.
The Member said that the appellant had stayed overnight in the premises without
authorisation and was not fit for work the next morning because of fatigue and
her emotional state. The Member remarked that those
matters did not constitute
abandonment of duties and observed that the evidence of Ms Findlay conflicted
with that of Mr Maloney
as to how the appellant abandoned her duties. The Member
concluded that the use of that term was misplaced, but that was not sufficient
to make the respondent’s conduct unreasonable, noting that the concept of
reasonableness did not require a standard of perfection
and that all of the
circumstances had to be considered objectively.
Member formed the view that the appellant probably knew that her conduct was at
least questionable if not inappropriate. She referred
to the appellant having
only advised Ms Findlay by email the following morning that she had stayed
overnight. She remarked that the
appellant had known that she needed Ms
Findlay’s approval to work in “H”’s room, especially
because “H”
was not the appellant’s patient and the carers had
not been advised.
Member referred to the appellant’s hand-written telephone number recording
the appellant as the next of kin of “H”.
The Member noted that the
file was not in evidence and while that was inappropriate and unprofessional
conduct when “H”
had her own carers, she could not make any finding
any event, that was immaterial to her finding already made that the disciplinary
process was reasonable action to address the appellant’s
conduct, which
was outside of her authority and put privacy and confidentiality in
Member observed that the appellant submitted that the process was not reasonable
because the support person, Ms Irving, was silenced.
The Member said that the
requirement that the support person remain silent was consistent with the role
of a support person, Ms Irving
was not present in the meeting as an
advocate, and she was not privy to the relevant events involving
“H”. The Member
declined to make a finding in respect of whether the
respondent’s treatment of Ms Irving was dismissive.
Member referred to the various authorities discussed by her and concluded that,
after a review of the evidence, the overall disciplinary
action constituted
reasonable action within the meaning of s 11A of the 1987 Act. She pointed out
(a) the appellant was made aware of the issues for discussion and the
seriousness of those issues;
(b) three meetings were conducted, with the first two having to be aborted
because of the appellant’s emotional state and the
third meeting was
conducted with the appellant having the benefit of a support person;
(c) she accepted that the appellant was told that she would not be terminated
but that the allegations were serious and would involve
intervention by Human
(d) the appellant had many years of experience in health care and was aware of
the issues;
(e) the appellant was aware that “H” was not her patient, so that
she was required to sign the visitor’s book or
have approval from
“H”’s carers to stay overnight, as well as from her line
manager and the nurse unit manager,
which she did not do;
(f) the appellant was requested by a nurse on duty to stay with “H”
but she did not report to that nurse and there was
no record of the appellant
being required to stay overnight, which the appellant did voluntarily;
(g) the appellant’s inappropriate relationship with “H”, the
fact that “H” was not the appellant’s
patient, and the
concerns about privacy and confidentiality, in the context of the
respondent’s regulatory environment, were
all appropriate matters to be
discussed with the appellant;
(h) the appellant admitted that she had stayed overnight and that she used her
laptop in “H”’s room, so that the
allegations were not
exaggerated;
(i) the term “abandonment of duty” appeared to have been used
inappropriately, but that did not detract from the respondent’s
discuss and address the appellant’s behaviour which had the potential to
constitute inappropriate and unprofessional
behaviour, and
(j) the policies and procedures were referred to in the notice issued pursuant
to s 78 of the 1998 Act and were “well-documented”.
Member formed the view that, given the appellant’s role, the nature of the
employment, and the requirement for adequate
competencies to be demonstrated,
the disciplinary process and the way it was carried out constituted reasonable
actions, taking into
account the rights and obligations of both the respondent
and the appellant.
Member concluded:
“For the reasons above, I find that the
psychological injury was wholly or predominantly caused by the reasonable action
by the respondent with regards to discipline. This means the s 11A defence
succeeds and there will be an award for the
respondent.”
Certificate of Determination issued on 9 April 2025
“The Commission determines:
for the respondent.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant brings 10 grounds of appeal, as follows:
(a) Ground A: The Member erred in law by failing to deal with the submission
that the respondent failed its own Policy Statement;
(b) Ground B: The Member failed to properly assess the evidence of Ms
(c) Ground C: The Member failed to make findings regarding what was said at the
meeting on 23 February 2021;
(d) Ground D: The Member committed error of fact and law in failing to deal with
the alleged issue of abandonment of duties;
(e) Ground E:
The Member erred in law in failing to deal with the
submission that it was the respondent’s employee who called the appellant
to come in to sit with patient “H” or make a finding of what the
facts were;
(f) Ground F: The Member erred in law and fact in failing to identify the rules,
policies or regulations regarding interactions between
staff and patients;
(g) Ground G: The Member erred in fact and law in inventing evidence in order to
establish facts;
(h) Ground H: The Member erred in fact and law in inventing the supposed
regulation and scrutiny;
(i) Ground I: The Member erred in fact and law regarding the manner in which
discipline was effected, and
(j) Ground J: The Member erred in fact and law by referring to the Privacy
Legislation.
SUBMISSIONS
appellant lodged her appeal on 8 May 2025 without the benefit of the transcripts
of proceedings recorded on 21 February 2025 and
13 March 2025. The transcripts
became available to the parties on the Commission’s Pathway Portal on 14
May 2025. On that date
the appellant was directed by a Delegate of the President
to lodge any supplementary submissions she wished to make by 28 May 2025.
appellant lodged amended submissions on 23 May 2025, which included references
to the transcripts relevant to the appeal grounds
and the amendments were
underlined.
respondent was directed to include any submissions in relation to the
transcripts in its submissions attached to its Notice of
Opposition to Appeal
Against Decision of a Member (Opposition). The Opposition was lodged on 16 June
2025, which was within the timeframe
set by the Delegate of the
The parties’ submissions in respect of the application of
parties are
(a) Culhana
is authority for the proposition that in an appeal from
findings of fact, the correct approach is that set out in
That is, where the
Member had some advantage over the Presidential Member when making findings of
fact (such as observing the demeanour
of a witness), deference should be
afforded the Member’s findings of fact;
(b) it is not sufficient for the Presidential Member to dismiss an appeal on the
basis that the Member’s findings of fact were
“open” on the
evidence, and
(c) in this case, the Member had no advantage over the Presidential Member
because there was no oral evidence given and the witnesses
cross-examined.
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the observation made by Free JA in
paragraph [99] that the appeal is a rehearing and not a hearing de novo. The
appellant submits that the Presidential Member does
not have to find legal error
in order to reach a different conclusion to that of the Member.
appellant observes that the effect of
on this case is
significant. The appellant points to the grounds of appeal and submits that, for
the reasons already expressed in
its substantive submissions, the Presidential
Member should find in favour of the appellant in respect of the errors of law
identified.
The appellant submits that in addition, and in accordance with
, the Presidential Member should reject the respondent’s
defence under s 11A because:
(a) it failed to comply with its own policy statement (Ground A);
(b) the evidence adduced from Ms Findlay was incomplete and thus unreliable
(Ground B);
(c) on the basis of the consistent evidence of the appellant and Ms Findlay, the
Presidential Member should make a factual finding
that Mr Maloney spoke about
the possibility of the appellant having to face court and that the appellant was
told she was in a lot
of trouble, which was not reasonable conduct (Ground
(d) the appellant was charged with abandonment of duties when that had not yet
occurred, which made the substance and manner in which
the appellant was
disciplined unreasonable (Ground D), and
(e) the Member failed to identify the applicable rules, policies or regulations,
the “standard matters” in a care facility,
regulation and scrutiny” and the particular provision in the
“Privacy Act” which the Member considered
justified the actions of
the respondent (Grounds F, G, H, and J).
appellant raised a potential further ground of appeal. The Direction issued by
the Delegate of the President did not provide the
parties with the opportunity
to raise further grounds of appeal and the appellant did not seek leave to do
so. I have not considered
the purported additional ground in this appeal.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the opportunity provided to the parties to make
submissions in relation to
did not extend to making other
substantive submissions on the merits of the appeal.
respondent disputes that the Presidential Member does not have to find legal
error and that an appeal to a Presidential Member
constitutes a re-hearing
“at large”. The respondent refers to the decision of Phillps P, in
Ferguson v Connemara Jack Pty
in which his Honour
“I do not accept the appellant’s suggestion, and I
put it no higher than a suggestion, that error may no longer be necessary
prove for an appeal to be
respondent submits that error of the kind referred to in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
must be established and says that without error, the
Commission does not have jurisdiction to intervene at the Presidential level.
The respondent asserts that the appellant’s submission on this point must
be rejected.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submissions that, on the basis of
, the Presidential Member should reject the respondent’s s
11A defence for the reasons set out at paragraph [93] above and submits
submissions are non-responsive to the direction for submissions and are simply a
reiteration of the submissions already
made. The respondent submits that the
appellant has not explained how the wider approach to an appeal would result in
a different
approach to that taken before
, and how that leads to
an error of fact, law or discretion.
respondent submits that the Direction issued by the Delegate of the President
was very specific in its terms and the appellant’s
submissions are in
breach of those terms by failing to specifically identify how, in the light of
, the findings would be different.
respondent asserts that the appellant has simply repeated her submissions
already made and for the same reasons provided by the
respondent in the
substantive submissions, the appeal should be dismissed.
As to Ground A
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the respondent’s own Policy Directive requires that
a person who is the subject of a misconduct process
must be afforded the right
to have a support person attend any interviews. The appellant says that both Mr
Maloney and Ms Findlay
had formed the view before the first meeting on 23
February 2021 that it was likely that the appellant was guilty of misconduct.
The appellant asserts that she submitted to the Member that she was not afforded
the opportunity of a support person at that meeting,
but the Member failed to
deal with that submission. The appellant contends that the failure to do so was
a factor that should have
been considered when assessing whether the
respondent’s action in the disciplinary process was reasonable. The
appellant submits
that, had the Member dealt with the submission about the
requirement of its own policy, she could have found that the respondent’s
actions in disciplining the appellant were not reasonable.
appellant asserts that Mr Maloney at least informed the appellant that there
were concerns in relation to privacy and that the
appellant did not have the
permission of the nurse unit manager to perform her work at
“H”’s bedside. The appellant
points to the evidence of Mr
Maloney, in which Mr Maloney denied ever commenting that the appellant could be
taken to court and submits
that that evidence was inconsistent with the evidence
of Ms Findlay that he did in fact speak to the appellant about that
possibility.
It is unclear how that submission relates to the assertion that the
respondent failed its own Policy Directive.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent indicates that it has difficulty understanding the proposed error and
submits that the appellant has not referenced
the part of the transcripts where
the submission was made. The respondent says that it assumes that the appellant
asserts that there
is a policy document that required the respondent to at least
give the appellant the opportunity to have a support person “at
similar to that of 21 [sic, 23] February 2021”, that this did not occur,
so that the respondent’s conduct was
not reasonable within the meaning of
s 11A of the 1987 Act. The respondent asserts that the appellant has failed
to identify a finding
by the Member that shows that the submission was material
and was not dealt with by the Member.
respondent points to the Member’s summary of the appellant’s
submissions where the Member referred to the appellant’s
submission that
she was “ambushed” in several meetings, and the support person was
silenced. The respondent submits that
the Member rejected the submission that
the appellant was ambushed.
respondent submits that the Member noted that two meetings were aborted because
the appellant was visibly upset, the appellant
was offered EAP assistance and
transport home, which the appellant declined. The respondent says that the
Member found that the matters
raised in the meetings were
“uncomfortable” but handled in a reasonable manner.
respondent refers to the transcripts and asserts that the appellant’s
submissions primarily concerned the meeting on 1 March
2021 and the fact that
the respondent would not allow the support person to speak in the meeting. The
respondent says that the appellant’s
submissions went no higher than that
there was a mandatory requirement for a support person and the right to a
support person was
not offered to the appellant in the first meeting, so that
the respondent’s actions were unreasonable. The respondent asserts
the appellant misquoted or misconstrued the policy document, which states
‘A person who is subject of a misconduct process must be
afforded the right to a support being present at any interviews. Other
may also need to be offered to all affected persons, where
appropriate.’
respondent asserts that there were two failed attempts at meetings on 23
February 2021 and 25 February 2021 where matters were
discussed but no formal
meeting took place, and the formal meeting took place on 1 March 2021. The
respondent refers to the Member’s
reasoning where the Member noted that
the support person was not at the meeting as an advocate and also noted the
appellant’s
submission that it could be inferred that the support person
and the appellant were treated dismissively. The respondent says that
rejected that notion and provided reasons for doing so.
respondent submits that the Member specifically referred to the Policy Directive
and referred to the applicable law, citing
Rail Corporation NSW v
Aravanopules
The respondent
points out that, as the appellant conceded, reasonable action does not have to
be perfect and compliance with policies
does not of itself make the conduct
reasonable. The respondent asserts that, contrary to the appellant’s
submission and as
determined by the Member, the failure to follow the policy was
not determinative of whether the action was reasonable. The respondent
that the meeting in question was one of the “aborted” meetings and
not a meeting that was central to the discipline
process. The respondent says
that the Member considered the appellant’s submissions about the support
person, applied the Policy
Directive and rejected the submissions.
respondent asserts that the Member was entitled to conclude that the defence
under s 11A was made out. The respondent asserts
that this ground of appeal
mischaracterises the Policy Directive and in any event is inconsistent with the
facts found and the way
in which the case was conducted. The respondent says
that the allegation that the Member completely failed to deal with the
submissions
was plainly wrong and should be rejected.
As to Ground B
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that Ms Findlay referred to her contemporaneous notes of the
meeting on 23 February 2021 which she said were
attached to her statement. The
appellant refers to her submission to the Member that the contemporaneous notes
were not in evidence
and thus Ms Findlay’s evidence should be treated with
caution. The appellant asserts that the Member did not deal with that
and thus committed an error of law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent contends that this ground is incompetent and does not disclose any
error of fact, law or discretion and the respondent
and the Commission should
not have to speculate as to what precisely is the appellant’s complaint.
The respondent refers to
the evidence of Ms Findlay and her email and submits
that those documents were attached to the ARD. The respondent asserts that the
Member dealt with Ms Findlay’s evidence extensively in her reasons at
paragraph [28(a)–(n)]. The respondent submits that
the Member ultimately
preferred the evidence of Ms Findlay over that of the appellant.
As to Ground C
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to her evidence that Mr Maloney told her she was “in a
lot of trouble”, that he had seen cases of
professional misconduct in
court, and mentioned breach of privacy and confidentiality and abandonment of
duty. The appellant points
to Ms Findlay’s evidence that Mr Maloney did
speak to the appellant about the possibility of appearing in court. The
indicates that Mr Maloney denied having ever told the appellant that
she was “in a lot of trouble” and denied that he
said to her that
she could go to court.
appellant submits that it was apparent that there were different versions of
what was said at the meeting on 23 February 2021.
The appellant asserts that
what was discussed at the meeting, about which there was conflict in the
evidence, was relevant to the
issue of whether the respondent acted reasonably
in respect of disciplining the appellant. She submits that the Member should
made findings as to what was said at the meeting. The appellant asserts
that the Member’s failure to do so constitutes error
in the fact-finding
process and a failure to provide sufficient reasons in relation to that evidence
constitutes an error of law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the appellant does not say what findings the Member
ought to have made, which is fatal to this ground.
The respondent says that it
is also fatal that the Member did not believe the appellant and provided reasons
supporting that conclusion.
The respondent contends that appellate restraint is
required and is not confined to questions of demeanour. The respondent adds that
the Member’s reasons must be read as a whole and a gap in the evidence may
be filled by inference or on a fair reading of the
respondent observes that there was a difference in versions of the evidence in
relation to going to court, however there was absolutely
no conflict about the
seriousness of what transpired in relation to the patient “H”. The
respondent asserts that there
was no challenge to the fact that the meeting
referred to was one of the aborted meetings and says that the meeting of
significance
was the meeting on 1 March 2021. The respondent refers to the Court
of Appeal decision in
, to say that pointing out one particular
meeting in order to submit the actions were not reasonable was contrary to the
notion that
the entire process must be taken into account when considering the
question of “discipline”.
respondent submits that, while accepting that there were differences in respect
of what each witness said, that did not detract
from what it describes as the
“essential finding”
that the respondent’s conduct in respect of discipline was consistent with
s 11A, and the Member’s findings were open
to her. The respondent says
that the Member was not required to make findings that were of no consequence.
The respondent adds that:
“the first two meetings were aborted
(unchallenged) and the final meeting was the meeting where matters were to be
in a more expansive way.
In providing the essential aspects of what each witness said in the various
summaries provided by the Member she complied substantially
in any event with
what is now the subject of the complaint and was not required to recite chapter
and verse what every witness said
at a meeting which had very little consequence
in the overall scheme of
respondent submits that this ground of appeal should be rejected.
As to Ground D
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the evidence of Ms Findlay that because the appellant was
not attending to the patients under her care, she
had abandoned her duties. The
appellant submits that there was no evidence that what she was doing in her own
time had any effect
on her duties to her own patients. The appellant says that,
in fact, she was working on her computer in “H”’s room
indicated in the email to Ms Findlay.
appellant further refers to the explanation by Mr Maloney that the accusation
that the appellant abandoned her duties came about
because the appellant needed
to go home because she was distressed and tired and was thus unable to perform
her own duties. The appellant
says that she made the submission to the Member
that the need to go home came
she had been told she had abandoned
her duties and that she was told to take the time off as annual leave. The
appellant contends
that the action in citing abandonment of duties could not be
considered reasonable.
appellant points to the Member’s comment that the allegation of
“abandonment of duty” was “an unusual
discussion” but
that that did not take away from the “overall need for the respondent to
discuss and address the behaviour
of the [appellant] which it potentially
considered inappropriate and
unprofessional.”
appellant asserts that the Member should have made a finding as to whether Mr
Maloney said that the appellant could be required
to attend court. The appellant
submits that the Member failed to deal with the conflict in the evidence of Ms
Findlay and Mr Maloney,
which constitutes an error of fact and law. The
appellant says that there was no doubt that the appellant was distressed by the
that she had abandoned her duty and that that would lead to the
termination of her employment. The appellant submits that the Member
give consideration as to whether raising abandonment of duty was reasonable
action taken by the respondent in respect of
discipline, and in those
circumstances, the Member erred in the fact-finding process and in
The respondent’s submissions
respondent notes that the appellant alleges error on the part of the Member by
failing to deal with a specific issue, the abandonment
of the appellant’s
duties. The respondent contends that the Member did in fact deal with the issue
at paragraph [73] of her
reasons and determined that the term was ambiguous, it
applied differently in various contexts and meant different things to different
respondent indicates that there were a number of complaints about the
appellant’s conduct in relation to “H”,
a terminally ill
patient, which, the respondent submits, constituted a “gross violation of
the boundaries and an inappropriate
relationship”.
respondent submits that it was not to the point that the other patients did not
experience any harm, when those other patients
may have suffered risks.
respondent refers to the appellant’s assertion that the Member was
required to resolve the conflict between Mr Maloney’s
evidence and that of
Ms Findlay and that the Member should have made a finding as to whether Mr
Maloney did say that the appellant
may end up in court. The respondent asserts
that the difference in the evidence from Mr Maloney and Ms Findlay is not
relevant to this ground of appeal, which was centred around the issue
of “abandonment of duties.”
respondent points to the Member’s finding that there was an inconsistency
between the evidence of the appellant and that
of Ms Irving (the
appellant’s support person) in relation to whether the appellant’s
employment would be terminated.
The respondent refers to the Member’s
finding that neither Ms Findlay nor Mr Maloney had jurisdiction to terminate the
appellant’s
employment and that they actually informed the appellant that
she was not going to be terminated but that she may be subjected to
taken by Human Resources.
respondent submits that the appellant is wrong to assert that the appeal
proceedings, and the proceedings below, are “informed”
concept of abandonment of duties and it is incorrect to assert that the Member
failed to consider that concept. The respondent
says that the Member in fact
found that the term was ambiguous. The respondent contends that the Member
considered the whole of the
process before determining whether s 11A was
satisfied, as she was required to do in accordance with
respondent indicates that the deemed date of injury was 1 March 2021, and the
Member was required to consider the entirety of
the process from the beginning
of the inappropriate conduct, including to a lesser extent the minor matters
after 1 March 2021. The
respondent submits that the Member was not required to
minutely pick out the facts and turn her mind to one factual issue and give
issue consideration above all others. The respondent asserts that this ground of
appeal must be rejected.
As to Ground E
The appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that the evidence shows, and it was confirmed by Ms Findlay
after access to “H”’s notes, that
the appellant attended the
respondent’s premises on 22/23 February 2021 as requested by an employee
of the respondent. The
appellant contends that the Member failed to deal with
her submission that because she was asked to attend by an employee of the
respondent, it was not then reasonable to subject the appellant to disciplinary
meetings on 23 February 2021 and 1 March 2021. The
appellant points to the
Member’s reasoning that “allegedly” the appellant was called
by Ms Annette Hill and not
Mr Maloney or Ms Findlay. The appellant asserts
that the Member was required to make a finding of whether Ms Hill called the
to come in. The appellant submits that the Member erred in fact and
law by failing to make such a finding and by failing to deal
with her submission
that the appellant had been requested to attend by an employee of the
respondent.
appellant refers to the Member’s reasoning that in the circumstances, it
was significant that the appellant attended the
premises without having
permission to care for “H”. The appellant asserts that there was no
evidence that she acted inappropriately
when she attended as requested but in
her own time. Further, the appellant says that there was no evidence that the
appellant was
required to get the approval of Mr Maloney or Ms Findlay to attend
as a friend.
appellant refers to the respondent’s onus, which was to establish on the
facts that the appellant’s actions raised
the potential of there being
professional misconduct in order to justify the commencement of disciplinary
actions against the appellant.
The appellant reiterates that the Member failed
to make the appropriate findings of fact and erred in law by not dealing with
appellant’s submissions.
appellant points to the Member’s reasoning whereby she:
(a) sought to distinguish between Ms Hill asking the appellant to stay with
“H” and not mentioning that the appellant
was to stay overnight;
(b) referred to the fact that the appellant did not report to Ms Hill, and
(c) observed that Ms Hill did not have the authority to alter the rosters.
appellant submits that none of those matters were put to the appellant, Ms Hill
was never called and there were no submissions
in relation to those matters. The
appellant asserts that it is an error of law to raise an issue not canvassed by
the parties or
fact and law in relation to those matters.
appellant refers to the fact that there was no evidence that Ms Findlay or Mr
Maloney had ever contacted “H”’s
carers. She refers to the
Member’s observation that the records did not establish that the appellant
signed in as a visitor
or received approval to stay overnight as a visitor and
that those matters were standard matters in a care facility. The appellant
asserts that there was no evidence to support that proposition and no
submissions made to that effect, there was no evidence from
Ms Hill, and the
Member’s consideration of the possible eventualities, which never
occurred, was pure speculation. The appellant
contends that it was inappropriate
for the Member to take those matters into account when considering whether the
respondent’s
actions were reasonable. The appellant adds that it was never
suggested to the Member that the appellant attended over the night
February 2021 as a paid employee and the appellant’s shift commenced at
8.30 am on 23 February 2021, at which time she
commenced performing her computer
appellant reiterates that the onus rested with the respondent to at least
establish that there were prospects of the appellant
having behaved in a manner
consistent with professional misconduct which warranted disciplinary action. The
appellant submits that
the Member failed to deal with the appellant’s
submission on that point and thus erred in law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent refers to the Member’s reasoning in which she noted that the
appellant received a telephone call from Ms Hill,
who said that “H”
had requested the appellant to come in and comfort her. The respondent says that
the appellant stayed
in a personal capacity as “H”’s friend,
did not seek permission to do so, did not sign the visitor’s book
not notify “H”’s next of kin, and took her work computer with
her. The respondent says that it was not
until 8.25 am on the morning of 23
February 2021 that the appellant notified Ms Findlay. The respondent
asserts that the appellant
must have known that staying overnight was contrary
to her obligations and outside of the boundaries of her employment.
respondent submits that it is curious that the appellant asserts that the Member
did not make a finding in respect of Ms Hill
capacity as an employee of the respondent, when the Member reasoned as
“In this case, the [appellant] has admitted that she
stayed overnight without permission to care for ‘H’. This is
significant given the circumstances. I acknowledge this was allegedly done at
the request of [Ms Hill], a nurse on duty, but the
conduct was not approved by
her direct supervisor [Ms Findlay] and more importantly the nurse unit manager,
[Mr Maloney].”
respondent submits that the appellant did not assert that it was part of her
duties that she was ever authorised to stay overnight
or that she was permitted
to subsequently ask for permission. The respondent asserts that on a factual and
legal basis, the ground
of appeal is misconceived.
respondent adds that the appellant complains that the Member used the word
“allegedly” in respect of Ms Hill’s
evidence. The respondent
says that the use of the word was cautionary in the context of the credibility
findings made against the
appellant. The respondent submits that the appellant
was never authorised to stay overnight, bring in her work, display her work
manner that risked a breach of privacy and did not seek permission from any of
her superiors in respect of those matters.
respondent refers to the appellant’s assertion that there was no evidence
that the appellant acted inappropriately. The
respondent indicates that there
were a number of statements annexed to the reply and submits that those
witnesses (particularly Mr
Maloney, Ms Findlay and Ms Cusack) gave the very
evidence that the appellant asserts was absent. The respondent submits that the
arguments that the matters were never put to the appellant and that Ms Hill was
never called to give evidence are erroneous because
the appellant was not
cross-examined and the appellant never stated that Ms Hill asked the appellant
to stay overnight or to bring
her work with her and that was the way the
appellant chose to run her case.
respondent submits that the appellant was highly experienced, knew about
professional boundaries and knew what was or was not
permissible. The respondent
says that the Member was correct to question the appellant’s involvement
particularly as there were outside carers. The respondent
submits that those carers were not involved in or aware of the appellant’s
activities and nor were the appellant’s direct line manager or the nursing
unit manager. The respondent asserts that that evidence
was not challenged by
the appellant, and the appellant cannot overcome it. The respondent says the
Member decided the matter on the
basis of the evidence of Ms Findlay and Mr
Maloney and submits that the Member’s conclusion was not speculative.
As to Ground F
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the respondent’s submission made to the Member that
the appellant had transgressed its rules, policies
or regulations in respect of
interactions between staff and patients. The appellant submits that the onus was
on the respondent to
adduce evidence of the rules, policies or regulations that
the respondent said provided a proper basis for having to deal with the
appellant by instigating disciplinary action and the way the action was taken.
The appellant points out that there was no such evidence.
The appellant contends
that the Member erred in her fact-finding process by failing to identify those
rules, policies or regulations,
and erred in law by failing to deal with the
appellant’s submission that the respondent had failed to discharge its
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that the appellant is seeking to put words into the
legislation that do not exist. The respondent describes
“discipline” and “actions with respect to discipline” as
“flexible words inviting attention
to be paid to an entire
The respondent
asserts that those words do not “slavishly adhere” to policies or
procedures. The respondent says, however,
that the policies and procedures,
which were summarised and referred to by Ms Findlay and Mr Maloney, were
relevant in this case.
The respondent points out that the issue never reached
the level of actual disciplinary action because the appellant did not return
work after the meeting on 1 March 2021.
respondent indicates that the appellant’s submission that there were no
policies and procedures in evidence was a submission
made to the Member in the
proceedings below. The respondent asserts that the Member criticised the
appellant because there was a
policy document in evidence in the
respondent’s reply and annexed to the respondent’s notice issued
pursuant to s 78
of the 1998 Act (the Policy Directive). The respondent asserts
that the only submission made about policy documents was the submission
relation to the lack of having a support person.
respondent submits that, even if there was a complete absence of policy
documents, the respondent did not have to rely on such
documentation to show
that the appellant’s behaviour was inconsistent with her duties, or that
the identification of her as
the next of kin was inappropriate, as was her
failure to inform the respondent that she was visiting “H” and
of the other
when the respondent
was required to intervene. The respondent adds that it was required to intervene
when the appellant breached
“H”’s room where anybody entering the room would have been
able to see the
information on the screen.
respondent contends that the appellant is in error to assert that, for the
respondent to succeed in its reliance on s 11A of the
1987 Act, the action must
be directly referrable to the ‘rules, policies and regulations’. The
respondent submits that
that concept is patently wrong, and all that is needed
is a consideration of all of the conduct and whether or not it was reasonable.
The respondent asserts that this ground of appeal should be rejected.
As to Ground G
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that there was no evidence that the need for a visitor to sign
in or have approval to stay overnight were standard
matters in a care facility
and the onus rested upon the respondent to adduce such evidence, which it did
appellant asserts that there were no submissions raising that issue in support
of the reasonableness of the respondent’s
actions. The appellant submits
that the Member erred in fact by making that finding.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the allegation that the Member invented the evidence is
a serious allegation and should be withdrawn.
The respondent says that the
Commission is entitled to inform itself of matters, including those matters that
are most obvious, as
in this case. The respondent submits that the attendance of
a staff member on the respondent’s premises for the purpose of
patient needs to be recorded in order to demonstrate whether there is an issue
surrounding that visit. The respondent
asserts that it is not speculation on the
Member’s part by her referring to visitation rights or records, but even
if it were,
her power to inform herself was justified and could be of no
significance in establishing an error of fact, law, or discretion sufficient
enough to disturb the Member’s finding.
respondent refers to the Member’s observation that:
records do not establish the [appellant] signed in as a visitor that evening
or had received approval to
remain overnight
as a visitor
(the respondent’s emphasis).
respondent submits that the appellant misquoted that observation and asserts
that the second part of the sentence was just as
important as the first. The
respondent submits that this ground of appeal should be rejected.
As to Ground H
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Member’s observations that the respondent’s
actions were “entirely reasonable and appropriate”
“facilities such as the respondent’s are subject to high regulation
and scrutiny”. The appellant concedes
that such an observation may be
correct and that the Member may have applied her general understanding of the
operations of such
a facility, but submits that there remains the question of
whether there was any transgression on the part of the appellant that
disciplinary action on the part of the respondent.
appellant asserts that the respondent was required to provide evidence in
response to the following rhetorical questions:
(a) what were the respondent’s rules in relation to a request by a patient
for a nurse to ring a friend (who in this case was
a staff member who did not
have the care of the patient), in order to ask the staff member to sit with the
(b) was the staff member required to seek approval from the nurse unit
(c) was it a requirement that the patient’s other carers were to be
(d) given that the appellant had previously assisted the patient to the
knowledge of Mr Maloney, (for example over the Christmas
period), what were the
respondent’s usual processes?
appellant says that the respondent did not provide such evidence, and in the
absence of evidence the Member erred by “inventing”
the evidence
(that the respondent was subject to “high regulation” and
“scrutiny”) to show that respondent’s
actions were
reasonable.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the statutory basis upon which the respondent was
required to act was the
Health Services Act 1997
Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) both of which are referred to in
the Policy Directive, which was in evidence. The respondent says that it
developed its own
practices and procedures that were not inconsistent with that
legislation. The respondent points to the contemporaneous documents
created at the time of the meetings with the appellant which were annexed to the
including what the
respondent referred to as Ms Findlay’s email, that were in fact documents
created by the appellant. The
respondent submits that the appellant’s
behaviour was a “gross violation of her
obligations”
in respect of
the specific prohibitions imposed upon her, and the appellant showed no insight
into her own behaviour of going beyond
the boundaries of her employment.
respondent contends that the contemporaneous documents show that the respondent
was not required to point to the specific rules
in place in order to identify
that the respondent was dealing with serious infractions because that was not in
issue. The respondent
asserts that the real issue was the fact that the
appellant believed she was entitled to act outside of the boundaries of what was
the normal accepted procedure.
respondent submits that, in any event, it is not appropriate to examine the
Member’s reasons minutely, and the Member’s
reasons must be looked
at as a whole. The respondent asserts that the ground of appeal is misconceived
and ought to be rejected.
As to Ground I
The appellant’s submissions
appellant points out that the Member considered that the respondent’s
actions in respect of discipline were reasonable,
taking into account that the
appellant was offered the assistance of EAP counselling and transport home. The
appellant says that
those opportunities were offered after the appellant became
distressed, and in any event, the Member failed to deal with the
appellant’s
submissions in respect of Ms Findlay and Mr Maloney
having raised the prospects that:
(a) the appellant’s behaviour constituted professional misconduct;
(b) court proceedings might eventuate;
(c) the appellant’s abandonment of duties would lead to dismissal, and
(d) the appellant was in “lots of trouble.”
appellant points out that the respondent relied upon what it said was reasonable
action on the part of its employees in investigating
whether the
appellant’s behaviour was a disciplinary matter. The appellant asserts
that the Member erred by failing to find
whether the respondent’s actions
and the manner in which the appellant was interviewed were reasonable actions
with respect
to discipline.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent indicates that it again relies upon the contemporaneous documents
referred to above under Ground H of the appeal. The
respondent says that the
appellant seeks to characterise the conversations as ‘threats’. The
respondent asserts that
the Member objectively considered all of the conduct, as
she was required to do, before she concluded that the process was reasonable.
The respondent contends that the Member was not required to do more than that,
but she also found that the appellant’s evidence
could not be preferred.
The respondent says that there was a significant conflict between what the
appellant asserts took place and
the statements relied upon by the respondent,
together with the contemporaneous email and notes.
respondent contends that the appellant assumes that the Member did not make a
credit finding adverse to the appellant. The respondent
says that the manner in
which discipline was put in place constituted two aborted meetings and a third
meeting and that was the total
of the action taken. The respondent points out
that the appellant handed in her resignation, which was not accepted. The
asserts that anything beyond 1 March 2021 was strictly not relevant
and thus the appellant’s allegation that the Member failed
to deal with
whether the relevant actions were reasonable and in respect of discipline was
meaningless. The respondent says that,
when reading the Member’s reasons
as a whole:
“the allegations, assertions and contentions
raised by the respondent against the appellant in the first two aborted meetings
and then finally discussed at the third were clearly involving a process that
was reasonable in that the assertions were fairly and
squarely put to the
appellant, the appellant had an opportunity to respond, the appellant had a
support person, the appellant was
not being terminated nor did the two superior
persons have any jurisdiction to do so and the matter would have to be dealt
Resources].”
respondent adds that it was very important that the respondent resisted the
appellant’s attempt to resign her employment
and submits that the
discipline put in place was more remedial than punitive, no warnings were issued
and there was no other punitive
process put in place.
respondent contends that the Member discharged her statutory function and
accordingly, this ground of appeal should be rejected.
As to Ground J
The appellant’s submissions
appellant points to the Member’s vague reference to Privacy Legislation.
The appellant says that the respondent submitted
to the Member that the
appellant had violated the policies and procedures under the health records
legislation and the “Privacy
Act”, without having referred to any
specific provision in those documents. The appellant submits that the Member
reach a conclusion as to whether by accessing information on the
computer in “H”’s room, the appellant had breached
policies and procedures without reference to the particular section or the part
of those policies or procedures that had been
transgressed. The appellant
submits that the Member erred in fact and law by referring to that legislation
in her reasoning process.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent refers to the potential breach of privacy, which was that there was a
potential that, while the appellant was performing
private and confidential work
in a room with a patient a person, such as one of the carers or another person
who was not a staff
member, walked into the room and saw what was on the screen
or on other paperwork. The respondent asserts that the Member did not
“go into a dissertation” in respect of the State or Commonwealth
when the respondent had concerns about privacy. The
respondent submits that the appellant did not suggest that performing her work
on her laptop was approved by the respondent.
respondent asserts that there is no basis for this ground of appeal, it is not
dispositive of the appellant’s claim and
the respondent’s defence
succeeded. The respondent says that this ground of appeal should be
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the Member’s Certificate of Determination revoked
and the matter remitted to another Member to determine
the extent of
compensation to which the appellant is entitled.
respondent seeks to have the appeal dismissed and the Member’s Certificate
of Determination confirmed.
CONSIDERATION
is convenient to firstly deal with Grounds F; G; H, and J, which assert error of
both fact and law on the part of the Member in
respect of her reliance on
various “rules”, “regulations”, “policies”
and “legislation”.
F complains that the Member erred in law and fact in failing to identify the
rules, policies or regulations in relation to
interactions between staff and
patients. The Member’s reasoning included the observation at paragraph
[51(e)] that procedural
and policy documents of the employer was relevant
evidence to consider. The Member acknowledged the submission made by the
that its actions were reasonable because the appellant had
transgressed the rules, policies and regulations in respect of relationships
between staff and patients.
Member noted that, in reply, the appellant submitted that the respondent had
failed to adduce evidence of its relevant policies
procedures.
Member determined that:
“Whilst [the appellant] may believe
for her actions were appropriate, they are inconsistent with the policies and
of the respondent, which have been filed by the respondent in the
ALAD and s 78 notice. The respondent had an obligation to query
her actions and
if found to be wanting, to correct them, as it works in a highly regulatory
landscape which requires transparency
professionalism.”
document referred to by the Member is the “Managing Misconduct”
Policy Directive and procedures, the potentially relevant
parts of which I have
reproduced at paragraphs [57] to [61] above. The respondent did not take the
Member to any particular provision
in that document. The definitions (b) to (h)
do not appear to define the appellant’s conduct. Paragraph (a) defines
“Behaviour or conduct which seriously or
repeatedly breaches expected standards, as identified in relevant legislation
Health Services Act 1997
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
), registration standards or codes/guidelines
approved by a National Health Practitioner Board or NSW Health policies (such as
Code of Conduct).”
appellant’s behaviour may have fallen within that definition, however
there was no evidence of the provisions of such legislation,
standards, codes,
guidelines or policies to show what behaviour was identified in any of those
instruments.
J asserts that the Member erred in fact and law by referring to the
“Privacy” legislation in her consideration
of the evidence about the
appellant working on her laptop in the patient’s private room. The Member
observed that:
“I again find that the respondent’s
concern about this issue was well placed, appropriate, in accordance with
Legislation and it was reasonable for it to bring it to the
[appellant’s]
attention.”
than a vague reference by the respondent to “the Privacy Act” (not
otherwise identified),
no mention of such legislation in submissions made to the Member and that
legislation was not more precisely identified
by the Member. In the absence of
more specific detail as to what that legislation was and how the
respondent’s actions accorded
with it, it is not possible to conclude
there was a legislative framework within which the respondent acted and which
the appellant
contravened.
G and H of the appeal allege that the Member erred in fact and law in
“inventing evidence” in order to establish
facts. The appellant
refers to the Member’s reasoning that the appellant was required to sign
in as a visitor and obtain approval
to stay overnight, which she said were
“standard matters” (Ground G), and that the respondent’s
facility was subjected
to “high regulation and scrutiny” (Ground H).
There was no evidence establishing the requirements for visitors attending
premises and no evidence as to whether the appellant, either in her capacity as
a visitor or an employee, was required to obtain
permission from the respondent
to stay overnight with the patient, who was also the appellant’s
appellant’s overarching complaint in respect of Grounds F; G; H, and J is
that the Member’s conclusions were erroneous
because they were not
supported by the evidence, the onus rested upon the respondent to prove that its
actions with respect to discipline
were reasonable, and the respondent failed to
adduce evidence to satisfy that onus.
accept the appellant’s submissions. There was no evidence to support the
Member’s conclusion that the respondent’s
actions accorded with the
relevant legislation, regulations policies, guidelines or procedures. Where
there is no foundation for
the conclusion reached, there is error of
As Allsop P observed in
Onesteel Reinforcing Pty Ltd v Sutton
Commission is required to draw its conclusions from material that is
satisfactory, in the probative sense, in order
that it act lawfully and in order
that conclusions reached by it are not seen to be capricious, arbitrary or
without foundational
the Member erred in law in finding that the respondent’s actions accorded
with the relevant legislation, regulations,
policies, guidelines and procedures
and Grounds F; G; H, and J of the appeal succeed.
appellant brings various further grounds of appeal in which she asserts that the
Member failed to deal with issues that were raised
in submissions and were in
dispute, namely that:
(a) the respondent failed to comply with its own Managing Misconduct Policy
Directive in that the respondent did not offer the appellant
the assistance of a
support person at the first two meetings, and did not allow the support person
(Ms Irving) to speak at the meeting
on 1 March 2021 (Ground A);
(b) the accusation that the appellant abandoned her duties was without
foundation (Ground D), and
(c) it was the respondent’s employee who contacted the appellant and asked
her to sit with “H” (Ground E).
respect of the respondent’s alleged failure to comply with the policy for
managing misconduct, it is not at all clear as
to whether that policy applied to
the appellant’s conduct as none of the definitions of misconduct,
including clause 1.2(a)
(which was not supported by the relevant legislation
referred to in that clause) identify the type of conduct pursued by the
In fact, the transcript of proceedings dated 13 March 2025 discloses
that the appellant forcefully submitted that there was no evidence
conduct fell within the definitions of that
were numerous submissions made by the appellant recorded in the transcript dated
13 March 2025 from pages 4 to 24 in relation
to the nurse who contacted the
appellant and asked her to come into the facility to assist “H”. The
submissions were
limited to the fact that the nurse was an employee of the
respondent.
Wang v State of New South
McCallum JA
(Macfarlan and Meagher JJA agreeing) said (citations
“It was submitted that the judge failed to respond
to substantial, clearly articulated arguments relying on established facts
behalf of Mr Wang, particularly the submissions as to his inability to
communicate in English.
The submission invoked the decision of the High Court in
Dranichnikov
v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
in which it was
stated that a failure to respond to a substantial, clearly articulated argument
relying on established facts was
a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction
... The decision is not authority for the proposition that any failure to refer
any argument put to a trial judge amounts to error. It is necessary to engage
with the nature and materiality of the argument in
the context of the issues in
the proceedings. In
Dranichnikov
, the Refugee Review Tribunal, in
considering whether Mr Dranichnikov had a well-founded fear of persecution on
the grounds of his
status as a member of a particular social group, overlooked
or misconceived the particular social group to which he claimed to belong.
was the central question in the proceedings.
The approach taken in the present case was to list every submission put on
behalf of Mr Wang to which the primary judge did not refer
in his judgment and
to assert error on that basis. That reflects a wrong approach. The primary judge
was not required to address
every submission advanced during the course of the
Day v SAS Trustee
Corporation
(Payne and White JJA agreeing) observed:
“ ... a constructive
failure to exercise jurisdiction (or a purported exercise, in the sense that
there is an appearance of
an exercise of jurisdiction) as alleged by the
appellant is not a mere failure to consider evidence or to address an argument
submission, which may be contingent or otherwise insignificant, but a failure
to understand and determine a case or claim. The ultimate
question is whether a
failure to consider and address certain issues or arguments involved a failure
to address central or critical
elements of the case or claim ... It will be
insufficient for the appellant to show that his ‘three key issues’
not stated and determined discretely. What he must show is that they raised
‘substantial’ (in the sense of clearly material)
arguments or
questions which the primary judge in substance failed to address in determining
the appellant’s claim ...
in order to establish error on the part of the Member, the submissions made
which the appellant alleged were not dealt with
must be substantial in that they
were material to the outcome, amounting to a constructive failure to exercise
to exercise jurisdiction is an error of
the conflict between the submission made by the appellant that the respondent
failed to comply with its own policy and the appellant’s
submission that
the policy did not apply to the appellant, I do not consider that the failure of
the Member to deal with the first
submission (compliance with its own policy)
was material to the outcome. Ground A of the appeal is not made out.
submission that it was relevant that the appellant was contacted by an employee
of the respondent who asked the appellant to attend
the facility in my view was
not sufficiently developed to the point where a failure on the part of the
Member to deal with those
submissions amounted to error. Ground E of the appeal
is not made out.
D of the appeal asserts that the allegation that the appellant abandoned her
duties was without foundation. The Member discussed
the evidence and submissions
made in respect of this allegation. She reasoned:
issue, which I found unusual was the allegation of ‘abandonment of
duties’. I still cannot comprehend
what was being meant by the use of
the term. The [appellant] did not abandon her duties within the legal definition
of this term.
She continued to work until she was told to go home. Admittedly
she remained on the premises for which she was not authorised through
chain of command, and was not fit to work the next day due to fatigue and her
emotional state. This is not abandonment.
The two statements on this issue are
divergent. Clare [Findlay] maintains that ‘abandonment’ meant that
the [appellant]
was not caring for her actual patients whilst on shift, whilst
Patrick Maloney suggests that abandonment meant not being fit for
having to leave the day after she stayed overnight in an unauthorised capacity.
Whilst the use of the term is misplaced,
I find that this does not render the
conduct of the employment as not being reasonable. (It is well established that
the concept
of reasonableness does not require a counsel of perfection. It
requires that all of the circumstances be considered objectively).
I find that the [appellant] likely knew that her conduct was questionable, if
not inappropriate.”
The Member added that:
“the claim of ‘abandonment of
duty’ is an unusual discussion to be had in the context of the situation
and appears
to be a term used inappropriately. However, I find that the use of
this term, in whatever context, does not detract from the overall
need for the
respondent to discuss and address the behaviour of the [appellant] which it
potentially considered inappropriate and
unprofessional”.
reasoning indicates that the Member considered that the appellant had not
abandoned her duties as that term is used in a legal
context but determined that
in any event the disciplinary process and the manner in which it was carried out
was reasonable.
that context the assertion by the appellant that the Member failed to deal with
the allegation that the appellant had abandoned
her duties (Ground D) is not
appellant further asserts that the Member erred by failing to properly assess
the evidence of Ms Findlay, make findings as to
what was said at the meeting on
23 February 2021, and failed to make findings in relation to the manner in which
the disciplinary
action was conducted (Grounds B, C and I). Given that I have
determined that the Member erred in law in finding that the respondent’s
actions accorded with the relevant legislation, regulations policies, guidelines
and procedures and that Grounds F; G; H, and J of
the appeal succeed, the
Member’s Certfiicate of Determination requires revocation, and the dispute
needs to be re-determined.
The issues raised under Grounds B, C and I, and the
ultimate question of whether the respondent’s conduct was reasonable
essentially
involve an assessment of the facts. In those circumstances, I
consider that it is not appropriate to proceed to a determination as
the Member made those alleged factual errors the subject of Grounds B, C and
F; G; H, and J succeed, and the Member’s Certificate of Determination is
revoked. The matter is remitted to a different
member for re-determination.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 9 April 2025 is revoked.
matter is remitted to a different Member for re-determination.
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
8 October 2025
[2025] NSWCA 157
Compensation Legislation Amendment Act
Application to
Resolve a Dispute (ARD), pp 10–22.
Appellant’s statement
dated 12 May 2021, ARD, p 17,
Application to Resolve a Dispute (reply), pp
Maloney’s statement, reply, p 45,
Reply, pp 47–56.
Respondent’s
Application to Lodge Additional Documents (ALAD) dated 10 December
Respondent’s
ALAD dated 10 December 2024, p
Respondent’s ALAD
dated 10 December 2024, p 2.
Respondent’s ALAD dated 10 December 2024, p
Respondent’s ALAD
dated 10 December 2024, p
Respondent’s ALAD
dated 21 February 2025, pp
Respondent’s ALAD
dated 21 February 2025, p
[2013] NSWCA
Payne v Mercy Public Hospital Inc
[2025] NSWPIC 137
[2025] NSWPICPD 55
Respondent’s ALAD dated 10 December 2024, p
[2019] NSWWCCPD 65
Respondent’s submissions,
Respondent’s
submissions,
Respondent’s
submissions, [46].
Respondent’s
submissions, [72].
Respondent’s submissions,
Respondent’s submissions,
Respondent’s
submissions, [92].
Transcript of
proceedings dated 21 February 2025 (T1), T1
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
, [130]–[131];
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Al-Miahi
Nicolia v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1970) 45 ALJR
Reinforcing Pty Ltd v Sutton
[2012] NSWCA 282
Transcript of
proceedings dated 13 March 2025 (T2), T2
36.10–T37.29.
Super SAS Trustee Corporation v Cornes
[2013] NSWCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter