URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v SFS Management (Aust) Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 18 (31 October 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v SFS Management (Aust) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 18
Hearing Date(s):
3 September 2025
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Paingakulam J
In Industrial Court proceedings 2024/391261 (s 32 Summons), I make the
following orders:
(1) I impose a fine of $480,000.
(2) SFS Management
(Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as
agreed or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the
fine is to be paid to the prosecutor.
In Industrial Court
proceedings 2024/391282
Summons), I make the following orders:
impose a fine of $20,000.
(2) SFS Management (Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — fall from height — ice machine compressor
fell through
roof while workers were attempting to move it, injuring multiple workers —
failure to ensure that the roof was
structurally capable of supporting workers
and compressor — guidance material readily available — Safe Work
Method Statement
did not refer to task of decommissioning and removing an item
of plant — procedure adopted for lifting and moving compressor
informal and ad hoc — “one-off” failure, not systems failure
— upper-mid range of objective seriousness
CRIMINAL LAW
— work health and safety — offences — failure to consult,
co-operate and co-ordinate activities with
other duty holders — no risk
assessment to determine whether roof was strong enough to take weight of the
compressor, equipment
and workers — offender did not require other duty
holder to provide a Safe Work Method Statement, safe work procedure or the
installation of a working platform — upper-mid range of objective
seriousness
SENTENCING — aggravating factors —
substantial harm, injury, loss or damage — victim impact statements
— prosecutor
tendered victim impact statements of employees of another
duty holder — offender objected based on late service and that statements
were not relevant to the
offence — it is not the role of the Court to
make factual findings based on the content of a victim impact statement —
victim impact statements do not increase the otherwise appropriate penalty, but
rather confirm the extent of the substantial injury,
loss and damage that can be
expected of such offences in their aggravated form
— relevant factors on sentence — moral culpability —
aggravating factors — mitigating factors —
deterrence —
reduced need for specific deterrence — totality — overlap between
two offences resulted in discount
to give effect to principle of totality
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd v Nash (2016) 93 NSWLR 3388;
[2016] NSWCCA 37
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New
South Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Environmental Protection
Authority v Barnes
[2006] NSWCCA 246
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR
357; [2005] HCA 25
Morris McMahon & Co Pty Limited v SafeWork NSW
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New South Wales v
Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
R v Borkowski
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA
SafeWork NSW v Canon Roofing Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v Coplex Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 165
NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 4
SafeWork NSW v Metro Crane
Services Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 144
SafeWork NSW v Newcastle Roofing
Professionals Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 155
SafeWork NSW v PV Solar Pro Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWDC 258
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 5
Unity Pty Ltd v
SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
Workcover Authority (NSW) (Inspector Howard) v Baulderstone
Hornibrook Pty Ltd
(2009) 186 IR 125
[2009] NSWIRComm 92
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
SFS Management Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
M Moir (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Barry Nilsson
File Number(s):
2024/391261
2024/391282
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to s 146A(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
prohibit the publication of evidence before the Commission, including evidence
contained in documents received in evidence
before the Commission, in relation
to the death of Mr Bradley Fenech.
Management (Aust) Pty Ltd (SFS Management) employed and supplied workers to
assist in the production, packaging and distribution
of seafood by Sydney Fresh
Seafood (Aust) Pty Ltd, trading as Fish in the Family (Sydney Fresh) in
Wetherill Park, New South Wales.
On 25 October 2022, Mr Duane Johns and Mr
Bradley Fenech, employees of SFS Management, were assisting five workers from
Refrigeration Management Pty Ltd (Coldline) to manually lift and move
the compressor of an ice machine in the roof space above the
Sydney Fresh main
cool room. While the compressor was being moved, the roof of the cool room
collapsed and six workers, including
Mr Johns and Mr Fenech, fell 3.6 metres to
the ground floor below, suffering serious injuries.
Management appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a
person who had a work health and safety duty pursuant
Health and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with
that duty and thereby exposed Mr Johns and Mr Fenech to a risk of death or
serious injury contrary to s
particularised at paragraph 11 of Annexure A to the Summons is as
“The risk was the risk to workers, in particular Duane Johns and Bradley
Fenech, suffering serious injury or death as a result
of falling from height
while working on the roof of the cool room.”
maximum penalty for the s 32 offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843).
Management also pleaded guilty to an offence that as a person who had a health
and safety duty under the
in relation to the same matter in which
Coldline had a duty under the
, it failed to consult, co-operate
and co-ordinate activities with Coldline contrary to s 46 of the
The maximum penalty for the s 46 offence is a fine of 1,155 penalty units
($124,127).
prosecutor tendered a single Statement of Agreed Facts in relation to both
offences. I have taken this document into account in
coming to an appropriate
sentence for each offence. What follows is a brief summary of the facts relevant
to the offences to permit
an understanding of the sentence
Management employed workers to assist in the production, packaging and
distribution of seafood by its parent company, Sydney Fresh.
Its sole director
is Ms Veronica Marie Papacosta.
Wetherill Park site consisted of an office with an attached warehouse and truck
delivery area. The warehouse included storage
areas, which themselves included
several freestanding cool rooms which were used for the storage of ice and
seafood. Sydney Fresh
engaged Coldline to provide refrigeration services
including installation, commissioning, repair and maintenance of refrigeration
plant and equipment.
were a number of workers involved in the incident. They included Mr James
Megalli, the 49-year-old managing director of Coldline,
and qualified
refrigeration mechanic who often attended sites to service and install
refrigeration equipment himself. Also involved
were Mr Paul Papacosta, SFS
Management’s Head of Wholesale Operations and Purchasing at the site since
2018, and Mr Duane Johns,
who at 50 years of age had been SFS Management’s
Distribution Manager at the site since 2020 and whose duties included assisting
warehouse staff. Mr Bradley Fenech, a 42-year-old truck driver at SFS Management
since 2018, also performed warehouse duties at the
site and reported to Mr
Coldline employees who reported to Mr Megalli were also involved in the
incident. They were 37-year-old refrigeration mechanic
Mr Lat Awng Gunhtang, who
had been employed by Coldline for approximately three years, 25-year-old fourth
year refrigeration mechanic
apprentice Mr Jayden Halford, and two first year
refrigeration mechanic apprentices – 19-year-old Mr Carson Sperling and
21-year-old
Mr Andrew Phan.
Events leading up to the
cool room is a freestanding structure made of expanded polystyrene (EPS) panels
that sits inside the warehouse building. Prior
occupiers of the site had
installed a large ice making machine above the roof of the cool room which was
attached to a frame suspended
from the ceiling of the building and dropped ice
down through a hole in the cool room roof. When Sydney Fresh took over the site,
this machine was still in operation.
enough to create the volume of ice that it required.
It engaged Coldline to
install two new ice machines. Approximately two months prior to the incident, Mr
Megalli and Mr Papacosta
decided that the compressor from the original ice
machine could be used to replace a faulty compressor in an ice machine at SFS
Management’s
Drummoyne site. Mr Megalli indicated that Coldline would
disconnect the compressor and arrange to remove it from the ceiling space.
five days before the incident, an employee of Coldline attended the site and
disconnected the original ice making machine from
the compressor and suspended
frame in preparation for the compressor’s removal and transportation to
the Drummoyne location.
On 23 October 2022, Mr Megalli informed Mr Papacosta
that his father had passed away the previous day. Mr Papacosta told Mr Megalli
not to worry about the removal of the compressor and to take time off to grieve
his father.
The incident
25 October 2025 at approximately 1:30pm, Mr Megalli attended the site with Mr
Halford, Mr Phan, Mr Gunhtang and Mr Sperling. They
accessed the ceiling cavity
of the cool room, which was about 2.9 metres above the ground floor, using a
ladder supplied by Sydney
Fresh and managed by SFS Management. Their intention
was to lift and carry the disconnected compressor about six to seven metres
across the ceiling space to the edge of the roof, overseen by Mr Megalli. A
forklift supplied by Sydney Fresh and managed by SFS
Management would then be
used to lift the compressor from the edge of the roof to the ground. However, Mr
Megalli decided that the
compressor, which weighed 200 kilograms, was too heavy
for them to lift and move, so he asked Mr Johns for assistance. Both Mr Johns
and Mr Fenech agreed to assist and the three of them went up the ladder to the
passageway between the cool room and another small internal room used for dry
storage had a ceiling made of interlocking EPS panels
that were secured to the
walls by aluminium “C” channels. To reach the edge of the roof with
the compressor, the workers
were required to cross the passageway ceiling. There
was no discussion about how much weight the EPS panels could withstand and no
system of falls arrest in place. Further, there was no edge protection such as
handrails or other barriers to prevent a worker falling
over the edges of the
roof space.
seven workers positioned themselves evenly around the compressor. They picked it
up and moved it a couple of metres before the
passageway ceiling collapsed under
the weight. Six workers fell through the ceiling onto the concrete floor of the
passageway, with
the seventh worker landing on the
seven workers involved in the incident sustained the following
(1) Mr Johns sustained compression fractures in his back, a fracture in his
fourth metatarsal bone in his left foot and abdominal
(2) Mr Fenech sustained bilateral fractured ribs, flail chest, hemopneumothorax,
T7 spinal compression, right humerus fracture and
left shoulder bursitis with
tendinopathy of rotator cuff.
(3) Mr Megalli sustained a laceration to his head and injuries to his back and
(4) Mr Gunhtang sustained fractures to his vertebrae, left femur, right shoulder
and eye socket, numerous lacerations, superficial
femoral artery occlusion,
traumatic vocal cord palsy and post-traumatic stress disorder.
(5) Mr Sperling sustained fractured vertebrae, eight thoracic spine disc bulges
and acute post-traumatic stress disorder.
(6) Mr Phan sustained a head trauma, concussion, cervical and lumbar spine
strain, shoulder strain, elbow strain, aggravated a pre-existing
injury/laceration to his hand and post-traumatic stress disorder.
(7) Mr Halford was struck on the knee by the falling compressor, but remained
balanced on the remaining cool room structure and did
not fall to the ground
below. He was taken to hospital for observation and released approximately four
hours later.
Legal obligations and guidance material
SafeWork NSW codes of practice were available to SFS Management at the time of
the incident. The SafeWork NSW Code of Practice
“Managing the Risk of
Falls at Workplaces”
(August 2019) applies to all workplaces in New
South Wales where there is a risk of a person falling from one level to another
is reasonably likely to cause injury. It provides identification of fall
hazards as the first step in the risk management process
with particular
attention to be given to work tasks on fragile surfaces or near unprotected
edges, and recommends contacting manufacturers,
suppliers or structural
engineers as required. It also refers to the requirements of cl 78 of the
Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation) for PCBUs to ensure, so
far as is reasonably practicable, that any work involving the risk of a fall is
out on the ground or on a solid construction as defined in cl 4.2 of the
WHS Regulation, and notes that the surface and its supports
must be able to
safely carry expected loads. Where this is in doubt, it emphasises the need for
a structural engineer to determine
the safe load capacity before use. Barriers
designed and constructed to withstand the force of someone falling against them
also be provided to prevent a person falling over edges and into
SafeWork NSW Code of Practice “How to Manage Work Health and Safety
(August 2019) was also available at the time of the
incident. It states that there is often more than one business or undertaking
involved in the same activity or workspace that may each have responsibility for
the same health and safety matters. It provides
that in such situations, duty
holders should exchange information and work together in a cooperative and
co-ordinated way to eliminate
or minimise risks so far as reasonably practicable
and never assume that someone else is taking care of a health and safety
the SafeWork NSW Code of Practice “Work Health and Safety Consultation,
Cooperation and Coordination”
(August 2019) was available at the
time of the incident. Under the heading “When must you consult, co-operate
and co-ordinate
with others?”, it states that duty holders should identify
who else will be involved in the work and start discussions as soon
as they are
reasonably able to do so. Where they are not initially aware that others are
involved in the work, they are to engage
in consultation with others when asked
to do so. Further, consultation should begin during the planning stages of the
work to ensure
that health and safety measures are implemented from the outset
and should be ongoing, with a need for further consultation when
circumstances
Systems of work prior to the incident
Mr Megalli and SFS Management all failed to ensure that the work in the cool
room roof was carried out from a surface that
was structurally capable of
supporting all persons and objects that were placed on it. The readily available
information from the
manufacturer and supplier of the EPS panels made it clear
that they could not support the weight of the compressor and the workers.
Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS) for working on a roof, which was not signed by
or explained to any of the workers,
did not address the task of decommissioning
and removing an item of plant. Its SWMS for working at heights generally
referred to
the need to use a work surface that is structurally capable of
holding the weight of workers, plant and equipment, but again, this
SWMS was not
signed by any of the workers involved in the incident. The procedure adopted by
Mr Megalli for lifting and moving the
compressor on the day of the incident was
informal and ad hoc.
was no consultation or agreement between Coldline and SFS Management about how
the work was to be carried out, or how to manage
the risk of falls. Before
agreeing to assist Mr Megalli, Mr Johns did not arrange for a risk assessment to
determine whether the
roof of the cool room was strong enough to take the weight
of the plant, equipment and workers. Mr Johns and SFS Management did not
Mr Megalli to provide a SWMS or safe work procedure for the task or themselves
require the installation of temporary edge
protection or the installation of a
working platform that was structurally capable of supporting all persons and
objects that were
placed on it.
addition, SFS Management allowed Coldline to work at the site without proper
sign-in procedures for contractors. There was no sign-in
register and no
training in contractor sign-in procedures for SFS Management managers and
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, SFS Management developed and implemented a mandatory procedure for
contractors to attend the office, sign
in to the register and undertake
contractor induction before commencing work at the site. SFS Management also
trained its workers
not to assist contractors in their work.
response to SafeWork NSW Prohibition and Improvement Notices, SFS Management
reviewed the contractor management systems manual
and policy to ensure they were
fit for purpose. They conducted Toolbox Talks and staff refresher training on
contractor management.
Managers were also given refresher training on onsite
induction. New signage was installed to ensure that contractors attend the
office to sign in and complete the contractor induction before commencing work
at the site. Installation of a QR Code at the sign-in
desk made the completing
and recording of contractor visits easier to manage. SFS Management also began
the process of transferring
the contractor management system to a new safety
Victim impact statements
prosecutor tendered victim impact statements (VIS) from Mr Sperling and Mr
Gunhtang. Both were admitted over the objection of
SFS Management. Mr Sperling,
who was 19 at the time of the offences, attests to ongoing physical pain and
mental trauma from the
accident. He lives with the financial implications of no
longer being able to work and faces a future “without hope”.
the aftermath of the incident, Mr Gunhtang was transported, unconscious, to
Liverpool Hospital where he underwent surgery to address
multiple injuries
before being placed in an induced coma for several days. He now lives with
vision impairment in his right eye,
significant loss of function in his right
hand, debilitating pain, vocal cord palsy preventing him from speaking and
post-traumatic
stress disorder. He is unable to work to provide for his wife and
three young children.
bases for the objection to the admission of this evidence were its very late
service, such that it was not possible for SFS Management
to test its content
and that, as employees of Coldline, Mr Sperling and Mr Gunhtang’s evidence
was not relevant to the s 32
offence. It was accepted that the evidence was
relevant to the s 46 offence. However, as both parties accepted that the
caused substantial harm, the evidence was said to add little to the
Court’s understanding of that issue.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
) requires the Court to take into account a VIS which has been tendered.
[2015] NSWCCA 8
Simpson J, with whom Ward JA and Wilson J
agreed, held at [78]–[79] that a VIS may be used as evidence of
substantial harm
where no objection is taken to it (noting that it is admissible
by statute), no question is raised as to the weight to be attributed
no attempt is made to limit its use. There is little difficulty in accepting the
content of a VIS where it either confirms
other evidence before the Court or
attests to harm of a kind that might be expected from the offence in question. I
have set out
above the evidence before the Court concerning both the physical and mental
impact of the offences on each of the victims.
SafeWork NSW v 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 5
held at [44]–[45] that
where the Court otherwise receives evidence
establishing the impact of an offence on a victim
, it is not the role of the
Court to make factual findings based on the content of a VIS. In such cases, a
VIS “allows the Court
to hear directly from a victim on the impact that
the offence has had on the victim and their family. It also allows the victim to
be heard by the defendant”.
Statement of Agreed Facts provides that Coldline was engaged by Sydney Fresh,
not SFS Management. However, Annexure A to the s
32 Summons provides as follows
at paragraph 3:
“At all material times, the defendant’s business or undertaking
involved the management or control, in whole or in part,
of a workplace located
at 14-16 Cavasinni Place Weatherill (sic) Park in New South Wales (the
then provides as follows at paragraph 6:
“At all material times, Coldline Refrigeration Management Pty Ltd
(Coldline) was an approved contractor of the defendant who
refrigeration and mechanical services to the defendant, including the
installation, commissioning, repair and maintenance
and decommissioning and
removal of refrigeration and ice making plant and equipment.”
Accordingly,
by its plea, SFS Management accepted that it was supplied services by Coldline
and had at least some management or control
of the site where those services
were provided. As such, it had capacity to influence or direct the activities of
Coldline employees
at work on the site, including Mr Sperling and Mr Gunhtang,
giving rise to a s 19(1) duty. Further, even if the evidence of Mr Sperling
Mr Gunhtang is not relevant to the s 32 offence, it is relevant to the s 46
offence, as accepted by SFS Management.
Accordingly,
I acknowledge the life-changing effect of this incident physically, mentally and
financially on both Mr Sperling, who
at 19 years of age had his whole life ahead
of him with its promise and ambitions, and Mr Gunhtang, whose diminished
existence has
also had a profound impact on the lives of his wife and three
young children. Both gentlemen were eloquent in capturing the ongoing
with which each of them lives as a consequence of what was plainly a preventable
incident. Their evidence reminds the Court
of the harm that such offences cause,
but it does not increase the otherwise appropriate penalty. Rather, it confirms
of the substantial injury, loss and damage that can unfortunately be
expected of such offences in their aggravated
Offender’s case on sentence
Management relied on the affidavit of Ms Veronica Marie Papacosta sworn 18
August 2025. The following is a summary of her evidence
in addition to matters
already set out in the Statement of Agreed Facts.
Papacosta is the sole Director of SFS Management and a Non-Executive Director of
Sydney Fresh and Yumbah Aquaculture Ltd. She is
also the Chief Executive Officer
of Seafood Industry Australia (SIA), the national peak body of the Australian
seafood industry.
Prior to holding these roles, Ms Papacosta was the Managing
Director of Sydney Fresh from March 2002 to June 2025 and Non-Executive
and Committee Chair of East 33 Limited from July 2023 to December
Expression of remorse and contrition
behalf of her family, SFS Management and senior management of the company, Ms
Papacosta expressed her regret and deep remorse for
the hurt that the incident
caused the injured workers and their families. SFS Management also offered an
unqualified apology for
the breaches of the
found by the Court,
and for exposing workers to risks to their health and safety.
Immediately
after the incident, she and other family members visited both Mr Johns and Mr
Fenech in hospital, although Mr Fenech’s
injuries were such that they were
only able to visit upon his family. They maintained regular phone contact with
both families to
ensure that they were financially supported. Access to an
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) was provided to all SFS Management employees,
including Mr Johns and his family. Furthermore, Ms Papacosta, Mr Papacosta and
Ms Costi checked in with Mr Megalli and his wife on
a regular basis to follow
his recovery.
Johns returned to work on light duties in June 2023 and his hours increased
until he became full time again in November 2024. [REDACTED].
It also provided
EAP access to Mr Fenech’s family as well as a number of SFS Management
Papacosta stated that she, SFS Management and its senior management have treated
and will continue to treat the incident and the
prosecution against them as
matters of the utmost seriousness. They have made safety a priority and hope
that their learnings from
this experience can go some way to preventing a like
incident from happening again.
Management’s predecessor company, “Penrith Seafoods”,
originated in 1976 when Ms Papacosta’s mother, Ms
Andrea Costi, opened
their first store at the foot of the Blue Mountains. In 1990, Ms
Papacosta’s brother joined the business.
In 2000, Ms Papacosta joined the
business following her completion of a Bachelor of Economics at the University
2002, Penrith Seafoods opened its second store at Wetherill Park. In 2009, it
began selling seafood in Harris Farm Markets stores
across Australia and changed
its name to “Sydney Fresh Seafood”. In 2018, Sydney Fresh
transferred its employees to SFS
Management. In 2020, Sydney Fresh changed its
trading name to “Fish in the Family”.
SFS Management and Sydney Fresh business is a “Large Business
Member” of SIA and a member of the Master Fish Merchants
Association and
OceanWatch Australia. It operates stores in New South Wales, Queensland and the
Australian Capital Territory. Its
25 outlets are all within the Harris Farm
Markets network except for the original Wetherill Park store. SFS Management
employs 250 workers.
Management makes a regular contribution of seafood to local events held for the
Seasafe and Stay Afloat programs through SIA.
It provides regular support to
local community, school and cultural events with the provision of a barbecue
octopus stand and an
annual contribution of seafood for the Giant Steps School
for Autism Gala Dinner fundraiser.
Papacosta stated that the incident prompted her, as CEO of SIA, to orchestrate
the development of an industry wide safety program,
SeaSafe. Recognising the
links between safety and fatigue or grief, she has also established a national
mental health program for
the seafood industry, Stay
Consultation with Coldline
is the primary contractor that SFS Management uses for all its refrigeration
work in Sydney. Prior to the incident, SFS Management
had undocumented
procedures in place which required contractors, including Coldline, to provide a
plan and quote for any major works
to be undertaken and to obtain approval from
SFS Management prior to the work commencing. Verbal approval was required for
any smaller
regular jobs.
Papacosta understood that Coldline had undertaken the planning and quote stage
for the installation of the new ice machines at
the site and had provided a SWMS
to Mr Papacosta prior to commencing work. However, Ms Papacosta did not have any
knowledge prior
to the incident that Coldline was attending the site to begin
work on removing the compressor from the original ice
Pre-incident work, health and safety management and
initiatives
Papacosta gave unchallenged evidence of the following systems of work in place
at the time of the incident, in addition to those
set out in the Statement of
Agreed Facts.
(1) A contracted Safety Officer, Ms Kelly Gilogly, conducted quarterly safety
audits of Sydney Fresh’s 12 sites, discussed
the results with the manager
of each site and reached agreement on any improvements to be made.
(2) All new employees were required to participate in a safety induction upon
commencement of their employment.
(3) A suite of work health and safety procedures were in place, including a
Working at Heights Procedure, a Visitor Management Procedure,
Worker Site Safety
Rules, a Contractor Management Procedure and Contractor Site Safety Rules.
(4) Workers expected to work at heights in their capacity as SFS Management
workers were required to review and sign onto the Working
at Heights SWMS.
(5) A procedure provided for employees to report safety issues and incidents to
their direct manager, who reported them to the Safety
Officer for action and
response. Once the first response was completed, the Safety Officer would inform
the executive team about
the issue or incident either by email or at a
fortnightly executive meeting.
Systems of work after the incident
Papacosta gave unchallenged evidence of the following steps taken after the
incident in addition to those set out in the Statement
of Agreed Facts.
Management was issued with three regulatory notices in the aftermath of the
incident, at which point it set up a working group.
Recovery Partners was then
engaged to respond, review the company’s safety program and investigate
the failures that led to
the incident. As a result of this review, SFS
Management engaged a structural engineer to assess the structural integrity of
cool room roof and a contractor to install a safe system for working at
heights. Barely a week after receiving the second regulatory
notice, it emailed
SafeWork NSW providing a copy of an action plan in response. On receipt of the
third regulatory notice, SFS Management
engaged Milton Webster, Structural
Consultant, to develop a plan to respond. SFS Management also delivered a
Toolbox Talk to its
employees regarding the safe system for working at heights
and engaged ACR Coolrooms to install a guardrail around the perimeter
cool room roof area. The Prohibition and Improvement Notices were closed out on
10 December 2024.
addition to the above measures, SFS Management has conducted Toolbox Talks with
employees to reinforce the rule that employees
cannot assist contractors in
completing their work. It now holds regular safety meetings and training with
all managers and executives
and has engaged Recovery Partners as an ongoing
safety contractor for all sites.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in s 3A of the
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Objective seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of SFS Management falls in
the range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relevant
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
Section 32 offence
prosecutor submitted that this offence falls within the upper half of the
mid-range of objective seriousness. The risk of the
roof collapsing while
multiple people were working on it was foreseeable, and a cursory reading of the
manufacturer’s document
that identified the load that the EPS panels could
safely support would have established that the panels were not strong enough to
withstand the weight of seven workers and the 200kg compressor. However, SFS
Management did not make that enquiry. Therefore, the
likelihood of the risk
occurring was “virtually certain”. The risk of workers falling from
height while working on the
roof of the cool room was also an obvious and
foreseeable risk by reason of the guidance material available to SFS Management
Management, which was responsible for the system of work of its employees who
entered the roof space, had employed workers at
the site over many years and had
previously assisted Coldline to move objects around the site. It had requested
Coldline to relocate
the compressor from the original ice machine at the site to
Drummoyne. It had control over the persons who were allowed to access
space and the equipment used by the workers. Despite this, it did not require
Coldline to provide a SWMS or safe work procedure
for the task and instead
adopted a “hands off” approach to the work. It was complicit in the
ad hoc and unsafe procedure
adopted, including by allowing Mr Johns and Mr
Fenech to assist with the task. In addition, there was no effective sign-in
in place for contractors to follow before the work commenced.
than one worker was exposed to the risk of death or serious injury. There was no
particular burden or inconvenience in implementing
the steps available to
eliminate or minimise that risk. The injuries sustained by Mr Johns and Mr
Fenech were serious and could easily
have been worse.
Management contended that its culpability had to be determined in the context of
the role played by Coldline in the creation of
the risk which manifested in the
incident on 25 October 2022. It stated that it had a working at heights
procedure, and it was Coldline
that had no safe work method in place. SFS
Management submitted that the significantly greater culpability of Coldline was
in assessing its culpability and that its mistake was to allow
Coldline to perform any work before all safety issues were investigated.
Management contended that the objective seriousness of the offence was at the
low end of the mid-range by reference to the decision
of Russell DCJ in
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWDC 245
), a case where the risk of falling through an infill panel on a
bridge into freezing water was obvious, had been raised by employees
at the site
and resulted in “severe injury” to a worker. However, it
acknowledged that the risk of falling from height
is a serious and preventable
accept that the failure of Coldline to identify any sort of safe work method for
the task, as identified by SFS Management and reflected
in the Statement of
Agreed Facts, contributed significantly to the manifestation of the
risk. I also accept that SFS Management’s
failure to ensure that
Coldline had put appropriate safety systems in place to remove the
compressor needs to be viewed in the context
of the lack of advance notice
given to SFS Management about Coldline’s intention to undertake the work
on that day. However,
in determining the objective seriousness of the
offence, the focus remains on the failure of SFS Management to meet its
obligation. In
Workcover Authority (NSW) (Inspector Howard) v
Baulderstone Hornibrook Pty Ltd
(2009) 186 IR 125
[2009] NSWIRComm 92
Walton J, Vice President, held at [241]–[242] (emphasis added):
“[241] There is now ample authority for the proposition that the
contribution of another entity to a risk to safety may be
considered in
mitigation in the assessment of penalty of a defendant. The authorities range
from cases such as the present, where
the contributing entity has provided
services or advice which have contributed to the detriment to safety
) to, more commonly, cases where the entity or entities
are engaged in a common project, enterprise or task with the defendant which
carries out the role of a principal, contractor or fellow sub-contractor:
Morrison v Waratah; Morrison v Powercoal
Workcover Authority
of New South Wales (Inspector Mansell) v Anytime Industrial Services Pty Ltd
(2001) 110 IR 34
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Farrell)
v Morrison (No 2)
[2002] NSWIRComm 27
(2002) 112 IR 312
Workcover Authority of New South
Wales (Inspector Mansell) v Orica Australia Pty Ltd
(2002) 116 IR 158
Workcover Authority (NSW) v Consolidated Constructions Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWIR Comm 263
[242] The common thread running through this line of authorities is the
principle that where it may be contended that an entity,
other than a defendant,
has contributed to a detriment to safety (either by advice or common
enterprise),
the question remains, in assessing penalty, what are the
specific culpabilities of the defendant, the statutory obligations placed
the defendant not having been diminished by the notion that other entities may
have contributed to the risk to safety
(see, for example,
at [46]). The contribution of the other entity is only relevant to
the extent that its contribution casts light upon the real level
of culpability
of the defendant:
Morrison v Waratah
at [46] and
at 437. Such an analysis may assist in understanding the reasonableness of
the defendants’ actions, and may include an assessment
of systems which
were operating at the time of an incident giving rise to the prosecution
its plea of guilty, SFS Management accepts that it could have taken the
following reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or
at least minimise the
reasonably foreseeable risk:
“(a) Undertake a risk assessment which identified the
risk of the roof collapsing by reference to the weight of the compressor
(approximately 200 kilograms) and the seven workers, and the maximum load
capacity of the EPS panels comprising the ceiling
(140 kilograms each panel).
(b) Require Coldline and/or its director, James Megalli to
provide a safe work method statement (SWMS) or safe work procedure that
specifically to the work of removing the compressor of the ice machine in the
roof space of the cool room prior to the commencement
of the work.
(c) Prohibit the performance of work in the roof space of the
cool room until it was first determined that the roof of the cool
structurally capable of supporting the weight of the workers and the plant and
equipment to be situated in that space.
(d) Install, or arrange to install, in the roof space of the
cool room a working platform that was structurally capable of supporting
persons and things that were to be located or placed on it.
(e) Install, or arrange to install, temporary edge protection
in the roof space, such as handrails or other physical barriers around
perimeter of the roof space.
(f) Dismantle or break up, or arrange for the dismantling or
breaking up of, the compressor unit into smaller, lighter parts before
and moving them in the roof space above the cool room, in order not to exceed
the maximum load capacity of the EPS panels.
(g) Set up a proper system for contractor management and
induction at the site and proper sign-in procedures.
(h) Maintain and enforce a sign-in register for contractors,
including Coldline, to be required to use at the Site before the commencement
work by the contractors.
(i) Maintain and enforce a requirement for contractors,
including Coldline, to report themselves to the Site office and obtain
approval before the commencement of work by the contractors.
(j) Install signage at the Site for contractors to attend the
Site office for signing-in before the commencement of work by the
contractors.
(k) Conduct training for the defendant's managers and
supervisors at the Site in the contractor sign-in procedures, as well as
on-site signage for contractors to attend the office for sign-in.”
those measures extend beyond preventing Coldline from performing any work before
safety issues were investigated. Measures
(g)–(k) are concerned with the
control of contractor access to the site, the absence of which was said to have
contributed
to the ad hoc nature of what unfolded. While I am not entirely
convinced about the validity of that causal connection in circumstances
SFS Management was aware that Coldline was on site and working in the roof
space, I proceed on the basis that the defendant
has accepted by its plea that
it failed to implement those measures.
finding about the objective seriousness of the offence is based upon the
following factors:
(1) The inability of the EPS ceiling to hold the weight of the compressor and
the seven men required to move it was obvious. However,
nobody turned their mind
to that issue and there is no explanation provided for that oversight.
(2) Although SFS Management was not expecting anyone from Coldline to turn up
and do the work on that day, it is clear for the reasons
set out below that the
removal of the compressor had been imminent and SFS Management had not required
Coldline to provide a safe
work method for the task. Accordingly, no precautions
were taken either to prevent ceiling collapse or to prevent someone falling
the edge of the ceiling platform.
(3) The incident which occurred was the inevitable consequence of the process
adopted by Coldline, assisted by SFS Management, to
remove the compressor from
the cool room, given the inability of the roof ceiling to support the weight of
the compressor and seven
(4) The potential consequences included death or very serious injury.
(5) Seven workers were exposed to the risk and the serious injuries sustained by
Mr Johns and Mr Fenech were a manifestation of that
(6) There were things that SFS Management could have done to eliminate or
minimise the risk, as explained in the ample guidance material
(7) Many of the measures that SFS Management accepts by its plea that it could
have taken were not burdensome, which is demonstrated
by the steps that it took
to quickly rectify the situation after the incident. However, even where those
measures involved structural
adjustment to the cool room ceiling, the burden or
inconvenience of implementing those measures is of less significance because of
the inevitability of what occurred without those measures in place.
(8) The failure which occurred was a “one-off” failure and not a
systems failure.
the above matters into account, I find that the objective seriousness of the
offence falls at the upper mid-range. It is an
objectively more serious offence
than that in
. In that case, the project manager had been
actively misled both about the measures that had been implemented and the
adequacy of
what was in place, there were fewer people exposed to the risk and
the manifestation of the risk was not inevitable, as was the case
Section 46 offence
is not an element of an offence pursuant to s 46 of the
the potential consequences of a failure to consult, co-operate and co-ordinate
with another s 19(1) duty holder are inherently
connected with the risk to
health and safety of workers that each duty holder has a duty to eliminate or
minimise so far as is reasonably
practicable. Accordingly, that risk must inform
an assessment of the objective seriousness of the offence.
9–11 of Annexure A to the s 46 Summons provide that the s 19(1) duty to
ensure the health and safety of workers shared
by SFS Management and Coldline
included a duty to manage the risk of falling from height while working on the
roof of the cool room.
Paragraph 12 of the s 46 Summons then provides as
“Particulars of the risk
The risk was to workers, in particular Duane Johns, Bradley Fenech, James
Megali, Jayden Halford, Andrew Phan, Lat Awng Gunhtang
and Carson Sperling,
suffering serious injury or death as a result of falling from height while
working on the roof of the cool room.”
prosecutor submitted that this offence falls within the mid-range of objective
seriousness, because SFS Management did not have
any systems to establish that
Coldline had measures in place to ensure that the roof was structurally capable
of holding the weight
of the workers and the compressor, in order to eliminate
or minimise the risk.
Management did not distinguish between this offence and the s 32 offence in
addressing the objective seriousness of the offending
and instead referred to
the significant overlap between them (a matter addressed below in the context of
its plea of guilty, SFS Management accepts that it could have taken the
following reasonably practicable measures to consult, co-operate
and co-ordinate
activities with Coldline, in circumstances where each had a duty to manage the
reasonably foreseeable risk:
“(a) Consult with Coldline about the hazards and risks
associated with the removal of the compressor and the ice machine
from the roof
of the cool room, including the risk of falling from one level to another or
falling through the ceiling panels.
(b) Consult with Coldline about the control measures that
should be implemented to control the risk of falling from heights while
in the roof space above the cool room, in particular:
(i) Making enquiries with the manufacturer of the EPS panels
comprising the ceiling, Bondor Australia Pty Ltd, as to the load bearing
capacity of the EPS panels before the work commenced in the roof space;
(ii) Dismantling or breaking up of the compressor unit into
smaller, lighter parts before moving it in the cool room roof space;
(iii) Installing temporary edge protection around the roof
perimeter, such as handrails;
(iv) Installing in the roof space of the cool room a working
platform that was structurally capable of supporting all persons and
things that
were to be located or placed on it.”
the above consultation is something that could have been implemented without
great burden or inconvenience to SFS Management.
I accept that the opportunity
for consultation with Coldline was unexpectedly cut short by Coldline’s
attendance without notice
on the day of the incident to undertake the work.
However, it is an agreed fact that a Coldline employee attended the site five
earlier and disconnected the original ice machine from the compressor in
readiness for the compressor’s relocation to Drummoyne.
Accordingly, the
removal of the compressor was then imminent.
SFS Management expected that the removal of the compressor was then imminent is
reinforced by the conversation between Mr Papacosta
and Mr Megalli on 23 October
2025 that Mr Megalli should not worry about the removal of the compressor and
take the time to grieve
for his father. However, I accept that the seriousness
of SFS Management’s failure to consult with Coldline about how to do
job safely prior to it proceeding is slightly moderated by Coldline’s
attendance without notice on 25 October 2022. Nonetheless,
the absence of any
formal process to consult with Coldline about the safety measures that needed to
be in place must put this offence
in the upper mid-range.
culpability of SFS Management
accept that SFS Management had a longstanding relationship with Coldline and was
relying on it to ensure that the compressor was
safely removed from the cool
room for transit to Drummoyne. As the provider and installer of the ice making
machines in use at the
site, SFS Management was entitled to expect Coldline to
identify and implement a safe method for removing the compressor from the
However, that in no way derogated from SFS Management’s obligation under s
to consult with Coldline to ensure that this had
as a controller of the site, SFS Management should have ensured that work being
conducted on the site occurred safely. Once
SFS Management’s employees
were involved in the task, it should have satisfied itself that the work which
those employees were
asked to do did not present a risk to their health or
safety. Accordingly, while I accept that Coldline has a greater moral
culpability
for what occurred in relation to the s 32 offence, the moral
culpability of SFS Management remains significant given the patently
nature of what occurred and the absence of any checks or balances to prevent
Aggravating factors
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
s 32 offence does not require an injury to be sustained, but merely the creation
of a risk of death or serious injury. The very
significant injuries to Mr Johns
and Mr Fenech, as detailed in the Statement of Agreed Facts and set out above at
establish this aggravating factor.
noted above, the risk of injury (serious or otherwise) is not an element of the
s 46 offence. I am satisfied of this aggravating
factor due to the substantial
injuries to six workers resulting from this offence as set out in the Statement
of Agreed Facts and
abundant clarity, I confirm that I reach this conclusion in respect of each
offence based on the material in the Statement of
Agreed Facts and without the
need to have recourse to the VIS of either Mr Sperling or Mr Gunhtang. It is a
conclusion that was accepted
by both parties at the sentence
Mitigating factors
Management has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
Management is of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
. In addition to an
absence of criminal antecedents over its five-year period of operation, it has a
history of regular and ongoing
contributions of seafood to a range of community
events as set out at [
of its acceptance of responsibility for what occurred, its cooperation with
SafeWork NSW’s investigation and the steps
that it has taken to
improve its systems since the incident, I find that SFS
Management is unlikely to reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
) and has good prospects of rehabilitation (s
Management has shown remorse for the offences: s 21A(3)(i)
has accepted responsibility for its actions and acknowledged that its failures
led to the injury of Mr Johns, Mr Fenech and the
Coldline employees. This is
further demonstrated by the support provided to Mr Johns, Mr Fenech and their
families as well as to
Mr Megalli.
Management entered a plea of guilty on 30 June 2025 to charges particularised in
summonses dated 21 October 2024 and is entitled
to a discount on penalty that
reflects the utilitarian value of those early pleas:
R v Thomson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. The pleas of guilty were entered
approximately eight months after the commencement of the proceedings and on the
fourth occasion
on which the matters came before the Court.
SFS Management is undoubtedly entitled to a significant discount to reflect the
utilitarian benefit of those pleas, their timing
is not one that ought routinely
to attract the maximum 25% discount. However, SFS Management entered pleas of
guilty to the original
charges laid and advised the Court of its intention to
enter a plea of guilty to those charges on 14 April 2025 at the second mention
of those matters. The reason for that not occurring for a further two and half
months was partly due to delays by the prosecutor
in considering the revised
facts proposed by SFS Management. In those circumstances I accept that a
discount of 25% is appropriate:
ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
have summarised at [
] above the evidence from Ms Papacosta concerning SFS
Management’s compliance with the regulatory notices issued by SafeWork
following the incident. SFS Management submits, and I accept, that its
cooperation with the authorities ought to be characterised
consistently with the
decision of this Court in
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 4
“(3) Assistance provided by an offender who takes
proactive steps in response to a regulatory notice, and embraces the opportunity
which it presents, should not be viewed as favourably as assistance which is
entirely voluntary (but can be contrasted with unwitting
assistance which has
been construed to fall outside s 23(1)).”
Accordingly,
it is a matter that should afford SFS Management a modest discount on the
sentences to be imposed: s 21A(3)(m)
penalty imposed in relation to these offences must provide for general
deterrence. The community is entitled to expect employers
to comply with their
obligations to provide a safe working environment for employees. Where this does
not occur, general deterrence
is a significant factor:
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338;
[2016] NSWCCA 37
That remains the case notwithstanding that the circumstances of this offence do
not represent the typical fall from heights case
with which the courts are
unfortunately very familiar.
relation to specific deterrence, I accept that, at the time of the incident, SFS
Management had regard for its safety obligations.
This was reflected in the
safety systems in place which included procedures for working at heights and
visitor management, and its
absence of prior convictions. It had also
demonstrated a commitment to safety in the engagement of a safety officer who
quarterly audits across both its retail and wholesale operations.
Accordingly, I find that there is a reduced need for the sentences
imposed upon
SFS Management to provide specific deterrence. I am fortified in that view by
the measures taken by SFS Management since
the incident, as set out above,
noting in particular the engagement of Recovery Partners both to conduct a
review of all existing
systems and processes and in an ongoing advisory
Capacity to pay a fine
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) requires the Court to have regard to the
means of SFS Management before imposing a fine. In
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of Criminal Appeal recognised that a
fine which may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on
financial operations of a large corporation and that the maximum penalty for
the offence was “undoubtedly” set having
regard to that
circumstance. I have regard to such matters to the extent that I am able in
circumstances where there was no evidence
before the Court concerning the
financial position of SFS Management and no submission made concerning SFS
Management’s capacity
to pay a fine.
totality principle has application to the imposition of fines which may require
some modification to ensure that the aggregate
total is an appropriate
reflection of the overall criminality:
Environmental Protection Authority v
[2006] NSWCCA 246
per Kirby J at [49]–[50].
was accepted by both parties that there was a degree of overlap between the two
offences. However, the extent of that overlap was
a significant issue between
them. The prosecutor submitted that the two charges form a different function
and that the measures which
were the subject of the
offence should have
occurred as a consequence of the measures which were the subject of the
offence. The
offence was said to be serious because compliance with those
measures would have prevented the incident which ultimately took place.
Management’s position was that there was a substantial overlap between the
accept that proper consultation, co-operation and co-ordination in accordance
with s 46 of the
could have prevented the incident. That is
largely because that consultation co-operation and co-ordination would have
involved the
implementation of measures which are contained in Annexure A of the
Summons for the s 32 offence. Accordingly, I accept the submission
Management that there is a substantial overlap between the offences.
examples suffice. First, the requirement for SFS Management, in connection with
the s 46 offence, to consult with Coldline about
the hazards and risks
associated with the removal of the compressor (including falling through the
ceiling panels) (paragraph 15(a)
of Annexure A to the s 46 summons), and the
control measures that should be implemented to control the risk of falling from
while working in the roof space (paragraph 15(b) of Annexure A to the s
46 summons) would have been significantly progressed by requiring
Coldline or Mr
Megalli to provide a SWMS or safe work procedure that related to removing the
compressor of the ice machine from the
roof space prior to the commencement of
the work (paragraph 12(b) of Annexure A to the s 32 summons).
paragraph 12(c) of Annexure A to the s 32 summons requires SFS Management to
prohibit the performance of work in the roof
space of the cool room until it was
first determined that the roof was structurally capable of supporting the weight
of the workers
and the plant. To make that determination, either SFS Management
or Coldline could have made enquiries with the manufacturer and
then dismantled
or broken up the compressor, or alternatively, installed a working platform in
the roof space that was able to support
the work. The consultation with Coldline
that was required to do this is the subject of paragraphs 15(b)(i), (ii) and
(iv) of Annexure
A to the s 46 summons. However, installing the work platform
and dismantling or breaking up the compressor are also the measures
contained in
paragraphs 12(d) and (f) respectively of Annexure A to the s 32 summons.
Practically speaking, they are not measures
that could have been implemented
without consultation and co-operation with Coldline. This is reflected in the
fact that co-operation
with Coldline to implement those measures is the subject
of paragraph 15(c) of Annexure A to the s 46 summons.
Management submitted that a fine of around $300,000 after discount features
prominently in the authorities, referring the Court
SafeWork NSW v
Newcastle Roofing Professionals Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 155
SafeWork NSW v PV Solar Pro Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWDC 258
SafeWork NSW v Canon Roofing Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC
Canon Roofing Solutions
SafeWork NSW v Metro Crane Services Pty
[2023] NSWDC 144
Metro Crane Services
). SFS Management noted
that these cases involved the offender’s failure to have a system in place
to deal with the risk.
Newcastle Roofing
, the offender used the lesser protection afforded by a
harness and anchor point system to prevent workers falling from the roof because
of the additional cost of installing scaffolding, which the client refused to
meet. It therefore put its own financial interests
ahead of the safety of its
workers. In
, a young apprentice wearing a harness and connected
via a lanyard to an anchor point on a roof suffered fatal injuries when he fell
through an exposed skylight, marked with a cone to draw attention to it, because
the rope grab was set too far down and he hit the
ground before it took effect.
Canon Roofing Solutions
, a worker fell through an unsecured roofing
sheet when not wearing the safety harness provided to him to prevent such a
Metro Crane Services
, a worker who had looked for but been
unable to find a harness fell through a skylight with no fall arrest system in
all but the last of these cases, there had been some attempt by the offender,
however inadequate, to put in place a system to eliminate
or minimise the risk
of falling which had been identified and which ultimately materialised. The same
could not be said in relation
to the subject offence. Further, the appropriate
fine in these cases, prior to the application of the discount for the
utilitarian
benefit of the plea, was $400,000. These fines were imposed in the
context of a lower maximum penalty, ranging from $1.5 million
$1,782,759.
contrast, the prosecutor directed the Court to the decision of
SafeWork NSW v
Coplex Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 165.
The appropriate fine in that
case, prior to the application of the discount for the plea of guilty, was
$540,000 in the context of
a maximum penalty of $1.5 million. The Court found
the offence in that case to be an upper mid-range offence, notwithstanding that
it was a one-off event and not a systems failure. It occurred in the context of
a formworker falling from the roof of a building
through a plainly visible
unguarded 19 metre penetration with no fall arrest system in place.
have regard to the penalties imposed in those cases, mindful of the limitations
of comparable cases to operate as a yardstick, particularly
in the work health
and safety prosecution context:
Morris McMahon & Co Pty Limited v
SafeWork NSW
[2019] NSWCCA 36
Management Pty Ltd was convicted of each offence pursuant to orders that I made
on 3 September 2025.
appropriate fine for the s 32 offence is $680,000, which will be reduced by 25%
to reflect the plea of guilty and a further $30,000
to give effect to the
principle of totality.
appropriate fine for the s 46 offence is $70,000 which will be reduced by 25% to
reflect the plea of guilty and a further $32,500
to give effect to the principle
of totality.
Accordingly,
the total of the fines imposed upon SFS Management is $500,000.
Industrial Court proceedings 2024/391261 (s 32 Summons), I make the following
(1) I impose a fine of $480,000.
(2) SFS Management (Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Industrial Court proceedings 2024/391282
Summons), I make the following
(1) I impose a fine of $20,000.
(2) SFS Management (Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (355 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter