URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/129.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reeves v Icon Group Constructions Pty Ltd and Bazzi [2025] NSWCATCD 129; (30 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Reeves v Icon Group Constructions Pty Ltd and Bazzi
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 129
Hearing Date(s):
10 March 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
M Tyson, Senior Member
(1) Pursuant to
s. 48O(1)(a)
first respondent Icon Group Constructions Pty Ltd and the second respondent
Samer Bazzi are ordered, jointly and severally,
to pay $500,000.00 by way of
damages to the applicants immediately.
(2) The first
respondent and the second respondent are ordered to pay the applicants’
costs of the proceedings, as agreed
or assessed, on the ordinary
Catchwords:
conjunction with a dwelling” in Schedule 1 clause 3(2)
Building Act
- breach of statutory warranty – major defect –
and Building Practitioners Act 2020
duty to exercise
reasonable care
Legislation Cited:
Design and Building
Practitioners Act 2020
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Cases Cited:
Bellgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Deaves v Sigma Group
NSW Pty Limited
[2023] NSWCATAP 94
Latoudis v Casey
(1990) 170 CLR
[1990] HCA 59
The Owners – Strata Plan No 87060 v
Loulach Developments Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1068
Strata Plan No 84674 v Pafburn Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWSC 659
Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Bowen Investments
(2009) 236 CLR 272
Texts Cited:
New South Wales Government Gazette, No 122, 12 June 2020
Principal judgment
Matthew Reeves (First Applicant)
Ciara Reeves (Second
Icon Group Constructions Pty Ltd (First
Respondent)
Samer Bazzi (Second Respondent)
Representation:
Counsel: G. Carolan (Applicants)
Solicitors: Maguire & McInerney
(Applicants)
S. Bazzi, director (First
Respondent)
Self-represented (Second Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00139189
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
application filed 15 April 2024 in the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, the applicants sought damages in the
sum of $491,239.00 against the
respondents. The application was filed with points of claim and that
“pleading” relied
on statutory claims arising from the
Building Act
Building Practitioners Act
applicants are the proprietors of a property at Wonga Road in the suburb of
Yowie Bay, New South Wales (“
the Property
”). The applicants
are joint tenants of the Property. The first respondent is the company which,
either itself or together with
the second respondent, is alleged to have
performed defective residential building work for the Homeowners. The second
has been sued personally in his capacity as an
“owner-builder” who either himself, or together with the second
respondent,
is alleged to have performed defective residential building work for
the Homeowners. He is also the director of the first respondent
and has been
sued in his personal capacity as a person “
otherwise having substantive
” of the first respondent, for the purposes of
PLEADINGS, APPLICATIONS, THE HEARING AND THE EVIDENCE
The points of claim and the points of defence
applicants rely upon points of claim dated 15 April 2024, while the respondents
rely upon points of defence dated 4 September
2024. Both of these
“pleadings” had been prepared by solicitors. (This was a proceeding
where the Tribunal had granted
leave for the parties to be legally represented).
the points of claim, paragraphs 5 and 6 pleaded that the first respondent and
the second respondent, at all material times, carried
out “residential
building work” within the meaning of the Act and identify the licence
numbers pertaining to each of
the respondents. What the “residential
building work” involved is not identified in the points of claim.
7 of the points of claim pleads that “
a retaining wall was constructed
on the Property
part of works under
construction certificate dated on or about 28 June 2018. Paragraph 8 of the
points of claim pleads that in May 2019 “
the retaining wall was
.” Paragraph 10 pleads that the rear south elevation
retaining wall failed and collapsed.
11 – 14 in the points of claim plead that the Building Work (which term is
not defined in the points of claim) was
residential building
” within the meaning of
of the Act and pleads that the
statutory warranties implied by the Act were breached by the respondents.
15 – 30 in the points of claim set out the applicants claim under the
DBPA. The claim under the DBPA is brought against
each of the
Respondents and/or any combination of the Respondents
”: [30] in the
points of claim.
am satisfied, having regard to [23] – [26] in the points of claim, that
the applicants have, for the purposes of a claim relying
upon the DBPA,
adequately pleaded the specific risks the alleged builder or builders were
required to manage and the precautions
that should have been taken to manage
those risks:
The Owners – Strata Plan No 87060 v Loulach Developments
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1068
per Stevenson J at [42] and [43].
way of summary of the points of defence, the respondents plead that the second
respondent carried out residential building works
builder”, plead that “the retaining wall” was not part of any
approvals given by the local government
authority, admit that “the rear
south elevation retaining wall only” was completed, and part of it later
collapsed, and
as I interpret the points of defence, the respondents deny [11]
in the points of claim, on the basis that “residential building
work” is not defined in the points of claim: see [11] in the points of
response to the claim under the DBPA, the respondents, in broad summary, deny
and do not admit parts of that claim, plead that
the retaining wall was not part
of any development application but otherwise rely on no affirmative matters of
law or fact as to
why the DBPA claim should fail.
points of defence was signed by the solicitors then acting for the
respondents.
was a directions hearing on 27 May 2024 where the Tribunal made directions
serving their evidence. On
23 September 2024, the Tribunal made orders extending the times for the parties
to file and serve their
evidence. One of the effects of the orders made on 23
September 2024 was that the respondents had until 21 October 2024 to file and
serve their evidence. A joint expert report and Scott schedule were to be filed
on 11 November 2024.
respondents did not file and serve evidence by the extended timetable and no
joint expert report was ever filed.
the hearing on 10 March 2025, Mr. Carolan of counsel appeared for the
applicants. Mr. Bazzi, director of the first respondent appeared
for the first
respondent. Mr. Bazzi also appeared for himself in his capacity as the second
respondent. Mr. Bazzi indicated at the
hearing that he was no longer represented
by his former solicitors.
appearances were announced, the respondents applied for the hearing to be
adjourned. The applicants opposed the adjournment
application. The Tribunal
received evidence on that application and heard submissions. The Tribunal
refused the adjournment application
and gave oral reasons for doing so.
the applicants made an application for leave to rely on a supplementary report
from one of their witnesses, Mr. James, which
report primarily updated costs for
labour and materials, claimed by the applicants for rectification work, that had
been the subject
of an earlier report from Mr. James. The supplementary report
had been served late and not in accordance with the timetable for the
file and serve evidence. The report had been provided to the respondents’
then-solicitors some time before the hearing
on 10 March 2025. This application
was opposed by the respondents. The Tribunal heard submissions on the
application, decided to
grant the application and gave reasons for doing so.
the hearing of the applicants’ substantive application, the applicants
tendered the affidavit of Matthew Reeves affirmed
on 15 July 2024, together with
exhibit MR01 to that affidavit. The affidavit, together with its exhibit, became
exhibit 1 in the
proceedings.
was no cross-examination of Mr. Reeves on behalf of the respondents.
applicants tendered an affidavit of Rahsn Witt affirmed 9 May 2024 that included
a retaining wall inspection report dated 23 April
2023. The retaining wall
inspection report did not purport to be prepared in accordance with NCAT
Procedural Direction 3. In the
affidavit, Mr. Witt agreed to be bound by the
expert witness code of conduct and annexed a copy to the affidavit of NCAT
Direction 3. The respondents objected to the tender of the report.
The Tribunal allowed the tender of Mr. Witt’s affidavit
with the question
of what weight should be attributed to the report, to be the subject of the
parties’ closing submissions.
The affidavit, together with the material
annexed to it, including the report, became exhibit 2.
applicants next tendered a report from Rahsn Witt dated 20 December 2024.
According to the curriculum vitae annexed to the report,
Mr. Witt has a bachelor
of engineering (civil) and a masters degree in engineering science
(geotechnical). He has twenty years of
experience in geotechnical, civil and
structural engineering. He has annexed NCAT Procedural Direction 3 to his report
and has stated
in the report that he has read, and agrees to abide by the
requirements of the Direction. Having regard to that agreement and the
education qualifications and professional resume annexed to the report, the
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr. Witt has sufficient
expertise to offer the
opinions which he has made in his report. The report became exhibit 3.
Bazzi cross-examined Mr. Witt.
applicants tendered a report dated 20 March 2024, from Gregory James, building
consultant and a supplementary report dated 26
February 2025 from Mr. James.
Having regard to Mr. James’ curriculum vitae (see annexure D to the
report) and Mr. James’s
knowledge of the expert witness code of conduct
set out in NCAT Procedural Direction 3 and his agreement to be bound by the
in that code (see [5] in the supplementary report), the Tribunal is
satisfied that Mr. James has sufficient expertise to offer the
opinions which he
has made in his report. The report dated 20 March 2024 became exhibit 4. The
report dated 26 February 2025 became
applicants tendered a NSW government trader/licence search showing that the
first respondent’s building licence was cancelled
on 5 February 2025 and
that a contractor licence in the name of the second respondent expired on 5
February 2025.
for the applicants provided the Tribunal and Mr. Bazzi with written submissions
dated 7 March 2025. The submissions are four
pages in length. The Tribunal
marked the submissions “MFI 2.”
respondents tendered six photographs which were received into evidence as
exhibits A, B, C, D, E and F. These photographs were
applicants’ expert witnesses during the cross-examination conducted by the
second respondent on behalf of the respondents.
the respondents, no witness statement or affidavit and no expert report was
the course of hearing, the respondents handed-up to the Tribunal a quotation
from Helix Projects which appeared to be a quotation
for the supply and
installation of 30m squared of Dincel wall and related rectification works. The
quotation was dated 23 July 2023
and was addressed to the former solicitors of
the respondents. The respondents also handed-up to the Tribunal a document from
abvd design consulting structural and civil engineers
document related to an inspection at the relevant site from an engineer that had
taken place on 3 April 2024. The document
itself was dated 23 September 2024
but, curiously, referred to and included appendices dated 22 October 2024. The
document suggested
that the primary cause of failure for the collapsed retaining
wall was insufficient footings combined with excessive rainfall. Both
in the Tribunal’s view, purported to provide expert opinion evidence.
Neither document purported to have been prepared
in accordance with the code of
conduct provided for in NCAT Procedural Direction 3. There was no evidence
explaining why the documents
had not been filed and served by 21 October 2024,
which was, as mentioned, the extended date allowed by the Tribunal for the
respondents
to file and serve evidence. Both documents were marked for
identification and did not become part of the evidence before the Tribunal.
Tribunal has not taken into account any of the contents of these documents in
reaching its decision on the application before
applicants provided a Court Book to the Tribunal. The Court Book includes the
pleadings from both parties and the applicants’
evidence referred to
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
on the evidence referred to above, the factual background to this case is as
2017, the second respondent was one of three registered proprietors of a parcel
at land located at Wonga Road, Yowie Bay, New South
Wales. There was a
weatherboard building with a tiled roof constructed on that parcel of land. The
weatherboard building appears
from the photographs in evidence to be a
residential property and the Tribunal finds that it is a “dwelling”
purposes of the definition of that term in Schedule 1 clauses 1 and 3 of
30 November 2017, the second respondent submitted a development application to
the local council for the subdivision of the parcel
of land and the construction
of an access driveway and staircase to service the proposed new lot to be
created by the subdivision.
subdivision, were it to take place, would lead to one estate being created in
the north-western corner of the parcel of land part-owned
by the second
respondent. The Tribunal will refer in these reasons to that proposed estate as
the second respondent’s Parcel
”. The dwelling referred
to above in these reasons would be located entirely on the second
respondent’s Parcel.
second estate to be created by the proposed subdivision would be located on the
south-western corner of the parcel of land then
part-owned by the second
respondent. This second estate would in due course become the Property, referred
to above in these reasons.
An easement providing for a right of carriageway over
the second respondent’s Parcel, as the servient tenement, would provide
access from Wonga Road to the Property. The easement would apply over the
driveway on the second respondent’s Parcel being
built as part of the
proposed subdivision. The second respondent’s Parcel is positioned at a
higher elevation than the Property.
development consent sought by the second respondent was issued on 5 April 2018.
The development consent (see clause 11) required
an appropriately-qualified
engineer to be engaged by the applicant for the subdivision and for that
engineer to supervise construction
of, inter alia,
“[a]ll other works
that form part of the subdivision
.” The relevant local council also
issued a construction certificate.
accordance with the development consent, a driveway, a set of stairs alongside
one of side of the driveway, and stormwater works,
were constructed on the
parcel of land part-owned by the second respondent. All of those works were
contemplated by the construction
certificate issued by the relevant local
survey of the Property taken on 12 August 2019 shows that Dincel retaining walls
were, by that time, also constructed on the Property.
One Dincel wall runs down
one side of the driveway that leads from Wonga Road into the Property. On the
other side of the driveway,
another Dincel retaining wall has been built
adjacent to the set of stairs. The Dincel wall which is adjacent to the set of
running down one side of the driveway, runs in a north to south
direction. At about the point where the stairs that run along one
side of the
driveway ends, this Dincel retaining wall then curves and runs in an east to
west direction to the western boundary of
the second respondent’s Parcel.
This retaining wall is referred to in the pleadings and in some of the evidence
Tribunal as the “rear, south elevation retaining wall”.
The August 2019 survey evidences the construction of this retaining
more correctly, this continuation of the retaining wall that runs down one side
of the driveway). The east to west line
of this part of the Dincel retraining
wall, as the Tribunal understands it, coincides with the boundary between the
Property and
the second respondent’s Parcel.
the Tribunal considers the development application, the development consent
(Court Book p. 287), and documents such as the services
plan, stamped by the
relevant council and identifying the construction certificate (Court Book p.
299), none of this material suggests
that any of the retaining walls which are
the subject of this application were contemplated by council’s development
The development application and consent, as the Tribunal reads them, do
not identify the construction of any of the Dincel retaining
respondents’ position is that the development consent did not contemplate
the construction of the retaining walls:
see [7] in their points of defence. The
Tribunal is not satisfied that the relevant development consent and construction
certificate
contemplated the construction of the retaining walls the subject of
this application.
to the construction of the rear, south elevation retaining wall, it is
approximately 3 metres in height. The wall has been constructed
using 200mm wide
Dincel panels which have been filled with concrete. The rear of the weatherboard
dwelling that sits on the second
respondent’s Parcel runs parallel to the
line if this rear, south elevation retaining wall. The distance between the line
the rear, south elevation retaining wall and the rear of the house is not
clearly identified in the evidence but the photographs
in evidence (see e.g. pp.
127 and 327 in the Court Book) suggest to me, making the best estimate I can, a
distance of somewhere between
3 and 5 metres.
survey plan completed on 14 August 2019, with a 12 August 2019 date of survey,
provides evidence that all of the Dincel retaining
walls were constructed by the
date of that survey plan. The Tribunal finds that the retaining walls running
down the sides of the
driveway, one of which curves and extends to include the
rear, south elevation retaining wall, were all constructed by 12 August
applicants’ submitted that May 2019 was the time when the retaining walls
were constructed: see too [8] in the points of
claim. There is no evidence
directly supporting a finding that May 2019 was when the retaining walls were
constructed. Paragraph
8 of the respondents’ defence, as the Tribunal
interprets it, appears to involve an admission only that the rear south
retaining wall was constructed in May 2019. In circumstances where
there is no evidence and no reason to infer that the Dincel retaining
the different parts of them, were constructed at different times, the Tribunal
is finds that May 2019 was the time when
all the Dincel retaining walls were
constructed.
next factual issue to consider is which of the respondents constructed the
Dincel retaining walls.
their points of defence, there is a plea by the respondents that the second
respondent “carried out residential building
work as an owner
builder”, however it is not clear from the points of defence what work is
meant to be encompassed by that
plea. That is because the applicants’
points of claim do not articulate the scope of the residential building works
used in the points of claim. The scope of any work falling within the
second’s respondent’s work as “owner-builder”
revealed by the pleadings.
evidence is unclear as which of the two respondents constructed the retaining
walls the subject of the application, or indeed,
whether the respondents may
have provided any residential building work jointly.
it is that it was the second respondent made a development application to the
local council: Court Book p. 238. However, as mentioned
above, the Tribunal is
not satisfied, and has not found, that the retaining walls that have been
constructed were contemplated by
the 2018 development consent that followed the
2017 development application.
entity which appears to have been responsible for supplying building goods or
services as part of the subdivision works was the
first respondent. The
engineering firm which did design and certification works for the subdivision
works gave advice on the completion
of inspections and compliance to “Icon
Group Construction”: see 8 June 2019 and 27 August 2019 letters. The
plan for the subdivision also identifies “Icon Group” as
the client: Court Book p. 299.
there is the 14 August 2019 survey plan which importantly provided the first
evidence that the retaining walls the subject of
this application were
completed. The survey plan identifies as the client “Icon Group.”
The Tribunal is satisfied that
“Icon Group” is a reference to the
first respondent. That survey plan is the evidence showing the construction of
retaining walls running down the side of the driveway, one of which curves
in an east-west direction to form the rear, south elevation
retaining wall. The
Tribunal infers from the survey plan and the identification of the client
therein, that it was the first respondent
which had sought the survey plan
following its completion of the construction of the retaining walls. There is
evidence (exhibit
6) that the first respondent was licensed from 9 November
2015. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that it was the first respondent
constructed the retaining walls the subject of the application.
Colourbond fence had also been installed at the top of the rear, south elevation
retaining wall. The fence was 1.8 metres in height.
seems to the Tribunal from the survey plans in the evidence (see e.g. p. 91 in
exhibit 1), and the Tribunal finds, that the function
of the rear, south
elevation retaining wall, is threefold. First, it marks part of the boundary
between the second respondent’s
Parcel and the Property. Secondly, the
wall serves the function of retaining material (topsoil, gravelly clay fill,
construction
rubble and concrete) that forms part of the second
respondent’s Parcel and thereby provides support for the
located on the Parcel. That Parcel, as mentioned, is
elevated above the Property. The material retained extends to a height of about
2.5 metres. Thirdly, the wall provides a base on which the Colourbond dividing
fence between the two adjoining properties was built.
Where this retaining wall
then curves to run north up one side of the driveway, it demarcates one edge of
the driveway/right of carriageway
which leads from the Property to Wonga Road.
or about 27 August 2019, the subdivision was finalised. The subdivision led to
the creation of two new, adjoining estates in land:
respondent’s Parcel and the Property.
or about 25 November 2019, the applicants acquired the Property from the second
respondent, Rizkallah Awdi and Zenab Awdi. Settlement
of the contract by which
the applicants acquired the Property took place on 2 March 2020.
9 February 2023, a large section of the rear, south elevation, Dincel retaining
wall collapsed following heavy rain. The length
of the collapsed section of the
rear, south elevation wall is about 17 metres (see the evidence of Mr. James).
The photographs in
evidence (see e.g. Court Book p. 327) suggest most of the
rear, south elevation part of the wall collapsed, save for a small section
installed on the western boundary of the second respondent’s Parcel and
the Property.
applicants lodged an insurance claim for the collapsed retaining wall. In March
2023, the insurer informed the applicants that
the claim was not accepted. On 5
June 2023, there were telephone and email communications between the first
applicant and the second
respondent whereby the first applicant sought for the
second respondent to rectify the collapsed retaining wall.
second respondent stated from the bar table during the hearing that there was no
for the Dincel retaining
September 2023 the applicants lodged a complaint with the NSW Building
Commission against the respondents for the collapsed retaining
wall. The NSW
Building Commission investigation report dated 20 December 2023 recorded (at p.
5 therein) an email transmission received
from the engineer who had certified
some of the subdivision works. The engineer stated that he had provided no
designs and had undertaken
no inspections of the retaining wall between the two
properties created by the subdivision. The engineer stated that he had designed
retaining walls to be constructed on the edges of the driveway but that the
builder of the wall had changed the engineer’s
design to install instead
Dincel retaining walls.
October 2023 the NSW Building Commission issued a rectification order to the
first respondent. The first respondent did not comply
with the rectification
mentioned above, the applicants filed these proceedings on 15 April 2024.
SUBMISSIONS
applicants’ submissions were made orally and in the written submissions
provided to the Tribunal.
applicants rely upon the expert report of the structural engineer Mr. Witt to
establish that all of the retaining walls were defectively
constructed. They
point to the evidence suggesting that the engineering firm which certified the
approved subdivision work did not
design or inspect the Dincel retaining walls.
They submit that work on the retaining walls falls within the definition of
“residential
building work” for the purposes of the Act. They submit
that the defects are “major” defects for the purposes of
They submit that a money order for the cost of rectification of the Dincel wall
should be made against “
both respondents
”: see [18] in the
applicants’ written submissions. They submit that their evidence on the
quantum of their loss, principally
set out in Mr. James’ reports, should
be accepted. The applicants acknowledge that although their evidence points to
them sustaining
a loss exceeding $500,000.00, the Tribunal’s monetary
to that amount.
applicants further submit that an order should be made against both respondents
under the DBPA. They say that s. 37(2) of the
Act extends the DBPA s. 37(1) duty
to exercise reasonable care to the applicants as the subsequent owners of the
Property. They submit
that the second respondent is liable as he was the sole
director of the first respondent and the company’s nominated supervisor
its building licence. They submit he supervised the relevant work or was
involved in the actual construction or is liable because
he was the sole
director, citing
The Owners Strata Plan No 84674 v Pafburn Pty Ltd
applicants also sought an order for costs. They submit that costs should follow
the event, if the Tribunal accepts their principal
submissions.
second respondent made oral submissions to the Tribunal. The second respondent
submitted that he did the residential building
work as one of the part-owners of
the property that was sub-divided. There was no contract but it was simply work
done for himself
and the other owners, who were his in-laws. The respondents
denied that any of the Act’s statutory warranties applied. The
denied that the rear, south elevation wall that had collapsed had been built
without reasonable skill or care. The photographs
in evidence showed that the
wall had been built with vertical and horizontal bars and that in
cross-examination at the hearing, Mr.
Witt had accepted that bars were present.
They submitted that the wall had fallen down because of a specific heavy rain
event which
caused the land supporting the rear, south elevation retaining wall
to slip away. Before that rain event, the wall had stood in place
years. The remaining retaining walls have steel in them and are still standing.
The respondents denied that any failing
in the wall was structural or major. The
wall built was fit for purpose and was sound in its construction. The cost of
the wall was
only $50,000.00 and the amount of the damages sought by the
applicants is excessive when compared to that. Mr. James was not qualified
give the opinion evidence he had given. If the respondents are found, contrary
to the respondents’ primary submission, to
have supplied a defective
retaining wall or walls, then the brother of the second respondent should be
given the opportunity to rectify
the wall. On costs, the respondents submitted
that there should be no order as to costs, regardless of the result of the case.
CONSIDERATION
General approach
applicants have the onus of proof and must prove their case on the balance of
probabilities. The applicants also have to prove
the quantum of their loss,
again, on the balance of probabilities standard. The evidence in this case about
a range of matters, including
matters such as when and why the retaining walls
the subject of the application were constructed, is sparse. It is open to the
to draw inferences from the evidence. Those inferences can be more
confidently drawn in circumstances where the respondents did not
witness statements disclosing details of the circumstances leading to the
construction of the Dincel retaining walls or
expert opinion evidence that
complied with the expert witness code of conduct identified in NCAT Procedural
Direction 3.
issue of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the Act to determine the
application was not an issue that was subject of detailed
submissions at the
hearing. During his oral submissions, counsel for the applicants pointed to
“retaining walls” as a
structure or improvement which is included in
the definition of “dwelling.” True it is that Schedule 1 clause
of the Act identifies “retaining walls” as a structure or
improvement that may be included in the definition of “dwelling”.
However there is also in the legislation the predicate “
constructed for use in conjunction with a dwelling
”, that also must be
established, in relation to the relevant structure or improvement: see Schedule
1 clause 3(1) of the Act.
Whether or not the predicate was established by the
evidence was not the subject of submissions. The Tribunal must nonetheless
the issue as it must be satisfied that it has jurisdiction to deal with
the application before it.
ordinary, natural English language usage of the phrase “
in conjunction
” is to describe a connection or combination between two different
nouns. There is nothing in the statutory text of the Act
or the statutory
context of “dwelling”, when defined and used in Schedule 1 of the
Act, suggesting any need to interpret
the phrase “
in conjunction
” in a way that differs from the ordinary, natural English
language usage of the phrase. The structure or improvement identified
Schedule 1 clause 3(2) therefore has to have been constructed for use to connect
or combine with a “dwelling.”
1 clause 3(4) of the Act provides:
“A structure or improvement that is included in the definition of
‘dwelling’ if it is constructed for use in conjunction
dwelling is to be regarded as a dwelling whether or not there exists any
dwelling of which it could be taken to form part.”
Tribunal will consider first the rear, south elevation Dincel retaining wall.
is no evidence to suggest that the Dincel retaining walls had any sort of
relationship in regards to any planned “dwelling”
to be built later
on the Property.
the other hand, as will be recalled from the factual background set out above,
there is a “dwelling”, a weatherboard
residence, situated upon the
second respondent’s Parcel. The rear of that residence runs parallel to
the line of the rear,
south elevation retaining wall. A Colourbond fence was
built along the top of the rear, south elevation retaining wall. The Tribunal
has found that the function of the rear, south elevation retaining wall was to
mark the boundary between the second respondent’s
Parcel and the Property,
serve the function of retaining material (topsoil, gravelly clay fill,
construction rubble and concrete)
that forms part of the second
respondent’s Parcel so as to provide support for the weatherboard
residence, and provide a base
for the Colourbond dividing fence. Based on all of
those factual matters, the Tribunal is satisfied that the construction of the
rear, south elevation retaining wall by August 2019 was a construction
“for use in conjunction with a dwelling.” The
said construction
served the function of retaining material in relatively close vicinity to the
rear of the dwelling on the second
respondent’s Parcel and also providing
a base on which to build a dividing fence, again, in relatively close vicinity
rear of the dwelling on the second respondent’s Parcel, thereby
providing privacy for the dwelling.
that the rear, south elevation retaining wall curves and then continues in a
north-south line along one side of the driveway
and stairs, the Tribunal is also
satisfied that that part of the retaining wall was a construction “for use
in conjunction
with a dwelling”, as it is a continuation of the one
retaining wall. As for the retaining wall that runs down the other side
driveway, looking at that wall in isolation, I would have had some misgivings
as being constructed “for
use in conjunction with a dwelling.” However, it would seem to me to be
taking an artificial
approach to characterise that retaining wall differently to
the other retaining wall. The Tribunal does not have evidence from the
respondents to suggest any differences in the times when the two retaining walls
were constructed or differences in the construction
methods used to build the
retaining walls. The Tribunal does not have evidence from the respondents to
suggest different reasons
behind the construction of the two retaining walls or
any sections of them. All of the retaining walls were built by 12 August 2019
(as evidenced in the survey plan dated 14 August 2019). The inference that the
Tribunal draws is that all of the retaining walls
considered in this case were
built as parts of a single construction job and all are properly characterised
as being constructed
“for use in conjunction with a dwelling” and
are to be regarded as a dwelling: Schedule 1 clause 3(4) of the Act.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicants are making a claim for the payment of
a specified sum of money that arises from a supply
of building goods and
services whether under a contract or not (see 48K(1) and 48A(1)(a) of the Act
and definition of “
building claim
”), supplied for or in
connection with the carrying out of “
residential building
”. That is because the second respondent made an alteration or
addition to a “dwelling” (see the Act Schedule 1
at clause 1(1) and
clause 2(1)(b)) in constructing the Dincel retaining walls, as that was a
structure or improvement constructed
for use in conjunction with a dwelling (see
the Act Schedule 1 clause 3(1)(l) and the reasons explained above for coming to
a conclusion), and in circumstances where none of the exclusions from
either the definition of “
residential building work
Act Schedule 1 clause 2 s. 3) or the definition of “
apply (see the Act Schedule 1 clause 3 s. 3). The Tribunal finds that the first
respondent, in supplying the Dincel retaining
walls the subject of this
application, has carried out “
residential building work”
within the meaning of that term in the Act.
also explained above in these reasons when setting out the factual background,
the Tribunal has found that it was the first respondent
who constructed the
Dincel retaining walls. In constructing the Dincel retaining walls, the Tribunal
infers that the first respondent
did so for the second respondent, Rizkallah
Awdi and Zenab Awdi, who were the three part-owners of the estate that was
on 27 August 2019. There is no evidence from the respondents
evidencing any arrangements between the first respondent and the three
part-owners with respect to the construction of the Dincel retaining walls.
There were submissions from the second respondent about
the three part-owners
being in-laws but is unclear what legal conclusions, if any, should follow from
that circumstance, even if
the Tribunal were to accept it. The Tribunal infers
that the first respondent must have constructed the Dincel retaining walls for
the three part-owners pursuant to a contract. The Tribunal is satisfied that it
can draw that inference of a contract between the
three part-owners and the
first respondent because the estate which became the subject of the subdivision
is real property, it is
valuable, and the construction of the Dincel retaining
walls must have been an expensive and difficult process in itself (having
to the height of the walls, the length of the walls, the difficult terrain
– see Court Book p. 239 - and the impact
the walls necessarily had in
demarcating the driveway on the second respondent’s Parcel and also
providing a base for the Colourbond
fence that operated as a rear fence to the
weatherboard house located on the second respondent’s Parcel. The Tribunal
readily draws the inference given the absence of evidence from the
respondents about any arrangements that gave rise to the construction
Dincel retaining walls.
statutory warranties that are provided for in s. 18B(1) of the Act are implied
into “every contract” to do residential
building work. Under s. 18D
of the Act, the statutory warranties extend for the benefit of the applicants as
the Tribunal is satisfied
that because of the sale of the Property from the
three part-owners to the applicants (see [18] in the first applicant’s
affidavit),
the applicants are successors in title to the three part-owners. In
their points of defence, or in their submissions at hearing,
the respondents
raised no defence that s. 18D of the Act did not operate to extend the benefit
of the Act’s s. 18B(1) statutory
warranties to the applicants. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicants are entitled to the benefit of the
Act’s s. 18B(1)
statutory warranties.
next issue which the Tribunal will consider is the design and construction of
the Dincel retaining walls.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the applicants’ engineer Mr. Witt that
there were Australian Standards applicable to the
design of the retaining walls:
see [1.6] in the 20 December 2024 report. There was no challenge to that
evidence in cross-examination
and no contradictory expert evidence tendered by
the respondents.
is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that an appropriately-qualified
engineer had designed the Dincel retaining walls
and certified that the design
of the Dincel retaining walls was in accordance with the relevant Australian
applicant’s expert, Mr. Witt has attended the site of the Dincel retaining
walls and has undertaken a detailed inspection
of the structure and surface of
the site where the rear, south elevation retaining wall was constructed (Court
Book p. 373). It is
clear from his second report too (e.g. Court Book pp. 371
– 2 at [31] and [36]) that he has also inspected the Dincel retaining
walls that have been built down the sides of the driveway serving the Property.
second respondent cross-examined Mr. Witt and in the course of
cross-examination, showed Mr. Witt photographs (see especially
exhibits A, B and
C) of the collapsed retaining wall that depicted some reinforcement bars in the
collapsed wall remnants. In his
oral evidence, Mr. Witt did not dispute that the
photographs did depict reinforcement bars; his oral evidence was that the bars
too short, were only oriented in one direction and did not appear to be
continuous throughout the part of the wall that had collapsed.
second respondent also cross-examined Mr. Witt about the drainage system for the
collapsed retaining wall, and he took Mr. Witt
to photographs showing parts of
the drainage system, such as the remains of drainage pipes and granular material
that appears to
have been used as part of the drainage system for the collapsed
retaining wall. In his oral evidence, Mr. Witt did not dispute that
photographs did possibly depict some parts of a drainage system that could have
been used, in effect, to prevent a buildup of
water pressure behind the rear,
south elevation retaining wall. Mr. Witt’s oral evidence was that the
adequacy of the agricultural
drainage line system that had been installed was
not evidenced by what could be seen in the photographs; he pointed to matters
as a lack of evidence of use of a filter or sock for any drainage pipe and
crushed metal or concrete to be used as part of the drainage
system. Mr. Witt
also accepted that photographs of the weatherboard house on the second
respondent’s Parcel appeared to show
there were no downpipes from the roof
of the house but he could not draw any conclusions that the combination of the
apparent lack
of downpipes and a heavy rain event caused the collapse of the
rear, south elevation retaining wall, as opposed to a problem with
construction of the retaining wall.
the course of his cross-examination, Mr. Witt did not retreat from his opinions
expressed in his expert reports and the Tribunal
did not form any view, during
the cross-examination, that Mr. Witt is a witness who was providing inaccurate
or unreliable evidence
to the Tribunal.
assessing Mr. Witt’s evidence, the Tribunal also takes into account the
absence of any witness statement or affidavit, tendered
on behalf of the
respondents, explaining exactly how the rear, south elevation retaining wall was
built, what reinforcement bars
were used, the size of those bars and their
orientation, and what were all the components of the drainage system for the
walls that were constructed. In assessing Mr. Witt’s evidence,
the Tribunal also takes into account the absence of any expert
report, tendered
on behalf of the respondents, disputing Mr. Witt’s opinion evidence,
either in whole or in part.
reviewed Mr. Witt’s reports and taken into account the cross-examination
of him, the Tribunal accepts the expert opinion
evidence of Mr. Witt that (a) he
did not observe any footing at the site of the failed retaining wall (Court Book
p. 373), and the
absence of a footing – together with matter (c) set out
below in this paragraph of these reasons - means that the wall would
insufficient capacity to resist instability due to over-turning and sliding
(Court Book p. 370); (b) the failed retaining wall
had Dincel panels that were
not observed to have regular horizontal or vertical steel reinforcement and
steel reinforcement required
to resist bending and shear forces and to prevent
concrete cracking, with any reinforcement arrangement needing to satisfy AS3600
“Concrete Structures” (Court Book p. 372); (c) the reinforcement
starter bars which he observed protruded 100 mm from
the base of the Dincel
panels, which is an insufficient length to transfer the required forces and does
not meet the requirements
of AS3600 “Concrete Structures” (Court
Book p. 372).
Tribunal is satisfied that each of the matters referred to in the preceding
paragraph of these reasons is a “major defect”
in the first
respondent’s residential building work, within the meaning of s. 18E of
the Act. The absence of the footing for
the retaining wall is a “major
element” (s. 18E(4) of the Act) because it is, in my assessment of Mr.
Witt’s evidence,
an external load bearing component of the retaining wall
while matters (b) and (c) referred to in the preceding paragraph of these
reasons also constitute a “major element” as they are internal
load-bearing components of the retaining wall, in my assessment
Witt’s evidence. Each of those defects in a major element are attributable
to defective workmanship (see s. 18E(4) “major
defect”) because (a)
the first respondent’s workmanship in constructing the rear, south
elevation retaining wall was
not in accordance with the Australian Standards
identified in Mr. Witt’s second expert report and (b) the defects are, in
assessment of Mr. Witt’s evidence, likely to cause the destruction of
the retaining wall or any part of it or the threat of
collapse of the retaining
wall or any part of it: s. 18E(4) “major defect” (a)(i) and
Mr. Witt’s reasoning process with respect to the defects affecting the
rear, south elevation retaining wall is persuasive
and is accepted by the
Tribunal, Mr. Witt’s reasoning process with respect to the sections of the
retaining wall that run along
both sides of the driveway leading from Wonga Road
to the Property is not as well developed, in my view. The reasoning is very
(see e.g. [31] at Court Book p. 371) and to large extent seems built on
the assumption that the same techniques used in the constructing
the collapsed
rear, south elevation retaining wall were used in the balance of the retaining
walls: see [36] at Court Book p. 372.
Nonetheless, the assumption is a
reasonable one. It is one accepted by the Tribunal because the rear, south
elevation wall is an
extension of the part of the retaining will that runs down
from Wonga Road and then curves to form the rear, south elevation retaining
and the Tribunal is more easily able to accept the assumption where there is no
evidence from the respondents establishing any
differences between the methods
of construction used for any particular sections or parts of the retaining walls
supplied by the
first respondent. But in any event, it was the cross-examination
of Mr. James by the second respondent that was additionally persuasive
Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the parts of the retaining wall that have
not collapsed also involve a “major
defect” and are not safe and
need to be pulled-down. In his answers during cross-examination, Mr. James gave
evidence about
the retaining wall still standing pushing against the stairs (on
the side of the driveway where there are stairs), and the parts
of it where it
has gone out of plumbness and is vulnerable to movement. While not an engineer,
Mr. James is an experienced building
consultant and the Tribunal is satisfied
that his qualifications and experience provided him with sufficient expertise to
opinion evidence that he gave, during his cross-examination, when he
explained why the Dincel retaining walls that are still in place
demolished.
the Dincel retaining walls were found above by the Tribunal to have been
constructed in May 2019, the filing of the application
in these proceedings on
15 April 2024 means that the application was filed within the six years
permitted by the Act in the case
of a “major defect”: s. 18E(1)(b)
of the Act.
Tribunal finds on the basis of matters (a), (b) and (c) described in paragraph
81 above in these reasons that the first respondent’s
construction of the
rear, south elevation retaining wall was residential building work done in
breach of the warranty that the work
will be done with due care and skill: s.
18B(1)(a) of the Act. The Tribunal also finds, for the reasons explained in
paragraph 83
above, that the sections of the retaining wall that have not
collapsed, and run along both sides of the driveway leading from Wonga
the Property, also involve residential building work done in breach of the
warranty that the work will be done with due care
and skill: s. 18B(1)(a) of the
will also follow from the above that the applicants’ case against the
second respondent (putting aside for the moment the
claim under the DBPA) should
be dismissed.
proceedings involve an allegation of defective residential building work. The
Tribunal has had regard to the preferred outcome
provided for in s. 48MA of the
Act. In circumstances where the evidence shows that the first respondent no
longer holds a licence
for the purposes of the Act, the Tribunal does not find
that it is appropriate to make a work order in this case. The respondents’
submission that the second respondent’s brother in law could perform any
required rectification work, cannot be accepted by
the Tribunal. Amongst other
things, there was no evidence that the brother in law had been the
“responsible party” for
the construction of the Dincel retaining
walls or was qualified and licensed to perform the rectification work.
applicant who is entitled to the benefit of the s. 18B statutory warranties
provided for in the Act is entitled to recover such
amount as will put him or
her in the same position so far as money can do, if the contract had been
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850.
Where there is a breach
of contract resulting in defective building work, the cost to make the work
conform to the contract is the
usual measure of damages (
Bellgrove v
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613)
but the rectification of the defect must be
necessary to achieve contractual conformity and a reasonable course to adopt or
that the work must not be unreasonable (
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Bowen
Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 236 CLR 272).
If those matters are not
established than other measures of damages, including the ‘diminution in
value’ measure might
be considered.
is an issue whether the scope and method of rectification suggested by the
applicants’ expert evidence – involving
demolition of the Dincel retaining walls that are still standing, and the
stairs, excavation works, the construction of new footings,
and then the
reinstatement of retaining walls and the stairs, together with engineering
certifications for the design and the work
itself – is too drastic and is
not a necessary and reasonable course to adopt. While being mindful of the
principles that an
applicant in a contractual damages case should not be
“over compensated” and that the cost of rectification should not
out of proportion to the benefit to be obtained by the applicant, the Tribunal
has to be guided by the evidence before it, if
that evidence is such as to
satisfy the Tribunal that the applicant has discharged his or her onus of proof
in relation to each of
the issues that arise.
Tribunal has in evidence the independent, expert reports from Mr. Witt and Mr.
James about what rectification work is required,
and an itemised costing from
Mr. James about the costs of the rectification work.
the Tribunal understands the evidence, the site of the collapsed wall and the
sites where the still-standing retaining walls are
to be demolished and then
reinstalled, feature difficult terrain, there are height issues and engineering
challenges to construct
retaining walls that can resist water pressure and shear
forces that may apply on the relevant site. The retaining walls themselves
will need to be re-installed are to run over a relatively lengthy distance and
there is considerable work involved in obtaining
relevant approvals from the
local council and then co-ordinating all of the work, all of which is set out
and itemised in Mr. James’
reports. The updated labour rates, material
costs, builder’s margin and all the quantities set out in Mr. James’
report, relied upon in reaching the estimate of rectification costs, are
clearly explained in the report. When the Tribunal tests
the applicants’
experts’ opinion evidence against all the facts and circumstances of the
case, as disclosed by the evidence,
that opinion evidence is, in my view,
persuasive.
second respondent made submissions that the cost of rectification claimed by the
applicants was excessive and disproportionate
when compared to the cost of
installing the Dincel retaining walls, but as was pointed out to him by the
Tribunal during his oral
submissions, there was no evidence about the cost that
had been incurred in installing the Dincel retaining walls. Further, the
respondents
tendered into evidence no expert opinion material, which complied
with NCAT Procedural Direction 3, challenging the method of rectification
proposed by the applicants or offering any credible alternatives that might have
involved a more modest rectification method such
as, perhaps, bolstering the
retaining walls that remain standing and then reinstalling footings and a new
section of retaining wall
where the wall has collapsed. The cross-examination
did not cause either of the applicants’ experts to abandon their opinions
or any parts of them.
Tribunal is satisfied that the method of rectification proposed by the
applicants is reasonable and necessary and that the applicant’s
on the balance of probabilities standard, establishes the cost of rectification
at $606,765.55 ($432,631.41 plus margin
plus GST of 10%): Mr. James’
supplementary report at Court Book p. 553.
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is limited to $500,000.00, the monetary award
against the first respondent must be limited to
$500,000.00, notwithstanding the
evidence points to damage sustained by the applicants in excess of that amount.
The Tribunal considers
it appropriate that it should make an order that the
first respondent pay the applicants $500,000.00 by way of damages: s. 48O(1)(a)
of the Act.
applicants also seek orders against both respondents for breach of the statutory
duty imposed by s. 37 of the DBPA.
Tribunal is satisfied that the way that the applicants have pleaded (see [15]
– [30] in the points of claim) and developed
at the hearing their claim
under s. 37 of the DBPA, means that this part of their claim is properly
characterised as, at least, a
claim that falls within the definition of
“building claim” in s. 48(1)(a) of the Act, that arises from a
supply of building
goods and services whether under a contract or not:
v Sigma Group NSW Pty Limited
[2023] NSWCATAP 94
– [81]. The
Tribunal is satisfied that it has jurisdiction to determine this part of the
applicants’ claim.
claim under s. 37 of the DBPA has been pleaded adequately: see [8] above in
these reasons.
37 of the DBPA, which is contained in Part 4 of the DBPA, came into force on 10
June 2020: DBPA s. 2(1);
New South Wales Government Gazette
, No 122, 12
June 2020 at 2628. That date is of course after May 2019 when the Dincel
retaining walls the subject of this application
were constructed. However, the
provisions of Part 4 of the DBPA were given retrospective effect for a period of
up to ten years:
DBPA Schedule 1, clause 5.
applicants have standing, under s. 37(2) of the DBPA, to make a claim relying
upon s. 37 of the DBPA because they are ‘subsequent
owners of the
land’ as they acquired the Property from the relevant part-owners: see
[18] in the first applicant’s affidavit.
Construction
” is defined by s. 36(a) of the DBPA to mean, building work, which
residential building work within the meaning of the
Building Act 1989
”. For the reasons explained earlier in this
decision, the Tribunal is satisfied that the first respondent, in supplying the
Dincel retaining walls the subject of this application, has carried out
residential building work within the meaning of the
” and has accordingly carried out “
construction
”, within the meaning of
of the DBPA, for the purposes of
of the DBPA.
Construction
” is also defined by
of the DBPA to mean
supervising, coordinating, project managing or otherwise having
substantive control over the carrying out of any work referred to
in paragraph
(a), (b) or (c)
second respondent has been the sole director of the first respondent since his
appointment as director on 19 November 2013 (see
ASIC search for the first
respondent at Court Book p. 219) and therefore was the sole director in May 2019
when the Dincel retaining
walls the subject of this application were supplied.
The Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of the preceding sentence in these
and in circumstances where the respondents tendered no contradictory
evidence, that the second respondent was the person “otherwise
substantive control”
of the DBPA) of the carrying out by the
first respondent of the “building work” involved in constructing the
Dincel retaining
walls the subject of this application. In reaching that finding
of fact, the Tribunal has considered and sought to apply the guidance
construction of
of the DBPA explained by Stevenson J in
Strata Plan No 84674 v Pafburn
[2022] NSWSC 659
Tribunal does not find that the evidence establishes that the second respondent
carried out the relevant “building work”
as explained above, the evidence pointed to the first respondent performing the
work while the scope of work falling with
any “owner-builder” work
of the second respondent was uncertain. The Tribunal does not have evidence to
support a finding
that the second respondent actually supervised, coordinated or
project managed the carrying-out of the first respondent’s “building
work.” (DBPA
of the matters set out above in these reasons at [81] - [83], including in
particular the risk that the Dincel retaining walls
constructed by the first
respondent would have insufficient capacity to resist instability due to turning
and sliding (see again
Mr. Witt’s report at Court Book p. 370), the
Tribunal is satisfied that:
were defects arising from the construction work carried out by the first
respondent (see [99] above in these reasons) and in
respect of which, the second
respondent otherwise had substantive control (see [101] above in these reasons)
has been a breach by the respondents of the duty to exercise reasonable care to
avoid economic loss caused by defects; and
of the cost of rectifying the Dincel retaining walls (see Mr. James’
supplementary report), being both the collapsed
section of the wall and the
still-standing parts of the walls, as explained above in these reasons;
the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicants have suffered damage as a result
of the breach of the duty provided for in
of the DBPA as if the
duty were a duty established by the common law (DBPA
Tribunal, based on Mr. James’ supplementary report, finds that the
applicants have established damage in the sum of $606,765.55
sustained by them
in breach of the
DBPA duty. The claim is established against both
respondents, for the reasons explained just above when considering the
applicants’
DBPA claim in these reasons. The Tribunal’s power under
the Act to make an order for the payment of money is limited to $500,000.00,
mentioned above.
the Tribunal considers it appropriate that it should make an order that the
respondents, jointly and severally, pay the applicants
$500,000.00 by way of
s. 48O(1)(a)
of the Act. In making such an order, it is no longer
appropriate to make the order contemplated at [94] above in these reasons.
issue of costs was the subject of submissions at the hearing.
amount claimed in the application exceeded $30,000.00.
Rule 38(2)(b)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
provides the applicable rule
to determine how costs should be awarded.
principles guiding the exercise of the discretion to award costs under
are well-established. The purpose of making a costs order is not
punitive but is to provide compensation for the legal costs incurred
party in whose favour an order is made, having been put to the expense of having
to initiate and prosecute the proceedings.
The starting point when exercising
the discretion is that the usual order for costs is that a successful party
should be entitled
to an order for costs in their favour:
(1990) 170 CLR 534
[1990] HCA 59
per Mason CJ at 554;
Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
appropriate to make such an order in this case as the applicants have been
successful in obtaining an order to pay money against
the respondents and for
the amount they sought at the hearing. (At no stage did the applicants suggest
the Tribunal could order more
than $500,000.00). The authorities make it plain
that there is no absolute rule that the successful party should be entitled to
order for costs in their favour, but in the circumstances of this case, there
is no disentitling conduct on the part of the applicants
that mean they should
not be entitled to an order for costs and nor is there any other reason, when
considering the balance of justice
between the parties, why such an order should
not be made.
Tribunal will accordingly make an order for the respondents to pay the
applicants costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed,
on the ordinary
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter