URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1089.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Award Review Principles Case 2025 [2025] NSWIRComm 1089 (17 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Award Review Principles Case 2025
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1089
Hearing Date(s):
31 July 2025 (final submissions filed on 11 August 2025)
Date of Orders:
17 October 2025
Decision Date:
17 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Taylor J, President
Chin J, Vice President
Commissioner
The parties are directed to provide submissions by 4.00pm on Friday, 14
November 2025 as to the content of the draft Principles, draft
Practice Note,
and draft standard award index published as Annexures to this decision. The
submissions are to address in particular
the content of paragraphs [12] and [13]
of the draft Principles, as to the test cases that ought to be included and the
any test case clause(s).
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Awards and enterprise agreements
— State decision setting new principles to guide the
process of award
review under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
— Decision to
retain Award Review Principles — Purpose of award review — Award
consolidation —Standardisation
of conditions — Consideration of
determinations — Standard index of award terms —Plain English
National Employment Standards entitlements under
Fair Work Act
— Principles to include test case standards or test
case standard clauses — Definition of “obsolete” award
Procedure to conduct award review to be set out in Practice Note —
Recognition of productivity improvements arising
from award review —
Substantive changes to terms and conditions of employment to be dealt with in
subsequent arbitral proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Fair Work Act 2009
Education (School Administrative and Support Staff) Act 1987
Fire and Rescue NSW Act 1989
Sector Audit Act 1983
Government Sector Employment Act 2013
Health Services Act 1997
Relations Act 1996
Police Act 1990
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4) (2024) NSWIRComm 25;
Teaching Service Act 1980
Cases Cited:
National Union of Workers v Employers’ Chamber of Commerce &
Industry (Vic) (Redundancy Case)
(2004) 129 IR 155
[2004] AIRC
Principles for Review of Awards – State Decision 1998
(1998) 85 IR
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
Re 4 yearly review of modern awards
Re 4 yearly review of modern awards
[2017] FWCFB 344
Re 4 yearly
review of modern awards
[2017] FWCFB 1612
Re 4 yearly review of modern awards
[2017] FWCFB 1738
Re Plain language drafting of modern awards
[2022] FWCFB
Re Storage Services – General – Award (Re Redundancy Case
– Supplementary Decision)
(2004) 134 IR 57
[2004] AIRC 564
of the Ministry of Health v Health Services Union NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm
Secure Employment Test Case 2006
(2006) 150 IR 1
[2006] NSWIRComm
State Part-Time Work Case
(1998) 78 IR 172
[1998] NSWIRComm 142
Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
Superannuation
Case 2025 (No 4)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1071
Texts Cited:
Hon Justice Richard Beasley, Special Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare
Funding, (April 2025)
Principal judgment
Australian Paramedics Association
Commissioner of Police
Health Secretary
Health Services Union
Industrial Relations
Local Government NSW
Secretary of the Department of
Transport Secretary
Representation:
H Pararajasingham (Industrial Relations Secretary, Transport
Secretary, Health Secretary, Fire and Rescue NSW, Commissioner of Police,
Secretary of the Department of Education)
L Saunders / K Fallah (Health
Services Union)
L N Hamilton (Unions NSW)
Solicitors:
(Australian Paramedics Association)
R Nassif (Local Government NSW)
File Number(s):
2025/148714
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) requires the Industrial
Relations Commission (Commission) to review awards every three years “to
modernise awards, consolidate
awards relating to the same industry and to
rescind obsolete awards”.
Principles for Review of Awards under
(Principles) that guide the
conduct of award reviews were made in
Having heard from interested
parties we are satisfied that they need to be updated. With this decision we
publish draft Principles
and invite the parties to provide submissions as to
their content.
Nature of award review proceedings
reviews are by their nature Commission-led proceedings. The Commission
identifies one or more awards to be considered together
and then asks the
parties why certain changes should not be made to update language, remove
redundant provisions, standardise conditions
or consolidate awards where
appropriate, and to rescind awards that no longer apply to anyone. Through a
process of conciliation
and consideration of submissions the Commission
determines an outcome and varies the awards in question. That they have in the
sometimes been conducted at the same time as a
application made by a
party to vary an award does not change the character of the award review
purpose of a review is to promote productivity and efficiency by simplifying
awards and removing uncertainty.
Even though such improvements may not be readily quantified by way of cost
savings, they nevertheless could be taken into account
in later proceedings that
consider increases in remuneration.
However, a review is not itself a vehicle for parties to pursue substantive
improvements in conditions, including increases in remuneration.
the process of conducting a review the need for substantive changes might be
identified. However, an award review, being Commission-led
and largely
administrative in nature, is not the appropriate mechanism to determine such
changes which require a hearing with evidence
led by the parties.
is not to say that an award review cannot commence a process to bring about
necessary substantive changes to ensure an award
is modern and up-to-date,
including the removal of gender undervaluation. The Principles we propose to
make will require the Commission,
when conducting an award review, to consider
whether to make one or more recommendations identifying substantive issues that
to be addressed. If the parties do not make appropriate applications to
address the identified issues, the Commission would then
consider acting on its
own initiative.
the proceedings before us the parties identified, correctly, that engaging in a
process is labour-intensive. While the Commission will lead
the process, it will expect a high level of cooperation and participation
parties to seek, via conciliation, consensus on appropriate changes. Where
substantial consolidation or harmonisation is being
sought, there may be a need
for a large number of conciliation conferences. Significant resources will be
required to provide the
Commission with the proper assistance required in such
cases. We note in that regard the evidence led as to the resources required
date by the Health Services Union (HSU) and the Health Secretary, who have been
working together for more than 3 years towards
a major consolidation of health
awards and determinations.
is in the interests of the NSW Government that awards are modernised and
consolidated and that the Commission gets the assistance
it needs to conduct
such an exercise properly and in a manner that enables the parties to fully
engage with the proceedings. To that
end we recommend that Government give
consideration to creating a fund that parties who are involved in significant
reviews are able
to access to fund the necessary additional
Content of Principles – Summary of our
conclusions
has changed since 1998 when the Commission set the current Principles that guide
the award review process. At that time state
awards applied to the private
sector, and most were minimum rates awards. Now, the only awards are those that
apply to the NSW public
service, government sector and local government, and
they are almost all paid rates awards. In addition, the objects of the
Industrial Relations Act
have been amended. These changes result in a
need to reconsider the existing Principles.
the reasons that follow we have determined that there ought to be a series of
changes to the existing Principles that reflect
the following
Content of Principles
(1) Awards are reviewed pursuant to
Industrial Relations
to update language and remove redundant provisions, to standardise
conditions and consolidate awards where appropriate and to rescind
awards that
no longer apply to anyone.
(2) An award review should not reduce existing conditions of employment.
(3) Award reviews are not a vehicle for parties to pursue substantive
improvements in conditions, other than:
(a) by consent;
(b) to the extent necessary to ensure that they reflect test case and statutory
minima, including the entitlements extended to non-national
system employees
Fair Work Act 2009
(c) to increase wages and allowances in minimum rates awards to ensure that
overall remuneration for particular classification(s)
is not less than that set
by the national minimum wage or a federal award for comparable work.
(4) Where there is more than one award that applies to employees who perform
the same or similar work for the same employer in the
same part of the public
service or government sector and who are covered by the same union(s)
(“like employees”), the
Commission will consider whether the awards
being reviewed should be consolidated and/or core conditions can be standardised
to improve productivity and efficiency. If so, the Commission should
then consider whether that can be done in the review proceedings
alternatively, because this measure would require a substantive and contested
change to existing conditions for employees covered
by one or more awards, it
ought to be the subject of a statement or recommendation to the effect that this
measure should be addressed
in subsequent proceedings.
(5) Statutory determinations setting terms and conditions of employment that
apply to employees covered by an award being reviewed
will be considered by the
Commission as part of the review. To the extent that an award does not deal with
a subject matter that
is addressed by a determination the Commission will
consider if there is a good reason why that term ought not be included in the
award. The Commission will otherwise consider determinations to ensure that
there is no inconsistency or ambiguity that arises because
of the interaction
between a determination and an award.
(6) Unless there is good reason not to do so, awards should be reordered to
follow a standard index format that will be attached to
the new Principles.
(7) The Commission will make changes necessary to improve ease of
understanding such as removing ambiguity and imprecise drafting,
and to that end
will have regard to the plain language drafting guidelines of the Fair Work
Commission (FWC).
(8) Amendments to awards are to be made to the extent necessary to ensure
that they are not less beneficial than minimum entitlements
provided by
Fair Work Act
. Alternatively, a term is to be included that makes
it an award obligation to provide specific entitlements that are at least equal
to those obligations.
(9) Where the Commission forms the view, having conducted an award review,
that for an award or awards to be properly modernised the
Commission needs to
consider substantive changes which are contested, the Commission will express
that view in the decision that
determines the award review to enable the issue
to be properly considered in subsequent arbitral proceedings. The Commission may
in addition make recommendations that address those issues. In particular, the
Commission member conducting the review should consider
whether to make a
recommendation that the award or awards may need or do need to be examined to
eliminate gender-based undervaluation.
(10) Where the Commission considers it appropriate the Commission will at the
end of a review identify whether changes have been made
to the award that
promote productivity and efficiency and whether their significance is such that
the Commission recommends that
they ought to be taken into account in
determining a future increase in remuneration.
Award review process – To be addressed by a Practice Note
(11) While an award review is Commission-led, parties are expected to
cooperate with a review process.
review will not ordinarily be dealt with as part of the same
proceedings as a substantive application to vary or make a new award.
(13) The Commission will commence an award review on its own motion, pursuant
Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2022
, once every
three years.
(14) This will be done by the Industrial Registrar giving notice to all
parties recorded on the party card of an award or awards,
pursuant to
of the Rules.
(15) The Commission will ask the parties whether the awards identified in the
notice should be considered together, whether there
are any other awards that
apply to like employees that ought to be considered in the same review, and a
list of issues the parties
consider ought to be dealt with as part of the
(16) The employer(s) will be asked to provide copies of any statutory
determinations that set conditions of employment for any employees
covered by an
award being reviewed.
(17) Having determined the awards to be reviewed, the Commission will provide
the parties with a draft list of issues to be addressed
in the review and
discuss with the parties in conciliation the most efficient means to conduct the
review. The list of issues may
be amended during the course of the review.
(18) During the s 19 review process the Commission will ordinarily and in the
order and manner that is considered most appropriate
to the particular
(a) have the parties confirm their view as to the issues they consider ought to
be considered in the review;
(b) have the parties identify any issue that the parties say involves
substantive changes that ought to be addressed by a recommendation
made by the
Commission;
(c) seek the parties’ views as to the extent to which any of the awards in
question can be consolidated with each other and/or
core conditions can be
standardised in order to improve productivity and efficiency; and
(d) work through the identified issues to be addressed in conciliation, during
which the Commission may propose changes to the award(s).
(19) Before making or varying awards or making any recommendation(s) in light
of the review, the Commission will provide the parties
with an opportunity to
make submissions on proposed draft awards and draft recommendations.
(20) Where there are contested positions the Commission may conduct a short
hearing before determining the outcome of the review.
(21) It is not expected that evidence would ordinarily be required, as an
award review is by its nature an exercise that focuses on
the terms of the
awards being reviewed having regard to what the Commission understands to be the
nature of the industry, the history
of the award, and any relevant test case
standards or minimum conditions. Evidence may be required where there is a
dispute as to
the factual basis for determining whether an award is obsolete, or
otherwise where a fact or facts in issue must be established to
Commission to exercise its powers under s 19.
(22) The Commission member is to identify at the end of a review:
(a) contested issues involving substantive changes to terms and conditions of
employment that the Commission considers need to be
addressed for the award to
be properly modernised and which were not addressed by the review, so they can
be properly considered
in subsequent arbitral proceedings;
(b) whether changes have been made to the award that promote productivity and
efficiency and whether the Commission recommends such
changes be taken into
account in determining any future increase in remuneration; and
(c) whether the award needs to be examined to consider whether it contains
gender-based undervaluation.
Other matters in summary
(23) There is no need for the Principles to restate the legislative
provisions nor to deal with procedural matters that can be addressed
Practice Note, which is provided in draft form for the parties to comment on at
the same time as this decision.
(24) The Principles should list the current test case standards and where
possible test case standard clauses. This will be finalised
following further
submissions from the parties.
(25) An award is obsolete and ought to be rescinded if it
does not set
conditions that apply to any employees and it is not expected do so in the
foreseeable future.
Procedural background
these proceedings, the Commission has acted on its own initiative. On 17 April
2025, an initial Summons to Show Cause was issued
which invited parties to show
Having regard to the current Principles for Review
of Awards set out at Annexure F of
Principles for Review of Awards
State Decision 1998
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
(1998) 85 IR 38
(the Award Review
Principles), the Commission should not:
(a) retain the Award Review Principles; and
(b) review the form and content of the Award Review Principles
generally, including by considering:
(i) introducing an obligation for plain english drafting;
(ii) having award clauses follow a consistent order and
(iii) whether there ought to be a presumption in favour of
consolidating awards and/or standardising conditions that apply to
employed by the same section or part of the public sector;
(iv) the need for the Principles to reflect or accommodate the
operation of Chapter 2A of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(v) the procedure by which award review proceedings should be
conciliated;
(vi) whether award reviews should be conducted by examining
awards concurrently in batches focusing on groups of awards that affect
employees; and
(vii) whether and how any productivity improvements arising
from award reviews and modernisation should be recognised.
16 June 2025, the Vice President’s chambers emailed the parties requesting
them to address two additional matters in their
submissions:
“Firstly, consideration should be given to whether or to what extent the
Commission is able to undertake and complete the award
modernisation process
contemplated by Recommendations 28 and 29 of the Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare
Funding published in April 2025 (the
Beasley Report). ... The Full Bench would be assisted by the parties’
submissions on the
scope for undertaking and completing such a process under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW), both with respect
to the NSW Health awards and for the broader purpose of reviewing the
Commission’s awards generally.
Secondly, please note that Chapter 6
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) extends some National Employment Standards to non-national system
employees, including State and Local Government employees.
...The Full Bench
would be assisted by submissions addressing whether or in what manner the Award
Review Principles ought to deal
with awards that contain terms and conditions
that are inconsistent with one or more of these National Employment
Standards.”
Historical background and purpose of the Award Review Principles
Full Bench set principles to be applied to award review proceedings in
Principles for Review of Awards – State Decision 1998
(1998 State
Those principles have
not been reviewed until these proceedings.
Full Bench in the 1998 State Decision interpreted
in the context of
the rest of Ch 2 of the
Industrial Relations Act
and distinguished it
from proceedings to make or vary awards under
“Applications brought by award parties in order to meet the needs of
employers and employees in the circumstances of a particular
industry or
enterprise are pursued and determined in accordance with the provisions of
the 1996 Act, particularly s 10, together
with other applicable legislation
and applicable principles, including those established in State Wage Case
decisions, State decisions
and test case decisions. By way of contrast, the
process established by s 19 has a stated and limited purpose
— namely ‘to
modernise awards, to consolidate awards relating to the
same industry and to rescind obsolete awards’.
In s 19(3) and (4),
matters which the Commission must take
into account in giving effect to that purpose are specified.
Care must be taken, it seems to us, to ensure that those two processes are not
Full Bench interpreted the word “modernise” to be understood as
“bringing the award up to date and making it
contemporary” and
“[ensuring] that the awards are made consistent with the current statutory
framework”.
The Full Bench
however considered that modernisation in the context of an award review under
include inserting conditions into awards which
the Commission might consider a “modern” award ought to
has changed since s 19 was drafted and the Principles were set. There were
at that time a much greater number of State awards,
a large number of which
applied to the private sector. Many of those private sector awards were minimum
rates awards. There were
several “splinter” awards, such as wages
adjustment awards, which dealt with select matters and operated to vary a main
first matter to note about the 1998 State Decision is that the Principles that
were made were largely agreed as between the Labor
Council of NSW (as Unions NSW
was then known) and the Crown, with any areas of disagreement principally
arising from private sector
employers and specifically the NSW Farmers
Federation. It was perhaps for that reason that the Principles for the most part
more than reflect and, in large part, repeat the statutory
provisions.
second matter to note is the context in which the Principles were being
determined. It was handed down in December 1998, at which
point there was
limited time left to complete the statutory exercise of reviewing every State
award within 3 years of the commencement
Industrial Relations Act
in September 1996. It was in that context that the Full Bench needed to consider
how reviews could be undertaken and concluded within
the prescribed timeframe.
In a manner that would assist reviews being commenced and conducted quickly, it
determined that a review
could be initiated by the parties and commenced at the
same time as an application to make a new award or vary an existing award.
the likelihood that a review would be considered at the same time as an
application by a party to alter existing conditions
it was no doubt important
for the Bench to give careful consideration to the extent to which the
Commission would consider substantive
changes to an Award as a result of a
review and whether and how it would have regard to the evidence of the
parties. In particular the Commission appears to have been
concerned to ensure
that the parties not have an expectation that a
review could be a
vehicle to seek substantive change to “modernise” an award and by
such means avoid the constraints
of the then Wage Fixing Principles. It is
against that background that we understand the Full Bench said what it did about
the Commission
not changing conditions even if appropriate to modernise an award
as part of a
Criticism of the existing Award
Review Principles
his Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare Funding (Beasley
Report), published in April 2025, the Honourable
Justice Richard Beasley
commented on what he saw as the limited capacity
by the 1998 State Decision − to bring
J recorded in Chapter 18 of his Report that there was a general consensus among
the parties that appeared before his inquiry
that NSW Health awards were
outdated and no longer fit for purpose and so required substantive reform, with
the exception of the
Public Health System Nurses’ and Midwives’
(State) Award.
The Report noted
that the Commission is required to review each award every three years in order
to modernise awards and that at
least some of the awards were reviewed in 2021
and 2022, but that:
“these reviews appear to have focussed on particular issues raised by
parties rather than conducting a wholesale review for
the purposes of
determining whether modernisation or consolidation should
Beasley Report identified that the reason such reviews had not led to the
necessary wholesale review was the narrow view taken
by the 1998 Full
Bench’s interpretation of the award review process. The Beasley Report
took the view that the Full Bench in
the 1998 State Decision interpreted that
“a. was not to be used for the purpose of ensuring that
in substance an award met the needs of employers and employees in
circumstances of the relevant industry or enterprise;
b. was not a mechanism for employers or employees to overcome
the effects of a previous decision of the Commission or an earlier
c. did not, at least generally, allow the Commission to insert
new conditions into an award, even ones the Commission might think
contained in a ‘modern’ award of that kind; and
d. was to be driven by the parties in the same way as other
litigation, such that, for example, the review was to be determined
material put before it by the parties and not by the Commission
‘embark[ing] upon a wide ranging investigation into
the operation of a
particular award or
industry’.”
led Beasley J to make the following recommendations, being recommendations that
we asked the parties in these proceedings to
Recommendation 28
: There should be an award reform process
conducted by the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
incorporating at least
the following features:
a. a legislated set of objectives to be achieved by the
process, which include:
i. simplifying and, where appropriate, consolidating the
current range of awards, determinations and other instruments setting
conditions of employment or engagement for NSW Health workers, to provide a
consistent and coherent framework of terms
and conditions that is easy to
understand and apply; and
ii. updating instruments so that they reflect the current and
expected future service delivery and workforce needs of the NSW
health system
and current and expected future working conditions; and
iii. providing fair and reasonable terms and conditions of
employment or engagement for workers across the NSW health system,
having regard to the value of their work to system, the impact of those terms
and conditions on attraction and retention,
and their fiscal and economic
b. a reasonable but expeditious timeframe in which the process
is to be completed; and
c. an extension of the process to Visiting Medical Officers
and the Visiting Medical Officer Determinations.
Recommendation 29
: To the extent that legislative amendment is necessary
for the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales to be able to
the award modernisation process contemplated by Recommendation 28 other
than in the context of an industrial dispute (and unconstrained
construction given to
Industrial Relations Act
amendment should be made urgently.”
a large extent the Beasley Report’s summary of the 1998 decision, as
quoted above, is correct. As the Full Bench in 1998
implicitly recognised, a
review, being a Commission-led process that is largely administrative
in nature, is not a suitable vehicle for parties to advance
substantive change.
The structure of the Act is one that empowers
the Commission to make
awards that resolve disputes between parties. Such awards are by their nature
the consequence of the competing
interests of parties, manifested through
contested proceedings. Arbitrations that give rise to awards or amendments to
adversarial proceedings which involve evidence and submissions being
contested in open court and written reasons being given for
the determination.
Those awards or amendments not made by arbitration occur as a result of consent
applications, being the outcome
of negotiations, often assisted by conciliation.
While the Commission has the power to make awards on its own
historically the making
and varying of awards under the
Industrial Relations Act
has always been
party-led. This is reflected in the Award Making Principles (AMPs).
Principle 9.1 of the AMPs identifies that, other
than in limited
circumstances, substantive changes to awards that are not made or varied by
consent are to be progressed as an arbitrated
case before a Full Bench and will
ordinarily only be granted if they meet one or more of the criteria in the
Arbitrated Case Principle.
light of those matters, and as the 1998 State Decision held, given the overall
scheme of the
Industrial Relations Act
review is not the
appropriate vehicle to make substantive changes to an award that might be
advanced by employers or employees, including
to alter a previous arbitrated
decision or an earlier bargain, even where the Commission “might
think” (to quote the
Beasley Report) such conditions should be contained
in a modern award.
last expression is one that warrants further comment. What the Commission
“might think” following a largely administrative
exercise conducted
by conciliation but without the benefit of evidence and contested submissions in
open court could only, in our
view, be a preliminary view.
are of the view, as each of the parties in these proceedings urged and as the
1998 State Decision concluded, that a
review is not itself the
appropriate vehicle to determine substantive contested changes to awards. In our
view, absent a legislative
directive and authority of the sort identified by
Recommendation 29 of the Beasley Report, the Commission would not initiate
wide-ranging
reviews into substantive conditions of employment across swathes of
the NSW public sector and local government of its own motion.
accept, however, the gravamen of the criticism of the Beasley Report, namely
that it is undesirable for the Commission to conduct
a review and form a
preliminary view that one or more awards need substantive change in order to be
a “modern” award,
and then do nothing about it.
light of that, we determine that at the conclusion of a review the Commission
ought to identify in its decision issues that involve
substantive changes to
terms and conditions of employment that the Commission considers need to be
addressed in subsequent proceedings,
such as when the award is next being
renewed or varied. These might include the standardisation of conditions or
consolidation of
awards involving substantive changes to terms and conditions
that are contested (noting that such consolidation and standardisation
occur through the
process if consent can be reached).
addition to identifying those subject matters that require consideration in
later proceedings, the member of the Commission should
also consider making
specific recommendations about such issues if the Commission considers that to
be appropriate. That should only
be done, however, after the Commission has
given the parties the opportunity to make submissions as to the content of such
a recommendation
or recommendations before they are finalised.
note that in the past a
review was sometimes heard and determined alongside
an application made by a party under
to vary an award. The latter
application created a vehicle for a party to seek substantive changes, initially
through conciliation
and, where that failed, by arbitration. The Principles we
propose do not prevent such an approach. They are founded, however, on
presumption that a
review is able to be conducted and concluded without the
need to determine other applications to vary the award made by a party.
Ultimately it will be a matter for the Commission member who is allocated the
proceedings to determine the most appropriate and efficient
course. In some
cases, the issues that are being considered might be thought sufficiently
connected to mean that it will be more
efficient to determine the outcome of the
review at the same time as a related application. However, ordinarily the
approach set
by the Principles we propose to make will give the Commission
sufficient flexibility to be able to determine the
review first, with any
arbitration to consider substantive contested proceedings heard subsequently,
potentially assisted by a recommendation
or statement.
we are mindful of the fact that the
Industrial Relations Act
was amended
on 13 October 2025 to include the elimination of gender-based undervaluation as
a further object at
s 3(f1)(ii)
, being a matter that must be considered
when exercising the Commission’s powers:
(f1) to achieve gender equality in the workplace, and in
particular—
(ii) to eliminate gender-based undervaluation.
light of that amendment, we consider that the Award Review Principles ought to
also contain a specific requirement that the Commission
member conducting the
review should consider whether to make a statement or recommendation that the
award or awards in question may
need or do need to be examined to eliminate
gender-based undervaluation.
Overview of parties’ key
submissions
NSW commenced its submissions by identifying that “the drafting of many
awards leaves a great deal to be desired”
but nevertheless contended that
there was no clear benefit for broad award reform that would outweigh the
potential costs of a large-scale
project to review awards, given that a
wholesale review of awards would require unions to expend significant resources.
NSW was wary that the redrafting and consolidation of industrial awards could
risk the reduction in employees’ actual
terms and conditions and disrupt
longstanding arrangements, thereby increasing disputation. It was submitted that
a fundamental purpose
of any award review process would be to ensure there is no
reduction in terms and conditions of employment.
that basis, Unions NSW opposed amendments to the Principles which would require
plain English drafting, a consistent order and
format, or a presumption in
favour of award consolidation and/or the standardisation of conditions. Unions
NSW also proposed that
the Commission should adopt a “minimalist”
approach when dealing with awards that contain conditions that are inconsistent
with any entitlements in
Fair Work Act
, by inserting an
award clause into such awards indicating that an employee under the award is
, in order to avoid having to engage in a longer process of
amending an existing award term.
Notwithstanding
those submissions, Unions NSW submitted that productivity gains can be achieved
by an award review and reform process
and that any such gains should be
reflected by an uplift in wages of 0.5%. It also supported the consolidation and
modernisation
exercise of the kind discussed by Recommendation 28 of the Beasley
Report, and any legislative reform that might be required for
the Commission to
perform that exercise as recommended by Recommendation 29.
Secretaries
submissions were made on behalf of the Industrial Relations Secretary, Transport
Secretary, Health Secretary, Fire and Rescue
NSW, Commissioner of Police, and
Secretary of the Department of Education (the Secretaries).
oral submissions, counsel for the Secretaries addressed three propositions which
he submitted underpinned the Secretaries’
submissions: first, that the
current Principles were largely fit for purpose and that alterations ought to be
limited in scope; second,
should be recognised as a
Commission-led process (rather than a party-led process) which should not be
used as an “alternative
gateway” for the exercise of the
Commission’s other powers under the
Industrial Relations Act
particularly at
; and third, that the Commission should take a
“pragmatic approach” in achieving the objectives set out in the
by way of, for example, a test case for plain English drafting.
reply submissions, the Secretaries supported the positions of parties who noted
that plain English drafting should be couched as
an aspiration rather than an
obligation during award review processes.
Secretaries were supportive of amendments to the Principles which would have
award clauses follow a consistent order and format,
create a presumption in
favour of award consolidation and the standardisation of conditions, require
parties to engage in conciliation
during award review, and examine awards
concurrently in batches. The Secretaries also recognised that the National
Employment Standards
(NES) entitlements in
Fair Work Act
should be considered in a
review, but they opposed the Commission
undertaking a comparative or qualitative assessment of award terms and other NES
entitlements.
Secretaries opposed Recommendation 28 of the Beasley Report on the basis that
the objectives in it exceeded the scope and purpose
process. In a similar vein, the Secretaries submitted that productivity
improvements arising from award reviews should not
be implemented in the review
process itself but by the Commission exercising its powers under
on application.
Secretaries identified that principle 14 needed to be updated with State
decisions made after 1998.
Secretaries also contended that other principles ought to be amended. Those
amendments were to:
(1) replace the text of principle 4 to read:
“Consistent with
of the Act, at least once every three years, the
Registrar, in a manner the Registrar deems fit, will give notice to those with
established industrial interest in applications affecting that award, that
the award is due to be reviewed”;
(2) include a reference in principle 12 to
Relations Act
and the mandatory factors that the Commission must consider
when exercising its functions;
(3) delete principle 15;
(4) delete from principle 16 the words “whether those procedures
facilitate resolution of industrial disputes concerning discrimination
employment on a ground to which the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(5) change the definition of “obsolete award” in principle 22
from an award where “there are no employees or employers
award” to an award where “there are no employees or employers under
that award, and no intention of employees
or employers under that award in the
future”; and
(6) change principle 23 to indicate that where no application to vary an
award has been made for five years or more, there is a presumption
rather than
an indication that the award may be obsolete and require rescission.
Local Government NSW
Government NSW (LGNSW) supported amendments to the Principles that would
introduce an obligation for plain English drafting,
refer to the conciliation of
award review proceedings, and require the Commission to review whether award
terms and conditions are
inconsistent with the NES provisions in
Fair Work Act
opposed the inclusion of a principle that would have award clauses follow a
“predetermined” order and format, on
the basis that the
reconfiguration of award clauses might undo “finely balanced”
consent outcomes in the local government
sector. It also opposed the variation
of awards to recognise productivity improvements arising from award review and
modernisation
submitted that the objectives raised by Recommendation 28 of the Beasley Report
are already contemplated by
Industrial Relations Act
which empowers the Commission to make an award setting fair and reasonable
conditions of employment. It also submitted that a batched
approach to award
review was already contemplated by principle 6.
Health Services
HSU opposed a presumption in favour of consolidating awards on a similar basis
to Unions NSW, namely that the exercise of award
consolidation is extremely
resource intensive. It submitted that employee interests need to be actively
represented in order to prevent
the reduction of entitlements during
standardisation.
HSU, while supporting plain English drafting on principle, acknowledged that the
redrafting of existing awards was a time-consuming,
technical and resource
intensive exercise, as demonstrated by the plain language drafting exercise that
is currently being undertaken
To the extent that the
Principles dealt with plain English drafting, it was submitted such drafting
should be expressed as an aspiration
rather than obligation, and that the
Commission should consult with the parties to develop plain language guidelines
to be tested
via a review of a test case clause or specific award.
HSU opposed an amendment to the Principles that would require award clauses to
follow a standard order and format, due to the
“diversity of the
structure” of public sector awards, “integration between existing
awards and payroll systems
and processes”, and absence of an arbitrated
standard order and format.
the HSU supported Recommendation 28 of the Beasley Report, it did not view the
issues raised in those Recommendations as needing
to be addressed through a
review process, given that the Commission is able to make, rescind and
vary awards pursuant to
sections 10
Industrial Relations
HSU also noted specific principles which were out-of-date, such as principle 7
which refers to obsolete counterpart awards or
principle 14 which does not
include State decisions made after 1998.
HSU also suggested that principles 9 and 10 could be amended to:
(1) include the right of intervention provided by
for peak councils,
the Minister, and the President of the Anti-Discrimination Board in
principle 9; and
(2) reconsider the usual directions in principle 10 for hearings involving major
redrafting.
Australian Paramedics Association
Australian Paramedics Association (APA) supported the inclusion of a
“guiding principle for plain English drafting”
in the Principles. It
submitted that a
review should include an update of award terms and
conditions which are less beneficial than the NES that apply to non-national
did not support amendments to the Principles which would require that, as a
matter of course, award clauses follow a consistent
order and format or a
presumption in favour of consolidating awards and standardising conditions
applying to employees employed by
the same sector or part of the public sector,
due to what the APA identified as “occupational specificity or distinct
operational
requirements” in public sector
industries.
11 August 2025, the HSU and the Health Secretary filed an agreed statement of
facts (ASOF) that detailed the parties’ process
to consolidate, reform and
modernise the more than 50 awards and determinations applying to employees
covered by the HSU in the NSW
public health system with the aim of reducing them
to about 6 awards. In summary that evidence established that the Ministry of
(MOH) and the HSU began discussions, meetings and correspondence relating
to award reform and structural consolidation in 2023, although
the MOH considers
that the award reform negotiation meetings formally commenced on 2 August 2024.
The HSU says the process started
even earlier, when it engaged with members as
to the form and content of award modernisation from mid-2022. The ASOF
summarised the
current status of award negotiations for the two broad streams
that are the focus of the award reform process; the steps undertaken
internally and with its members during the process, as well as the number of
persons who “resourced” the HSU
at each step; and a log of the
scheduled meetings held between the HSU and the MOH.
evidence served to reinforce two matters that were the subject of submissions.
The first is that a modernisation exercise, properly
conducted, can require the
expenditure of significant time and resources by the parties. We note, however
that an exercise of consolidating
over 50 instruments into about 6 awards is
extraordinary, being at a level well exceeding what will ordinarily be required.
is that parties working cooperatively and with the assistance of the
Commission can achieve substantial reform. As the President
of the Ministry of Health v Health Services Union NSW
“[9] The parties are now within striking distance of achieving something
that would stand as one of the most significant industrial
reforms that has
occurred in this jurisdiction for many years. ...
[10] The outcome of this project will not only benefit the workers and managers
covered by the new simplified and modernised awards,
who will be able to perform
their jobs more efficiently, but also the health service and the people of NSW
more generally. These
are not changes that might be expected to result in
immediately quantifiable reduction in costs. Rather, like changes in other areas
of regulation directed at reducing red tape and unnecessary complexity, these
are changes that can be expected to increase efficiency
and productivity over
now turn to the questions that the parties were asked to
Whether to retain the Principles
the APA and the HSU supported the retention of the Principles and a review of
their form and content generally. The Secretaries
also supported the retention
of the Principles and submitted that minor amendments should be made to the
Principles to remove overly
prescriptive requirements and preserve the
Commission’s discretion. Unions NSW’s written submissions did not
provide a position on whether the Principles should be retained but
adopted their existence as an underlying assumption in their
submissions.
agree with the parties that principles to guide the process of award reviews,
with a practice note to guide procedure, are helpful
and should be
determined.
do not see a need for the Principles to repeat the statutory provisions, and to
that end the draft Principles proposed and attached
to this decision delete
various provisions which are not necessarily incorrect but are
unnecessary.
Introducing an obligation for plain English
was the only party which supported amending the Principles to include a plain
English drafting obligation. The Secretaries,
APA and HSU, while supporting
plain English drafting in principle, submitted that plain English drafting
should be included in the
Principles as an aspiration rather than requirement.
The Secretaries, in their reply submissions, supported the HSU’s proposal
that, should the Commission include a principle relating to plain English
drafting, it should first facilitate a consultative process
with industrial
parties to develop plain language guidelines which could then be considered in
the context of a pilot project.
NSW observed that many awards:
“are archaic, arcane and ambiguous. Some provisions of some awards border
on the incomprehensible. Much of the ambiguity appears
to be avoidable.”
NSW however cautioned against any amendment to the Principles that would elevate
a requirement for plain English drafting over
the need to avoid any reduction in
actual terms and conditions of employment.
FWC has introduced plain language drafting guidelines (FWC Guidelines) to assist
in re-drafting modern awards.
The FWC Guidelines were developed out of a pilot that was established in
September 2015 to create a plain language exposure draft
based on the Pharmacy
Industry Award 2010.
FWC’s proceedings to redraft federal awards in plain language has occupied
a substantial amount of its time and resources.
A Full Bench of the FWC resolved
in March 2017 to redraft a tranche of ten awards in plain
Of those ten, the Hair
and Beauty Industry Award 2010 and the Fast Food Industry Award 2010 are still
currently under review.
consider that plain English drafting ought to be a goal of an award review, with
an aim to remove ambiguity and imprecise drafting
to improve ease of
understanding. To that end the FWC Guidelines provide a useful guide that can be
parties are right, however, when they submit that certain terms in an award have
over time come to have an understood meaning,
and care needs to be taken not to
alter such terms unnecessarily with the potential risk of creating, rather than
removing, ambiguity.
we agree with the parties that the goal of plain English drafting ought to be
applied in a sensible and pragmatic manner.
The goal ought not become an end in
itself that takes up more time than can be justified by the improvements it
might bring about.
Having award clauses follow a consistent
order and format
HSU, Unions NSW and LGNSW opposed amendments to the Principles that would
require award clauses follow a consistent order and
format. That was not because
they opposed consistency in order and formatting in general; the HSU
acknowledged that it would be a
“positive development” that could
“greatly improve useability and assist employees and managers in
identifying
their relevant rights and obligations”. Instead, it was
submitted by the HSU that it would be burdensome to produce a standard
across awards given the diversity of the structure across different public
sector awards and the integration between existing
awards and payroll systems
and processes. Unions NSW submitted that such a requirement in the Principles
would risk elevating improvements
in drafting over the overriding need to
maintain conditions. LGNSW submitted that local government awards should not be
to follow a predetermined order and format as that could risk undoing
negotiated outcomes in those awards.
APA contended that an express requirement for awards to adopt a consistent order
and format may not be required, as
already requires the Commission
to consider during the award review process any “unnecessary
technicalities in the awards and
the ease of understanding of the awards”,
noting that the phrase “unnecessary technicalities” is defined in
18 as “the language, order or composition of
Secretaries supported the introduction of this requirement, submitting that it
could “assist stakeholders with engaging
with the applicable industrial
instrument”. In their reply submissions the Secretaries agreed with the
submission of other
parties that the restructuring of award clauses should only
be done whenever it is reasonably possible or appropriate so as to not
administrative difficulties or undo the legal effect of an award.
consider it would assist if awards followed a similar format, as occurs in
respect of federal awards. While creating some initial
work, it will assist
parties and regular users of awards to navigate the relevant provisions
efficiently. To that end, we propose
that the Principles would annex a standard
index that could be used when conducting an award review and awards should be
to follow the standard index unless there is a good reason not to do
however, the award review process in this regard should be pragmatic and avoid
undue time being spent on resolving disputes
provisions of an award. Further, the Principles will not require awards to be
reordered. There may well
be force in the oral submissions from Unions NSW that
renumbering might, at least in some cases, have unintended consequences that
would reduce rather than enhance productivity and efficiency, including
requiring some changes to payroll processes or publications
that explain awards
which would be expensive or time-consuming to have to amend. Whether those
concerns are valid is a matter that
we consider can be left to the Commission
member considering whether to reorder an award.
Whether there
ought to be a presumption in favour of consolidating awards and/or standardising
conditions that apply to employees
employed by the same section or part of the
public sector
NSW, the APA and the HSU opposed the introduction of a presumption in favour of
consolidation. The APA submitted that it would
be more appropriate for parties
themselves to determine in which circumstances consolidation is suitable, rather
than having to “disprove”
a presumption of consolidation. On that
basis, the APA supported the removal of the current presumption at principle 20
of consolidating splinter and parent awards. The HSU proposed that a
major consolidation exercise can create the risk of a reduction
in entitlements.
Instead, it was submitted that there should be a presumption in favour of
maintaining existing terms and conditions
unless the AMPs are satisfied.
Secretaries supported the introduction of this presumption, provided that it
could be displaced in circumstances where, for example,
awards contain bespoke
or distinctive terms and conditions which would hinder attempts at consolidation
or standardisation.
are satisfied that there ought to be no presumption in favour of consolidating
awards and/or standardising conditions. There is,
however, the potential for
improvements in productivity and efficiency that come from reducing the number
of awards that apply to
like employees and removing small differences in
conditions that apply to those working alongside each other by either
consolidating
awards or standardising conditions. Consequently, the Principles
will require the Commission to consider whether it would promote
productivity
and efficiency for the awards that are being reviewed to be consolidated or
their conditions standardised. If so, the
Commission should then consider
whether that can be done in the review proceedings or alternatively, because
that would require a
substantive change to existing conditions for employees
covered by one or more awards, it ought to be the subject of a
or recommendation to be addressed in subsequent proceedings.
need for the Principles to reflect or accommodate the operation of
Chapter 2A of the
Industrial Relations Act
of the parties submitted that the Principles do not need to reflect or
accommodate the operation of Chapter 2A. The HSU, LGNSW,
APA and the
Secretaries distinguished between the purpose of a
review and the
parties entering into mutual gains bargaining under Chapter 2A to negotiate
substantive changes to award terms and
conditions.
are satisfied for the reasons expressed by the parties that there is no need for
the Principles to reflect or refer to the operation
of Chapter 2A.
we note that some of the techniques that are used when engaged in interest-based
or good faith bargaining might be utilised
in the process of conciliating
improvements to awards in the context of a
review. They include
avoiding positional bargaining and adopting instead a non-adversarial approach
where the parties are encouraged
to work collaboratively to achieve improvements
to the award or awards being reviewed, to their mutual benefit. It would also
the parties sharing relevant information as part of collaborative
discussions.
The procedure by which award review proceedings
should be conciliated
Secretaries and LGNSW supported the inclusion of an explicit requirement for
parties to engage in conciliation. The Secretaries
noted that since the nature
and procedure for conciliation differs for each award review process, given the
number and nature of
the terms and awards being reviewed, the Principles should
not impose any limits or specific guidelines as to how conciliation should
Unions NSW and the HSU submitted that the existing procedure for award reviews
was appropriate, namely, call overs conducted
by the Commission during which it
outlines tasks and assists parties with the conferral process, including via
conciliation.
agree that an award review will be primarily conducted by conciliation, with a
hearing to be required only if there are ultimately
contested positions that
need to be determined. We are not inclined to mandate in the Principles
themselves a particular approach
to conciliation that must be adopted. It will
be a matter for the Commission member as to how any particular review ought to
be conducted.
is intended that the Commission member will be guided by a revised Practice Note
for the Procedures for Review of Awards, to be
issued by the President. The
Practice Note would contain provisions to the effect of those set out at in
[10](11)–(22) above.
Whether award reviews should be
conducted by examining awards concurrently in batches focusing on groups of
awards that affect related
Secretaries, HSU and LGNSW all supported a batched process of award review. The
HSU acknowledged that in practice, awards are
already grouped by agency or union
coverage for review purposes, and that award review should proceed in this way.
LGNSW noted that
principle 6 already permits the Commission to review
concurrently awards which involve the same union(s) and employer(s). The
Secretaries
submitted that conducting award review in this manner may assist in
consolidating awards and standardising conditions.
NSW opposed the examination of awards in this way, submitting that it carries
“an increased and unjustifiable risk of
reduction in conditions and/or
increased disputation”.
are satisfied that some awards ought to be reviewed at the same time as other
awards that apply to like employees. That is for
two reasons. First, it is
efficient for awards that apply to like employees, represented by the same
parties, to be reviewed together
(even if, in the process of a single review,
the process involves considering them sequentially). Second, considering awards
apply to like employees at the same time allows the Commission and the
parties to consider whether there ought to be consolidation
or standardisation
of conditions.
approach will be reflected in the provision of the Practice Note stating that
the Commission will commence a review by asking
parties whether one or more
awards should be considered together.
Whether and how any
productivity improvements arising from award reviews and modernisation should be
HSU acknowledged that changes to awards which drive or recognise operational
productivity improvements are more often dealt with
during bargaining than award
reviews. Nonetheless, where productivity improvements do arise from award
reviews, the HSU submitted
that they ought to be recognised by improvements to
wages and/or conditions in accordance with the AMPs. In support of this
submission,
it is noted that
permits the Commission to “make
such changes to awards as it considers necessary as a result of a review”.
Secretaries and LGNSW submitted that the ambit of the
review process
did not accommodate potential productivity improvements that could arise from
the award review process. During the
hearing, LGNSW acknowledged the
Commission’s power under
to make changes to awards “as
it considers necessary”, but submitted that the practical result of those
changes needing
to be pursued in accordance with the AMPs was that they would
need to be determined in an arbitrated case with evidence, which is
to an award review proceeding. The Secretaries submitted that while productivity
improvements could be recognised during
award reviews, those improvements should
only be recognised as part of an application to make or vary an award pursuant
NSW proposed that any productivity improvements arising from an award review or
modernisation process should result in a 0.5%
wage uplift. No reason was given
in written nor oral submissions to justify that figure. There is an apparent
tension between that
submission and the rest of Unions NSW’s submissions
that an award review should not extend to a review of issues of substance.
do not accept Unions NSW’s proposal that a review ought to give rise to a
predetermined 0.5% increase in remuneration, nor
indeed any increase in
remuneration other than by consent. A determination to increase remuneration
requires consideration of a range
of matters that in turn requires evidence that
is often contested. An award review process is not suited to hearing and
determining
such matters.
as the President identified in his Statement in the proceedings that address the
review of HSU awards that apply to the Health
Secretary quoted above at [56], an
award review process might be expected to give rise to an outcome that improves
productivity and
efficiency. If so, that ought to be recognised in some manner.
That is industrially just and will also serve to encourage cooperation
and their members in the award review process.
consider the most effective way to achieve the balance between those two
competing factors is to include in the Principles an expectation
that in the
decision that concludes an award review, the Commission member will give
consideration to the making of a statement addressing
whether the changes are
ones that are expected to improve productivity and efficiency and, if the member
is so minded, including
a recommendation that such changes ought to be taken
into account in any future consideration of rates of pay. As a general
observation
we consider it would not be appropriate for the member to ordinarily
go so far as to identify a particular change to rates of pay.
Any recommendation
that award review changes ought to be taken into account in a future
consideration of rates of pay should be provided
to the parties in advance to
allow them to put submissions as to its terms before it is
Whether the Commission should undertake and complete
the award modernisation process contemplated by Recommendations 28 and 29 of
Beasley Report
Beasley Report formed the view that this Commission should undertake a wholesale
review and modernisation of awards that cover
NSW Health employees.
Recommendation 28 recommended that the Commission should conduct an “award
reform process” incorporating
a “legislated set of objectives to be
achieved by the process”, including the simplification and (where
appropriate)
consolidation of industrial instruments; an update to instruments
to reflect the current and expected future service delivery, workforce
and working conditions of the NSW health system; and the setting of fair and
reasonable terms and conditions of employment
for NSW Health workers. These
objectives at Recommendation 28 were supported by Unions NSW, the HSU and the
Recommendation
28 does not tie such a process to
review, but to the extent that
or any other provision constrains the Commission from completing such
a review other than in the context of an industrial dispute,
Recommendation 29
recommended that there be legislative change to enable the Commission to do
HSU submitted that Recommendation 28 could be achieved through a
review process, although it did not need to be. That was because these
objectives could already be realised by the Commission’s
powers to make,
vary and rescind awards under
Relations Act
, including, if necessary, by acting on its own motion.
Therefore, so the HSU contended, further legislative change was unnecessary.
an application for new awards covering NSW Health employees is
anticipated to be made later this year and arbitrated sometime next
HSU did, however, recognise the difference between the traditional focus of the
Commission to altering paid rates awards at the
initiative of the parties and
after extensive attempts to conciliate outcomes on the one hand, and the
administrative approach of
the Fair Work Commission which has a duty to make
modern awards that cover particular industries on the other. The HSU accepted
this Commission’s traditional approach to making awards on an
inter partes
basis is an “entirely appropriate” practice
which reflects the different nature of awards in the two jurisdictions and
“somewhat different” duties of the NSW and federal industrial
tribunals. In the context of this concession, the HSU
emphasised that it does
not oppose legislative reform if there is an obstacle to the Commission
conducting the kind of review contemplated
by Recommendation 28. As counsel for
the HSU, Mr Saunders, succinctly put it: “We think you can do it. If you
it, you should be able to.”
submissions were endorsed by Unions NSW during the hearing. LGNSW submitted that
some of the objectives in Recommendations 28
are already contemplated by
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act
, namely at
Secretaries identified several features of the objectives in
Recommendation 28 that they submitted fell outside of the scope of
could be considered in a
review. Those were, namely, the consolidation
of “determinations and other instruments”, as the power under
is limited to a review of only “awards”; considerations of
current and expected future service delivery, workforce needs
and expected
future working conditions, which are “substantive” elements which
should be examined under the AMPs; and
the setting of fair and reasonable terms
and conditions of employment, which is dealt with under
Secretaries were agnostic towards whether the legislative amendment proposed by
Recommendation 29 was desirable. We understand
that the Secretaries are not
opposed to some form of award review that has regard to the matters raised in
Recommendation 28 (except
for the consolidation of industrial instruments which
are not awards), provided that it is not conducted under
set out earlier the Beasley Report’s concern as to the limited capacity of
review to bring about necessary reform to NSW Health awards. That
specific concern is being addressed in the separate proceedings
currently before
the President. The wider concern is one that we consider ought to be addressed
in the limited manner set out earlier
in these reasons, namely by the Commission
considering whether to identify in the decision that concludes the review if
substantive changes that ought to be considered in future proceedings,
and potentially to make recommendations as to such changes.
agree in part with the Secretaries’ submission that
empower the Commission to conduct award reviews to the full extent called for by
Recommendation 28. The principal limitations
are on the Commission’s
capacity – pursuant to a
review − to set fair, reasonable
substantive
terms and conditions of employment and to consider
current and expected future service delivery, workforce needs and expected
working conditions, which are “substantive” elements which
travel beyond the scope of
Furthermore,
we do not consider that the statutory context giving rise to the
Commission’s traditional approach to its substantive
award making powers
is apt to accommodate the kind of systematic and wide-ranging process
contemplated in the Beasley Report. We
note that the award review process
endorsed in Recommendation 28 is explicitly contemplated to be conducted in
accordance with “a
legislated set of objectives to be achieved by the
process”. We consider that the
Industrial Relations Act
lacks such a set of objectives.
Accordingly,
to be able to complete an award modernisation process as contemplated by
Recommendation 28 in the Beasley Report, we
consider that the legislative
amendment called for by Recommendation 29 is necessary. According to the Beasley
Report, this amendment
“should be made urgently”.
Whether the Principles should deal with awards that contain
terms and conditions that are inconsistent with and not more beneficial
Fair Work Act
Fair Work Act
extends some NES entitlements to non-national
system employees, including State and local government employees. Those
entitlements
are to unpaid parental leave and related entitlements, paid family
and domestic violence leave, and notice of termination or payment
notice. These provisions are not intended to apply to the exclusion of the
“laws of a State or Territory”,
including an
“instrument” made by a State industrial law such as an
to the extent that those
laws apply to non-national system employees and provide entitlements to those
employees that are more beneficial
than the federal
entitlements.
The consequence is
that there may be conditions of employment to which NSW public sector and local
government employees are entitled
pursuant to
Fair Work Act
which are not found in the relevant state award. The Full Bench invited the
parties to make submissions on how the Commission should
deal with awards that
contain terms and conditions that are inconsistent with one or more of the
entitlements in
oral submissions, the Secretaries submitted that the Commission should have
regard to the
entitlements during a
review, in part because of
the requirement in
for the Commission to consider “minimum
conditions of employment”.
NSW proposed that the Commission should adopt a “minimalist”
“signposting” method, namely, the insertion
of an award clause
indicating that an employee is covered by the entitlements at
of any other entitlements provided for in the award. When questioned by the
President as to why it would not be preferable
for an award to clearly state an
employee’s entitlements, Unions NSW submitted that it would be
time-consuming to compare whether
an existing award entitlement is more or less
beneficial than the NES entitlement. The HSU noted that the signposting method
the benefit of being able to accommodate any change to the
. While LGNSW did not endorse the “signposting” method, it
also noted that the introduction of a principle dealing with
would raise
questions as to how the Commission should assess whether an existing award
entitlement is inconsistent or less beneficial
than an NES entitlement.
do not agree that mere “signposting” is appropriate. That would mean
that a person seeking to enforce conditions would
need to enforce federal
conditions, even though they are covered by a State award. It might in some
cases lead to an employee having
to enforce more than one instrument under two
different Acts. It also leaves those covered by a State award having to
undertake the
task of both finding and then reconciling federal statutory rights
with those set by the award.
determine that when conducting a review the Commission should turn its mind as
to what changes, if any, need to be made to ensure
that the award itself
provides benefits no less favourable than those provided by
. That could
be achieved by substantive change to conditions with no reference to
, or by adding a clause in respect of each of the three subject
matters which provides for notice, payment in lieu of notice and paid
violence leave benefits that are no less favourable than those provided by
Fair Work Act
Parties’ proposed
well as the specific issues that the Commission invited parties to make
submissions on, the parties contended that other principles
ought to be amended.
Whether we should amend the way the Registrar gives notice of
award review
4 restates rule 39 of the Industrial Relations Commission Rules 1992 (NSW) (1992
Rules), which set out how the Registrar
ought to give notice to parties to
awards that were to be reviewed:
“Rule 39 of the Commission’s Rules requires that at least once every
three years the Registrar will give notice to the
persons on the record
maintained under r 40 as to the parties to the award, State peak councils and
others who have established a
sufficient industrial interest in applications
affecting that award, that the award is due to be reviewed. Such notice:
(a) may be given whenever an application for a new award is filed;
(b) will be given when a period of 30 months has passed since the award was made
or last reviewed, whichever is the later; or
(c) will be given before 2 July 1998 in respect of any awards then in force
which were made prior to 2 September 1996 and which have
not already been
Secretaries submitted that principle 4 should be entirely rewritten to reflect
the amendments to the Industrial Relations Commission
Relations Act
since 1998, as follows:
“Consistent with
of the Act, at least once every three years, the
Registrar, in a manner the Registrar deems fit, will give notice to those with
established industrial interest in applications affecting that award, that
the award is due to be reviewed.”
HSU, in its reply submissions, submitted that an amendment to principle 4 should
be limited to updating the reference from rule
39 of the 1992 Rules to
Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2022
and deleting (c). It submitted
that the Secretaries’ proposed amendment removed necessary certainty as to
the process of notification
and unjustifiably narrowed the number of parties to
be notified.
APA, in its reply submissions, suggested that the principle should include a
timeframe for when the review would occur, as the
Secretaries’ amendment
to principle 4 would have the Registrar give notice to parties “at least
once every three years”,
which could be longer than the current
requirement to give notice 30 months after the award’s creation or most
recent review.
have determined that there should be a change to the procedure, in the manner
set out at paragraph [10](13)–(14) above.
Whether we should
delete principle 7
7 provides: “When reviewing counterpart awards to a federal award, the
Commission will take account of their counterpart
HSU contended that this principle appears to be obsolete. We agree that this
principle, which was relevant at the time it was
made, is now redundant and can
be removed.
Whether we should amend principles 9 and 10 relating
to the parties to the review proceedings
9 restates the entitlement in
Industrial Relations
of relevant industrial organisations and other parties to the award to
make submissions at the review hearing. Principle 10 prescribes
parties must take to exercise that right.
HSU submitted that principle 9 could be amended to make reference to the rights
of the Minister, President of the Anti-Discrimination
Board, or State peak
council to intervene in proceedings pursuant to
Relations Act
. There is no need for the Principles to repeat statutory
provisions. As such, this is not a matter that needs to be addressed.
HSU further submitted that the procedure for principle 10 may need to be
reconsidered for hearings which involve major redrafting
of awards. That is
addressed by the change to the procedure as set out in [10](15) and (18)
Whether we should amend principle 12 relating to the
matters the Commission takes account of when reviewing awards
Secretaries made a submission that we should amend principle 12 to explicitly
and the mandatory factors that the Commission must
consider when exercising its functions.
mandatory considerations are just that: mandatory matters that the Commission
must consider when exercising its functions including
review. We are
not minded, however, to accede to the Secretaries’ submission given our
view that the Principles need not repeat
provisions.
Whether we should amend principle 14 to include new
the course of the proceedings it was identified that principle 14, which lists
test cases that must be considered, needs to
be updated to include test cases
determined since 1998, such as:
Superannuation Case 2025
Employment Test Case 2006
National Union of Workers v Employers’ Chamber of Commerce &
Industry (Vic)
Services – General – Award
Re Redundancy Case –
Supplementary Decision
State Part-Time Work
The inclusion of some
of those later cases may allow for some of the test cases currently listed in
principle 14 to be removed.
was also suggested in the course of proceedings that it might be more convenient
for the Principles to set out the terms of test
case standard clauses rather
than to merely list test cases.
Secretaries and the HSU in their submissions accepted that the clause needed to
be updated and that, in principle at least, it
might be more convenient for test
case clauses to be included. The parties indicated that such matters could be
addressed by them
in submissions as to the terms of the Principles after this
decision is handed down. We are content to take that course. As such
Principles published with this decision do not attempt to update the references,
and we invite the parties by way of supplementary
submissions to address how the
Principles ought to be updated in that regard.
Whether we should
amend principles 15 and 16
Secretaries contended we should delete from principle 15 the words “will
have regard to the needs of employers and employees
as well as the public
interest in removing from awards unjustified impediments to employment”,
in respect of the Commission’s
consideration of part-time work, casual
work, and job-sharing arrangements pursuant to
s 19(3)(c).
Secretaries also contended we should delete from principle 16 the words
“whether those award procedures facilitate resolution
of industrial
disputes concerning discrimination in employment on a ground to which the
Anti-Discrimination Act applies”, in
respect of the Commission’s
consideration of award dispute resolution procedures pursuant to
s 19(3)(d).
we agree with the Secretaries that the Principles do not need to give prominence
to certain criteria that the Commission should
take into account when it
considers the matters in s 19(3), we have taken the view that there is no
need for the Principles to repeat
the text of statutory provisions. As such
principles 15 and 16 can be removed and the proposed changes to the text are
unnecessary.
Whether we should amend the principles relating to
obsolete awards
“obsolete award” is defined by principle 22(a) as an award where
“there are no employees or employers under that
award”. The
Secretaries contended that we should amend the definition of an obsolete award
to refer to an award where “there
are no employees or employers under that
award, and no intention of employees or employers coming under that award in the
In the proceedings, counsel for the Secretaries was asked to
identify the person or persons to whom the relevant lack of
“intention”
is imputed. The Secretaries replied that the Commission
might rely on an inquiry of the parties, especially the relevant Secretary.
LGNSW submitted that rather than “intention” the word
“prospect” might be more appropriate.
our view there is no value in maintaining, and having to review, awards which do
not apply to any employees. We accept that there
may be a rare case where an
award that applies to no employees at that particular point in time can be
expected to apply to employees
in the foreseeable future. We are not minded to
leave the question to the subjective
of the parties, nor to
maintain awards where there is merely the
that an award might
apply to an employee in the future. Instead, the Commission will ordinarily
determine that an award is obsolete
if it does not set conditions that apply to
any employees and is not expected to do so in the foreseeable future.
principle 23 provides that where no application to vary an award has been made
for five years or more, it indicates a
presumption
that the award may be
obsolete. Unions NSW noted that many awards will not have been varied in five
years or more.
accept that the presumption has the potential to be misleading, given that there
are awards that do not set rates of pay but only
conditions that might not have
been varied for many years but continue to apply to employees. We do not see the
utility in the presumption
and determine that it should be
Determinations
sector employers are able to make determinations fixing the conditions of
employment for employees, including under the
following provisions:
Education (School Administrative and Support Staff) Act 1987
Fire and Rescue NSW Act 1989
Government Sector Audit Act 1983
Government Sector Employment Act 2013
Health Services Act 1997
Police Act 1990
Teaching Service Act 1980
Transport Administration Act 1988
is no public register of such determinations. These determinations set terms and
conditions of employment, in some circumstances
to address gaps in respect of
conditions set by an award, and in other circumstances to provide benefits over
and above those set
by an award. For example, there are determinations that set
rates of pay for a new classification of employees and determinations
provide a loading for particular types of work, in each case requiring a person
to read both the award and the determination
to be able to understand the full
entitlements of employees covered by the award.
parties were asked to consider whether, when conducting an award review, the
Commission ought to have regard to any relevant determinations
that apply to the
employees covered by the award or awards being reviewed.
Secretaries submitted that the Commission has the power to have regard to a
determination when assessing an award, in order to
have a complete overview of
the terms and conditions of the relevant employees. However, given that a
determination can be unilaterally
extinguished by a Secretary and the Commission
has no power to vary or rescind a determination, the Secretaries urged the
to not readily insert conditions of employment set by a determination
into an award during an award review. Unions NSW and the HSU
submitted that the
Commission should take determinations into account when considering what is
appropriate in an award.
accept the Commission does not have the power to directly vary or rescind
determinations, while noting that the making of an award
that deals with the
same subject matter will ordinarily have the effect of removing the legal effect
of a determination.
do not accept that it follows that the Commission cannot have regard to
determinations during an award review. By their very nature,
determinations set
conditions of employment that at least one party considers are necessary,
including in respect of pay and conditions
which are not addressed in an award
that otherwise applies to those employees and otherwise is considered a
‘paid rates’
award setting their full conditions. As such, their
existence and terms are relevant in considering whether the award contains terms
that are fair and reasonable.
are of the view that it may be beneficial for the parties to be able to find all
relevant conditions in a single instrument, being
the award, rather than there
being multiple instruments in the form of an award plus one or more
determinations, particularly given
the fact that determinations are not readily
available. This is also consistent with
in the objects of the Act to
facilitate appropriate regulation of employment through awards, enterprise
agreements and other industrial
instruments.
existence of a determination can also assist to identify if there are gaps in an
award that need to be addressed, such as a new
classification for which the
award contains no current rate of pay.
even if an award is not to be amended to, in effect, repeat the contents of a
determination on the same or similar terms,
the terms of a determination ought
nevertheless be considered to ensure that there is no inconsistency or ambiguity
that arises because
of the interaction between a determination and an
those reasons we consider that when undertaking a s 19 review, it is
appropriate for the Commission to have regard to any determinations
to employees covered by the award(s). That will allow the Commission to consider
whether the awards require additional
terms to address those matters currently
dealt with by a determination, and to otherwise ensure the appropriate
regulation of employment
through the combination of different instruments.
note that in order to have regard to relevant determinations it will be
necessary for the employer to provide copies of all determinations
that apply to
the employees covered by the award or awards being reviewed at the outset of the
review process.
Principles and Practice Note
to this decision are three documents: draft Principles, a draft Practice Note,
and a draft standard award index.
the outset of this decision, we set out in summary our conclusions as to the
content of the revised Principles, followed by a summary
of the proposed
procedure. Those summaries form the basis of the attached draft Principles and
draft Practice Note respectively.
make the following order:
(1) The parties are directed to provide submissions by 4.00pm on Friday, 14
November 2025 as to the content of the draft Principles,
draft Practice Note,
and draft standard award index published as Annexures to this decision. The
submissions are to address in particular
the content of paragraphs [12] and [13]
of the draft Principles, as to the test cases that ought to be included and the
any test case clause(s).
ANNEXURE A – DRAFT PRINCIPLES FOR REVIEW OF AWARDS
UNDER S 19 OF THE ACT
Draft published with Award Review Principles Case 2025
(1) These principles apply to the conduct of award reviews under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(2) When conducting such a review the Commission will endeavour to achieve
the purpose expressed in
having regard to the mandatory
considerations in
Industrial Relations
(3) Awards are reviewed pursuant to
Industrial Relations
to update language and remove redundant provisions, to standardise
conditions and consolidate awards where appropriate and to rescind
awards that
no longer apply to anyone.
(4) An award review should not reduce existing conditions of employment.
(5) Award reviews are not a vehicle for parties to pursue substantive
improvements in conditions, other than:
(a) by consent;
(b) to the extent necessary to ensure that they reflect test case and statutory
minima, including the entitlements extended to non-national
system employees
Fair Work Act 2009
(c) to increase wages and allowances in minimum rates awards to ensure that
overall remuneration for particular classification(s)
is not less than that set
by the national minimum wage or a federal award for comparable work.
(6) Where there is more than one award that applies to employees who perform
the same or similar work for the same employer in the
same part of the public
service or government sector and who are covered by the same union(s)
(“like employees”), the
Commission will consider whether the awards
being reviewed should be consolidated and/or core conditions can be standardised
to improve productivity and efficiency. If such changes are substantive
and contested they ought to be dealt with in accordance with
(11) below.
(7) Statutory determinations setting terms and conditions of employment that
apply to employees covered by an award being reviewed
will be considered by the
Commission as part of the review. To the extent that an award does not deal with
a subject matter that
is addressed by a determination the Commission will
consider if there is a good reason why that term ought not be included in the
award. The Commission will otherwise consider determinations to ensure that
there is no inconsistency or ambiguity that arises because
of the interaction
between a determination and an award.
(8) Unless there is good reason not to do so, awards should be reordered to
follow a standard index format attached to these Principles.
(9) The Commission will make changes necessary to improve ease of
understanding such as removing ambiguity and imprecise drafting,
and to that end
will have regard to the plain language drafting guidelines of the Fair Work
Commission.
(10) Amendments to awards are to be made to the extent necessary to ensure
that they are not less beneficial than minimum entitlements
provided by
Fair Work Act
. Alternatively, a term is to be included that makes
it an award obligation to provide specific entitlements that are no less
than those obligations.
(11) Where the Commission forms the view, having conducted an award review,
that for an award or awards to be properly modernised
the Commission needs to
consider substantive changes which are contested, the Commission will express
that view in the decision that
determines the award review to enable the issue
to be properly considered in subsequent arbitral proceedings. The Commission may
in addition make recommendations that address those issues. In particular, the
Commission member conducting the review should consider
whether to make a
recommendation that the award or awards may need or do need to be examined to
eliminate gender-based undervaluation.
(12) Where the Commission considers it appropriate the Commission will at the
end of a review identify whether changes have been made
to the award that
promote productivity and efficiency and whether their significance is such that
Commission recommends that they
ought to be taken into account in determining a
future increase in remuneration.
Other matters
(13) A ‘test case’ decision referred to in
a decision made under
– National and State decisions of Chapter 2
Industrial Relations Act
or any other decision which the
Commission determines to be a test case having general application to awards in
(14) The test case standards presently applying which must be taken into
account by the Commission in a review are: [
to be finalised following further
submissions
(a) Re Application for Redundancy Awards
(1994) 53 IR 419
(b) State Personal Carer's/Leave Case - August 1996
(1996) 68 IR 308
Carer's/Leave
(unreported, IRC 96.2, 10 December 1998);
(d) State Wage Case -
(1997) 73 IR
and earlier
State Wage Case
decisions therein referred
(15) The Commission will consider whether there is any good reason not to
include the test case clauses set out in the attached schedule
finalised following further submissions
(16) An ‘obsolete provision’ of an award referred to in
Industrial Relations Act
is a provision that
covers circumstances which no longer apply to any employees.
(17) ‘Unnecessary technicalities’ in an award referred to in
Industrial Relations Act
means the language, order
or composition of clauses, which may lead to misinterpretation or which do not
assist the reading and understanding
of the award.
(18) An award is obsolete and ought to be rescinded if it does not set
conditions that apply to any employees and it is not expected
to do so in the
foreseeable future.
(19) An award which covers only a small number of employees is not, by that
fact alone, obsolete.
ANNEXURE B – DRAFT REVISED PRACTICE NOTE NO 13
Draft published with Award Review Principles Case 2025
Procedures for Review of Awards under
Relations Act 1996
Practice Note has effect from [date] and replaces previous Practice
Application
Practice Note applies to the review of awards under
Relations Act 1996
) and is made following the revised
Principles for Review of Awards made in the
Award Review Principles Case
Nature of proceedings
purpose of a
review is to modernise and consolidate awards relating to the
same industry
and to rescind obsolete
an award review is Commission-led, parties are expected to cooperate with the
review process.
review will not ordinarily be dealt with as part of the same
proceedings as a substantive application to vary or make a new
Commission will commence an award review on its own motion, pursuant to
rule 3.2 of the Industrial Relations Commission Rules
), once every three years.
will be done by the Industrial Registrar giving notice to all parties recorded
on the party card of an award or awards, pursuant
to rule 6.7(5) of the
matter will be initially listed for callover before the Commission or the
Registrar on a date to be fixed by the Commission.
party wishing to appear in the award review proceedings must file a notice of
appearance in accordance with the Rules.
the callover the Commission will make directions that will ordinarily include
the parties filing a document setting out their position
(1) whether the awards identified in the notice should be considered together;
(2) whether the review should consider any other awards that apply to employees
who perform the same or similar work for the same
employer in the same part of
the public service or government sector and who are covered by the same union(s)
(“like employees”);
(3) a list of issues the party considers ought to be dealt with as part of the
s 19 review.
consideration of the position of the parties the Commission may determine to add
one or more awards to the proceedings,
or alternatively to split off one or more
awards into separate s 19 review proceedings. If there is no consensus as
to that issue
the Commission may first conduct a short hearing to consider
submissions before determining the issue.
determining whether to review more than one award at the same time the
Commission will have regard to whether the awards in question
apply to like
Commission will require that the employer(s) provide the Commission with copies
of any statutory determinations that set conditions
of employment for any of the
employees covered by an award being reviewed.
determined the awards to be reviewed together, the Commission will provide the
parties with a draft list of issues to be addressed
in the review and discuss
with the parties in conciliation the most efficient means to conduct the review.
The list of issues may
be amended during the course of the review.
the s 19 review process the Commission will ordinarily and in the order and
manner that is considered most appropriate to the
particular review:
(1) have the parties confirm their view as to the issues they consider ought to
be considered in the review;
(2) have the parties identify any issue that the parties say involves
substantive changes that ought to be addressed by a recommendation
made by the
Commission;
(3) seek the parties’ views as to the extent to which any of the awards in
question can be consolidated with each other and/or
core conditions can be
standardised in order to improve productivity and efficiency; and
(4) work through the identified issues to be addressed in conciliation, during
which the Commission may propose changes to the award(s).
making or varying awards or making any recommendation(s) in light of the review,
the Commission will provide the parties with
an opportunity to make submissions
on proposed draft awards and draft recommendations.
there are contested positions the Commission may conduct a short hearing before
determining the outcome of the review.
is not expected that evidence would ordinarily be required, as an award review
is by its nature an exercise that focuses on the
terms of the awards being
reviewed having regard to what the Commission understands to be the nature of
the industry, the history
of the award, and any relevant test case standards or
minimum conditions. Evidence may be required where there is a dispute as to
factual basis for determining whether an award is obsolete, or otherwise where a
fact or facts in issue must be established to
enable the Commission to exercise
its powers under s 19.
Changes to the award
accordance with s 19(6), after considering submissions made by the parties,
the Commission may make such changes to each award
being reviewed as it
considers necessary as a result of the review. Such changes include modifying or
removing provisions of the
award, consolidating a number of awards or rescinding
obsolete awards.
Commission may also make recommendations that address substantive changes to
conditions that were not able to be resolved through
the review process.
Commission member will identify in the decision at the end of the
(1) contested issues involving substantive changes to terms and conditions of
employment that the Commission considers need to be
addressed for the award to
be properly modernised and which were not addressed by the review, so they can
be properly considered
in subsequent arbitral proceedings;
(2) whether changes have been made to the award that promote productivity and
efficiency and whether the Commission recommends such
changes be taken into
account in determining any future increase in remuneration; and
(3) whether the award needs to be examined to consider whether it contains
gender-based undervaluation.
Practice Note will be periodically reviewed by the
ANNEXURE C – DRAFT STANDARD AWARD INDEX
Parties are to use this standard award index during award review proceedings,
if the award that is being reviewed deals with both
salaries and conditions of
employment.
1. Application and Operation
Commencement
and Duration
: An award must have a nominal term that is not less than 12 months
and not more than 3 years:
Industrial Relations Act
to the Award
: An award should state the persons bound by the award pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act
(1) all employees and employers to
which it relates, (2) all employees and employers in the industry if it is an
award that applies
to a particular industry, and (3) all industrial
organisations that were a party to the making of the award.
Dispute resolution
Consultation
and dispute resolution clause
: An award must contain procedures for the resolution of industrial
disputes under the award:
Industrial Relations Act
the Commission is satisfied there is another award that does so.
3. Types of employment and termination of
of employment
: An award may specify on what basis an employee can be employed ie,
full-time, part-time, casual, temporary etc.
Termination
of employment
: An award may specify how an employee’s employment can be
terminated. This could include provisions relating to a minimum notice
redundancy entitlements etc.
4. Wages and allowances
Classifications
: An award may provide a classification structure: see Crown
Employees (Household Staff – Department of Education) Wages and
Award 2022. The wage rates for classifications should be set out in a Schedule.
Industry-specific
packaging arrangements
Superannuation
: The NSW Public Sector and Local Government Employees Minimum
Conditions of Employment (Superannuation) Award 2025 (Superannuation
which applies to all employees who can be covered by an award made by the
Industrial Relations Commission and their employers,
creates an obligation on an
employer to make superannuation contributions for the benefit of an employee
under Commonwealth superannuation
legislation. The terms of a superannuation
clause in an award can (without limiting the terms of the clause) note the
existence of
the employer’s obligation under the Superannuation Award,
replicate clauses 4.1–4.3 of the Superannuation Award, or provide
additional superannuation entitlements. The interaction rules at 3.2 of the
Superannuation Award apply to awards made under the
Industrial Relations
5. Hours of work and related matters
weekend, public holiday rates
: An award may provide entitlements to breaks including meal breaks,
rest breaks, and lactation breaks.
of hours of work
: An award may provide a procedure relating to how an
employee’s hours of work can be varied on a one-off, short or long-term
basis, due to circumstances including personal reasons, community or family
reasons, natural emergencies, major transport disruptions
6. Leave and Public Holidays
entitlements
7. Miscellaneous / Other
See Principles for Review of
Awards – State Decision 1998
(1998) 85 IR 38
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
Annexure F.
See the object at
Industrial Relations Act 1996
which is a mandatory consideration
pursuant to
s 146(2)(a).
, which requires the Commission to take
account of the effect of the awards on productivity and efficiency in the
industry concerned.
Making Principle 11, at State Wage Case 2024 (No 4) (2024) NSWIRComm 25;
at Annexure A.
(1998) 85 IR 38
[1998] NSWIRComm
Principles for Review of
Awards – State Decision 1998
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
(1998) 85 IR 38
[1998] NSWIRComm
Principles for Review of
Awards – State Decision 1998
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
(1998) 85 IR 38
[1998] NSWIRComm
Principles for Review of
Awards – State Decision 1998
[1998] NSWIRComm 661
(1998) 85 IR 38
[1998] NSWIRComm
See Award Review
Principles 1, 2, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 16, 21,
Hon Justice Richard
Beasley, Special Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare Funding, (April 2025) at
Hon Justice
Richard Beasley, Special Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare Funding, (April
2025) at [18.141].
Justice Richard Beasley, Special Commission of Inquiry into Healthcare Funding,
(April 2025) at [18.142].
Industrial Relations Act 1996
ss 11(1)(a)
See Re Plain language
drafting of modern awards
[2022] FWCFB
[2025] NSWIRComm
See Re 4 yearly review
of modern awards
[2017] FWCFB 344
; Re 4 yearly review of modern awards
FWCFB 1612.
Re 4 yearly
review of modern awards
Re 4 yearly review of
modern awards
[2017] FWCFB
Fair Work Act 2009
s 26(2)(g).
[2025] NSWIRComm
State Wage Case 2024
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm
(2006) 150 IR 1
NSWIRComm 38.
(2004) 129 IR
[2004] AIRC 287.
[2004] AIRC 564
(1998) 78 IR 172
[1998] NSWIRComm 142.
Education (School Administrative and Support Staff) Act 1987
Fire and Rescue NSW Act 1989
Government Sector
Audit Act 1983
Government Sector Employment Act 2013
Health Services Act 1997
Police Act 1990
Teaching Service Act 1980
; Transport Administration Act
(NSW), s 68K(1).
Relations Act 1996
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (483 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter