URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2016/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Selby & Phillips [2016] NSWNMPSC 5 (10 May 2016)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
JANE CATHERINE PHILLIPS
REGISTRATION NUMBER
NMW0001250409
SELBY REGISTRATION NUMBER
NMW0001273258
HCCC v Selby & Phillips
[2016] NSWNMPSC
DATES OF HEARING:
29 & 30 September, 1 & 2 October, 3 & 13
November 2015
DATE OF DECISION:
10 May 2016
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr F Shar, solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Michele Selby & Jane Catherine Phillips
(Respondents) represented
by Ms K Doust, solicitor, NSW Nurses and Midwives Association
Nursing and Midwifery Professional Standards Committee
COMPLAINT NUMBERS:
509282 & 509283
Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Kelly-Anne Eyre (Nurse Member)
Mr Ian McQualter (Nurse Member)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
Unsatisfactory professional conduct is established against
both RN Phillips and RN Selby - Committee reserved with respect to orders
Phillips - RN Selby reprimanded and conditions imposed on her registration
CATCHWORDS: Health Practitioner Regulation – National Law –
registered nurses – care of a six month old infant –
communicate with treating medical practitioner – failure to ensure
treating medical practitioner aware of observations,
change in fluid balance
– failure to communicate information to Ambulance Service – failure
to recognise clinical indications
of dehydration – unsatisfactory
professional conduct
LEGISLATION CITED: Health Practitioner Regulation (National Law) -
s3(3)(c), s139B, Clause 7 of Schedule 5D
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association (1960)
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly
[2009] PSTNSW 7
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Kalil v Bray [1997]
1 NSWLR 256
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
Lindsay v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2005] NSWCA 356
Neat Holdings Pty v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
(1992) 110 ALR
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
Sudath v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 171
TEXTS CITED:
Registered nurse competency standards - January 2006
– Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia -
http://www.nursingmidwiferyboard.gov.au/Codes-Guidelines-Statements/Professional-standards.aspx
Recognising and Responding to Clinical Deterioration In Acute Health Care:
Standard 9 – Fact Sheet - A
Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care -
http://www.nursingmidwiferyboard.gov.au/Codes-Guidelines-Statements/Professional-standards.aspx)
REASONS FOR DECISION
the afternoon of 19 October 2013 Patient A, a six month old infant, was taken by
his parents to the Emergency Department of Shoalhaven
Memorial Hospital (the
Hospital) as he had been unwell since he awoke that morning. Patient A was
initially seen by an ED doctor
and subsequently came under the care of a
paediatrician, Dr Greenacre. Patient A was admitted to the Children’s Ward
of the Hospital that evening.
Phillips commenced her shift in the Ward of the Hospital soon after Patient A
was admitted. RN Phillips was allocated the care
of Patient A. RN Phillips
remained on duty until 0715 hours on 20 October 2013. RN Selby commenced her
shift in the Ward of the Hospital
at about 0700 hours on 20 October 2013. RN
Selby was allocated the care of Patient A until he was discharged at about 1440
later that day.
Complaints faced by each of the Respondents (RN Selby and RN Phillips) relate to
their care of Patient A during their respective
shifts at the Hospital.
Committee notes that Patient A was discharged from the Hospital on 20 October
2013 to the care of the NSW Ambulance Service for
the purpose of transfer, by
road, to Sydney Children’s Hospital (SCH). During this transfer Patient
A’s condition deteriorated
and the ambulance diverted to Shellharbour
Hospital. Patient A received treatment in the Emergency Department of
Shellharbour Hospital
from staff at that hospital and later from a NETS team
(Neonatal and Paediatric Emergency Transport Service) that had flown in by
helicopter. Patient A was flown from Shellharbour Hospital to SCH and admitted
to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Later that evening
Patient A underwent an
operation and returned to ICU. Early on the morning of 21 October 2013 Patient
A’s parents were informed
there were neurological issues with Patient A.
Further testing revealed Patient A had suffered extensive brain damage and on
advice life support was turned off on the evening of 22 October 2013.
Patient A died shortly thereafter.
is the Complaints made by the HCCC regarding the conduct of RN Phillips and RN
Selby whilst Patient A was in their care that this
Committee is now considering.
8 of the National Law. It is not the role of this
Committee to determine issues
such as the cause of Patient A’s death. The Committee notes the role of
the NSW Coroner in this
with all bodies exercising the protective jurisdiction provided for under the
National Law, this Committee looks to the potential
for harm of a registered
health practitioner’s (nurse’s) conduct rather than the actual harm
caused. There is no doubt
that death of an apparently otherwise healthy baby is
tragic in the extreme. The depth of the tragedy was patent from the evidence
given by both of his parents and grandmothers to this Committee. In noting the
tragic outcome for Patient A this Committee emphasises
it has taken extreme care
not to go beyond its legislative role nor take into account matter not pertinent
to this jurisdiction.
Legislation
139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
provides as follows:
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” of registered health
practitioner generally [NSW]
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following—
Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
Standard of Proof Required
standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is the
civil standard. The seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their
consequences require the Committee to be ‘
comfortably
’ that the particulars of the Complaint have been
established. In this matter, the HCCC bears the onus of proof.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J said at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a civil
issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is
principle applies to the quality or sufficiency of the
evidence available, as Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ held in
Holdings Pty v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
(1992) 110 ALR
the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on
the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
of what it is
sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the
effect that clear or cogent or strict
proof is necessary ‘where so serious
a matter as fraud is to be found.’ Statements to that effect should not,
be understood as directed to the standard of proof
Protective and not punitive
findings and orders made are not designed to be punitive (
Clyne v New South
Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186).
This is a protective
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
, the Tribunal stated:
32. In the exercise of its functions under the Act for the paramount
purpose of protecting the health and safety of the public, the
Tribunal may
consider five matters bearing on protection:
(1) Any need to protect the public against further misconduct by the
practitioner.
(2) The need to protect the public though general deterrence (of other
practitioners).
(3) The need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional
standards and denouncing transgressions.
(4) The maintenance of public confidence in the profession.
(5) The desirability of making available to the public any special skills
possessed by the practitioner.
One Stage Process
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
, the Court of Appeal (per Handley AJA and McColl JA)
determined that the Medical Tribunal breached its duty of procedural fairness
ordering deregistration without giving the appellant the opportunity to adduce
evidence and make submissions on the appropriate
orders consequential on the
Tribunal’s findings (see at paras [202]-[205]). However, in
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 171
Basten JA explained that whether there is a need for a separate hearing will
depend upon the nature of the complaint and the circumstances
of the particular
complaint under consideration.
the course of the Inquiry both the HCCC and the Respondents accepted that a
one stage process
” in which liability and consequential
orders (if appropriate) were considered together would be appropriate in the
circumstances
of these matters.
was only when the Committee considered the written submissions made by the
parties that it formed a view that a ‘second stage’
was required in
relation to consequential orders re RN Phillips. The Committee intends to
reconvene for the purpose of providing
an opportunity for the parties to place
further evidence and/or submissions before the Committee prior to proceeding to
make consequential
(protective) orders in relation to RN Phillips. The Committee
notes it has made findings in relation to the Particulars of Complaint
Complaint before it relating to RN Phillips. The Committee has also made
comments as to the Committee’s view as to
the deficits in RN Phillips
practice based on the evidence already before the Committee that may assist the
parties to prepare for
‘stage two’ of the hearing. The Committee
will consider the entirety of the evidence and submissions that ultimately
before it before considering consequential orders.
Hearing matters together
parties consented to the two matters being heard together at the first
Directions Hearing. The Committee notes this is consistent
with the reasoning
set out in matters such as
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly
[2009] PSTNSW 7.
The Committee also accepts the submission of the HCCC (which was not challenged
by the Respondent’s) that
it has an obligation to consider the complaints
regarding each of the Respondent’s separately without comparison between
(or indeed other disciplinary matters) to determine the objective
seriousness of the conduct (
HCCC v Litchfield
(1971) 41 NSWLR 630 at
Nursing Standards
registered nurses are expected to meet the National competency standards
published by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
These standards are
an evolution of the standards developed and adopted by the Australian Nursing
and Midwifery Council (ANMC) in
the early 1990s. The ANMC represented all nurse
registration authorities then in Australia. These were ‘amalgamated’
with the introduction of the National Law in 2010 and equally bind every
registered nurse in Australia. The competency standard is
expected to be met by
every registered nurse expecting to retain registration.
(http://www.nursingmidwiferyboard.gov.au/Codes-Guidelines-Statements/Professional-standards.aspx)
Recognising and Responding to Clinical Deterioration In Acute Health Care:
Standard 9 – Fact Sheet
the Australian Commission on Safety and
Quality in Health Care (ACSQH) failure to monitor observations consistently and
the import in any changes in these observations was identified as a
matter that contributes to the failure to recognise a deteriorating
http://www.safetyandquality.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/NSQHS-Standards-Fact-Sheet-Standard-9.pdf
The Committee notes that accreditation of hospitals in Australia is contingent
on compliance with these Standards. This Standard
has been adopted by the
Clinical Excellence Committee in NSW and is an integral part of programs such as
‘Between the Flags’,
DETECT and DETECT Junior which are mandated CPD
for nurses in NSW. The Committee notes that reference is made to these documents
in the reports of the peer reviewer, CNS Chellew.
Professional Standards Committee is an expert tribunal and may form its own
views as to the characterisation of conduct. It has
been constituted by
parliament with fifty percent of its membership being members of the profession.
The use of this expertise must
be done in a procedurally fair manner. In
particular, the Committee has an obligation to make apparent to the parties its
on the evidence. The Committee notes support for the utilisation of the
expertise within the Committee from the Court of Appeal in
the matter of
Lindsay v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2005] NSWCA 356
at paragraph
46 (Hunt AJA):
46 In my opinion, this Court would have to act very cautiously in making
its own characterisation of conduct established to the satisfaction
Tribunal where there was room for different views on the subject. The Medical
Tribunal is a specialist tribunal, being constituted
for the purpose of
conducting inquiries by a District Court judge, two registered medical
practitioners and one lay person (
Practice Act
This Court is not in the position to apply such medical expertise, although
there may perhaps in some cases be a clear and unanimous
view expressed by
medical experts who gave evidence in the proceedings before the Tribunal on
which this Court could act.
Committee notes that each Respondent was legally represented and was afforded
the opportunity of cross-examination of the peer
reviewer. The Committee also
notes it afforded the parties procedural fairness and made known its concerns
regarding numerous aspects
of the evidence by way of extensive questioning of
the witnesses. Further, the Committee accepts the submission made by the HCCC
that this is not a matter where there are genuine differences of view within the
profession (this being a reference to the principle
Kalil v Bray
1 NSWLR 256
Purpose under the National
Committee notes one of the purposes of the National Law is to place restrictions
on the practice of a health profession registered
under the scheme only if it is
necessary to ensure health services are provided safely and are of an
appropriate quality (s3(3)(c)).
SUPPRESSION ORDER
Chairperson of the Committee made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
the Patient, his mother, father and both maternal
and paternal grandmothers in
accordance with provisions of Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law. These
names are indicated
in the schedule annexed hereto and marked “A”
and any information that may identify them is not to be published. Annexure
will only be attached to the original Reasons for Decision held by the Registry
and must not be reproduced. The temporary Suppression
Order made in relation to
the names of the Respondent’s no longer
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
folders of documents were tendered by the HCCC. These folders included the
complaint against each of the Respondent’s,
statements made for the
purpose of the complaint to the HCCC and in some cases to the police for the
purpose of the Coronial Inquiry
from Patient A’s parents, grandmothers,
great grandmother and aunt. There are also a number of statements from other
care providers involved in the care of Patient A, correspondence between
the Respondents and the HCCC, the medical records of Patient
A held by the
Hospital as well as a number of policies and guidelines. The HCCC also provided
reports from a peer reviewer.
folder of documents was tendered on behalf of each of the Respondents. The
folders each included a statement of the Respondent,
the Respondent’s
Curriculum Vitae, including recent Performance Assessment documentation, and
character references.
addition to the documentary evidence, the Committee also heard oral evidence
from Patient A’s parents, Patient A’s
paternal grandmother, Patient
A’s maternal grandmother, RN Lynette Carlson, RN Diane Lameks, Ms Kate
Chellew (CNS) (the peer
reviewer) and the respondents.
all of the evidence before the Committee is recounted herein. The Committee
makes a number of general observations regarding the
evidence to assist. There
was substantial discord between the recollection of the two Respondent’s
and Patient A’s family
members, in particular relating to Patient
A’s conditions during his admission in the Ward. Largely these issues do
to be resolved for the purpose of consideration of the Particulars of
the Complaints. The Committee notes many of the Particulars
are admitted by the
Respondents (and these admissions are supported in the evidence) and many others
rely on failures to communicate
various matters with Dr Greenacre (or with Dr
Greenacre and the Ambulance Service in the case of RN Selby) or omissions to
out certain assessments or to record them adequately. The establishment
of these Particulars do not rely upon the evidence of Patient
relatives. Whilst each witness’ evidence has been considered in its own
right, the Committee observes that there
was a level of guarding on the parts of
the Respondents as will be evident from the content of this document (and also
from the transcript
of evidence). The Committee also observed that Patient
A’s parents and grandmothers each gave evidence that accorded with their
statements without evident distortion despite the obvious distress caused to
them by recounting the events of 19 and 20 October 2013.
Both of Patient
A’s grandmothers are registered nurses and provided first hand evidence of
their observations of Patient A.
The Complaint
dated 24 April 2015 made by the HCCC against RN Phillips is as
RN Phillips, being a registered nurse and a under the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law
”), is guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s. 139B of the
National Law
in that they engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by each of them
the practice of nursing is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience.
At about 1600 hours on Saturday, 19 October 2013, Patient A (a six month old
infant) presented to the Emergency Department of Shoalhaven
District Memorial
Hospital (the hospital) with his mother. Patient A presented with a history of
decreased oral intake, vomiting,
lethargy, nil diarrhoea, decreased urine
output, and appearing unwell, amongst other issues.
Patient A was admitted to the hospital under paediatrician Dr Toby Greenacre
with possible gastroenteritis having failed a trail of
oral feeding at the
hospital. At about 2130 hours Patient A was admitted to the Children’s
RN Phillips, a registered nurse, commenced her shift in the Children’s
Ward at about 2245 hours on 19 October 2013 and was allocated
to the care of
Patient A until about 0715 hours on 20 October 2013.
Particulars
The particulars of the Complaint against
RN Phillips
1. During her shift, the practitioner did not communicate with Dr
Greenacre about or ensure that Dr Greenacre was made aware of the
a. Patient A had vomited approximately 40-50mls of fluid at about 2100
hours and/or approximately 60mls of fluid at about 2330 hours
on 19 October
b. Patient A looked pale to the practitioner on observation at 2330 hours
on 19 October 2013;
c. the practitioner had stopped Patient A’s intake through the Naso
Gastric tube (NG tube) for over two hours and then recommenced
NG feeds at a
rate lower than that ordered by Dr Greenacre;
d. Patient A’s urinalysis results on 20 October 2013; and/or
e. Patient A’s inadequate fluid intake, low urine output, and
failure to tolerate feeds during her shift.
2. During her shift, the practitioner failed to assess and/or maintain
adequate hospital records for Patient A of the following:
a. Patient A’s blood pressure and blood sugar level in the SPOC;
b. her physical assessments of Patient A, including at about 2330
Background of RN Phillips
Phillips has been a registered nurse since 1979. She completed a Certificate in
Midwifery in 1982. She commenced working at the
Hospital in 1985 in both the
paediatric and obstetric wards. She is currently working on a part time basis in
the Ward. She worked
as a Clinical Nurse Specialist in the Ward between 1990 and
1994. In 1991 RN Phillips completed a Certificate in Acute Care Paediatric
Nursing at the then NSW College of Nursing. RN Phillips provided a CV to the
Committee (exhibit P3). Prior to this incident, the
Committee notes RN Phillips
attended the Paediatric Life Support Course in 2011 (8 Hours), the Ins and Outs
of Paediatric Gastroenterology
Conference at SCH (8 Hours), the Resus4Kids Train
the Trainer Workshop in 2012 and a Paediatric Emergency Guidelines Online
evaluation test in May 2013. Subsequent to October 2013 RN Phillips
completed a significant number of CPD hours targeted towards
paediatric nursing
including the Detect Junior Training Program. From the information before the
Committee the CPD undertaken by
RN Phillips prior to 2015 did not comply with
the CPD Standard set for all registered nurses by the NMBA in 2010. The
Committee notes
this is not a Particular of Complaint.
Background to the admission of Patient A to the Hospital
A’s mother noted that Patient A was unwell when he awoke on the morning of
19 October 2013. At approximately 1611 hours
that day Patient A was seen in
Triage at the Emergency Department (ED). Patient A was noted to have had a
normal bowel motion on
19 October 2013 prior to his admission. A paediatric
urine collection bag was placed on Patient A in the Emergency Department.
A was assessed by an ED doctor, Dr Allen, and then by a paediatrician,
Dr Greenacre. Dr Greenacre decided that Patient A should be
admitted to the
Allen provided a letter to the HCCC dated 14 January 2014 (exhibit 14). Dr Allen
had taken steps to prepare to insert a cannula
by placing anaesthetic cream on
to Patient A. In a letter dated 8 January 2014, Dr Greenacre stated that it was
decided that NG feeding
would be given as insertion of the cannula could be a
‘difficult and painful procedure’
(HCCC exhibit 24 – page
Children's Ward at the Hospital has a 14 bed capacity. On the night of 19
October 2013 there were 6 patients in the Ward at the
commencement of the night
shift and two further patients were admitted during the shift. The night shift
was covered by RN Phillips
and CNS Carlson. RN Phillips commenced her shift at
2245 hours. CNS Carlson was In Charge of the shift.
A was in the room closest to the Nurses’ Station. He arrived in the Ward
at around 2130 hours. The ED admitting nurse
had commenced Patient A on
Gastrolyte 40 ml/hour via a nasogastric (NG) tube and a kangaroo pump. Patient
A’s care was subsequently
allocated to RN Phillips. RN Phillips received a
handover report from the admitting nurse.
Events - night
shift 19/20 October 2013 relevant to the Particulars of Complaint
Phillips provided a statement dated 2 September 2015 (exhibit P1) and gave oral
evidence before the Tribunal. As noted above, Patient
A’s mother also gave
evidence regarding her observations of the night of 19 October 2013.
Phillips commenced her shift at 2245 hours on 19 October 2013. She received a
handover that Patient A was a six month old infant
with a history of vomiting,
reduced oral intake and urine output. RN Phillips was also informed during the
handover that Patient
A was lethargic and had not had any diarrhoea. RN Phillips
was aware that Patient A had been reviewed by a doctor in the ED and then
Greenacre. Dr Greenacre had made the provisional diagnosis of Viral
Gastroenteritis and ordered rehydration via a NG tube with
Gastrolyte. RN
Phillips was not informed at handover that Patient A had a 40-50 ml vomit at
2100 hours (whilst still in the ED).
She was not aware of this fact until
sometime later in the shift when she read the notes (this appears to have
occurred sometime
after midnight – T 187 & paragraph 18 of exhibit
Phillips did her first round of the ward at approximately 2300 hours. She stated
that both Patient A and his mother were sleeping
at this time (paragraph 11
– exhibit P1). She checked the pump was infusing at the correct rate,
observed the NG tube was taped
in place, that Patient A was breathing
comfortably and his pulse and oxygen saturation was within normal range.
call button alerted RN Phillips to attend Patient A at 2330 hours. When she
attended Patient A she found that he had vomited about
60 ml of clear fluid. RN
Phillips observed that Patient A was pale
‘but was alert and
interactive’
(paragraph 14 – exhibit P1)
RN Phillips
stopped the pump and disconnected it from the NG tube so that Patient A could be
Phillips admits she did not communicate with Dr Greenacre or make him aware of
that Patient A had vomited at 2100 hours and then
again at 2330 hours on 19
October 2013 (Particular 1(a)). RN Phillips accepts that Dr Greenacre may have
formed the view that nasogastric
feeding was not being tolerated by Patient A
had he been informed of these two moderate sized vomits (T203). She accepts she
have informed Dr Greenacre of this failure of a trial of nasogastric
fluids (T230).
Patient A had a bath, at approximately 2400 hours, RN Phillips observed that the
urine bag was still securely attached to Patient
A but did not have any urine in
it. It was at this time that RN Phillips says she undertook a ‘head to
toe’ examination
of Patient A and felt his abdomen, which was soft and not
distended. RN Phillips also gave evidence that she applied pressure over
sternal area and found capillary refill was less than 3 seconds (paragraph 15
– exhibit P1).
Phillips’ statement records she made the following observations (paragraph
16 of exhibit P1) during this examination:
His observations were
all within normal parameters for his age. His eyes were not sunken and his mucus
membranes were moist. He was
not displaying any signs of pain as per the
‘FLACC’ behavioural scale (Face, Legs, Activity, Crying,
Consolability Scale)
recommended for children 2 months to 7 years.
Phillips noted that Patient A had been assessed as pale in the ED (paragraph
41). RN Phillips also noted that Patient A was pale
when she answered the
patient call buzzer at about 2330 hours (paragraph 14 – exhibit P1). In
response to Particular 1(b) RN
Phillips admitted that she did not communicate
with Dr Greenacre or make him aware that Patient A looked pale at 2330 hours on
October 2013.
Phillips’ description of Patient A does not accord with the description
provided by Patient A’s mother. One example
is the evidence of Patient
A’s mother that she did not recall RN Phillips taking the type of actions
she would have needed
to do to undertake parts of the examination such as a
capillary refill. Further, the description of Patient A given by his mother
not accord with the evidence of RN Phillips that Patient A was
and interactive’
at this time. The Committee notes there is little in
the clinical notes recording this examination.
is agreement that after Patient A was bathed after 2330 hours he was returned to
the cot by about 0015 hours on 20 October 2013.
Phillips states that at around the time Patient A was bathed she also checked
the NG tube was secure; that it was still located
in Patient A’s stomach
and flushed the line with 10ml of normal saline. RN Phillips’ evidence was
that by this time she
had read the clinical notes and her
‘assessment’
was that Patient A’s condition
‘was unchanged’
(paragraph 18 – exhibit P1)
Phillips gave evidence that she decided that the NG feed should be stopped until
approximately 0200 hours then restarted at a lower
rate (paragraph 20 –
exhibit P1). RN Phillips provided an explanation for her decision to turn off
the feed and restart it
at a lower rate in her statement and extensively in her
oral evidence. The explanation provided in paragraph 19 of her statement
accurately represents RN Phillips evidence as to this decision. Paragraph 19
reads (a similar explanation is found at paragraph 44):
worked with Dr Greenacre for close to 30 years. I am familiar with his usual
practice and approach to NG fluid rehydration
therapy. I followed his usual
practise of discontinuing fluids after vomiting and then cautiously recommencing
the fluids after a
period of observation. In my experience, Dr Greenacre used
this method, and was happy for the senior nursing staff to trial a slower
as per his usual approach
Committee observes from the evidence of RN Phillips that she did not appear to
appreciate the significance of Patient A being
tachycardic, that he had vomited
(indicating he was not tolerating the NG feed) and was oliguric at 2400 hours.
Committee notes that the evidence before it regarding Department of Health
policies (NSW Health Clinical Practice Guidelines Children
and Infants with
Gastroenteritis – Acute Management and Junior Detect, Detecting
Deterioration, Evaluation, Treatment, Escalation
and Communicating in Teams, The
Paediatric Approach) reveals that the approach outlined by RN Phillips does not
accord with these
policies and does not represent contemporary practice. Had RN
Phillips undertaken calculations as set out in the Gastroenteritis
would have found that Patient A was well behind in fluid intake throughout the
entirety of the time she was caring for
Phillips admitted that she did not communicate with Dr Greenacre or ensure he
was aware that she stopped the NG feed for over two
hours and then recommenced
it at a lower rate (Particular 1(c) - paragraph 42 – exhibit P1).
being bathed and returned to his cot Patient A slept from about 0030 hours to
0530 hours. RN Phillips stated that after flushing
the NG tube with normal
saline she recommenced the NG feed at around 0200 hours and checked the urine
bag, observing urine in the
bag at this time (paragraph 21 – exhibit P1).
from increasing the pump rate to 30ml/hour at approximately 0500 hours there
were no other documented nursing interventions
until after Patient A woke up
between 0530 and 0600 hours. RN Phillips became aware of activity in the room
and entered the room
as Patient A’s mother was changing Patient A’s
nappy. RN Phillips performed a ward analysis on the urine specimen that
collected in the urine bag. This testing revelled specific gravity of this urine
was 1030, ketones were present at a ‘large’
level and protein was
indicated at the 1+ level (paragraph 23 – exhibit P1). The Committee
notes these are the upper ends
of the readings capable of being measured in a
ward urinalysis. RN Phillips was aware that a specific gravity of 1030 was as
as could be read from the ‘dipstick’ test, that it indicated
‘was concentrated’
and that Patient A was
‘needing more fluid’
(T302). Under cross-examination RN
Phillips agreed that the urine output of Patient A she observed was not adequate
and that she should
have contacted Dr Greenacre (T330).
Phillips admitted that she did not communicate with or ensure Dr Greenacre was
made aware of the results of the urinalysis (Particular
1(d)). There was no
addendum to RN Phillips’ night report in the clinical notes that would
have ensured the morning staff
and Dr Greenacre would have been alerted to this
important information (T304).
paragraph 50 of her statement RN Phillips expressed the view that the urinalysis
results were as would be expected from a child
with decreased fluid intake.
Further during handover she informed the nurses on the morning shift of the
urinalysis results and noted
they were available on the fluid balance chart for
Dr Greenacre to read and assess when he came into the ward later that morning.
RN Phillips admitted that she did not communicate Patient A’s inadequate
fluid intake, low urine output and failure to tolerate
feeds to Dr Greenacre or
ensure he was made aware of these matters (Particular 1(e)).
Phillips denied she failed to assess and/or maintain adequate hospital records
of Patient A’s blood pressure (BP) and blood
sugar level (BSL) on the
Standard Paediatric Observation Chart (SPOC) in the clinical records (paragraph
54 – exhibit P1) (Particular
2(a)). She also denied she failed to assess
and/or maintain adequate hospital records of Patient A’s physical
assessment,
including the assessment she says she undertook at around 2330 hours
(Particular 2(b).
Phillips made a small concession in her oral evidence to the Committee by
agreeing that other nursing interventions she could have
undertaken at around
midnight were measuring Patient A’s BSL and BP (T303). Even without these
observations having been made
the Committee is of the view that an experienced
paediatric nurse should have considered the vomiting, ongoing mild tachycardia
the absence of urine output at 2400 hours to be of concern sufficient to
warrant escalation (see also opinion of CNS Chellew T166).
Phillips states she was monitoring heart rate and oxygen saturation every 30
– 60 minutes, noting she was able to view this
from the monitor in the
nurses’ station. The monitor was set to alarm if the readings fell outside
of the normal range. Although
she noted slight tachycardia she had attributed
this to mild dehydration (paragraph 55 – P1). The saturation level
by RN Phillips was consistently 100% despite Patient A not receiving
oxygen therapy to add to the fraction of inspired oxygen.
Phillips confirmed in her evidence that she did not document the physical
examination she said she undertook of Patient A at 2330
hours. She also admits
that she should have made an entry in the clinical notes after her physical
assessment at 0600 hours and that
this oversight arose because the Ward was busy
with high acuity care patients (paragraph 66 of her statement).
Evidence of peer reviewer: CNS Kate Chellew re RN Phillips
Chellew is a registered nurse and clinical nurse specialist at the Sydney
Children’s Hospital. CNS Chellew provided a
number of reports regarding
the conduct of RN Phillips.
Chellew expressed various criticisms of RN Phillips’ conduct. The opinions
with respect to the sub-particulars in Particular
One are found in the report
dated 9 September 2014 (exhibit 34 - HCCC) at paragraphs 5.1(g), 5.2(i),
5.2(j), 5.3(a), 5.6(a), 5.6(d)
and in the report dated 16 June 2015 (exhibit 37
- HCCC) at paragraph 2.1.
Chellew considered there were a number of reasons to call Dr Greenacre during
the time RN Phillips cared for Patient A and identifies
why the failure to do so
reflects a poor clinical understanding of Patient A’s situation on the
part of RN Phillips.
relation to the element of Particular 2(a) regarding RN Phillips’ failure
to make a further assessment of Patient A by way
of taking a BSL, CNS Chellew
opined that a further BSL reading should have been taken by RN Phillips after
Patient A had a large
vomit at about 2330 hours on 19 October 2013 and that it
may have contributed to the clinical picture. CNS Chellew rejected the
explanation
provided by RN Phillips in her statement that she did not undertake
a further BSL as the one done in the ED had been within the normal
range (T115).
When this evidence was clarified by the Committee CNS Chellew stated that this
large vomit was a change in Patient
A’s condition.
Chellew opined that RN Phillips conduct fell below the standard expected of a
registered nurse (paragraph 2.2(c) – exhibit
Chellew’s opinions regarding Particular 2 is recorded under the heading
‘RN Phillips – Findings on the Complaint’
Submissions re RN Phillips
Committee received comprehensive oral and written submissions on behalf of both
Respondent’s and the HCCC. The Committee
is grateful to both
representatives for their assistance.
is unnecessary to recount the submissions in full in this decision.
submission was made on behalf of both of the Respondents regarding the expertise
of CNS Chellew. This submission is relevant to
the consideration of CNS
Chellew’s evidence regarding both RN Phillips and RN Shelby. The
submission noted the peer reviewer
a trained paediatric nurse,
she had limited clinical experience, only working in a major very well resourced
Sydney paediatric hospital’
. It was submitted that as CNS Chellew had
no experience working in a regional setting she had no experience on which to
base an opinion
regarding a regional setting. The submissions also noted that
CNS Chellew had only had experience in a paediatric ward as a junior
was no submission in reply from the HCCC on this specific point. However, the
HCCC submitted that the evidence of CNS Chellew
was not significantly challenged
during cross-examination. The Committee accepts that although there was some
refining and clarification
of evidence, the peer evidence was substantially
unchallenged.
Committee does not accept the submission made on behalf of the Respondents
regarding CNS Chellew’s experience and suitability
as a peer reviewer in
this matter. As noted above all registered nurses are expected to meet the
National competency standards published
by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia and other policies, codes and guidelines.
Consideration
of the parties submissions in relation to RN Phillips is reflected in the
balance of this document relating to RN Phillips
or are relevant to the
‘second stage’ of this hearing.
RN Phillips – Findings re Particulars of complaint
set out above, RN Phillips admits Particulars 1 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e). The
evidence set out above supports the admission of
these Particulars to the
comfortable satisfaction of the Committee. The Committee finds that RN Phillips
did not communicate or ensure
Dr Greenacre was aware of two moderate sized
vomits in the hours after Patient A was examined by Dr Greenacre and that
continued to be pale. Further she did not communicate to Dr Greenacre
(or otherwise ensure he became aware of) the changes she made
to the NG feeds
being provided to Patient A including ceasing the feed for over two hours and
recommencing it at a lower rate. There
was also no communication regarding the
urinalysis results (save for inadequately completing the fluid balance chart) or
the overall
poor fluid balance position of Patient A during her shift. Whilst
nurses are autonomous health care professionals there is an obligation
treating medical practitioners of changes in the condition of patients,
particularly deteriorations. When medical orders
are departed from there should
be consultation and approval.
is of considerable concern to the Committee that RN Phillips relied on Dr
Greenacre’s
‘usual procedure’
. The Committee notes RN
Phillips’ evidence that there was in fact no
from Dr Greenacre. The evidence of RN Phillips was that
stopping the naso-gastric feed (followed by a reduce rate of feed) was what
believed Dr Greenacre would expect to be done in the circumstances. As noted
above there was evidence that RN Phillips consulted
CNS Carlson about this
course of action. It is concerning that RN Phillips was aware that CNS Carlson
had not read Patient A’s
clinical notes nor did RN Phillips fully appraise
her of Patient A’s condition.
Committee notes the evidence of RN Phillips to the effect that she would have
vomiting, signs of discomfort
or worsening deterioration after she changed the NG feeding regimen (ceasing it
and then recommencing
at the lower rates). The Committee notes the context of
this evidence is that RN Philips did not undertake any observations of Patient
A, apart from noting he was sleeping, from around 0030 hours to 0530 hours and
looking into his nappy at the urine bag at 0200 hours.
This is not consistent
with RN Phillips taking a vigilant stance regarding further deterioration. The
Committee is of the view that
it would be difficult for RN Phillips to have been
aware of deterioration in the circumstances of her failure to take steps to
whether there was in fact deterioration.
this point the Committee notes that RN Lameks gave evidence that before a RN
suspended a NG feed there would have to be a full
assessment of fluid balance
(T389). RN Phillips was extensively questioned regarding her understanding of
Patient A’s fluid
balance. RN Phillips did not assert that she had
undertaken such an assessment nor is one evident from the evidence before the
The evidence of RN Phillips did not give the Committee confidence
that she could adequately perform a fluid assessment.
Committee also notes the evidence of CNS Carlson that she was of the opinion
that the treating doctor should be called in circumstances
where there is a
second vomit after a trial of NG fluids in a patient with a clinical picture of
Patient A (T355, 375).
Committee has considered the failure to alert Dr Greenacre to the urinalysis
results together with the overall fluid balance position
of Patient A to be a
substantial departure from acceptable nursing standards. The urinalysis RN
Phillips performed at about 0530
hours should have left her with no doubt that
Patient A was dehydrated.
Committee accepts the submission made by the HCCC that when the sub-particulars
of Particulars One are considered together it
is clear that RN Phillips failed
to appreciate the significance of Patient A’s condition and identify that
escalation was required
(paragraphs 26-29 HCCC submissions).
Commission submitted that Particular One of the Complaint should be found
proved. The Committee has the benefit of the reports
and oral evidence of CNS
Chellew who confirms her support for the establishment of the allegations in
Particular One and that the
conduct is significantly below the standard expected
of a nurse of RN Phillips’ training and experience and that it invites
strong criticism. The Commission submits that Particular One amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
relation to Particulars 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 1 (d) and 1(e) the Committee finds
unsatisfactory professional conduct established in
that RN Phillips’s
conduct demonstrated that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed and care
exercised by her in the practice
of nursing was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
respect to Particular 2 the Committee notes CNS Chellew provided an opinion at
paragraph 5.6 of exhibit HCCC 34, as well as giving
oral evidence before the
Chellew expressed the view that a failure to take a BSL reading in circumstances
where the feeds to Patient A had been suspended
and re-started at a reduced rate
(contrary to medical prescription) is a significant departure from the
acceptable standard and invites
her strong criticism.
at T115 & 158 CNS Chellew confirmed that the taking of a BSL was a step that
could have been done in the circumstances
of Patient A’s changed condition
and that a BP measurement also could have been done or at least attempted (and
Committee notes that the Junior Detect Manual provides that a measurement of BSL
should be undertaken for a child that has a history
of reduced calorie intake
and/or lethargy (page 37 – HCCC exhibit 58).
relation to Particular 2 the Committee notes the evidence of CNS Carlson in
response to hypothetical questions posed. Her opinion
was to the effect that in
the clinical circumstances (aligned to that of Patient A) she would have
undertaken measurement of BP and
BSL after the large vomit (which occurred at
2330 hours) (T352-369).
Committee notes RN Phillips denied these Particulars. RN Phillips did provide
explanations as to why she had not undertaken these
tests and in
cross-examination agreed that with hindsight she should have undertaken them. RN
Phillips also agreed that she did not
document the physical
examination/assessment she undertook of Patient A at around midnight. RN
Phillips’ assertion that she
undertook this examination at midnight is not
assisted by the evidence of Patient A’s mother as to what she observed at
time. The evidence before the Committee indicates there had been observable
changes in Patient A’s condition. In these clinical
circumstances the
taking of a BP and a BSL would have been of assistance in adding to the clinical
picture. The Committee also notes
RN Phillips did not make more frequent
observations of Patient A despite her stated knowledge of his
her evidence before the Committee RN Phillips ultimately accepted that she
thought she had not read well enough the clinical notes
from the Emergency
Department. She accepted that Patient A had in fact deteriorated since he had
been assessed by Dr Greenacre in
the ED (see paragraphs 29-33 HCCC submissions).
RN Phillips did not adhere to the NSW Health Policy on Gastroenteritis (exhibit
As set out above, the Committee is of the view that all registered nurses
working within NSW are required to adhere to this policy
no matter the practice
setting. Certainly nothing in this particular policy requires steps to be taken
that were not available to
RN Phillips during her shift on 19/20 October 2013.
Considering
Particular 2(a) and 2(b) together the Committee is of the view that the conduct
of RN Phillips was well below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or experience.
RN Phillips - Findings on the Complaint
respect to Particular 1 of the Complaint the Committee notes the observations
and the documentation regarding urinary output
of Patient A were poorly done and
inadequately document. In her evidence RN Phillips did not use appropriate
technical language to
describe urinary output measurement, does not describe any
coherent process she utilised to estimate or gauge the urinary output
infant. RN Phillips did not appear to have correlated the high specific gravity
reading of the small amount of urine Patient
A had voided by about 0600 hours on
20 October 2013 to his hydration status.
RN Phillips did not appear to the Committee to understand the importance of this
nursing care for this particular patient.
The Committee has concerns regarding
RN Phillips failure to appropriately document fluid balance/urine output of
Patient A during
her shift. RN Phillips also struggled to explain to the
Committee the appropriate way in which to assess the adequacy of urinary
in infants. A deficit of this nature is at odds with the training and experience
of RN Phillips.
Committee is comfortably satisfied that all of the Particulars of Complaint are
established. The Committee is further satisfied
that the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s139B of the National
Law in that RN Phillips’
conduct demonstrated the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed as well as care exercised in the practice of nursing was
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
RN Phillips
– preliminary observation relevant to Orders
the reasons set out above, the Committee has found the Complaint made out and
made a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of s.
139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
. Accordingly, it is appropriate for the
Committee to consider consequential/protective orders that should be
is well established that while the primary role of the Committee is protective,
the Committee also has a role in maintaining public
confidence in the profession
and maintaining the reputation of the profession:
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630.
Committee notes RN Phillips provided a number of references. These are not
sufficient to allow the Committee not to proceed to
request further
submissions/evidence regarding protective orders.
Committee notes the submissions received re protective orders extended only to
caution and reprimand. As noted above the Committee
has formed the view that the
parties should be provided with an opportunity to consider the Committee’s
findings and to place
further evidence and/or submissions before the Committee.
Committee has detailed above significant concerns regarding RN Phillips
practice. It is not just her failures to inform Dr Greenacre
that are of concern
but there is the underlying issue of her failure to actually appreciate or
assess relevant observations and then
apply clinically reasoning processes.
These failures are against a backdrop of acting contrary to the prescription of
the treating
medical practitioner.
RN Phillips took no recorded steps to respond to her own assessment that Patient
A had shown no improvement throughout the
night. There is little in the records
covering the period 0200 – 0700 hours. RN Phillips gave evidence that she
had escalated
the care of a patient by contacting Dr Greenacre at home
‘thousands of times’
(T291-292).
evidence of RN Phillips does not demonstrate she had a care plan which included
matters such as some form of nursing diagnosis,
care goals for Patient A or had
regard for the concern expressed by Patient A’s mother. The Committee
notes the Gastroenteritis
Policy cites parental concern as significant.
Phillips gave evidence of the changes she had made in her practice. RN Phillips
stated she would now never turn off fluids without
a doctor’s order
(T197). The Committee is concerned that this evidence of RN Phillips (and her
evidence generally) did not
demonstrate she had committed to changing her
clinical practice in a clinically reflective manner. To say she would never turn
a NG feed is equally of concern to the Committee as her turning the feed off
without consultation and approval. There must be circumstances
when a registered
nurse will have to turn off a feed for the patient’s safety.
Committee also struggled to find evidence of the development of clinical
reasoning and insight as a result of having undertaken
the Junior Detect course
subsequent to the events of 19/20 October 2013. RN Phillips’ claim that
her 30 years of nursing experience
would stand her in good stead is not borne
out by the reality of her conduct on this occasion.
are significant deficits in areas of her practice identified in the
Committee’s findings. Overall, the Committee has concerns
regarding the
safety of RN Phillips practice. There is particular concern regarding any
supervisory role she may have. This Committee
is charged with the responsibility
of making protective orders with the purpose of ensuring the nursing care RN
Phillips provides
is safe and is of an appropriate quality.
Committee reserves with respect to consequential orders and notes a suitable
date to resume the Inquiry with respect to RN Phillips
has been agreed upon with
the parties.
HCCC v SELBY
Background of RN
Selby was first registered as a nurse in 1983. She commenced working at the
Hospital in 2005. She worked in the Children's Ward
until July 2015 and is now
working as the Diagnostic Related Group Facilitator. She completed a Graduate
Certificate in Child and
Adolescent Health Nursing in 1993 and a Graduate
Certificate in Paediatric Nursing in 2004 through the then NSW College of
RN Selby provided a CV to the Committee (exhibit S2). There is sparse
CPD recorded prior to June 2013 when RN Selby undertook the
Detect Course. RN
Selby did a number of CPD courses not directly related to paediatric nursing
between June and September 2013 when
she spent one hour on the Junior Detect
Online training. RN Selby completed the Face to Face Junior Detect on 27
November 2013. After
this time RN Selby appears to have complied with the 20
hours of CPD prescribed in the Registration Standard by the NMBA although
significant portion of these CPD were also not specifically paediatric focussed.
her oral evidence RN Selby described her role as the Diagnostic Related Group
Facilitator as essentially a clerical position with
limited, if any, patient
HCCC v Selby – the Complaint
dated 24 April 2015 made by the HCCC against RN Selby is as
follows (as amended at the commencement of the hearing):
RN Selby, being a registered nurse under the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law
”), is guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s. 139B of the
National Law
in that they engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by each of them
the practice of nursing is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience.
Background to the Complaint
At about 1600 hours on Saturday, 19 October 2013, Patient A (a six month old
infant) presented to the Emergency Department of Shoalhaven
District Memorial
Hospital (the hospital) with his mother. Patient A presented with a history of
decreased oral intake, vomiting,
lethargy, nil diarrhoea, decreased urine
output, and appearing unwell, amongst other issues.
Patient A was admitted to the hospital under paediatrician Dr Toby Greenacre
with possible gastroenteritis having failed a trail of
oral feeding at the
hospital. At about 21.30 hours Patient A was admitted to the Children’s
RN Selby, a registered nurse, commenced her shift in the Children’s
Ward at about 0700 hours on 20 October 2013 and was allocated
to the care of
Patient A until about 1440 hours on 20 October 2013.
Particulars:
1. Prior to Dr Greenacre’s assessment of Patient A at about 1045
hours on 20 October 2013, the practitioner did not communicate
with Dr Greenacre
or ensure that Dr Greenacre was made aware of the following:
a. Patient A vomited approximately 40-50mls of fluid at about 2100 hours
and/or 60mls of fluid at about 2330 hours on 19 October 2013;
b. Patient A’s intake through the Naso Gastric tube (NG tube) had
been ceased for two hours from about 2330 hours on 19 October
c. Patient A’s inadequate fluid intake, failure to tolerate feeds,
and low urine output since Dr Greenacre had last reviewed
d. Patient A’s urinalysis results received on 20 October 2013;
e. Patient A’s NG tube had been removed at or around 0700 hours and
had not been reinserted;
f. Patient A had been recommenced on oral feeds at about 0830 hours
despite Dr Greenacre’s orders for NG tube feeds;
g. Patient A vomited and/or aspirated several times between 0730 hours and
0945 hours including a bilious vomit or aspirate at about
0945 hours;
h. Patient A’s family’s concerns about Patient A including
that he looked very pale, was lethargic, and/or could not hold
his head up.
2. The practitioner commenced Patient A on oral feeds at or about 0830
hours on 20 October 2013. This was inappropriate in the following
circumstances:
a. Patient A had already failed a trial of oral feeds;
b. Dr Greenacre had not approved a trial of oral feeds and had ordered NG
tube feedings;
c. Dr Greenacre was unaware of Patient A’s status after his
assessment of Patient A the previous evening;
d. Patient A had not tolerated NG tube feeds;
e. Patient A had vomited and/or aspirated several times from 2100 hours
until 0830 hours.
3. The practitioner failed to adequately recognise and/or assess Patient
A’s hydration status during her shift in the following
circumstances:
a. Patient A vomited at 2100 and 2330 hours on 19 October 2013, and
vomited or aspirated several times between 0730 hours and 0945
hours on 20
October 2013;
b. the practitioner did not inform herself of Patient A’s up to date
heart rate, blood pressure or blood sugar levels until
on 20 October 2013;
c. Patient A’s feeds had been suspended for two hours from about
2330 hours on 19 October 2013 and recommenced on a reduced
d. Patient A’s urinalysis results showed a specific gravity of 1030,
large Ketones and ‘+ protein’;
e. Patient A had low urine output from about 0530 hours on 19 October 2013
for approximately 24 hours;
f. Patient A did not have a urine bag in situ from at least 0600 hours on
20 October 2013 until shortly prior to his discharge from
the hospital
– this sub-particular was not pressed by the HCCC)
g. Patient A’s NG tube had been removed at or around 0700 hours and
was not reinserted for another four hours; and/or
h. Patient A continued to be unable to tolerate fluids.
4. When the practitioner communicated with the Ambulance Service on 20
October 2013, she failed to use the ‘Identify, Situation,
Background,
Assessment and Recommendation’ communication framework, she acted contrary
to NSW Health PD2009_060 (Clinical Handover
– Standard Key Principles),
and/or her communication with the Ambulance Service was inadequate, in that
during her telephone
conversations:
a. at about 1133 hours, she failed to provide sufficient information about
Patient A’s recent vital signs, his hydration status,
and that he had been
observed to be pale, drowsy, and/or lethargic; and/or
b. at about 1133 hours, she agreed to an almost two hour delay in the
ambulance transport arriving at the hospital, contrary to Dr
Greenacre’s
orders.; and/or
c. at about 1237 hours, she delayed the ambulance transport again when she
asked them to wait for Patient A’s medical imaging
to occur, contrary to
Dr Greenacre’s orders.
(Note – this sub-particular was not
pressed by the HCCC)
5. The practitioner failed to escalate Patient A’s care to Dr
Greenacre and/or the nurse in charge after Patient A’s heart
rate was on
the border between the Blue and Yellow Zones in the SPOC at 1400 hours and
Patient A met the Yellow Zone criteria for
low urine output at 1400 hours. In
doing so, the practitioner acted contrary to NSW Health PD2011_077
‘Recognition and Management
of Patients Who Are Clinically
Deteriorating’.
6. The practitioner failed to ensure that Patient A was reviewed by Dr
Greenacre or that Dr Greenacre was aware of Patient A’s
departure from the
hospital by ambulance.
Background to the admission of Patient A
is set out in the section of this document relating to RN Phillips above.
Events – day shift 20 October 2013 relevant to the Particulars of
Selby commenced her shift at 0700 hours in the Children’s Ward at the
Hospital on 20 October 2013. RN Lameks was in charge
of the shift and EN Wilton
was assisting both RNs. RN Selby gave evidence that the role of the EN was to
in the Ward and attend to observations,
reporting any concerns to the RNs, and attend to other tasks such as updating
fluid balance
charts (paragraph 9 – statement dated 31 August 2015 –
exhibit S1).
Selby stated that handover was provided by RN Phillips and CNS Carlson. At this
time RN Selby was advised that Patient A had been
admitted to the Ward the day
before, at approximately 2130 hours, with vomiting
‘for investigation
and possible gastroenteritis’.
RN Selby remembered Patient A from his
admission about one month earlier for bronchiolitis (paragraph 11 –
information provided to RN Selby at handover included:
Patient A had
been reviewed by Dr Greenacre late on the evening of 19 October 2013
Patient A was
receiving continuous NG feed of Gastrolyte via a kangaroo pump – although
this was ceased for two hours after
he had vomited at around midnight
Patient A was
stable at the time of handover – with oxygen saturation and heart rate
within normal range being measured continuously
Selby also provided the Committee with information regarding the condition of
other patients admitted to the Ward at the time of
handover. RN Selby made
numerous references in her evidence to the significant workload on this shift
being a result of the patient
load (four patients being allocated to her and
having significant nursing demands). The Committee is of the view that part of
role of the RN is to be able to make an assessment of the workload and seek
assistance if required. The Committee makes two further
observations at this
point. There is no evidence before it to indicate that any further nursing
resources were requested at any time
during the admission of Patient A to the
Hospital (noting that the ADON did assist with some arrangements for transfer of
A). Second, the patient load outlined by RN Selby (see paragraph 12
– S1) is, in the Committee’s view properly characterised
demanding but not extraordinary.
the handover report the patient call buzzer from Patient A’s room was
activated and RN Phillips answered the call, leaving
handover (paragraph 55
– S1). After the handover RN Phillips spoke to RN Selby and EN Wilton in
the door way of Patient A’s
room. At this time RN Phillips informed them
that Patient A
‘had removed his NG Tube’
(paragraph 15
– S1). At approximately 0730 hours, after Patient A had a further small
vomit, RN Selby and RN Lameks had a discussion
and a decision made to leave the
NG tube out until Patient A was reviewed by Dr Greenacre and trial oral fluids
(paragraph 55 –
S1). RN Selby stated that commencing Patient A drinking
small amounts of Gastrolyte via a bottle was in accordance with the
Gastroenteritis
Policy Directive (paragraph 15 – S1).
Selby’s evidence was that Dr Greenacre usually came in early on Sundays to
do his round of the Ward (paragraph 15 –
S1). The Committee notes that by
the commencement of RN Selby’s shift Patient A had not been seen or
assessed by a medical
officer for about 12 hours.
Selby stated that she observed Patient A at 0730 hours, noting he was being held
in his mother’s arms and moving his arms
around and had his eyes open. He
appeared pale, skin turgor appeared normal and his eyes were not sunken. EN
Wilton took Patient
A’s observations at around 0730 hours. These
observations were within normal limits with the exception of an elevated heart
rate (165bpm). RN Selby stated she was not informed of the elevation in Patient
A’s heart rate (paragraph 18 – S1).
0730 and 0800 hours Patient A had two further vomits.
bottle with a small amount of Gastrolyte was provided by RN Selby to Patient
A’s mother at about 0830 hours (paragraph 19
– S1). Patient
A’s mother confirmed in her evidence that this was the first fluid
provided for her to give to Patient
A after his NG tube became dislodged. The
evidence before the Committee indicates providing oral fluids at this time
represents a
misinterpretation of the rehydration regimen detailed in the
Gastroenteritis Policy. Oral fluids had been trialled and failed (see
Chellew’s evidence T158).
Committee notes that there is a dispute in the evidence as to the timing of and
means by which the NG tube became dislodged. For
the purpose of the findings in
this matter the Committee does not have to resolve exactly when or how Patient
A’s NG tube became
dislodged. There is no dispute in the evidence that it
was dislodged by around 0700 hours at the latest and around 0530 hours at
Selby was aware that Patient A vomited shortly after being given the Gastrolyte
via a bottle. She says she informed Patient A’s
mother that it was likely
that a IV drip would have to be inserted and that Dr Greenacre would be coming
in early to review Patient
A (paragraph 20 – S1). RN Selby’s
evidence was that the vomit was of clear fluid (paragraph 19 –
Selby stated that it was not the usual practice in the Ward to call the general
resident medical officer on weekends when the Paediatric
Registrar was not on
call unless the Paediatrician was
‘not easily contactable’
if he was not expected to attend (paragraph 20 –S1).
Selby gave evidence of having observed Patient A following the failed oral feed
at 0830 hours and prior to the arrival of Dr Greenacre
in the Ward at about 1030
hours. On this occasion RN Selby recalled that Patient A’s mother informed
her that she was ‘worried’
was pale and quiet.
Observation
taken of Patient A at 1030 hours record a slightly decreased heart rate (156
bpm) and a slightly increased rate of respiration
(32 to 38 rpm), with oxygen
saturation and temperature remaining stable.
after 1030 hours, and before 1100 hours, RN Selby saw Dr Greenacre as he was
going to see Patient A. There were a number
of people in the room when Patient A
was examined by Dr Greenacre. RN Lameks and both of Patient A’s
grandmothers were also
Committee notes the evidence Patient A’s paternal grandmother that she had
seen Dr Greenacre in the Ward and had informed
him of the family’s
concerns at about 1045 hours which prompted his attendance in Patient A’s
Selby noted that Patient A’s condition had deteriorated by this time. She
observed that he was pale, lethargic and floppy
(paragraph 24 – S1). RN
Selby took no steps to ensure Dr Greenacre was alerted to Patient A’s
deterioration.
examining Patient A Dr Greenacre requested a BSL and a BP measurement be taken.
A further set of general observations was taken
at 1100 hours. There was
discussion between Dr Greenacre and Patient A’s family members and Dr
Greenacre formed the view that
Patient A was suffering from a bowel obstruction,
most likely to be intussusception. He gave an order for the NG tube to be
for the purpose of free drainage. This was attended to promptly.
Greenacre then took steps to arrange for Patient A’s transfer to Sydney
Children’s Hospital (SCH). This included speaking
to doctors at the SCH
and to the Neonatal Intensive Care Transfer Team (NETS). When Dr Greenacre was
informed that the NETS transfer
could not be effected until 4pm he requested
that arrangements be made with the NSW Ambulance Service for transfer by
Selby, RN Lameks and the ADON were also involved in communicating with the NSW
Ambulance Service for the purpose of arranging the
road transfer. Apart from the
issues raised in Particulars 4 and 6 of the Complaint relating to RN Selby, the
Committee makes no
comment on other obvious questions relating to this transfer
including questions such as whether transfer of Patient A by road was
appropriate in the circumstances, whether the Ambulance Centre Officer was
appropriately trained to appreciate information provided
regarding Patient
A’s condition, whether the training and experience of the
‘paramedics’ or ‘ambulance officers’
undertaking the
transfer was sufficient, whether RN Selby had an appropriate understanding of
the differences between ‘paramedics’
and ‘ambulance
officers’ (if any) and whether there should have been a nurse escort for
this transfer. These issues are
left for the appropriate bodies to deal with and
resolve as they fall outside this Committee’s statutory role.
Wilton provided a statement to the Committee dated 26 June 2014 (exhibit
HCCC-21). EN Wilton saw Dr Greenacre arrive in the Ward
at about 1100 hours. She
then observed Dr Greenacre go into Room 4 and then return to the office and talk
on the phone. Later she
observed RN Selby talking on the phone. EN Wilton
reported that after this she heard Dr Greenacre talking to RN Selby in the
of the Ward. She heard Dr Greenacre saying the words
intussusception’
‘talk to NETS’
and that RN
Selby said the word
(paragraph 19).
Committee was provided with transcripts of telephone conversations with the
Ambulance Service. Details of these conversations
are provided below.
transfer of Patient A was being arranged some further tests were undertaken. An
abdominal ultrasound was performed (the sonographer
being called into the
Hospital for the purpose of performing this procedure). Dr Greenacre made this
arrangement at about 1130 hours.
Greenacre also took a blood sample from Patient A and inserted an IV cannula and
normal saline was commenced at 1215 hours with
160 ml over the first hour and 40
ml thereafter. Patient A’s paternal grandmother who provided assistance to
Dr Greenacre for
this procedure (and therefore was well placed to comment on his
condition).
1315 hours antibiotics (cefotaxime – 250mg) were delivered via the IV
cannula. This was followed at 1400 hours with another
antibiotic (gentamicin
– 50mg). The ultrasound was performed between the administration of these
doses of antibiotics.
Selby gave evidence of spending a significant period of time preparing the
relevant transfer documentation, including obtaining
print outs of blood test
results. RN Selby had spoken to the Ambulance Service and indicated to them that
a delay in their arrival
was satisfactory (exhibit 32). Initially, in a
conversation at 1133 hours RN Selby stated that the transfer was
‘fairly urgent’
meaning within
She then indicated that the IV was still being sited and they still
‘haven’t got anything ready’
and agreed to a two hour
delay. In evidence RN Selby clarified that there was paper work to be completed
in preparation for the transfer
and it was unlikely to be completed until the
time nominated by the Ambulance Officers (paragraph 38 – S1 and T
423.31-36).
RN Selby spoke to the Ambulance Service again at 1237 hours and
indicated that Patient A was awaiting a abdominal ultrasound and
x-ray and a
further half hour delay would be
(exhibit 32).
Selby gave evidence about her observation of Patient A just prior to his
transfer as follows (paragraph 38 – S1):
Patient A remained
pale and lethargic but was otherwise unchanged from earlier when Dr Greenacre
reviewed him.
are statements from the two paramedics from the Ambulance transferring Patient A
from the Hospital to Sydney Children’s
Hospital (exhibits 11 and 12) which
are noted by the Committee.
Evidence of peer reviewer: CNS Kate Chellew re RN Selby
Chellew expressed the view that considering the totality of the circumstances
described in sub-particulars of Particular 1 RN
Selby should have contacted Dr
Greenacre without delay (paragraph 5.1(g) – exhibit 39 HCCC).
paragraph 5.5 of her report dated 9 September 2014 (HCCC exhibit 39) CNS Chellew
expressed the view that oral feeds should not
have been recommenced and the
decision of RN Selby to do so was a significant departure from acceptable
standards and invites her
strong criticism.
respect to Particular 3, CNS Chellew expresses criticism of the conduct of RN
Selby in paragraphs 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 of her report
dated 9 September 2014 (HCCC
– exhibit 39) and in paragraph 2.2 of her supplementary report dated 16
June 2015 (HCCC exhibit
Chellew was critical that RN Selby failed to recognise the significance of a
heart rate of 165 in a resting infant. CNS Chellew
opined that this warranted
further investigation whether by repeating this observation or taking a blood
pressure or blood sugar
level to complete the clinical picture regarding Patient
A’s hydration status (paragraph 5.2 – exhibit 39). CNS Chellew
observed that there was no documentation regarding other indicators of Patient
A’s hydration status (moist mucous membranes,
moist tongue and mouth). CNS
Chellew expressed strong criticism of RN Selby’s failure to adequately
assess and recognise the
hydration status of Patient A and was of the opinion
that the conduct was significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner
with an equivalent level of training and experience.
respect to Particular 4 CNS Chellew expressed the following view (HCCC exhibit
RN Selby delayed the transfer, despite Dr Greenacre’s
request not to delay the transfer. This is consistent with my comments
5.6(e) of my first report, that RN Selby significantly departed from the
standard expected, and that this conduct invites my strong
criticism...
The Ambulance Service should also have been notified that [Patient
A]’s HR had remained at 170bpm at both 1100h and 1200h when
she spoke to
the Ambulance Service, and again at 1400h just prior to the retrieval
respect to Particular 5 and the failure of RN Selby to notify Dr Greenacre of
Patient A’s observations falling into the
‘Yellow Zone’ CNS
Chellew stated:
The appropriate response to these indicators
[elevated heart rate and low urine output]
would be to seek a clinical
review within 30 minutes... RN Selby’s response to these indicators was
significantly below the
standard expected... This conduct invites my strong
criticism...
respect to Particular 6 the Committee notes that CNS Chellew expressed the view
that a registered nurse does not require a written
protocol or policy to seek a
review of a patient prior to transfer. At paragraph 5.7 of her report dated 9
September 2014 (HCCC exhibit
39 at page 13) she states:
The letter from Dr Greenacre states that RN Selby should have notified him that
the paramedics had arrived so that he could
provide handover to them.... Dr
Greenacre may have chosen to contact the Ambulance Service of NSW to provide
further handover prior
to when the paramedics arrived or to document clearly any
further details or interventions required for transport.
her supplementary report (HCCC exhibit 41) she added:
there was no policy for notifying doctors when a patient’s transport
arrives, [Patient A]’s clinical picture
should have been communicated to
Dr Greenacre when the Ambulance Service arrived. As [Patient A] was still
unwell, Dr Greenacre
should have been made aware of this. So that he could
confirm that [Patient A] was stable for transport. All of the listed factors
[Patient A]’s elevated HR, his appearance and the long distance by road
... should have been taken into consideration by
Submissions re RN Selby
Committee notes both parties made extensive written submissions. These
submissions have been carefully considered by the Committee
but will not be
reproduced herein. The submissions made on behalf of RN Selby are addressed in
the Findings.
HCCC submitted that each of the Particulars of Complaint should be established,
that the conduct should be found to constitute
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and a raft of conditions should be imposed on RN Selby’s
registration.
respect to Particular 1 of the Complaint the HCCC submitted that the Committee
should have regard to a number of matters including:
RN Selby should
have noticed shortly after commencing her shift from the information in Patient
A’s hospital file that contact
with Dr Greenacre was required urgently
(paragraphs 86 – 88 HCCC Submissions)
RN Selby did not
demonstrate an awareness of Patient A’s condition (paragraphs 89, 92,
RN Selby did not
take steps open to her to react to Patient A’s clinical picture
(paragraphs 90 – 91, 95) without any
real explanation for these failures
(paragraph 94)
observations of Patient A contrasted with the concerns of Patient A’s
mother, father and grandmothers (paragraph
respect to Particular 2 of the Complaint the HCCC submitted that RN Selby
attempted to avoid responsibility for making the decision
to commence oral feeds
by (paragraph 100):
Giving evidence
that the decision was jointly made with RN Lameks at 0720 hours – a time
prior to the allocation of Patient
A to her care and before the 0730 hours vomit
evidence was that the decision was not made until after Patient A was allocated
to RN Selby’s care
This Particular
relates to the decision made at 0830 hours, when the care of Patient A had been
allocated to RN Selby
the HCCC submitted that the Committee should have regard to the fact that no
assessment of Patient A or reading of his hospital
file was undertaken prior to
the decision to commence oral feeds at 0830 hours. RN Selby gave evidence that
she did not think about
reinserting the NG tube and accepted that it was
unlikely that oral feed would be tolerated if NG feed had not been tolerated
issues relevant to Particular 2 submitted for consideration by the HCCC
In evidence RN
Selby accepted oral feeding brought the risk of further vomiting and further
dehydration (paragraph 101)
position with respect to this Particular is essentially a denial of the
allegation (paragraph 102)
evidence was that in her experience if a NG tube came out it would not
automatically be replaced and a trial of oral
fluids would be appropriate which
is at odds with the experience of RN Phillips and CNS Carlson (paragraph
feeding section of the NSW Health PD on Gastroenteritis states that the aim is
for fluid input to exceed output sufficient
to rehydrate then maintain hydration
and the decision at 0830 hours did not accord with that aim (paragraph
HCCC submissions with respect to Particular 3 highlighted the evidence of RN
Selby that would allow the Committee not only to
be satisfied as to the
establishment of this Particular but also to highlight the nature of her
failures. The submission characterises
the failures as a lack of situational
awareness on the part of RN Selby. Her conduct did not appear to appreciate the
risks explicitly
explained in the Junior Detect Manual and ignored the
‘Between the Flags’ policy. Further, the submissions detailed areas
of RN Selby’s evidence in relation to this Particular (paragraphs 78
– 105 of S1) that should cause concern for the Committee.
submitted the Committee should be concerned about her attempt to minimise her
level of awareness, her seeking to avoid responsibility,
her references to the
decision of others out of context, the general lack of plausibility, the
illustration provided by the evidence
that she was not proactive in obtaining
information and the disregard she had for Patient A’s treatment plan. The
submitted that RN Selby’s evidence was incorrect or
contradictory in places.
submissions made by the HCCC contain, what the Committee considers to be, an
accurate summary of the chronology of events for
the morning of 20 October 2013
after the arrival of Dr Greenacre in the Ward (paragraph 126 – HCCC
Submissions). The Submission
reads as follows:
126. The following chronology is put forward:
Greenacre completes his review of Patient A and writes in the hospital records
at about 1100 hours (first half of page 19, tab
Greenacre called NETS at about 1105 and during that call (tab 31, page 6) he
told NETS that “
If it was helpful we could do abdominal x-rays and
ultrasounds but I didn’t want to do that if it was going to delay what I
thought was almost certain surgical transfer”
Dr Greenacre had the
following exchange with NETS (tab 31, page 7):
Greenacre: ... I think that sometimes it’s actually better to put the
patient in an ambulance that’s already here at
: That’s exactly right. When it’s going to take us
two hours to get there so and he needs to be moved fairly quickly.
Do you know
what I mean?
Greenacre ends the call and writes in the hospital records (second half of page
19, tab 52) in which he records: “... U/S
+ AXR if possible before T/F
(but shouldn’t delay T/F)”
Greenacre arranges for the Patient Flow manager at the hospital to call
Ambulance NSW. She does this at 1122 hours (tab 32) and
in this conversation
Greenacre is in the Children’s’ Ward;
has asked for an urgent transfer;
page 2 the Ambulance Officer asks, “
Alright, would you be ready to go
if we get there shortly?”
The response is “
” but she is told that the Children’s’ Ward will
get in touch with them to confirm.
Selby is asked by RN Lameks to contact the Ambulance Officers. RN Selby does so
at about 1133 hours (tab 32, page 3) and has the
following exchange with the
Ambulance Officer (tab 32, page 5):
And so what time frame has the doctor requested?
of checking the progress notes or confirming with Dr Greenacre as she did with
the query concerning the type of fluid going
through the IV) Selby:
said fairly urgent. If it could probably be, I’d say, about, it’s
just we’re putting a drop in so they’re
not going to be ready for,
I’d say an hour?
Service]: Within the hour?
I’d say an hour.
I’d say, because they’re still putting a drop in so I’d say,
yeah an hour would be a lot because we still
haven’t got anything ready
Service]: So, do you want me to say within two hours?
Um, yes, that might be good, yes.
and tries to obtain blood for testing. (By contrast,
RN Selby wrote in her entry
timed at 1100 hours that “Bloods collected by Dr Greenacre”) which
she accepts is incorrect.
Greenacre is informed that the Ambulance will arrive in two hours from 1133
hours, as arranged by RN Selby. Dr Greenacre ordered
the imaging at about 1215
hours (see tab 52, page 11) as the ambulance will not arrive for some time.
This is consistent with the
statement of:
A’s maternal grandmother (tab 8, page 2 and tab 30, page 24) who recalls
Dr Greenacre later coming in to say they should
have his imaging done at
was going to be a delay with the road ambulance.
A’s paternal grandmother (tab 9, page 11): “
Dr Greenacre came
back into the room and said due to the delay of the road ambulance and the
unavailability of the NETS team... [Patient
A] would have an abdomen x-ray and
abdominal ultrasound at Shoalhaven Hospital while he was waiting for the
ambulance to arrive
.” This indicates that Dr Greenacre
ordered the ultrasound and abdomen by the time RN Selby spoke to the
ambulance at about 1133 hours.
A was taken for imaging at about 1245 hours (tab 9, page 11).
RN Selby – Findings re Particulars of complaint
a general observation, before considering each of the Particulars of Complaint,
the Committee notes that RN Selby also gave evidence
as to her belief that she
was acting in accordance with the
that Dr Greenacre
‘happy for the more senior staff in the Unit to follow’
when a child vomited during a trial of fluids. This regimen is recounted by RN
Selby as being the turning off of the feed, resting
for a period followed by
resumption of the NG feed at a reduced rate until it is tolerated (paragraph 47
Selby admits Particular 1(a) of the Complaint. There is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made contact with Dr Greenacre
until he attended the
Hospital and assessed Patient A at approximately 1045 hours on 20 October 2013.
The Committee is satisfied
that there is undisputed evidence that Patient A
vomited at approximately 2100 and 2330 hours. The Committee finds Particular
established to its reasonable satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(b) of the Complaint. As noted above with respect to
Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made
at approximately 1045
hours on 20 October 2013. The Committee notes there is
undisputed evidence that the NG feed to Patient A was ceased for over two
from about 2330 hours on 19 October 2013.The Committee finds Particular 1(b)
established to its reasonable satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(c) of the Complaint. As noted above with respect to
Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made
at approximately 1045
hours on 20 October 2013. Whilst initially RN
Selby’s position was that Patient A had tolerated reduced feeds and had
a good amount of urine (paragraph 49 – S1) after detailed
questioning regarding fluid balance of Patient A she agreed that
Patient A had
inadequate fluid intake, that he had failed to tolerate feeds and had had low
urine output. The Committee finds Particular
1(c) established to its reasonable
satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(d) of the Complaint. As noted above with respect to
Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made
at approximately 1045
hours on 20 October 2013 (and then it was Patient
A’s paternal grandmother that alerted Dr Greenacre). RN Selby was
that these results were concerning. RN Selby emphasised that
she was expecting
Dr Greenacre to attend the Ward early and she had intended to bring the
urinalysis results to his attention when
he assessed Patient A (paragraph 53
– S1). The Committee finds Particular 1(d) established to its reasonable
satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(e) of the Complaint. As noted above with respect to
Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made
at approximately 1045
hours on 20 October 2013. RN Selby stated that in her
experience if a child continued to vomit after NG feeding then Dr Greenacre
would commence IV therapy for hydration. The Committee finds Particular 1(e)
established to its reasonable satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(f) of the Complaint. As noted above with respect to
Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the evidence
that indicates RN Selby made
at approximately 1045
hours on 20 October 2013. RN Selby’s evidence was
that she considered she was following the Gastroenteritis PD by offering
amounts of fluid to attempt oral rehydration whilst awaiting Dr
Greenacre’s decision as to how to manage Patient A’s
hydration. The
Committee finds Particular 1(f) established to its reasonable
satisfaction.
Selby admits Particular 1(g) of the Complaint as far as it relates to Patient A
vomiting. RN Selby denies that Patient A aspirated
at any time whilst he was in
her care. As noted above with respect to Particular 1(a), there is nothing in
the evidence that indicates
RN Selby made contact with Dr Greenacre until he
attended the Hospital and assessed Patient A at approximately 1045 hours on 20
2013. RN Selby gave evidence that whilst the vomit was clear it was
stained with bile at 0945 hours. The Committee finds Particular
1(g) established
to its reasonable satisfaction as far as it relates to
Selby admits Particular 1(h) of the Complaint with respect to her observations
that Patient A was pale and lethargic but denies
seeing him unable to hold his
head up. As noted above with respect to Particular 1(a), there is nothing in the
evidence that indicates
RN Selby made contact with Dr Greenacre until he
attended the Hospital and assessed Patient A at approximately 1045 hours on 20
2013. RN Selby gave evidence that she had observed that Patient A could
hold his head up and at the commencement of his shift he
was settled although
‘slightly fidgety’. She understood from the handover that Patient A
was stable, had passed urine
and she considered that his presentation was as
expected for a child with gastroenteritis. RN Selby’s evidence
acknowledges
that Patient A had become more lethargic and continued to look pale
by the time he was assessed by Dr Greenacre. The Committee finds
Particular 1(h)
established to its reasonable satisfaction.
respect to Particular 2 the Committee notes RN Selby’s evidence that she
had discussed Patient A’s hydration with
RN Lameks who had agreed with her
‘interim assessment to leave the NG tube out and continue to offer
oral fluids in accordance with the Gastroenteritis PD until
Dr Greenacre arrived
in the Unit’
. RN Selby also gave evidence that RN Lameks had informed
her that she had spoken to Dr Greenacre during the evening shift on 19 October
2013 and Dr Greenacre had said he would be in early on Sunday morning to see his
patients (paragraph 44 – S1). The Committee
notes RN Lameks’
evidence that she had not spoken to Dr Greenacre about his arrival time and did
not know when he would arrive
on 20 October 2013 (T382).
RN Lameks gave evidence to the Committee she could not recall all of the details
of the discussion wherein a trial of oral fluids
was discussed. She was however
able to confirm that she had not reviewed Patient A’s notes prior to this
conversation. When
asked to make assumptions regarding a patient with vomiting
consistent with Patient A’s clinical presentation RN Lameks expressed
view that it would not appropriate to commence oral feeds at 0830 and that the
child should have been reviewed by the doctor
(T388-389).
Selby denied Particular 2(a) of the Complaint. RN Shelby’s evidence was
that she did not consider that the two vomits at
0730 and 0800 hours indicated a
failure of oral rehydration so it was appropriate to offer a small amount of
fluid via a bottle at
0830 hours. The clinical notes reveal that Patient A had
failed oral fluids on 19 October 2013. Further, the notes revealed he failed
fluids at 2330 hours. The NSW Health PD confirms the position that offering oral
fluids at this time was not appropriate. The
Committee is satisfied to the
requisite standard that Particular 2 (a) is established.
Selby made admission of Particular 2 (b) at the commencement of the hearing, her
initial denial having originally been based on
reliance on the usual practice of
Dr Greenacre where a NG tube is dislodged and not automatically replaced –
rather a there
would be a trial of oral fluids. The Committee is of the view
that there is nothing in the evidence to indicate that Dr Greenacre
had approved
a trial of oral feeds at any time on 20 October 2013. The Committee is
satisfied to the requisite standard that Particular
established.
Selby made admission of Particular 2 (c) at the commencement of the hearing, her
denial having originally been based on reliance
on her clinical judgment that
the two small vomits at 0730 hours and 0800 hours did not constitute a failure
of oral rehydration
therapy; an occasional vomit not resulting in a conclusion
that there had been a failure of trial of fluids in accordance with the
Gastroenteritis PD. She also placed reliance on the usual practice of Dr
Greenacre. The Committee is of the view that there is nothing
in the evidence to
indicate that Dr Greenacre had any knowledge of the fluid status of Patient A
since the time he had reviewed him
early on the evening of 19 October 2013
– some 12 or more hours previously. The Committee notes RN Selby accepts
that Patient
A was in a negative fluid balance position at this time. The
Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that Particular 2 (c)
established.
Selby made admission of Particular 2 (d) of the Complaint at the commencement of
the hearing, her denial having originally been
based on reliance on her clinical
judgment that the two small vomits at 0730 hours and 0800 hours not constituting
a failure of oral
rehydration therapy; an occasional vomit not resulting, in her
submission, in a conclusion that there had been a failure of a trial
in accordance with the Gastroenteritis PD. RN Shelby also considered the fact
that Patient A had not vomited for about
eight hours during the night as
relevant. The evidence before the Committee does not support the position that
Patient A had tolerated
NG feeds. He had vomited at around 2330 hours and then
had the feed turned off for over two hours. It was then recommenced at a reduced
rate, never reaching the full delivery rate before the tube was removed. Not
long after it was removed (whether that be around 0530
hours as per the
recollection of Patient A’s mother or sometime around 0700 hours on RN
Phillips’ account) Patient A
vomits on two occasions. This does not
present a clinical picture of NG feeding being tolerated. The Committee notes
the evidence
of RN Selby that the course of action she followed was the practice
in the Ward at the time and that this practice had now changed
(T 431). The
Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that Particular 2(d) is
established.
respect to Particular 2(e) of the Complaint RN Selby also changed her position
from an initial denial to acceptance of it being
inappropriate to have commenced
an oral feed when Patient A had vomited several times from 2100 hours to 0830
hours. The Committee
notes RN Selby’s denial that Patient A aspirated at
any time. The Committee is of the view that the evidence supports RN
admission of this Particular. The Committee is satisfied to the
requisite standard that this Particular (in relation to Patient
A having vomited
but not aspirated) is established.
respect to Particulars 3 (a) – (e) & (h) of the Complaint RN Selby
also changed her position from an initial denial
to acceptance that she failed
to adequately recognise and assess Patient A’s hydration status in the
circumstances detailed
in those Particulars (several vomits, not informing
herself of heart rate, not undertaking BSL or BP until 2030/1100 hours, feeds
having been suspended and recommenced at a lower rate overnight, no urine output
for a 24 hour period and continuing to not tolerate
fluids). The Committee is of
the view that the evidence supports RN Selby’s admission of this
Particular. The Committee notes
RN Selby’s evidence that it was not the
usual practice in the Ward to use calculation to keep track of hydration (T430).
the evidence of RN Selby does not give the Committee any indication
that she had any methodical approach to considering hydration
patients. In her evidence before the Committee she recognised that from 1900
hours until the time of her shift Patient
A had not received sufficient fluid
(T458). The Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that these
Particulars are established.
Selby denies Particular 3(f), RN Selby noted that at handover (and recorded on
the Fluid Balance Chart) she was informed that Patient
A had passed a good
amount of urine at 0630 hours. RN Selby gave evidence that it was not the usual
practice in the Ward for patients
to continually wear urine bags. Rather, the
practice was to record when a patient voided (Paragraph 97 – S1). In the
circumstances
of this patient, keeping a close watch on fluid balance was
critical. If a urine bag was not in place then another method of ascertaining
urine output, such as weighing nappies, should have been utilised. RN
Selby’s actions of not ensuring a urine bag was in situ
(or adopting
another method to accurately measure urine output) is part of her failure to
adequately assess Patient A’s hydration
status during her shift. The
Committee finds this Particular established.
Selby denies Particular 3(g), RN Selby relies upon her experience of working
with Dr Greenacre and her expectation that he would
order IV fluids to be
commenced. In her statement she also relied upon the fact that RN Lameks had
agreed to the care plan she had
formulated of leaving the NG tube out and
trialling oral fluids via a bottle (paragraph 99 – S1). As noted
elsewhere, RN Lameks
was not aware that RN Selby had not read Patient A’s
clinical notes at the time she was consulted regarding not reinserting
tube. By not reinserting the NG tube RN Selby was not following the care plan
and failed to adequately recognise and assess
Patient A’s hydration
status. The Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that Particular
3(g) is established.
respect to Particular 4(a), RN Selby admitted that she did not provide all of
information to the Ambulance Call Centre as described
in the NSW Health Clinical
Handover – Standard Key Principles PD (paragraph 106 – S1). RN Selby
also gave evidence that
she now regrets not providing more information to the
Ambulance Call Centre and to the attending Paramedics at handover. As to
4(a) RN Selby gave evidence that she provided certain information to
the Ambulance call centre. This information did not include
the hydration status
of Patient A, her observations of his condition or details of his vital signs.
Having the benefit of the transcript
of the telephone calls to the Ambulance
Call Centre and statements from the Ambulance Officers the Committee is
satisfied to the
requisite standard that the conduct alleged in Particular 4 (a)
is established.
Selby admits that she agreed to an almost two hour delay in the Ambulance
arriving at the Hospital but not that her actions were
contrary to Dr Greenacres
orders (Particular 4(b)). The evidence before the Committee records that RN
Selby was aware that Dr Greenacre
had attempted to arrange a NETS transfer for
Patient A. She had informed the Ambulance Call Centre that it was an urgent
Further, she was not present for the entire review of Patient A by Dr
Greenacre nor had she read the clinical notes prior to agreeing
to the delay in
the arrival of the ambulance.
Committee is of the view that the chronology provided by the HCCC accurately
reflects the evidence. The Committee finds that RN
Selby’s evidence as to
what she knew of Dr Greenacre’s orders with respect to the transfer was
not consistent. While
she appreciated it was a priority for Patient A to be
transferred for specialist care (paragraph 114 – S1) she gave evidence
that the transfer had to be delayed for the IV to be sited, for paper work to be
prepared, bloods to be taken, a bolus of normal
saline and antibiotics to be run
as well as imaging to take place. At no time did she consult the notes or Dr
Greenacre regarding
whether it was appropriate to delay the transfer. The
Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that the conduct alleged in
Particular 4 (b) is established.
Committee notes RN Selby’s evidence that she formed the view that Dr
Greenacre had wanted to delay the transfer of Patient
A until after the imaging
had been completed. She had overheard Dr Greenacre talking to the sonographer on
the phone (it being a
Sunday and therefore there was a need to call the
sonographer in to the Hospital). For the reasons detailed above regarding
4 (b) the Committee is of the view that the evidence supports a
finding that Particular 4(c) is established.
for Particular 5, the Committee notes RN Selby admits she did not inform Dr
Greenacre about Patient A’s observations at 1400
hours. The Committee
notes that the ‘Between the Flags’ policy and the NSW Health
“Recognition and Management of Patients Who Are Clinically
Deteriorating’
required that the upwardly trending heart rate, on the
border of the Blue and Yellow Zones and the Yellow Zone for urine output
action on the part of RN Selby (HCCC exhibit 63 – page 13). In
her statement (at paragraph 114) RN Selby noted she relied on:
The fact that Dr
Greenacre had reviewed Patient A between 1100 and 1200 hours and was aware that
Patient A’s heart rate was
on the border of the Blue and Yellow zone and
that Patient A had low urine output
Dr Greenacre and
the NETS team doctor had assessed Patient A as being hemodynamically stable
Dr Greenacre had
ordered treatment accordingly and there were no additional orders re treatment
for the raised heart rate or the low
urine output
She understood
that the ‘priority’ was for Patient A to be transferred to SCH for
specialist treatment
‘paramedics’ had taken over monitoring at 1430 hours and Patient
A’s HR was measured to be within the normal
explanations are of particular concern to the Committee as they indicate a
failure to process the information (an essential
step in the Clinical Reasoning
Cycle) provided by these observations and a lack of understanding of the purpose
if the IV therapy
prescribed by Dr Greenacre.
Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that the conduct alleged in
Particular 5 is established.
respect to Particular 6, RN Selby stated that as at October 2013 it was not
protocol or usual practice for the treating doctor
to be present at the handover
to the Ambulance Service unless they had made such a request (paragraph 116). RN
Selby was satisfied
that all of the tests and medications ordered by Dr
Greenacre had been undertaken/administered prior to handover.
Committee accepts the HCCC’s submission that a RN does not need a protocol
or a request from a doctor to be present at handover
in circumstances where a
clinical need arose. The HCCC further submitted that the clinical need arose by
deteriorating clinical picture (see Particular 5)
the fact that
Patient A had not been monitored whilst undergoing imaging
the fact that Dr
Greenacre had not seen Patient A for over two hours
the fact that
over three and a half hours had elapsed from the time Dr Greenacre had informed
RN Selby that there should be an urgent
the fact she had
observed black specs in the aspirate from Patient A’s NG tube
the ambulance
officers would not be able to manage the IV infusion as per Dr Greenacre’s
orders and that they were concerned
she had not
ascertained whether the ambulance officers were experienced and skilled in
paediatric resuscitation and airway management
(in accordance with NSW Health
‘Children and Adolescents – Inter-Facility Transfers’
Committee accepts the HCCC’s submissions that the clinical circumstances
of this matter required RN Selby to ensure that
Dr Greenacre was informed that
Patient A was departing the Hospital. The Committee is of the view that for all
of the clinical reasons
above RN Selby should have ensured that these matters
were brought to Dr Greenacre’s attention in the circumstances where it
appeared to her that he had not reviewed Patient A nor aware of these issues.
Committee is satisfied to the requisite standard that the conduct alleged in
Particular 6 is established.
RN Selby - Findings on the Complaint
respect to Particular 1 the evidence of RN Selby does not give the Committee any
comfort that she had an appreciation of the
poor fluid balance position of
Patient A nor the information that needed to be conveyed to Dr Greenacre to
prompt the necessary review
of Patient A let alone the urgency surrounding this
communication. RN Selby also decided to ignore or place little importance on
fluid balance data from the ED, justifying this by stating that they don’t
look at the retrospective clinical data or in
RN Selby’s words they
‘backwards’
(T 457.24).
Committee accepts the submission of the HCCC that a ‘busy shift’ is
no excuse for failing to contact Dr Greenacre.
In the Ward at the relevant time
there was an ‘In-charge’ RN. There was also an ADON with
responsibility for the whole
of the Hospital available.
the view of the Committee the conduct established in Particular 1 amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of s139B of the National
Law in that RN Selby’s conduct demonstrated the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed as well as
care exercised in the practice of nursing was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience.
Committee has found that the commencement of oral feeds at 0830 hours was
inappropriate in all the circumstances detailed in the
sub-particulars of
Particular 2 of the Complaint. It did not accord with the NSW Health
Gastroenteritis PD and it had the potential
to cause further dehydration of
the view of the Committee the conduct established in Particular 2 amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of s139B of the National
Law in that RN Selby’s conduct demonstrated the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed as well as
care exercised in the practice of nursing was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience.
Committee has found that RN Selby failed to adequately recognise and assess
Patient A’s hydration status during her shift.
The Committee notes that
the BSL and BP measurements were not initiated by RN Selby, rather they were
ordered by Dr Greenacre once
he arrived in the Ward. The Committee also notes
that with respect to Particular 3(b) RN Selby gave evidence (see paragraph 59 of
her statement – S1) that she was not informed that Patient A’s heart
rate was elevated at 0730 hours, however when she
looked at his observations on
later occasions they were within the normal range. RN Lameks gave evidence that
she would expect RN
Selby to have inspected the charts of Patient A prior to
commencing her shift and to have made an assessment of Patient A’s
hydration level. In her view the chart should have been reviewed every one to
two hours, increasing to hourly after the vomiting
occurred (T381-382. The
Committee accepts the submission made by the HCCC that the conduct of RN Selby
demonstrates poor situational
awareness and a lack of understanding of the
potential consequences of dehydration (paragraphs 108 – 110 HCCC
Submissions).
The Committee is of the view that failure to have been advised by
the EN about the elevated heart rate is not an acceptable explanation
There is an obligation on a RN to be aware of the condition of their patients
with reference to the clinical notes. At
this point the Committee is not of the
view that the obligation on RNs to be aware of the observations of their
patients relieves
an EN from the obligation of reporting to RNs on the
observations of patients.
the view of the Committee the conduct established in Particular 3 amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of s139B of the National
Law in that RN Selby’s conduct demonstrated the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed as well as
care exercised in the practice of nursing was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience.
Committee had found Particular 4 established. Even if Particular 4(c) was not
considered the Committee would still be comfortably
satisfied that this
Particular is established. It is of particular concern to the Committee that in
RN Selby’s evidence regarding
the conduct covered in this Particular she
commented on how busy she was preparing the paperwork required for the transfer
the demands of caring for
‘other unwell patients’
somehow explained her conduct. At no time did RN Selby give evidence that
she should have clarified the urgency of the transfer with
Dr Greenacre. The
answers given in cross-examination by RN Selby at around T 486 – 487 are
of particular concern to the Committee.
If the Ward was
as described by RN Selby then it was incumbent upon
her to seek additional assistance to ensure proper nursing care was provided.
Committee has found Particular 5 established. The failure to follow the
‘Between the Flags’ policy is a fundamental
failure to provide
nursing care. The Committee is of the view that RN Selby’s conduct
established in Particulars 4 and 5 cumulatively
amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct in that the conduct demonstrated the knowledge, skill and
judgment possessed as well
as care exercised in the practice of nursing was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience.
Committee has found Particular 6 established. It is of concern that RN
Selby’s substantive response to this Particular was
that she had attended
to all of the matters that had been ordered by Dr Greenacre. Once again this
brings serious questions regarding
RN Selby’s clinical reasoning ability.
The Committee is of the view that RN Selby’s conduct demonstrated the
skill and judgment possessed as well as care exercised in the
practice of nursing was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of
a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
RN Selby – considerations re Orders
set out above, the Committee has found the Complaint made out against RN Selby
and unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of s. 139B(1)(a) of
National Law
is established. Accordingly, it is appropriate to now
consider the consequential protective orders that should be
is well established that while the primary role of the Committee is protective,
the Committee also has a role in maintaining public
confidence in the profession
and maintaining the reputation of the profession:
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630.
Committee’s concerns regarding RN Selby’s failure to inform Dr
Greenacre of the matters set out in Particular 1 is
compounded by her extremely
limited response to the circumstances. Apart from providing a bottle of
Gastrolyte (which she knew had
not been tolerated by Patient A earlier) at about
0830 hours RN Selby took no other substantive steps to provide nursing care for
Patient A. She could have requested EN Wilton to take more regular observations,
she could have contacted Dr Greenacre to ensure
he was attending promptly, she
could have sought assistance with her own nursing load to provide her the
opportunity to undertake
further observations, she could have gained a better
picture of the condition of Patient A by speaking to his mother and other
that had arrived in the Ward during the morning, she could have
consider the clinical records more comprehensively and she could
have made a
blood pressure and/or a BSL reading for Patient A.
the oral feed at 0830 hours had the potential to compound the fluid deficit of
Patient A (Particular 2). The circumstances
of this decision are of considerable
concern to the Committee as RN Selby had not read the clinical notes and did not
alert her colleague
to this fact when she sought her confirmation of her
Committee notes that there were numerous clinical indicators that RN Selby
failed to adequately recognise as relevant to Patient
A’s hydration status
(Particular 3) or to process information to form a clinical picture (Particular
5). An inability to identify
relevant clinical information to provide to other
health care providers is evident from the findings regarding RN Selby’s
communication
with the Ambulance Service (Particular 4) and Dr Greenacre
(Particular 6).
observations made by RN Selby were inadequate. Even if she had further
information the Committee is not confident from her evidence
that she would have
dealt with it appropriately as she relied on the unwritten expectations of Dr
Greenacre, her usual practice and
an imprecise recollection of Policies. Her
conduct does not demonstrate the nuanced and intuitive practise based on astute
and detailed
observation, critic and analysis expected of a nurse with the
experience of RN Selby.
Committee has also taken into account the limited impact the period of
supervised practise undertaken by RN Selby at another hospital
in formulating
the appropriate protective orders. In order to remediate her practise RN Selby
will need to reflect to the point where
she develops satisfactory clinical
reasoning to enable her to work in a clinical environment.
Committee accepts the HCCC submission that the conduct established reflects RN
Selby’s poor situational awareness and ability
to contextualise a
patient’s care. This is of particular concern given RN Selby’s
evidence that felt that she was functioning
well that day (T522). The Committee
accepts the HCCC submission that poor practices are part of RN Selby’s
usual practice.
Committee also notes the HCCC submission that RN Selby’s admissions were
made very late in the proceedings and her level
of insight into her own role in
the care of Patient A is lacking. The Committee does not have confidence that
RN Selby could return
to a clinical role, whether paediatric or not, without
significant conditions in place to protect the health and safety of the public.
THE COMMITTEE ORDERS RE RN SELBY (Noting no Orders have
been made re RN Phillips at this time):
1. The Practitioner is hereby
reprimanded.
the event the Practitioner is employed as a registered nurse by a nursing
agency, she may only work for a health service facility
of the conditions on her practice;
to employ her on a contract of at least three (3) months duration;
to provide supervision as specified in the
conditions.
Practitioner is to undertake, at her own expense, the ‘Clinical Assessment
for Nurses, NSW Health’ course, or a similar
course approved by the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW, within six months of the decision of the
Professional Standards Committee
(NSW) and is:
provide written evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW within two
months of the Committee’s decision that she
has enrolled in the above
provide written evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW within two
months of completing the course of her satisfactory
completion of the
Practitioner must:
Immediately
inform all current nursing employers (including nurse managers at agency
placements) of the conditions on her registration
and provide the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales with each employer’s name and contact
all future nursing employers (including nurse managers at agency placements) of
the conditions on her registration, and provide
the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales with the name and contact details of each employer,
before commencing work/employment
as a registered
Practitioner must only be employed as a nurse in circumstances where the
employer has agreed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South
Wales of any breach of the conditions on her registration or unsafe practice,
and exchange information with
the Council related to compliance with the
conditions.
to returning to any nursing practice which involves the direct or indirect
clinical care of patients the Practitioner must provide
written evidence of
successful completion of a course(s), that has/have been approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of New
South Wales as being substantially equivalent to
‘Care of the Deteriorating Patient’
being offered by Critical Care Education Services. The nominated course should
be submitted for approval no later than
four months prior to the date on which
the Practitioner intends to commence working in a clinical role. The course(s)
must be taken
in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional Development
hours required by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia’s
Registration Standard.
to returning to any nursing practice which involves the direct or indirect
clinical care of patients the Practitioner must provide
written evidence of
successful completion of a course(s) approved by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales relevant
to the area of clinical nursing in which she
intends to work. The nominated course should be submitted for approval no later
four months prior to the date on which the Practitioner intends to commence
working in a clinical role. The course(s) must be in
addition to the 20 hours of
Continuing Professional Development hours required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia’s
Registration Standard. The course(s) must be of at
least two days duration, be at least partially delivered face to face, provide
comprehensive update on the intended area of clinical nursing and include at
least one written assessment.
the Practitioner returns to any clinical nursing role the Practitioner must
practise under the indirect or direct supervision of
a registered nurse
(Division 1) who does not have any conditions on her practice for a minimum
period of 12 months (full time equivalent).
The supervisor (‘shift
supervisor’) is to be designated by the approved supervising nurse
manager. The shift supervisor
and working in close proximity within a ward or unit with the practitioner;
to oversee and provide advice about the practitioner’s practice when
the Practitioner returns to any clinical nursing role she must commence being
supervised by a nurse manager (or equivalent) approved
by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales who has agreed to oversee supervision and
designate supervisors (‘shift
supervisors’). The Practitioner must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with the name, contact
details and résumé of the nominated
nurse manager within two weeks
of commencing work;
the nurse manager to:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales of any breach of the
conditions or unsafe practice; and
information with the Council related to compliance with the conditions; and
the Council with a copy of the conditions signed by the Practitioner and by the
nominated nurse manager indicating awareness
of the conditions and
authorisation.
the nurse manager to provide a written report about the Practitioner’s
performance against the competency standards
for a registered nurse (Division 1)
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia at three monthly
Practitioner must engage in a mentoring relationship within 14 days of returning
to a clinical nursing role. The mentoring relationship
must occur when the nurse
is practising in a clinical nursing role, for a minimum cumulative period of 12
months full time equivalent,
commencing from the date the mentor is approved by
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales. In accordance with the
published Mentoring Guidelines the mentor should not have
managerial responsibility or a formal assessor’s role with respect
Practitioner. The mentor must be:
registered nurse (division 1) who meets the criteria specified in the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of New South Wales Mentor Policy;
by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South
Practitioner must:
a copy of the Professional Standards Committee Reasons for Decision to the
proposed mentor; and
least three months prior to commencing a clinical nursing role provide the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with
the name, contact details
and résumé of the registered nurse who has agreed to: act as
mentor; and act as specified
in the conditions; and notify the Council of any
breach of the conditions including repeated failure to attend mentoring
and exchange information with the Council in relation to the
Practitioner’s compliance with the conditions; and
least three months prior to commencing a clinical nursing role provide to the
Council a copy of the conditions signed by the Practitioner
and by the mentor
indicating their awareness of the conditions and authorisation; and
within four weeks of the mentor being approved by the Council, a mentoring plan
that is developed in consultation with the
mentor which meets the standards
required by the Council’s mentoring policy; and
a mentoring report to the Council every three months for a period of at least 12
months, and until the Council advised the
Practitioner in writing. The mentoring
report is to be co-signed by the approved mentor and meet the standards required
by the Council’s
mentor policy; and
with her mentor must include:
Practitioner’s communication with parents and caregivers of infants if she
works with infants;
Practitioner’s communication with medical officers and other health
practitioners;
Practitioner’s communication with the nurse in charge of shift;
Practitioner’s record keeping in the hospital records;
Practitioner’s training and education;
Practitioner’s monitoring and supervision of enrolled nurses;
Practitioner’s communication during clinical handovers;
Practitioner’s monitoring and entries in the Fluid Balance Chart;
other issues the mentor or the Practitioner consider important concerning the
Practitioner’s performance as a registered
the Practitioner has returned to work in a clinical nursing role she must
the nurse in charge of any shift, ward or unit;
supervisory responsibilities for any other nurse;
as the sole practitioner on any shift, ward or unit.
to any application under s163A of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) (“the National Law”) for
a review of the
Practitioner’s conditions, the Practitioner must satisfactorily complete a
performance assessment by performance
assessor/s approved by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW. The performance assessment must not be undertaken
until the Practitioner
has worked in a clinical nursing role for a period of
three months full time equivalent. The Practitioner must satisfactorily complete
the performance assessment before she completes a period of 12 months full time
equivalent in a clinical nursing role. The Practitioner
is to meet the costs of
this assessment.
Practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with the
conditions unless otherwise specified.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of ss. 163-163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
where the practitioner’s principal place of practice is in
125 to 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
apply should the practitioner’s principal place of practice be anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so
that the appropriate review body in
those circumstances is the relevant National Board.
Date: 10 May 2016
__________________
Joanne Muller
Chairperson
for the Professional Standards Committee
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (628 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter