URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Borrow [2024] NSWPICMRP 6; (5 December 2024)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Borrow
NSWPICMRP 6
Leonie Borrow
Insurance Australia Limited trading as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
John Harris
Bianca Montgomery-Hribar
Anthony Scarcella
DATE OF DECISION:
5 December 2024
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act); review
of merit review decision; whether insurer entitled to refuse payment of
statutory benefits in accordance with part
Civil Liability Act
(CL Act) as applied by section 3.39 of the MAI Act; pure mental harm;
claimant’s husband riding motorbike when he lost control,
struck another
vehicle and collided with guard rail dying shortly thereafter; claimant seeking
statutory benefits against insurer
of husband’s vehicle; finding that
husband wholly at fault for the purposes of this dispute; concept of review;
doubtful or
no requirement of satisfaction of error;
Tan v National Australia
applied; statutory interpretation where section of MAI Act
specifically requires that it be read “subject to any necessary
modifications”;
court or tribunal should refrain from projecting policy
views into the interpretation process;
Australian Education Union v
Department of Education and Children’s Services
applied; insurer
submitted that section 30 of CL Act required the presence of tortious defendant;
no tortious defendant required
given no-fault statutory scheme;
referred to;
AAI Ltd (t/as GIO) v Evic
applied; section 3.39 applies to payment of statutory benefits; text
of legislation does not require tortious defendant; necessary
modifications to
section 30 of the CL Act requires that insurer is liable for statutory benefits
for pure mental harm in connection
with another person being killed or injured;
section 3.39 of the MAI Act subject to clause 8 of the MAI Regulations; clause 8
application of CL Act in relation to mental harm under section 3.39;
necessary intendment of clause 8(2) and (3) that the cessation
of benefits
applies because no fault benefits are payable in the first 52 weeks;
merit review decision confirmed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
review panel confirms the decision of the merit reviewer dated 3 September
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Christopher Borrow died in a motorcycle accident on 17 March 2024.
Borrow was riding his motorcycle travelling in a north-easterly direction on The
Lakes Way, Boolambayte, as part of a charity
It was raining heavily and Mr
Borrow commenced a tight left bend. The motorcycle lost traction, causing his
motorbike to drop onto
the road and slide across into the oncoming lane.
this time, Mr Kelly was travelling in a south-westerly direction on The Lakes
Way and approaching the same bend. Mr Kelly stated
that, about a third of the
way around the bend, he noticed a group of motorcyclists coming around the
corner in the opposite direction.
He saw the front wheel of Mr Borrow’s
motorcycle slip, then the motorcycle hit the roadway and slid into Mr
Kelly’s lane.
Mr Kelly heavily applied the brakes but could not prevent a
collision between the front left of his vehicle and Mr Borrow. Mr Borrow
slid off the roadway and collided with the Armco
Mr Borrow was pronounced
dead a short time later.
Borrow’s wife, Leonie Borrow, was unable to work for 12 weeks following
the accident. On 13 May 2024, Ms Borrow made a claim
on NRMA Insurance
(insurer), the third-party insurer of Mr Borrow’s motorcycle, seeking
financial assistance for the leave
she took during the period immediately
following the motor accident, and to cover any future leave that may be
Borrow alleges that her husband’s death caused her “significant
mental trauma and distress”, and that she is
“overwhelmed with
grief, sadness and a deep sense of
“His passing has left me struggling with anxiety,
insomnia, and difficulty concentrating. These challenges have made it impossible
for me to return to work.”
Borrow did not witness the motor accident.
Victoria Frostis, general practitioner, provided a certificate of capacity dated
21 May 2024 which certified that Ms Borrow had
no capacity for any work from 18
March 2024 to 31 May 2024 and diagnosed “bereavement post
husband passing away in MVA”.
The treatment listed was “grief counsellor via SIRA /
Borrow further alleged that she suffered subsequent distress due to
administrative issues on the part of the insurer, including
as a result of the
insurer sending a copy of the police report to her deceased husband’s
email address.
Prior to this
administrative error, Ms Borrow was unaware that a second vehicle was
involved in the motor accident.
medical evidence provided by Ms Borrow in respect of her alleged psychological
injuries is the certificate of capacity dated 21
May 2024, described above at
paragraph 7.
dispute has arisen between Ms Borrow and the insurer as to whether she is
entitled to statutory benefits under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(NSW) (MAI Act).
issue before the review panel is whether the insurer is entitled to refuse
payment of statutory benefits in accordance with
Liability Act 2002
(NSW) (CL Act) (as applied by section 3.39 of the MAI
Act). This is a merit review matter for the purposes of Part 7 of the MAI Act
and within the meaning of Schedule 2 clause 1(t).
legislation
benefits are payable pursuant to Division 3.3 of the MAI Act based on the earner
being “injured as a result of a motor
accident”. Various sections
provide time periods for the payment of statutory benefits and quantify the
minimum and maximum
statutory benefits
3.11 of the MAI Act provides for the cessation of weekly statutory benefits
after 52 weeks to injured persons where the motor
accident was “caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the person”.
3.24 of the MAI Act provides that an injured person is entitled to statutory
benefits for treatment and care expenses. The
right to payment under that
section is not dependent upon a finding of fault. Section 3.28, like s 3.11,
limits statutory benefits
to a period of 52 weeks if “the motor accident
was caused wholly or mostly at fault by the person”.
3.5 of the MAI Act specifies restrictions and limitations on the entitlement to
statutory benefits. These limitations include
where the at-fault driver was
where workers
compensation benefits are
or where the injured
person commits a serious driving
the limitations and restrictions of Division 3.5 is s 3.39 of the MAI Act, which
“Part 3 (Mental harm) of the
Liability Act 2002
applies to the payment of statutory benefits under
this Part in connection with an injury in the same way as it applies to the
of damages in connection with an injury, subject to any necessary
modifications and to any modifications prescribed by the regulations.”
provision specifies that it is “subject to any necessary modifications and
to any modifications prescribed by the regulations”.
(Mental harm) of the CL Act consists of sections 27 to 33. Section 30 regards
“Limitation on recovery for pure mental harm
arising from shock”.
30 of the CL Act relevantly provides:
(1) This section applies
to the liability of a person (
the defendant
) for pure mental harm
to a person (
the plaintiff
) arising wholly or partly from mental
or nervous shock in connection with another person (
being killed, injured or put in peril by the act or omission of the
(2) The plaintiff is not entitled to recover damages for pure mental
harm unless—
(a) the plaintiff witnessed, at the scene, the victim being
killed, injured or put in peril, or
(b) the plaintiff is a close member of the family of the
(3) Any damages to be awarded to the plaintiff for pure mental harm are
to be reduced in the same proportion as any reduction in
the damages that may be
recovered from the defendant by or through the victim on the basis of the
contributory negligence of the
(4) No damages are to be awarded to the plaintiff for pure mental harm if the
recovery of damages from the defendant by or through
the victim in respect of
the act or omission would be prevented by any provision of this Act or any other
written or unwritten law.
family member is defined in subsection 30(5) and includes the spouse or partner
of the victim.
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
(NSW) (Regulations) is
expressed to modify Part 3 of the CL Act to the payment of statutory benefits.
This provision falls within
the meaning of “any modifications prescribed
by the regulations” in s 3.39 of the MAI Act and provides:
The application of Part 3 (Mental harm) of the
Civil Liability Act
to the payment of statutory benefits under
of the Act in
connection with an injury is subject to the modification set out in
this clause.
(2) The requirement in
Liability Act 2002
(to reduce damages awarded to the plaintiff for pure
mental harm in the same proportion as any reduction in the damages that may be
recovered from the defendant by or through the victim on the basis of the
contributory negligence of the victim) is to be read as
a requirement to apply
the at-fault statutory benefits limitations to the payment of
statutory benefits to the claimant in the same
way as they apply to the payment
of statutory benefits to the victim.
at-fault statutory benefits limitations
provisions of
of the Act that provide for the reduction of, or cessation
of entitlement to, weekly payments of statutory benefits to injured persons
wholly or mostly at fault in the motor accident from which the injury
(4) Words and expressions used in subclause (2) have the same meaning as they
Civil Liability Act 2002
[emphasis in original]
Procedural history and conduct of the review
13 May 2024, Ms Borrow lodged an application for personal injury benefits with
the insurer. On 24 May 2024, the insurer issued
a liability notice declining her
application on the following basis:
“For your claim to have
satisfied the requirement of point 1 [of
Civil Liability Act
], there must be 3 distinct parties to the incident, being the Defendant
(Insured Driver), the Plaintiff (Claimant) and the Victim
(Third Party). In this
case the Insured driver is both the Defendant and the Victim given there was
only one occupant in the vehicle
and Late Christopher Borrow was held to be the
responsible party at fault.
The wording of
section 30(1)
Civil Liability Act 2002
(NSW) (Civil
Liability Act) which limits the scope of such claims as follows:
‘This section applies to the liability of a person (the defendant) for
pure mental harm to a person (the plaintiff) arising
wholly or partly from
mental or nervous shock in connection with another person (the victim) being
killed, injured or put in peril
by the act or omission of the
defendant.’
However, the NSW Police considered that the insured driver was at fault for
the subject accident, and he was subsequently held to
be the responsible
In accordance with section 30 of the Civil liability Act 2002 (NSW) the fault
aspect in terms of liability flows through to the person
claiming and hence
since the Insured driver is at fault this aspect of the fault will apply to your
Therefore, we regret to inform you that your claim for statutory benefit is
6 June 2024, Ms Borrow sought internal review of the insurer’s decision.
On 21 June 2024, the insurer informed Ms Borrow
that it had completed
a review of the decision dated 24 May 2024 and decided that the original
decision should be affirmed. The internal
review found that the insurer was
entitled to refuse payment of statutory benefits in accordance with Part 3 of
the CL Act, as applied
by section 3.39 of the MAI Act. Relevantly, the insurer
“Applying the Act and Regulations, as your late husband
was the at fault party in the subject MVA, you are not entitled to statutory
benefits for the first 52 weeks from the date of the subject
29 July 2024, Ms Borrow referred the dispute to the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) for merit review in accordance with
Division 7.4 of the MAI
On 3 September 2024,
the Commission set aside the insurer’s decision of 24 May 2024 to deny Ms
Borrow statutory benefits and,
in substitution for that decision, held that the
insurer is not entitled to refuse payment of statutory benefits to Ms
insurer has sought a review of the Merit Reviewer’s decision pursuant to
section 7.15 of the MAI Act.
review panel met and is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied
to it in connection with the proceedings so that
the review panel may determine
the matter on the papers without holding a conference or formal
Reviewer’s reasons
Reviewer Cassidy issued a certificate and reasons dated 3 September 2024.
was made by the Merit Reviewer to the scheme of statutory benefits under
Division 3.3 of the MAI Act. It was noted “
[h]ow the CL Act mental harm
provisions are to be applied to the statutory benefits scheme is the real issue
in the current
proceedings
involved an examination by Merit Reviewer Cassidy of whether the relevant
sections of the CL Act required modification and,
if so, what “necessary
modifications” were
Reviewer Cassidy set out various “necessary modifications” to the CL
Act provisions when importing them into Part
3 of the MAI Act, and concluded:
“[83] Section 3.39 of the MAI Act imports the provisions of
the mental harm provisions of the CL Act subject to any necessary
modifications
and any modification prescribed by the Regulation.
[84] Section 30(1) of the CL Act needs to be modified to adjust the
terminology used and to allow persons with pure mental harm to
recover statutory
benefits in circumstances where there was no fault on the part of the owner or
driver of a motor vehicle or even
if the motor accident was caused by the fault
of the primary victim of the accident.
[85] Section 30(1) should therefore be modified to read as follows:
"This section applies to the liability of the relevant insurer to pay
statutory benefits for pure mental harm to the claimant arising
wholly or partly
from mental or nervous shock in connection with a victim being killed, injured
or put in peril in a motor accident.”
[86] There is no dispute in this matter that the claimant, as Chris
Borrow’s wife, is a close member of the family of the victim
proposed modified version of s 30(2). The insurer has not raised an
argument to suggest s 30(4) applies and NRMA has not
disputed that the claimant
has sustained a psychological or psychiatric illness as a result of the
[87] It follows therefore that the insurer is not entitled to refuse payment
of statutory benefits to Mrs Borrow.”
SUBMISSIONS
review panel has considered the Insurer’s submissions in support of the
review application dated 27 September 2024 (review
submissions) and the
insurer’s merit review reply submissions dated 15 August 2024 (reply
submissions). Certain submissions
in the reply submissions are adopted in the
review submissions.
Borrow made no submissions although support for her position is found in the
reasons of the Merit Reviewer.
Insurer’s reply
submissions
insurer referred to the distinction between “primary” or
“immediate” victims and “secondary”
victims, focusing on
the different duty of care owed to a primary victim and a secondary
The insurer submitted
that s 30 of the CL Act “codifies the common law in respect of secondary
victim claims”
submitted that the claimant was not an “immediate or primary victim”
and was only entitled to compensation if she
satisfied the requirements in
s 30 of the CL Act.
insurer cited various common law authorities concerning “primary” or
“immediate” victims and claims for
damages involving psychiatric
The insurer submitted
that Ms Borrow does not satisfy the definition of an immediate or primary
victim as there was no immediate
physical proximity between her and the motor
respect of whether the claimant was a “secondary” victim, the
insurer submitted there was a requirement that psychiatric
injury was caused by
direct perception of harm “as a result of the tortious action of
another” citing
Claimant does not satisfy the definition of a secondary victim. What is missing
is the presence of an established pre-existing
duty between the tortfeasor and
the primary victim, which gives rise to a discrete duty owed to the secondary
victim. As was made
, the common law does not recognise a
general duty on the part of the driver of a motor vehicle not to cause
psychiatric injury to
a close relative as a result of injury to himself or
these reasons, the insurer submitted that Ms Borrow does not satisfy the
requirements of s 30 of the CL Act and would have no
entitlement to damages
under Part 3 of the CL Act. Accordingly, pursuant to s 3.39 of the MAI Act, Ms
Borrow had no entitlement to
statutory benefits under Part 3 of the MAI
insurer referred to clause 8 of the
Regulations and submitted that
“clause 8 [Regulations] has no relevance in the context of the current
review submissions
insurer’s review submissions focused on principles of statutory
interpretation and alleged error in the merit review
The insurer submitted
that the Merit Reviewer re-wrote the provisions which cannot be justified as a
necessary modification. It submitted:
“No matter what it
might be thought the context of the legislation discloses, the interpretation
process must begin and end
with the text of the legislation. A court or tribunal
cannot legislate”.
insurer submitted that, in the current circumstances, where an Act contains a
provision requiring it to be read and construed
with provisions of another, the
effect is to require the relevant parts of the CL Act notionally to be written
into the MAI Act,
with each of the provisions of the two Acts to be construed as
if they were included in the one
insurer also submitted that cl 8(4) of the Regulations provides that the words
in subclause (2) have the same meaning as s 30
That submission was not
this submission deviates from the insurer’s reply submissions, where it
was said that cl 8 of the Regulations has no
relevance to the current
Further, the
insurer’s review submissions stated:
“It is noteworthy
that Clause 8 MAIR, which is the extent of the modification to Part 3 CLA
prescribed by the regulations, includes
the following provisions:”.
Subclauses (2) to (4) of Clause 8 of the Regulations were referenced, with
emphasis placed on subclause
was noted that, as a general principle, courts are not at liberty to consider
any word or sentence as superfluous or insignificant,
and all words must, prima
facie be given some meaning and
The court or tribunal is
required ‘to construe an Act, not to rewrite it, in the light of its
The insurer
submitted that the reference in s 3.39 of the MAI Act to “necessary
modifications” is no more than a recognition
that there can be
circumstances of “clear necessity” where it is appropriate to make
modifications to the legislation
as part of the interpretation
insurer referred to “cutting and pasting with editing that is
‘necessary’” and to the adoption of s 30(1)
of the CL Act
“subject to modification” in the reasons of the Merit Reviewer,
which was submitted to highlight the Merit
Reviewer’s erroneous approach
to statutory interpretation.
was submitted that the Merit Reviewer erred in assuming the incorporating Act
should be given pre-eminence and failed to give proper
weight to the context and
purpose of the provisions being incorporated. Section 3.39 of the MAI Act was
said to require the relevant
parts of the incorporated Act (Part 3 of the CL
Act) notionally to be written into the incorporating Act (Part 3 of the MAI
Further, it was submitted
that the effect of Part 3 of the CL Act is clear and is a codification of the
law in respect of secondary
“[T]he incorporation of section 30(1) CLA, with its
well-known meaning, into Part 3 MAIA must be
insurer submitted that the process adopted by the Merit Reviewer of reading
words into a provision was otherwise inconsistent
with the decision of the High
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No
Reviewer’s substantial re-writing of provisions as part of the statutory
construction process, particularly s 30(1)
of the MAI Act, was submitted to
create a category of claimant previously not recognised by
It submitted that this
cannot be justified on the basis that it was a ‘necessary
modification’ or one necessary to effectuate
the purpose of the relevant
provisions within the meaning of s 3.39 of the MAI
Factual findings
dispute before the review panel, crystallised by the insurer’s
submissions, focuses on the interpretation of s 3.39 of the
MAI Act and whether,
by its operation, the insurer is entitled to refuse payment of statutory
benefits to Ms Borrow in accordance
with Part 3 of the CL Act with focus on s 30
of the CL Act.
Ms Borrow is entitled to statutory benefits requires satisfaction of other
requirements contained in the MAI Act. Any associated
findings are unnecessary
because they are beyond the scope of the dispute before the review panel.
for the purposes of these proceedings, the evidence establishes, and we find
that Ms Borrow has brought a claim for statutory
benefits against the insurer of
her husband’s vehicle. Mr Borrow lost control of his vehicle on a bend in
wet conditions, suggesting
that he failed to drive at a safe speed in the
circumstances.
is no basis on the evidence before us to find any fault on the driver of the
vehicle heading in the opposite direction. Mr Kelly
was driving in his own lane
with no suggestion of excessive speed and minimal time to react to the collision
when Mr Borrow slid
across the path of his vehicle.
is otherwise unclear how Mr Borrow sustained the injuries which caused the loss
of his life, although on the witness evidence these
injuries were likely due, in
part, to his impact with the Armco railing.
is a referral of a merit review decision to a review panel pursuant to s 7.15 of
the MAI Act. The review panel is to conduct
a “review” of a
single merit review decision (s 7.15(1)) and may confirm or set aside and
make a decision in substitution
of the single merit review decision (s
Tan v National Australia Bank
Basten JA noted a
series of decisions of the NSW Court of Appeal which held that it was
“doubtful” or “no requirement”
to find error before
revoking a decision.
also noted the observations of the plurality of the High Court in
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
“But what emerges from the judicial decisions and, for
that matter, from statutes is that ‘review’ has no settled
pre-determined meaning; it takes its meaning from the context in which it
contextually, the review panel is conducting a “review” (s 7.15(1)).
The application for a referral of a decision
to a review panel may only be on
the grounds that the decision was “incorrect in a material respect”
(s 7.15(2)). The
President is to refer the application to a review panel if
satisfied “there is reasonable cause to suspect that the decision
determining the review was incorrect in a material respect”.
powers of the review panel to confirm or vary the decision are contained in s
7.15(4) of the MAI Act.
legislation imposes a low bar test for enabling a review to proceed to a merit
review panel in that the President must be satisfied
that there is
“reasonable cause to suspect” that the original decision was
“incorrect in a material respect”.
is no statutory requirement that the review panel is required to be satisfied of
error “in a material respect”.
initial decision being reviewed is of a merit reviewer (s 7.13) who is required
to provide a “brief statement to the certificate”
setting out the
reasons for determination. The requirement to provide a brief statement of
reasons supports the position that the
review panel would not look to the
reasons to determine error but resolve the review based on the material before
these circumstances, we are of the view that the authorities referenced in
have application to the definition of the review by a review panel
under s 7.15 of the MAI Act.
Principles of statutory
construction
the plurality stated in
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission
“question of construction is determined by reference to the text, context
and purpose of the Act” citing
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
Grain Growers Limited v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW),
Beazley P stated (with whom Bathurst CJ and Leeming JA agreed)
that “the starting point and end point is with the text of the
provision”, citing the comments of the High Court in
when the plurality stated:
“This Court has stated on many
occasions that the task of statutory construction must begin with a
consideration of the text
itself. Historical considerations and extrinsic
materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the text. The
which has actually been employed in the text of legislation is the
surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the text
may require
consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and policy of a
provision, in particular the mischief
it is seeking to remedy.” (footnotes
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection,
Nettle and Gordon JJ stated:
“The starting point for the
ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is the text of the statute
whilst, at the
same time, regard is had to its context and purpose. Context
should be regarded at this first stage and not at some later stage and
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to deny the importance of the
natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely
how it is ordinarily understood
in discourse, to the process of construction. Considerations of context and
purpose simply recognise
that, understood in its statutory, historical or other
context, some other meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if its
ordinary meaning is not consistent with the statutory purpose, that meaning must
be rejected.” (footnotes omitted)
insurer otherwise referenced other High Court decisions such as
Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
SAS Trustee
Corporation v Miles,
which is consistent with the above principles.
Preliminary
observations
make some preliminary observations prior to an analysis of the various
provisions.
the insurer referenced various authorities and correctly submitted that a court
or tribunal should refrain from projecting
their own policy views into the
interpretation process. We agree with this
submission.
We do not intend to
comment on necessary modifications to s 3.39 of the MAI Act unless this is
required to address the merit review
we do not read words into the provision in accordance with common law principles
of interpretation. The test for reading
words into a statutory provision is
articulated in
where the plurality of the High Court
question whether the court is justified in reading a statutory provision as if
it contained additional words or omitted
words involves a judgment of matters of
degree. That judgment is readily answered in favour of addition or omission in
the case of
simple, grammatical, drafting errors which if uncorrected would
defeat the object of the provision. It is answered against a construction
fills ‘gaps disclosed in legislation’ or makes an insertion
which is ‘too big, or too much at variance with
the language in fact used
by the legislature’.”
principles set out in
have been applied by the Court of Appeal in
two appeals concerning the construction of the
Workers Compensation Act
Work Injury Management & Workers Compensation Act,
State of NSW v
Chapman-Davis
Cram Fluid Power Pty Ltd v
relevant test from
would not be satisfied. However, it is
otherwise unnecessary to apply the test enunciated in
3.39 of the MAI Act provides that the provisions of Part 3 of the CL Act apply
to the payment of statutory benefits “subject
to any necessary
modifications and to modifications prescribed by the regulations”. We
later in our reasons.
Relevant statutory construction
general entitlement to statutory benefits is conferred by s 3.1 of the MAI Act
which provides:
(1) If the death of or injury to a person
results from a motor accident in this State, statutory benefits are payable in
of the death or injury as provided by this Part.
(2) Statutory benefits are payable (except as otherwise provided by
this Part)—
(a) whether or not the motor accident was caused by the fault of
the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of
the vehicle,
(b) even if the motor accident was caused by the fault of the
person to whom the statutory benefits are payable.
requirement for an entitlement to statutory benefits is dependent upon the
existence of an injury that “results from a motor
accident”. Injury
is defined in s 1.4 of the MAI Act to include “psychological or
psychiatric injury”.
accident is defined in s 1.4 of the MAI Act and involves the use or operation of
a motor vehicle causing death or injury. The
notion of fault is irrelevant to
whether there is a defined motor accident.
it is accepted that Ms Burrow suffered a psychological injury, that injury was
caused by the motor accident when her husband lost
his life and she was advised
of his death. Accordingly, Ms Burrow has a general entitlement to recover
statutory benefits for psychological
injury as defined in s 3.1 of the MAI
benefits are paid by the relevant
If a motor accident
involves more than one motor vehicle, the relevant insurer is defined as
“the insurer of the at-fault motor
motor accident involved two vehicles. Ms Borrow has proceeded against the
insurer of her husband’s motor vehicle, which,
on the facts of this case
discussed above, was the vehicle “which contributed most to causing the
death or injury for which
statutory benefits are
is no requirement in any of these provisions to show fault to recover statutory
benefits unless there is an issue as to which
vehicle is liable to make the
payments. That issue does not arise in this matter as Ms Borrow only proceeded
against the insurer
of her husband’s vehicle.
insurer’s submissions accept that Mr Borrow was wholly at fault for the
motor accident.
analysis of the legislation that the payment of statutory benefits under the MAI
Act is a no-fault scheme is consistent with the
observations of Mitchelmore J in
AAI Ltd (t/as GIO) v
Minister’s second reading speech on the introduction of the relevant Bill
which is referenced by her Honour. Her Honour
“Part 3 of the MAI Act, which deals
with statutory benefits, did not form part of the motor accident scheme in
earlier legislation;
and, significantly, the entitlement to statutory benefits
is not fault-based. In the second reading speech to the
Motor Accident Injuries
(NSW), the then Minister described
“[o]ne of the landmark changes” from the previous statutory regime,
which would see “all injured people receive
support soon after they lodge
a claim”. The Minister stated (New South Wales Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 9 March 2017 at
of the bill includes provisions for a statutory income,
medical and care benefits for up to six months for all injured people, without
any need for fault to be proven. At the moment, at-fault drivers can only claim
a maximum of $5,000 under the accident notification
form. This includes drivers,
for instance, who may have been injured due to a momentary lapse in
concentration or being blinded by
the sun. The Government believes denying those
people adequate support is not fair and only delays their recovery. NCTP [New
Wales compulsory third party] will extend coverage by providing a
six-month safety net for all at-fault drivers.
Income benefits will be paid for up to two years for injured people not
mostly at fault... If there is contributory negligence, such
as not wearing a
seatbelt or helmet in the case of a motorcyclist, payments for loss of earnings
or earning capacity are subject
to being reduced after six
subsequent amendment to the MAI Act extended the provision of statutory benefits
from 26 weeks to 52 weeks.
amendment applied to this motor accident.
AAI Ltd v Singh
expressed similar observations to those made in
. His Honour
“The effect of s 3.1 is that statutory benefits are
payable to a person who is injured in a motor accident notwithstanding that
was not caused by the fault of the owner or driver of any motor vehicle in the
use or operation of that vehicle and even if the
injury was caused by the fault
of the injured person himself or
various contextual provisions and Supreme Court authority establish that the
payment of statutory benefits for 52 weeks is based
on a no-fault system.
noted above, s 3.39 of the MAI Act limits the payment of statutory benefits
under Part 3 in relation to mental harm, providing:
(Mental harm) of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
applies to the payment of
statutory benefits under this Part in connection with an injury in the same way
as it applies to the award
of damages in connection with an injury, subject to
any necessary modifications and to any modifications prescribed by the
regulations.”
8 of the Regulations provides for the “Application of provisions of
Liability Act 2002
relating to mental harm (section 3.39)”. This clause
was referenced by the Merit Reviewer and the insurer. In our view, the
significance of cl 8(2) and (3) has not been appreciated.
8(2) of the Regulations provides that s 30(3) of the CL Act:
“[I]s to be read as a requirement to apply the at-fault
statutory benefits limitations to the payment of statutory benefits
claimant in the same way as they apply to the payment of statutory benefits to
the victim.”
at-fault statutory benefits limitations are defined in cl 8(3) of the
Regulations as “the provisions of Part 3 of the [MAI]
Act that provide for
the reduction of, or cessation of entitlement to, weekly payments of statutory
benefits to injured persons wholly
or mostly at fault in the motor accident from
which the injury resulted”. An injured person who is wholly at-fault
be entitled to statutory benefits beyond the 52-week period.
8 of the Regulations amends the application of Part 3 of the CL Act to provide
statutory benefits are payable in connection
with pure mental harm injuries
where the claimant is a close family member of the family of the deceased or
injured person. This
is because it is a necessary intendment of reading cl 8(2)
into s 30(3) of the CL Act that the reduction or cessation of statutory
after 52 weeks due to the “at-fault statutory benefits limitations”
means that the claimant is entitled to statutory
benefits on a no-fault basis in
the first 52 weeks. The entitlement to statutory benefits cannot cease if, as
the insurer submitted,
they were never available because there was no tortious
as the insurer submitted, s 30 of the CL Act imposes a requirement for a
tortious defendant, then there would be no need for cl
8(2) and (3) of the
Regulations in situations where the driver was “wholly at fault”.
This is because there would be
no need to state that the claimant’s
statutory benefits cease after 52 weeks where the deceased or injured person was
at-fault” as the right to recover in pure mental harm cases
would never arise.
insurer’s submissions focus on the distinction at common law between
primary or immediate victims and secondary victims
and note that the duty of
care owed by a road user to the secondary victim is separate to that owed to the
injured or deceased person,
. It was submitted that s 30 of
the CL Act “codifies the common law in respect of secondary victims”
and imposes restrictions
and limits on common law rights. These common law
rights, however, regard rights to claim damages and are separate and distinct
the rights provided by the MAI Act for statutory benefits.
Mr Borrow owed Ms Borrow a tortious duty of care is, on our view, irrelevant to
the issue before the review panel. The current
matter is not a claim for damages
but a claim for statutory benefits under a no-fault statutory scheme.
set out in our reasons above, it is well established that the starting point for
the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory
provision is the text of the
statute whilst, at the same time, regard is to be had to its context and
is clear from the text that s 3.39 of the MAI Act imports Part 3 of the CL Act
to the “payment of statutory benefits”,
subject to “any
necessary modifications and to any modifications prescribed by the
regulations”. Section 3.39 expressly
provides that it applies to payments
for statutory benefits, not payments for damages. Further, s 3.39 specifically
refers to the
CL Act applying to the “payment” of statutory
benefits, rather than applying to the restriction or denial of a person’s
entitlement to statutory benefits.
insurer’s submission introduces a fault-based test for the receipt of
statutory benefits in relation to a certain class
of claimants, requiring the
establishment and breach of a tortious duty of care. In our view, the text of
the legislation leaves
no room for this test to be imposed. This also aligns
with the context and purpose of Part 3 of the MAI Act, which establishes a
no-fault scheme for statutory benefits for persons injured in a motor vehicle
accident for a temporal period.
are “necessary modifications” to Part 3 of the CL Act when it is
imported into the MAI Act, in addition to those
specifically prescribed by cl 8
of the Regulations.
those modifications are minimal and limited to aligning the language of the CL
Act to the MAI Act. They involve minor amendments
to the language of s 30(1) to
read that the insurer is liable for the payment of statutory benefits for pure
mental harm in connection
with another person being killed or injured resulting
from the motor vehicle accident.
have also considered the wording of s 3.39 of the MAI Act in the context of the
legislation and recent Supreme Court authority.
To the extent that s 30 of the
CL Act is incorporated into the statutory benefits scheme, that section is
subject to cl 8 of the
Regulations. It is clear from the contextual reading of
the various provisions and the recent Supreme Court decisions that have
the no-fault statutory benefits scheme that the necessary intendment
of these provisions is that the statutory benefits scheme under
Part 3 of the
MAI Act apply to situations of pure mental harm.
reject the insurer’s submission that there is an error in assuming that
the incorporating Act (the MAI Act) should be given
pre-eminence over the CL
Act. Section 3.39 states that Part 3 of the CL Act applies “subject to any
necessary modifications
and any modifications prescribed by the
regulations”. The meaning of “necessary modifications” must
relate to the
application of the no-fault provisions in the MAI Act.
Accordingly, Part 3 of the CL Act applies “subject” to the necessary
modifications required by the no-fault provisions of the MAI Act.
insurer has conceded that Ms Borrow satisfies the definition of “close
member of the family of a victim”, for the
purposes of s 30(2) of the CL
is for these reasons that we reject the insurer’s submissions that Ms
Borrow has no entitlement to statutory benefits under
Part 3 of the MAI
completeness, we will briefly consider purpose. The insurer referred to
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) and the observations in
where Dawson
J explained the effect of the similar provision under the Victorian legislation
“The approach required by
ambiguity or inconsistency; it allows a court to consider the purposes of an Act
in determining whether there is more than
one possible construction.... However,
if the literal meaning of a provision is to be midwifed by references to the
purposes of the
Act, the modification must be precisely identifiable as that
which is necessary to effectuate those purposes and it must be consistent
the working otherwise adopted by the draftsman.”
is a limit to which purpose can be taken particularly where the legislation,
such as the MAI Act, contains inconsistent provisions
as to the purposes of the
legislation.
principle of reading legislation in accordance with its purpose was discussed in
All Seasons Air Pty Ltd v Regal Consulting Services Pty
when Leeming and Payne
applicant repeatedly invoked in support of its construction the legislative
purpose, which was to benefit subcontractors
in its position. But Gleeson CJ
observed in
Carr v Western Australia
(2007) 232 CLR 138
[2007] HCA 47
‘[T]he underlying purpose of an Income Tax Assessment Act is to raise
revenue for government. No one would seriously suggest
that s 15AA of the Acts
Interpretation Act
has the result that all federal income tax legislation is to
be construed so as to advance that purpose.’
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union v Mammoet Australia Pty
it was said, by
reference to
‘Legislation rarely pursues a
single purpose at all costs. Where the problem is one of doubt about the extent
to which the legislation
pursues a purpose, stating the purpose is unlikely to
solve the problem’.”
is unclear from the insurer’s submission what purpose should be adopted
and therefore how the insurer says the legislation
should be construed in light
of the unstated purpose. The MAI Act lists a number of competing objects which
- encourage
early and appropriate treatment and care;
financial support; and
premiums for this party polices affordable.
provision of both early financial support and encouraging early and appropriate
treatment is an object supporting any construction
in support of Ms Borrows of
receiving statutory benefits, particularly within the first 52 weeks. It is
assumed, although not the
subject of precise submission, that the insurer
suggests its construction limits potential recipients, in this case described by
it as secondary victims, and limits the payments of statutory benefits under the
MAI Act and thus supporting the object of keeping
premiums affordable.
found no assistance from identifying a specific object which supported a
purposive approach to construction. The text and context
of the legislation is
clear and there is no need to resort to a purposive construction.
we observe that there is a clear purpose in Part 3 of the MAI Act to provide for
the payment of statutory benefits for a
limited period on a no-fault basis. That
purpose is not inconsistent with the MAI Act limiting the entitlement to claim
damages under
the MAI Act by the inclusion of the threshold injury test and a
separately defined purpose limiting the right of injured persons
damages. This latter purpose has no relevance to the present
proceedings.
different reasons, we have reached the same conclusion as the merit reviewer.
The review is dismissed, and the decision of the
single merit reviewer dated
3 September 2024 is confirmed.
Insurer’s Supplementary
Bundle A4, p8.
Supplementary Bundle A4, p8.
Leonie Borrow – Supporting Documents
Supplementary Bundle A5, p11.
Insurer’s Supplementary Bundle A5,
Supplementary Bundle A11, p2.
Insurer’s Supplementary Bundle A11,
Leonie Borrow –
Supporting Documents A4 (Application for internal review), p19.
See ss 3.6 – 3.10 of the
Section 3.36 MAI
Section 3.35 MAI
Section 3.37 MAI
Supplementary Bundle A6,
Supplementary Bundle A8, [9]
Insurer’s Supplementary Bundle A9,
Borrow v Insurance
Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
[2024] NSWPICMR 67
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(NSW) and Procedural Direction
reply submissions,
reply submissions, [21].
Insurer’s reply submissions,
Insurer’s reply
submissions, see [25]-[37].
Insurer’s reply submissions,
Insurer’s reply
submissions, [38].
Insurer’s reply submissions,
[38(c)-(d)].
reply submissions, [16].
Insurer’s review submissions, [1.4],
review submissions, [2.5].
Insurer’s review submissions,
review submissions, [3.38].
Insurer’s reply submissions, [16]; Insurer’s review submissions,
review submissions, [3.7].
Insurer’s review submissions,
review submissions, [3.11].
Insurer’s review submissions, [3.10].
Insurer’s review
submissions, [3.9].
Insurer’s review submissions, [3.33].
Insurer’s review
submissions, [3.34]-[3.35]
Insurer’s review submissions,
[2014] HCA 9
253 CLR 531
Insurer’s review submissions, [3.39], [3.40],
review submissions, [3.39], [3.40], [3.45].
[2008] NSWCA 198
[7], Bell JA (as his Honour then was) and Young CJ in Eq
[1995] HCA 10
[2016] HCA 19
[1998] HCA 28
[2016] NSWCA 359
[2017] HCA 34
[2012] HCA 59
[2012] HCA 55
[2018] HCA 55
The insurer referred to
Australian Education Union v Department of Education and Children’s
[2012] HCA 3
Esso Australia Pty Ltd v Australia Workers
[2017] HCA 54
[2016] NSWCA 237
[2015] NSWCA
, [12], [88] and
Section 3.2
Section 3.2(4(b)), MAI
[2024] NSWSC 1272
Motor Accident Injuries Amendment Act 2022
[2019] NSWSC 13
This is distinct
from the approach in
, discussed above at
[1990] HCA 6
[2017] NSWCA
At [42]-[43], White JA
(2013) 248 CLR
[2013] HCA 36
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter