URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/276.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GTZ v Children's Guardian [2025] NSWCATAD 276; (12 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GTZ v Children’s Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 276
Hearing Date(s):
25 September 2025, 3 November 2025 and 4 November 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
A Starke, Senior Member
J Herberte, General Member
The decision of the Children’s Guardian dated 20 December 2024 to
place an Interim Bar on the applicant’s working with
children check
clearance is set aside and, in substitution of that decision being set aside,
the applicant’s clearance is to
be reinstated forthwith pending
finalisation of the Children’s Guardian’s risk assessment.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — Application for review under s 27(3) of Child
Protection (Working with Children) Act 2012 — Interim
Bar placed on the
applicant’ s clearance pending a risk assessment to decide whether the
clearance should be reinstated or
cancelled — Report made by former foster
child that she had been sexually assaulted by the applicant’s ex-husband
an allegation that the applicant failed to act protectively towards the
child — Tribunal to assess whether applicant poses
a risk to the safety of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Child Protection (Working
Children) Act 2012
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Cases Cited:
AYU v NSW Office of the Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 69
v Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 115
BHY v Children’s
[2015] NSWCATAD 91
BJB v The Children’s Guardian (No 2)
NSWCATAD 164
BKE v Office of Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
CHB v Children’s
[2016] NSWCATAD 214
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
Commissioner for Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA
Commissioner for Children and Young People v IK
[2005] NSWSC 1136
v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 295
CTE v Children’s
[2018] NSWCATAD 28
CXZ v Children’s Guardian
[2020] NSWCA
CYY v Children’s Guardian (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 262
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 308
Drake v Minister of Immigration
& Ethnic Affairs
(1970) 2 ALD 60
DYH v Public Guardian
[2021] NSWCATAD
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth (2009) 240 CLR 162
Guardianship and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] VR 521
Smith v Commissioner of
[2014] NSWCATAD 184
Tilley v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA
VQB v The Secretary to the Department of Justice (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 789
YG & GG v Minister for Community Services
[2002] NSWCA
ZZ v Secretary, Department of Justice
[2013] VSC 267
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
GTZ (Applicant)
Children’s Guardian (Respondent)
Representation:
B Dean (Respondent)
Solicitors:
The ME Legal
Group Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Crown Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00278297
Publication Restriction:
With the exception of expert witnesses and officers of government agencies,
the publication or broadcast of the name of any person
mentioned in these
proceedings referred to in the documentary material lodged in these proceedings
is prohibited. This order was
made on 24 July 2025 under
section 64(1)(a)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Note: A reference to the name
of a person includes a reference to any information, picture or other material
that identifies the person
or is likely to lead to the identification of the
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant sought administrative review under
Child Protection
(Working with
Children) Act 2012
(NSW) (“the
Act”) of the
decision of the Children’s Guardian made on 20 December 2024 to impose an
Interim Bar on her working with
children check clearance pending completion of a
risk assessment to decide whether her clearance should be maintained or
Interim Bar was imposed because information held by the respondent indicated
there is a likely risk to the safety of children
if the applicant engages in
child-related work while the risk assessment is conducted.
applicant was a former foster carer, along with her ex-husband, GTX. They have
provided foster care to as many as 100 children
during their foster careers with
Burran Delai Aboriginal Corporation (“Burrun Dalai”). Notably, they
provided long-term
care for IB since his birth in December 2010 and his sister
VB since her birth in August 2015. They also provided care for BB (who
unrelated to IB and VB) in two separate periods, the first from January 2018 to
December 2019 and the second from January 2021
to September 2021.
11 December 2024, just over 3 years after leaving their care, BB alleged to
police that she had been sexually abused by GTX during
the second period of her
care with GTZ and GTX. BB also alleged that GTZ knew about the abuse and failed
to act protectively towards
a result of the allegations, IB and VB were removed from the care of the
applicant and GTX on 11 December 2024. GTZ’s and
GTX’s carer
authorisations were suspended on 13 December 2024. The respondent issued a
Notice of Interim Bar and Risk Assessment
to each of GTZ and GTX on 20 December
18 July 2025, GTZ applied for a review of the respondent’s decision to
place an Interim Bar on her clearance.
emphatically denied the allegations made against her and asserted that the
allegations against her and GTX were false and unsubstantiated.
Further, GTZ
asserted that she does not pose a risk to the safety of children. Indeed, to the
contrary, GTZ asserted that, as a foster
carer, she understands that she is
accountable to a higher standard of care with respect to other persons’
children and understands
her responsiblities to keep children safe.
respondent submitted the decision to impose an Interim Bar is correct and ought
to be affirmed.
considering all the evidence, the Tribunal concluded that the applicant does not
pose a risk to the safety of children. Further,
the Tribunal was satisfied that
a reasonable person would allow their child to have unsupervised contact with
the applicant while
she is engaged in child-related work, and that it is in the
public interest to set aside the Interim Bar.
Non-publication
to the sensitive nature of these proceedings and to protect against the identity
of any child being disclosed, an order was made
on 24 July 2025 pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(“NCAT Act”) that with the exception of expert witnesses and
officers of government agencies the publication or
broadcast of the name of any
person mentioned in these proceedings or referred to in the documentary material
lodged in these proceedings
is prohibited.
Material and evidence
before the Tribunal
following material was filed on behalf of the applicant in support of her
application:
(1) her affidavit affirmed on 13 August 2025 (marked for identification as
“Exhibit AZ1”);
(2) a character reference dated 22 August 2025 provided by KM, Clinical
Neuropsychologist (marked for identification as “Exhibit
(3) a character reference dated 18 August 2025 provided by AS, Clinical
Psychologist (marked for identification as “Exhibit
following material was filed on behalf of the respondent:
(1) a bundle of documents filed pursuant to
Administrative
Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (“ADR Act”) in two volumes
(marked for identification as “Exhibit “RZ1” Volumes 1 and
(2) written submissions (not marked).
Additionally,
the material filed in the associated Case No. 2025/00249659 concerning the
applicant’s ex-husband (GTX v Children’s
Guardian) was before the
Tribunal. That material included:
(1) an affidavit of the applicant’s ex-husband (GTX) affirmed on 19 August
2025 (marked for identification as “Exhibit
(2) an affidavit of the applicant GTZ affirmed on 19 August 2025 (marked for
identification as “Exhibit AX2”);
(3) a bundle of documents filed on 31 July 2025 pursuant to s 58 of the ADR
Act (marked for identification as “Exhibit RX1”);
(4) a bundle of documents labelled “Respondent’s Further
Evidence” filed on 16 September 2025 and subsequently
replaced by a
revised version dated 31 October 2025 (marked for identification as
“Exhibit RX2”);
(5) a further bundle of documents in two volumes labelled “Further s 31
responses from Department of Communities and Justice
and Burrun Dalai”
filed on 26 September 2025 (marked for identification as “Exhibit
(6) respondent’s further material produced under Summons by the
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force and the Secretary,
Department of
Communities and Justice (“DCJ”) filed on 23 October 2025 (marked for
identification as “Exhibit RX4”).
Oral evidence
applicant gave oral evidence and was cross-examined during the hearing.
Additionally, the applicant’s daughter gave brief
oral evidence at the
Background leading to the application for review
applicant GTZ is 53 years of age and was in a relationship with GTX for around
30 years. They met in high school in the late 1980’s
and were married in
1994, raising four biological children together. Throughout 2018 and 2019 the
parties spent periods of time where
they were separated and GTX lived with his
mother to provide her with care. GTZ acknowledged in her oral evidence that she
good with dates and acknowledged that clause 11(b) of her affidavit was
probably not correct in that GTX was still living in the
family home from time
to time during 2019. Upon reflection, her recollection was that the parties
separated in 2020 and were divorced
and her ex-husband have been authorised foster carers for some 25 years. They
were accepted to provide foster care services with
a not-for-profit Aboriginal
community-controlled organisation, Burrun Dalai, since 18 July 2008.
have provided foster care to many children, including biological siblings IB and
VB (“the siblings”) who are Aboriginal
and were placed with GTZ and
GTX shortly after each of their births. IB was placed in their care in January
2013 and VB was placed
with them in August 2015. The siblings remained in the
care of GTZ and GTX until 11 December 2024 when they were removed and placed
respite care following allegations made by another child BB who had been in the
care of GTZ and GTX that she had been sexually
abused by GTX and that GTZ knew
the siblings were
removed, IB was about to turn 12 years of age and VB was aged
and GTX also provided care for BB (who is not biologically related to IB and VB)
in two separate periods. The first period of
care was from January 2018 until
December 2019 (prior to the carers’ separation). The second period of care
was around 9 months
in duration, from January 2021 to September 2021, and was
subject to an informal co-parenting arrangement agreed between GTZ and
children lived primarily with GTZ, and GTX provided respite care on alternate
moved out of the family home by 2020. However, there were occasions when he
stayed at the family home over the weekend, sleeping
downstairs on a mattress
and taking the children on outings during the day.
and GTX maintained shared foster care responsibilities for the children IB and
VB until their removal on 11 December 2024. The
siblings have not been returned
to the applicants’ care.
circumstances giving rise to the removal of IB and VB from GTZ’s and
GTX’s care were a precursor for the respondent’s
decision to place
Interim Bars on their working with children check clearances.
early December 2024, the Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
(“DCJ”), received a number of reports alleging
that BB had made
disclosures to the effect that she had been sexually assaulted by GTX whilst in
his care and in the care of GTZ.
BB also alleged that she told GTZ about the
alleged abuse and that GTZ failed to act protectively towards BB and failed to
police or Burrun Dalai. At the time of the alleged abuse, BB was 10 years
old, turning 11 in September 2021. At the time of disclosing
the alleged abuse
in December 2024, BB was 14 years of age.
Allegations against GTZ
and GTX causing imposition of Interim Bar
her interview with police on 11 December 2024, BB alleged that:
(1) GTX called BB up to his and GTX’s bedroom, BB knocked on the door and
GTX told her to come in, at which time BB saw GTX
get on top of GTZ and start
“humping” (having sex).
(2) After school, GTZ was at work and GTX called BB up to his bedroom. She
knocked and he told her to come in and then “grabbed”
vagina and said “this is good for you”.
(3) Another afternoon, after school, BB saw GTX, his son TH and TH’s
friends walking around the home naked.
(4) BB saw GTX watching pornography on TV in the loungeroom and GTX told BB, IB
and VB to sit down and watch it because he said it
was “good for
(5) GTX would force BB, IB and VB to watch him use the toilet.
(6) When GTZ was out of the home, GTX called BB up to his bedroom, pushed her
onto her back on the bed, pulled her legs apart and
put his penis up her vagina,
causing her to bleed. He then made BB get bleach and clean up the blood. GTZ
came home and asked what
had happened and GTX told her BB had fallen over and
started bleeding.
(7) GTX attempted to sexually assault BB again but she ran away. BB said she ran
downstairs, grabbed clothes, a phone and a knife
and ran away. She said she
didn’t get very far before GTX’s son TH saw her and took her home.
GTZ later askd BB why she
ran away and BB told GTZ it was beause GTX sexually
abused her. BB asserted that GTZ said “okay” and BB was upset that
that GTZ didn’t tell the “police or DOCS”.
GTZ and GTX have denied the allegations made against them by BB.
11 December 2024, police officers contacted DCJ to express concern about the
safety of IB and VB in the care of GTZ and GTX and
being “coached” before being interviewed by police. An investigation
was commenced by the
State Crime Command, Child Abuse Squad.
the same date, Burrun Dalai decided to place IB and VB into a respite
13 December 2024, Burrun Dalai suspended GTZ’s and GTX’s carer
authorisations.
16 December 2024, police officers interviewed IB and VB. They made no
disclosures.
19 December 2024, an Apprehended Violence Order (“AVO”) was made
against GTX for the protection of BB. The AVO was
subsequently withdrawn and
dismissed on 13 February 2025. It appears a number of considerations were taken
into account, including
the available evidence and also subjecting the victim to
court proceedings in the absence of criminal charges.
20 December 2024, the respondent issued to each of GTZ and GTX a Notice of
Interim Bar and Risk Assessment.
27 and 31 December 2024, police officers spoke with GTZ’s and GTX’s
children, TH, IH and MH. They denied knowledge
of any offending behaviour by GTX
and denied that they were exposed to pornography or nudity in the family
30 December 2024, police officers spoke with MW, a child previously in
GTZ’s and GTX’s care. MW said that GTX was a
bit weird and got in
her space such that he would get close to her when talking and this made her
uncomfortable. However, she denied
that GTX ever sexually touched or sexually
assaulted her, and she had no complaint to make against him.
on 30 December 2024, police officers spoke with GTZ who made it clear she was
unaware of any offending by GTX towards any children
including BB. GTZ strongly
denied all the allegations and said GTX would not have done such things. She
said she had kicked GTX out
of the house at least before BB’s second stay
with her. She said GTX did not sleep at her house and was living with his
She said that if he did sleep over it would be on a mattress on the
floor in the loungeroom. GTZ said he would only generally come
to the house on
weekends and was not home during the week after school. She said she was always
and never worked. GTZ also said that BB
never disclosed any offending by GTX or any other person to her. GTZ strongly
denied BB ever
seeing her and GTX have sexual intercourse and strongly denied BB
ever disclosing any offending to her.
15 January 2025, DCJ officers separately interviewed IB and VB and neither child
made any disclosures with respect to GTX.
29 January 2025, GTX declined an invitation to participate in an interview with
21 February 2025, NSW Police advised GTX’s legal representative that the
investigation into the disclosures made by BB was
suspended with no charges
pending. DCJ notes confirm that several lines of inquiry were exhausted.
However, after a review of all
the available evidence, it was determined that
the threshold of proving all criminal offences beyond any reasonable doubt could
around the same time, officers of the Joint Child Protection Response Program
(“JCPRP”) completed a safety assessment
and concluded that, on the
balance of probabilities, sexual abuse had been substantiated. As a result, DCJ
recommended that GTX be
allocated the highest alert level available. On 10 April
2025, the JCPRP Director determined that GTX would be designated as a "Person
Causing Harm".
Independent assessment of GTZ’s capacities
to act protectively
commissioned an urgent independent assessment of GTZ’s suitability and
protective capacities to care for IB and VB and ensure
their safety and
well-being. The assessment was undertaken by a Cultural Consultant who provided
a comprehensive report dated 29
May 2025. The Consultant concluded that GTZ had
“effectively demonstrated her protective capacities to provide a safe and
environment for the children that supports their physical, emotional and
cultural wellbeing”. The Consultant recommended reinstatement
GTZ’s carer authorisation on the conditions that her clearance is
reinstated and the outcome of Burrun Dalai’s investigation
is that the
allegations are unsubstantiated.
Outcome of reportable conduct
investigation by Burrun Dalai
23 June 2025, the Reportable Conduct Officer at Burrun Dalai wrote to GTX and
GTZ to inform them that Burrun Dalai had finalised
its investigtions into the
allegations made against them and determined there was insufficient information
to substantiate the claims
made by BB.
Application for
administrative review
18 July 2025, GTZ applied to the Tribunal for a review of the respondent’s
decision to impose the Interim Bar on her clearance.
Pursuant to a Tribunal
Order made on 24 July 2025, GTZ filed an amended application for review of the
respondent’s decision
on 31 July 2025.
Other matters to be
weighed in the assessment of risk
addition to the allegations by BB that caused the imposition of the Interim Bar,
there are a number of other matters that were
raised against GTZ concerning her
care of certain other foster children. These matters are taken into account when
assessing GTZ’s
risk to the safety of children under the heading
“Consideration”.
Applicable legislation and legal
Protective jurisdiction of the Act
protective jurisdiction of the Act is plainly evident from its stated object as
set out in s 3:
3 Object of Act
The object of this Act is to protect children—
(a) by not permitting certain persons to engage in child-related work, and
(b) by requiring persons engaged in child-related work to have working with
children check clearances.
Paramount consideration
paramount consideration in the operation of the Act is set out in s 4:
4 Safety, welfare and well-being of children to be paramount
consideration
The safety, welfare and well-being of children and, in particular, protecting
them from child abuse, is the paramount consideration
in the operation of this
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective, and not punitive
regard to that paramount consideration, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under s
27 of the Act is protective, and not punitive,
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 308
NSW Office of the Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 69
Commissioner for Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA
, per Young JA at [61]. The object of the Act is not to impose additional
punishment on a person such as the applicant, but to eliminate
possible risks to
CYY v Children’s Guardian (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 262
protective jurisdiction of the Act was emphasised in CXZ v Children’s
[2020] NSWCA 338
per Simpson AJA at [58]:
“It is plain that in some cases this will be the cause of potential
injustice to the applicant for a clearance. A person entirely
innocent of any
allegations may be refused a clearance because the evidence does not permit a
conclusion that the allegations are
without foundation and the inability to
reach such a conclusion leaves open sufficient possibility that the risk exists.
of the relevant provisions of the Child Protection Act satisfies me
that the legislature preferred the risk of injustice to an applicant
the safety of children.”
Definition of “children”, “child abuse” and the
meaning of “risk to the safety of children”
is defined in s 5(1) of the Act to mean “persons under the age of 18
words “child abuse” appearing in s 4 above are not defined in the
Act. The Tribunal stated in
BFX v Children’s Guardian
NSWCATAD 115
that the words would be aptly described as
“maltreatment of a child consisting of physical, emotional, or sexual
abuse, neglect,
or any combination of these, and includes exposure to harm
caused by or being subjected to family violence”.
meaning of “risk to the safety of children” is defined in s 5B of
the Act to mean a “real and appreciable risk
to the safety of
children.” The meaning of the word ‘risk’ was considered by
Young CJ (in Equity) in
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
56 NSWLR 476
“One does not define risk as meaning minimal risk. One would... exclude
fanciful or theoretical risk but what one is looking
for is whether, in all the
circumstances, there is a real and appreciable risk in the sense of a risk that
is greater than the risk
of any adult preying on a child. One, however, must
link the word ‘risk’ with the words that follow, namely ‘to
the safety of children’...”
Honour’s consideration of the meaning of risk was cited with approval in a
number of cases before the Tribunal and the NSW
Supreme Court:
Children’s Guardian
[2018] NSWCATAD 28
BKE v Office of
Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 523
) at [26] and
at [39]. Ultimately, the Tribunal must consider whether a clearance,
if granted, will create a “real and not fanciful”
risk to the safety
of children:
per Basten JA at [26].
Child-related work
requires a WWCC clearance
s 8(1) of the Act, a worker must not engage in child-related work unless the
worker holds a clearance. A worker who is subject
to an Interim Bar must not
engage in child-related work: s 8(2) of the Act.
that involves direct contact by a worker with a child or children and that
to the work is defined as
“child-related work” for the purposes of the Act: s 6(1) of the
Test to be satisfied that a person is not a risk to the
safety of children
s 18(2) of the Act, the Children’s Guardian must grant a clearance to a
person who is subject to a risk assessment unless
satisfied that the person
poses a risk to the safety of children.
Risk assessment under s
15(4) of the Act
Subsections
15(1) and (2) of the Act set out circumstances in which the respondent must
conduct a risk assessment into a person who
has applied for or holds a
clearance. Section 15(3) makes clear that the respondent may decide when to
conduct a risk assessment
concerning a person who holds a clearance. That
discretion is not limited by subsections 15(1) and (2).
making an assessment, the Children’s Guardian
consider the
matters set out in s 15(4) of the Act. The Children’s Guardian does not
limit its consideration to offences involving
children because some offences or
behaviours might have an impact on children in the community or home. This is
clearly advised to
applicants applying for clearance.
the Children’s Guardian is not satisfied of risk based on the s 15(4)
matters alone, the ‘reasonable person’
and ‘public
interest’ tests set out in s 15(4A) of the Act
considered:
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with
the applicant that was not directly supervised by
another person while the
applicant was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the determination.
the person fails either the ‘reasonable person’ or the ‘public
interest’ test, clearance will not be granted.
of an Interim Bar
any time after commencing an assessment of a person who holds a clearance, the
respondent may determine that the person is subject
to an Interim Bar: s 17(1)
of the Act.
effect of an Interim Bar is to prevent the clearance holder from engaging in
child-related work or residing on the same property
as an authorised carer, as
defined in s 137 of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
17(2) provides that “[t]he Children’s Guardian may make a
determination under this section if it is of the opinion
that it is likely that
there is a risk to the safety of children if the [clearance] holder engages in
child-related work or resides
on a property referred to in [s 17(1)] pending the
determination of the application or assessment.”
Interim Bar may only be in place for up to 12 months: s 17(4)(c) of the
person made subject to an Interim Bar may apply to the Tribunal for review of
the decision to impose the Interim Bar provided the
Interim Bar has been in
force for more than 6 months: s27(3) of the Act.
Issue for the
Tribunal’s determination
issue for determination is whether GTZ poses a real and appreciable risk to the
safety of children and, consequently, whether
the correct and preferable
decision (under s 63(1) of the ADR Act) is to affirm the imposition of the
Interim Bar on her clearance.
the purpose of determining an application for administrative review, the
Tribunal exercises all of the functions that are conferred
or imposed by any
relevant legislation on the administrator who made the decision: s 63(2) of the
in exercising those functions, the Tribunal must not simply “stand in the
shoes” of an administrator. The Tribunal
does not conduct a review of the
respondent’s decision to impose an Interim Bar. As explained in
Public Guardian
[2021] NSWCATAD 136
, the Tribunal must conduct its
review without any presumption as to the correctness of an administrator’s
“The effect of these two subsections is sometimes characterised as the
Tribunal being required to “stand in the shoes”
of the administrator
who made the decision. But that is not entirely accurate. I must conduct this
review without any presumption
as to the correctness of the decision:
McDonald v Guardianship and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] VR 521
and I am required to decide what the correct and preferable decision is having
regard to the material before me. It is clear that
that may include material
which postdates the making of the decision:
YG and GG v Minister for
Community Services
[2002] NSWCA 247
Drake v Minister
of Immigration & Ethnic Affairs
(1970) 2 ALD 60
Tribunal has regard to the material before it, including material that may not
have been before the Children’s Guardian,
and the applicable law:
at [25], per Hodgson JA (with whom Foster and Brownie A-JJA agreed); applied
BHY v Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWCATAD 91
What orders the Tribunal can make
Tribunal may make orders that affirm, vary, set aside or remit the matter to the
decision-maker for reconsideration, with or without
any directions or
recommendations from the Tribunal. If the decision is set aside, the Tribunal
may make a decision in substitution
for the decision it set aside: s 63(3) of
the ADR Act.
Mandatory matters for the Tribunal’s
consideration under s 30(1) of the Act
determining this application, the Tribunal
consider the
matters set out in s 30(1) as set out below:
30 Determination of applications and other matters
(1) The Tribunal must consider the following in determining an application under
(a) the seriousness of the offences with respect to which the person is a
disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or
imposition of an interim bar,
(b) the period of time since those offences or matters occurred and the conduct
of the person since they occurred,
(c) the age of the person at the time the offences or matters occurred,
(d) the age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time they
occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim,
(e) the difference in age between the victim and the person and the relationship
(if any) between the victim and the person,
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known, that the victim was
(g) the person’s present age,
(h) the seriousness of the person’s criminal history and the conduct of
the person since the matters occurred,
(i) the likelihood of any repetition by the person of the offences or conduct
and the impact on children of any such repetition,
(i1) any order of a court or tribunal that is in force in relation to the
(j) any information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the
application,
(j1) any relevant information in relation to the person that was obtained in
accordance with section 36A,
(k) any other matters that the Children’s Guardian considers necessary.
Further considerations under s 30(1A) of the Act
addition, if the Tribunal is considering making an order enabling an applicant
to work with children, it
then consider the two-part test set out in
s 30(1A) of the Act:
(1A) The Tribunal may not make an order under this Part which has the effect of
enabling a person (the affected person) to work with
children in accordance
with this Act unless the Tribunal is satisfied that—
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with
the affected person that was not directly supervised
by another person while the
affected person was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the order.
First limb of the two-part test under s 30(1A)(a) - the “reasonable
person” test
first limb of the two-part test is known as the “reasonable person”
test. It requires the application of an objective
standard based upon the views
of the “reasonable person”. It assumes that the “reasonable
person” is acquainted
with all the relevant facts of which the Tribunal is
CHB v Children’s Guardian
[2016] NSWCATAD 214
legislation in Victoria contains provisions similar to those in s 30(1A) of the
VQB v The Secretary to the Department of Justice (Review and
Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 789
) at [36], the Tribunal held that an
objective test was called for by the legislation:
“... The reasonable person would, in reaching his or her conclusions,
acquaint himself or herself with all of the matters that
have been placed before
me, giving an applicant for a positive assessment a right to be heard, as well
as considering the material
gathered by the Secretary. A reasonable person would
not approach the task with a closed mind, thinking that once a person has
he or she can never be redeemed. The reasonable person, however, would
not put aside all scepticism and reasonable caution in this
most difficult area
in some over-optimistic attempt to facilitate rehabilitation.”
reasonable person approach taken in
was endorsed in NSW in
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 295
at [91], the Tribunal said:
“In order to properly consider this test, a ‘reasonable
person’ would need to know about the disqualifying offence,
circumstances surrounding the offence, the applicant’s entire criminal
history, the length of time since those offences
occurred, his conduct since
then and any expert assessment made for him.”
Second limb of the two-part test under s 30(1)(b) - the “public
interest” test
second limb of the two-part test is referred to as the “public
interest” test. The notion of “public interest”
was addressed
by the High Court of Australia in
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(2009) 240 CLR 162 in which French CJ, Gummow and Crennan JJ said at
“The term ‘in the public interest’ is one of broad import.
When used in a statute, the term classically imports
a discretionary value
judgment to be made by reference to undefined factual matters confined only by
the subject matter, scope and
purpose of the statute in question.”
Accordingly,
in proceedings under the
Child Protection (Working with Children) Act
, the “public interest” must be considered in light of the
paramount purpose of the Act, namely, to ensure the protection
of children from
sexual or physical harm: s 4 of the Act.
applying the public interest test, the Victorian Supreme Court has endorsed a
broad and not a narrow approach:
ZZ v Secretary Department of Justice
[2013] VSC 267
) per Bell J at [205]. While emphasising the main
purpose of the Victorian legislation (equivalent to the NSW legislation) is the
protection of children from harm, the decision in ZZ
at [202] also
acknowledged the relevance and importance of rehabilitating offenders and their
right to work. The private interests
of an applicant such as their right to work
in their chosen area of employment are also a factor to be taken into
consideration insofar
as those private interests also have a broader community
benefit as per Bell J at [203]:
“In the context of the right to work, the tribunal has (in my view,
correctly) taken into account the public interest in enabling
persons to engage
in their chosen field of employment or in the field in which they are most
suited to work, in not lightly turning
people away from their commitment to a
chosen career and in encouraging people to use their qualifications, experience
and expertise
for the benefit of others.”
concept of public interest has been determined by the Tribunal on the basis of
giving priority to the broad interests of the community
over private interests:
Smith v Commissioner of Police
[2014] NSWCATAD 184
the Tribunal is not satisfied that an applicant has met either of the first or
second limbs in the two-part test, it is precluded
from making an order enabling
the applicant to work with children.
The approach to fact finding
and the assessment of risk
recognition of the protective jurisdiction of the Act and the paramount
consideration being the safety, welfare and well-being
of children, the Tribunal
is bound to follow the decision in
at [33] when assessing
“Thus in such cases it may be that NCAT can be satisfied that an
allegation of sexual abuse against an applicant is established.
Equally, NCAT
may be affirmatively satisfied that the relevant incident did not occur, in
which case it can be put aside. However,
in a context where the welfare of the
child is paramount and the question being posed concerns the risk of harm to
children, NCAT
may not be satisfied that an allegation of abuse has been made
out, but nevertheless conclude that the circumstances surrounding
a particular
incident or course of conduct means that there is a risk to a child or, more
correctly, that the existence of a risk
has not been disproven.”
approach to fact finding as explained in
at [33] has been approved by
the Court of Appeal in
Tilley v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA
per Simpson AJA at [57]:
“The task of the Tribunal is, to expand on what Beech-Jones J said in
, to determine, even if it is unable to be satisfied one way or the
other as to the truth of all or any of the allegations, whether,
by reason of
possibility
that the alleged conduct occurred, the applicant poses a
risk to the safety of children. [emphasis in original] If so, the Tribunal
refuse to grant a clearance. Of course, in that process the Tribunal will give
consideration to the strength of the evidence
supporting the allegations and
will, inevitably, reach conclusions about the truth or falsity of some. If it
finds any allegation
to be without foundation it will discard it from further
consideration. If it is satisfied that the allegation is well founded, it
assign to it such weight as it sees fit, in the consideration (inter alia) of
the circumstances listed in s 30. It is the allegations
between those two
extremes, those that are neither proved nor disproved, that the Tribunal must
address in determining whether the
applicant for a clearance poses a risk to
relying upon the analysis in
at [51], many cases will not lend
themselves to definitive factual determination. Where an allegation is neither
“well founded”
nor “groundless”, the Tribunal must
decide whether, on the evidence before it, the possibility that the conduct did
justifies a finding that the applicant poses a risk to the safety of
at [52]. The assessment and the weight to be assigned to
allegations will depend upon the seriousness of the allegations, the strength
any evidentiary support for those allegations, and the relevance of the conduct
the subject of the allegations to the risk to
the safety of children if a
clearance is granted to the applicant:
determining the application, the Tribunal is required to consider “the
totality of the evidence”:
at [28] citing
The Commissioner
for Children and Young People v IK
[2005] NSWSC 1136
Tribunal is to make a decision based on the “cumulative effect” of
the matters before it:
at [69]-[71].
standard of proof
party bears an onus of proof in relation to an application for review under s 27
of the Act: BJB v The Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 164
28(2) of the NCAT Act provides that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of
evidence and may inquire into and inform itself
on any matter in such manner as
it thinks fit, subject to the rules of natural justice.
standard to which the Tribunal must be satisfied before making a positive
finding in relation to an allegation is the civil standard,
that is, on the
balance of probabilities, and not the criminal standard: CFW at [14]-[17],
subject to the need to have regard to
the principles in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336 (Briginshaw).
The Briginshaw principle can broadly be
described as a standard of satisfaction to be reached where serious allegations
are concerned.
Put simply, serious allegations with serious consequences require
more compelling evidence for the decision maker to reach the necessary
reasonable satisfaction that the facts in dispute are more likely than not to
Consideration
proceedings before this Tribunal, the allegations are assessed according to the
civil standard, on the balance of probabilities,
subject to the
evaluating the evidence before us, it is not necessary to find that the alleged
conduct occurred. It is sufficient to conclude
the alleged conduct occurred before then proceeding to consider whether, based
on the allegations, the applicant poses a risk
to the safety of children.
determining the application, we are obliged to consider the evidence under each
of the headings in s 30(1)(a)-(k) of the Act.
The seriousness of
the offences with respect to which the person is a disqualified person or any
matters that caused a refusal of
a clearance or imposition of an interim bar: s
30(1)(a) of the Act
allegations made against GTZ that caused the imposition of the Interim Bar are
serious and sexual in nature. Specifically, BB
alleged that when she was called
into their bedroom, she saw GTZ having sex with GTX.
BB’s allegations were principally directed towards GTZ’s ex-husband,
her allegation that GTZ engaged in some of
the inappropriate conduct with GTX is
serious. BB’s allegation that GTZ was aware of her complaints and did not
respond appropriately
by notifying either police or Burrun Dalai, is also
serious since GTZ was the primary carer responsible for BB’s health and
safety and wellbeing. As her primary carer, GTZ was required to act protectively
towards BB, to ensure her physical, emotional and
psychological safety.
denied the allegations against her. She also denied that her ex-husband could
have engaged in the conduct alleged. She found the
allegations distressing and
“disgusting”. Her affidavit evidence was that, at the time of the
alleged conduct, her ex-husband
was not living in the family home and the
concept that she would be having sex with him after their separation was
ridiculous. After
their separation, GTX did not have a bedroom in the family
She was adamant that she would never allow a child to watch her having sex.
her interview with police on 30 January 2025, GTZ emphatically denied the
allegations against herself, her ex-husband and her children.
She said that BB
had never disclosed any offending by GTX or any other person to her. This
included after BB had run away on one
occasion with another child in foster
cross-examination in these proceedings, her response to the allegation that BB
saw her having sex with GTX was an emphatic denial.
She said that she was not
having sex after separating from her ex-husband, they did not share a bed, and
they had a house full of
children. She said that she found the allegation to be
“disgusting”. She also denied the allegation that she had come
on one occasion and had been told that BB had fallen over and started bleeding,
but did not ask how BB was. She said that had
“never happened”. GTZ
added that she had, on previous occasions, acted protectively towards children,
by reporting matters
of concern to Burrun Dalai. She recounted an instance when
BB had assaulted VB (which resulted in BB’s removal from GTZ’s
care), and another instance when another child in her care assaulted one of her
biological sons.
and GTX’s three biological children (TH, IH and MH) were all interviewed
by police and said that BB’s allegations
were false. TH said he never saw
his father show pornography to BB or any other child. He denied ever walking
around the house naked
and denied seeing his father or anyone else walking
around the house naked. MH denied any knowledge of her father’s offending,
saying he would not do such things. IH said he never saw or heard of any sexual
offending regarding his father and that BB never
disclosed any offending to
note that MH was also interviewed by the Cultural Consultant engaged by DCJ to
assess GTZ’s protective capacities. The Consultant
recorded that MH was
interviewed by police and found the allegations to be “disgusting”
and “gross”. She
said that she caught the bus home every afternoon
with BB and if anything had happened, she would have seen it and would have said
something to someone.
and VB were also interviewed by police and made no disclosures.
do not dismiss the possibility that, sadly, BB has at some point in time, been
the victim of sexual abuse. GTZ postulated that
BB may have been subjected to
abuse when she was living with her own family and then with non-authorised
carers before the second
period of care with the applicant in 2021. We make no
finding concerning the possibility that GTZ’s assertion (about who may
have perpetrated any abuse towards BB) may be correct.
in light of all the evidence, we are not persuaded that the abuse has been
perpetrated by GTZ or GTX. We say this, taking
into account GTZ’s
consistent and emphatic denial of the allegations made against her and GTX, and
the prevailing circumstances
surrounding the parties in the household at the
time of the alleged conduct, following their separation. The applicant’s
was that there were times when the relationship with GTX was
“bitter”. From 2020, GTZ was not having sexual relations
and he did not have a bedroom in the house at that time. GTZ did not work full
time and only engaged in inconsistent casual
work. If she did work, it was
during school hours so that she could be home when the children arrived home
from school. This was
necessary because of the children’s complex
conditions and their need for consistent supervision. GTX was not alone with the
children on the weekdays after school as GTZ was already home.
acknowledge that, as a result of the PCPRP assessment, GTX was designated to be
a “Person Causing Harm”. However, there
are a number of
counterbalancing factors to be taken into account. They include that there is no
corroborating evidence to support
BB’s allegations, the police
investigation was suspended with no charges pending, no charges have
subsequently been laid against
either party, the AVO against GTX was withdrawn,
and the reportable conduct investigation concluded that the allegations against
both GTZ and GTX were unsubstantiated. Additionally, GTZ’s protective
capacities, to provide a safe and caring environment
for the siblings, have been
the overall assessment of the applicant’s risk, we have given a
substantial amount of weight to our finding that GTZ did
not participate in the
alleged conduct and did not fail to act protectively towards
Other matters
Allegation in May 2004
was asked to respond to an allegation in May 2004 made by another child who had
been placed with her, that GTZ was a “cranky
lady” and that
“she bashes me and she drags me around the house” and bashes other
children. The child also was
allegedly sexually assaulted by another child in
the house and was allegedly told by GTZ that she was “not allowed to
GTZ recognised the report as referring to a child who had a
significant sexual abuse history, recalling that every second weekend
would stay with her grandmother and every Monday following those weekends an
officer of Burrun Dalai would enquire into
the child’s allegations. GTZ
vehemently denied the allegation that she “bashes” children. She
also recalled that
the child alleged that another foster child had come into her
room at night. GTZ acted protectively by calling Burrun Dalai who then
the alleged offending child. GTZ’s evidence was that she acted
protectively and that she would never tell a child
that they could not disclose
what had happened to them.
is insufficient evidence to support the allegations and GTZ’s oral
evidence was persuasive. Accordingly, we have not taken
the allegations into
account when assessing GTZ’s risk.
Allegation in November
report stated that a female child had asserted that in November 2004 when GTZ
and GTX went out, she was left with three teenage
boys who touched her
inappropriately and smacked her with a wooden spoon and a piece of garden hose.
GTZ absolutely denied the allegations,
saying these incidents did not occur, and
said it was ludicrous to suggest that she would leave a female to be looked
after by three
teenage boys.
is insufficient evidence to support the allegation and we have not taken it into
account when assessing GTZ’s risk.
Allegations in May
was asked to respond to reports concerning a baby in her care in May 2009 who
was observed to have significant bruising around
both eyes and her nose. GTZ had
explained that the child had been sitting on a tiled floor, with a pillow behind
her, and when left
unattended for a short time, the child had fallen forward
onto the tiles. GTZ recalled that the baby was in her care from birth until
around one year old. GTZ said that she had gone into the kitchen and the baby
had fallen forwards, and GTZ took her to see a doctor.
She acknowledged that the
baby did not need medical attention and said that she consulted a doctor to
protect herself. She also acknowledged
that it was more important that the
baby’s needs were met, and denied ever neglecting a child.
another report, the same child allegedly had bruising and scratches on her face.
GTZ said that she was at the beach at the time
and had dropped the baby’s
bottle. When trying to reach the bottle, the baby started to fall and, as a
reflex action, GTZ grabbed
her face (on each side of the face). GTZ said she
felt terrible and let Burrun Dalai know straight away. She asked Burrun Dalai if
she could tell the baby’s mother herself about what had happened because
she felt “gutted” by what had happened.
another report, the same child had allegedly been in a bouncer and had
accidentally bounced out and hit a wall. GTZ could not recall
that alleged
event. She also could not recall another incident where it was alleged that the
baby had a burn on her stomach and a
black eye. In various reports, the baby was
alleged to have blisters possibly associated with severe nappy rash, the baby
had swallowed
a balloon which then passed through to her nappy, and had blood in
her nappy, and possibly a staph infection due to severe nappy
explained that the baby’s mother was very young and was seeking to have
the baby returned to her. As a result, the mother
appeared to be fabricating
reports such that Burrun Dalai staff asked GTZ to photograph the baby before and
after the weekends she
spent with her mother. GTZ recalled that she sent
medication to relieve teething pain with the baby on one of the weekends with
mother, and the medication came back fully used, indicating over-usage. Yet
another report noted that the baby was observed to have
a long mark near her
left eye. The report stated that the carer (GTZ) had advised that the mark
occurred when the child was climbing
in and out of a box. However, GTZ’s
oral evidence was that the child had a rattle, with beads inside it, that she
to hit herself, leaving a mark.
denied that she had ever neglected the baby. She said that when the baby was
with her, she used a nappy cream and always changed
her nappy. She added that
she looked after foster children better than she did her own, and that she
operated to a higher standard,
recognising that she is answerable to other
people for their children.
accept that there were complex circumstances surrounding the care of this baby
whose very young and inexperienced mother appeared
to be seeking to discredit
GTZ’s efforts to care for, and keep, the child safe. On balance, we do not
accept that the reports
demonstrate neglect on GTZ’s part, and have not
given a great deal of weight to the allegations in assessing GTZ’s
Allegation that BB felt left out and unwanted
a report concerning BB in September 2019, it was alleged that BB felt left out
in the household and that she felt unwanted. She
asserted that GTZ had said they
couldn’t wait until she goes, which was upsetting for her. Another report
asserted that BB
had holes in her shoes and was always in trouble, and always
cleaning the home. GTZ denied ever saying that she couldn’t wait
leave and that she never heard GTX say that. She said that BB used to drag her
toes on concrete, leaving holes in her shoes,
but that this was remedied. She
acknowledged that BB liked to tidy and sweep the back yard when she came home
from school. BB was
not asked to do this, and GTZ regarded it as her way of
transitioning from school. GTZ said that she always spoke with kindness and
respect. After leaving her care, BB would jump into her arms upon seeing her,
and called her “Aunty”.
balance, we accept GTZ’s evidence concerning her care and concern for BB.
We have not taken these allegations into account
when assessing GTZ’s
Level of control exerted by GTX over GTZ
was asked about whether she trusted GTX and about the level of control that GTX
exercised over her. Her evidence was that she
trusted GTX with her life and the
lives of her children and that he was a moral and a good man, but that he was
unreliable. She said
that she didn’t think he was controlling, and that
she felt her opinion was heard. She said that she knew very little about
employment and that “his business in his business”.
asked about her relationship with GTX if the siblings were returned to her care,
GTZ said that she would be guided by DCJ. She
understood that having IB and VB
in her care may mean that they would not be permitted to go to GTX’s
house. In our view, GTZ
is a compliant carer, and we accept her evidence that
she would “follow the rules” and not risk IB and VB being placed
with other carers again.
Altercation between GTX and MH
asked about an incident when GTX had verbally abused their daughter (MH), GTZ
said she was aware that there was an altercation
between the two, on the
anniversary of their son’s death. It was alleged that GTX said to MH
“you’re a dog ####”
and “hope you and your mother
die”. GTZ found GTX’s conduct to be “disgusting” and
explained that the
emotions had been heightened on that occasion, causing a
“meltdown” in GTX. MH gave evidence, saying that GTX’s
was unusual, and his comments were not made in the presence of IB and VB. This
incident does not reflect negatively on GTZ
or the assessment of her
Alleged online contact with IB and VB
was asked whether there had been contact with IB and VB online. She said that
she understood IB had contacted GTX and that GTX
had sent a message to the
effect: “We’ll get you home as soon as you (sic) can”. GTZ
rejected any suggestion that
this would cause harm and said that she herself had
said “we’re doing everything to get you home”. In giving her
response, GTZ said: “We love them, we miss them. It would be worse for
them to think we didn’t want them back”.
challenged that the decision to return IB and VB was not theirs, GTZ said words
to the effect of: “I have to believe that
I’ll get my kids
evidence indicates her love and strong commitment to caring for the siblings IB
and VB. It demonstrates her insight into
the vulnerability of the siblings who
have been cared for since birth by GTZ. We understand there are no restraints
imposed on the
carers with respect to their communications to IB and VB. We
accept that comments made by the carers to IB and VB may be emotionally
confusing for them at this time and may cause disappointment if it transpires
that the siblings are not returned to GTZ’s care.
intimidation of GTZ by GTX
was asked to explain her concern about the way a handover of IB and VB with GTX
was managed on 28 April 2024. According to a police
report, GTX came to the
driver’s window (where GTZ was sitting), knocked on the window and stared
at her, trying to intimidate
her. Under cross-examination, she confirmed that
she did not like GTX’s conduct, but asserted that the fact that she had
the matter to Burrun Dalai demonstrated she was not intimidated by him.
There is insufficient evidence associated with this incident
to make a finding
relevant to an assessment of GTZ’s risk.
The period of time
since those offences or matters occurred and the conduct of the person since
they occurred: s 30(1)(b) of the Act
allegations by BB concern events that she asserted took place in the second
period of her placement with GTZ, that is, between
January and September 2021.
GTZ continued to co-parent (with GTX) IB and VB until their removal on 11
December 2024 when BB made
the allegations. Neither IB nor VB have made any
disclosures against GTZ or GTX. The applicant GTZ has denied all the allegations
made against her and has endeavoured to have IB and VB restored to her
The age of the person at the time the offences or matters
occurred: s 30(1)(c)
applicant was aged between 49 and 50 at the time of the matters alleged by
The age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at
the time they occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
victim: s 30(1)(d)
was aged between 10 and 11 at the time of the alleged conduct. She was 14 years
of age at the time that she made the allegations.
is no question that BB was vulnerable, being a child placed in foster care, and
reliant on GTZ and GTX for her physical and
emotional safety and
The difference in age between the victim and the
person and the relationship (if any) between the victim and the person: s
age difference between the applicant and BB at the time of the matters alleged
is approximately 39 years.
was a child placed in foster care with the applicant and GTX in January 2018
until December 2019 and then from January 2021 until
Whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known,
that the victim was a child: s 30(1)(f)
the applicant knew that BB was a child at the time of the alleged
The person’s present age: s 30(1)(g)
applicant is currently 53 years of age.
The seriousness of the
person’s criminal history and the conduct of the person since the matters
occurred: s 30(1)(h)
is no evidence before the Tribunal that GTZ has a criminal history before or
after the time of the alleged conduct.
The likelihood of any
repetition by the person of the offences or conduct and the impact on
children of any such repetition: s 30(1)(i)
Tribunal has found, on the balance of probabilities, that the applicant did not
engage in the conduct as alleged by BB. If GTZ
were to engage in such conduct in
the future, towards a child in her care, it would likely cause emotional and
psychological harm,
and potentially physical harm.
has not participated in an expert assessment of her risk or the likelihood that
she may engage in the nature of the conduct alleged
against her. However, she
has provided a character reference from a Clinical Neuropsychologist who has
known her for around 13 years.
The applicant has engaged in therapy with the
Neuropsychologist who is also a personal friend. The Neuropsychologist is
acquainted with the high needs of IB and VB. Her personal reference
attests to the applicant’s prioritisation of the needs
of foster children
in her care and to her integrity:
“[The applicant] is a person of high moral values and personal integrity
She has extensive knowledge and lived experience of
young people’s mental
health issues. [The applicant] has prioritized ensuring that her children and
foster-children understand
personal safety behaviours, and the children feel
confident to approach her with their question and concerns, which are discussed
with frankness and are acted upon appropriately.”
also submitted a character reference from a Clinical Psychologist who has worked
closely with her since December 2020 and is the
treating psychologist to IB. Her
reference makes the following statements:
“Over the past five years I have found [the applicant’s] commitment,
dedication and love for the children in her care
to be remarkable Despite facing
significant challenges due to [IB’s] behavioural difficulties and
emotional needs, [the applicant]
has responded with unwavering patience,
understanding and integrity. I do not know many carers who could consistently
place the children’s
needs ahead of their own to provide a stable and
nurturing environment, and I feel that this has required considerable personal
from [the applicant].”
“... Again, her commitment to the children in her care is unparalleled and
I have not experienced this level of care with any
other foster carer, guardian,
or parent.”
“In conclusion, I would strongly recommend [the applicant] as a capable
and compassionate foster carer. She has demonstrated
dedication, diligence, and
strong moral and ethical principles in her role as a foster carer.”
her assessment of GTZ’s protective capacities, the independent Cultural
Consultant engaged by DCJ made the following observations
applicant’s ability to reflect on adverse findings and acknowledge risk
“[The applicant] was open, transparent, and reflective during discussions
(CS) check. Her account of
the circumstances aligned with the documented information provided to the
assessor, demonstrating her
willingness to acknowledge past concerns and engage
in constructive dialogue about her history. This openness is indicative of her
developing insight and a readiness to work alongside professionals in addressing
risk factors.”
Consultant also observed the applicant’s insight into past difficulties
and her willingness to engage collaboratively with
services to assist in her
care for children:
“[The applicant] is currently preparing for the return of her children to
her care following a period of removal. She has shown
significant motivation and
growth, with a clear understanding of the challenges she previously faced and a
renewed commitment to
creating a safe, nurturing and structured home
environment. Her insight into past difficulties and willingness to work
collaboratively
with services marks a positive shift in her caregiving
balance, we have given a moderate amount of weight to the personal references
since both referees are well acquainted with GTZ’s
standard of care for
foster children. We have, additionally, given a moderately high amount of weight
to the assessment by DCJ’s
Cultural Consultant.
regard to all the evidence, and in particular GTZ’s oral testimony, we are
of the view that the applicant’s likelihood
of engaging in conduct in the
nature of that alleged by BB, is very low, to the point of being
negligible.
Any order of a court or tribunal that is in force in
relation to the person: s 30(1)(i1)
is not the subject of any order of a court or a tribunal.
information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the application: s
applicant affirmed two affidavits in support of her position in which she denied
the allegations made against her by BB. Her oral
testimony was consistent with
her affidavit evidence. She also provided two personal character references
which we have already referred
Any relevant information
in relation to the person that was obtained in accordance with section 36A: s
Tribunal understands there is no other relevant information in relation to the
applicant obtained in accordance with s 36A of
the Act (exchange of information
to bodies in other jurisdictions) to be taken into
consideration.
Any other matters that the Children’s
Guardian considers necessary: s 30(1)(k)
was submitted on behalf of the Children’s Guardian that the allegations
made by BB ought not be viewed in isolation from
the totality of information
available in relation to her care of a number of children. Those other matters
were put to GTZ in cross-examination
and have been taken into account, with no
significant negative findings made by this Tribunal.
was also submitted on behalf of the Children’s Guardian that although GTZ
is in a different category to GTX insofar as their
alleged conduct is concerned,
it is a matter of concern that GTZ maintains a close association with GTX
despite her own negative
report about his conduct towards her. This was also a
matter on which GTZ was cross-examined and we accept GTZ’s evidence that
she functions with full agency and is not dependant upon GTX for any form of
support. We understand that GTZ would not require any
co-parenting relationship
with GTX to be implemented if she were to have IB or VB or any other children
placed in her care in the
future. We also understand, from the Cultural
Consultant’s report, that GTZ’s daughter (MH) would be prepared to
be assessed
as a respite carer, to provide support for
Overall evaluation of risk
a number of respects, the applicant impressed the Tribunal as a dedicated foster
carer, with an exemplary attitude of genuine interest
in the welfare of children
in her care and an appreciation of the responsibilities attaching to the role of
a carer. She demonstrated
empathy towards BB notwithstanding BB’s
allegations against her, and expressed concern that BB may have experienced
emotions associated with her time in GTZ’s care.
Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence before it that the applicant does not pose
a risk to the safety of children.
Reasonable person and public
interest tests
making an order that has the effect of enabling a person to work with children,
the Tribunal must be satisfied that the reasonable
person and public interest
tests in s 30(1A) of the Act have been met.
first to the reasonable person test, the Tribunal must be satisfied that a
reasonable person would allow their child to have
direct unsupervised contact
with the applicant while she is engaged in any child-related work.
reasonable person would need to be acquainted with all of the matters that are
before this Tribunal. That includes the applicant’s
long history of being
an authorised carer for around 100 children, with the two long-term placements
of children with complex diagnoses
and high needs; the matters considered by the
Tribunal with respect to BB’s allegations including the circumstances
surrounding
the applicant’s separation and divorce from GTX; the result of
Burrun Dalai’s reportable conduct investigation which
found there was
insufficient evidence to substantiate BB’s allegations; the fact that the
police suspended their investigation
with no charges pending, the circumstances
where the applicant acted protectively towards children in her care, the
recommendation
of the Cultural Consultant and the references from the Clinical
Neuropsychologist and the Clinical Psychologist.
applicant has insight into the vulnerability of children in foster care and the
risks associated with their care.
applicant presents as a compliant person, willing to following procedures and
maintain a collaborative relationship with authorities.
applicant presents as having a low to negligible risk of engaging in conduct in
the nature of the conduct alleged against her.
are satisfied that the reasonable person test in s 30(1A)(a) of the Act has been
respect to the public interest test, the broad interests of the community are
clearly served by having persons such as the applicant
provide a stable, loving
family environment in which foster children feel safe and protected.
applicant’s right to use her experience and expertise as a carer is of at
least equal importance to the public interest,
and is entirely consistent with
the community interests.
are no public interest considerations to suggest that it is not in the public
interest for this applicant to have the Interim
Bar removed from her
are therefore satisfied that the public interest test in s 30(1A)(b) of the Act
has been met.
(1) The decision of the Children’s Guardian dated 20 December 2024 to
place an Interim Bar on the applicant’s working
with children check
clearance is set aside and, in substitution of that decision being set aside,
the applicant’s clearance
is to be reinstated forthwith pending
finalisation of the Children’s Guardian’s risk assessment.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter