URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Langtry & ors v Cordaro & ors [2001] NSWSSB 1 (14 May 2001)
Langtry & ors v Cordaro & ors
[2001] NSWSSB 1
(14 May 2001)
APPLICATION NO : SB00/00444
SCHEME : SP10805
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME Drummoyne NSW
APPELLANTS : B &B Langtry, P Johnston, B & M Smith and
(OTHER PARTIES) : J. Cordaro, I Ward and G.
APPLICATION : The application is an appeal against orders
made by an Adjudicator appointing a strata managing agent with full
APPEARANCES : The appellants Mr Langtry, Mr & Mrs Smith,
Ms Northey, in person.
J. Cordaro, I Ward and G. Franklin represented by Mr Le Page, Solicitor.
HEARINGS : 9 October 2000, 16 November 2000 and
5 March 2001
1. The appeal is dismissed.
2. The Adjudicator’s orders made on 22 June 2000 are affirmed as
1. Titles Strata Management Pty Limited (ACN 001 111 931) of "...", Drummoyne,
NSW, 2047 being a managing agent licensed under the
Property Stock and Business
Agents Act 1941
is hereby appointed as the strata managing agent of strata plan
no. 10805 for a period of twelve months commencing on 1 July 2000.
2. Titles Strata Management Pty Limited is to exercise all the functions of the
owners corporation and is to have and may exercise
all the functions of the
chairperson, secretary, treasurer and executive committee of the owners
corporation for strata plan no.
3. Titles Strata Management Pty Limited is to be remunerated in accordance with
a management fee of $1,200.00 per annum plus disbursements
plus an hourly fee of
$80.00 for any matter outside of the everyday management of strata plan no.
10805, on the terms set out in
a letter dated 9 June 2000 from Titles Strata
Management Pty Limited to the Strata Schemes Board.
4. The owners corporation and members of the executive committee for strata plan
no. 10805 are to deliver the following items to
Titles Strata Management Pty
Limited no later than 1 July
records and documents required to be kept by the owners corporation in
accordance with:
- Divisions 1, 2 and 3 of
Chapter 3 of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
- Clauses 5, 6, 8 and 9 of the
Strata Schemes Management Regulation 1997
of the owners corporation for strata plan no.
REASONS FOR
This is a reserved decision in relation to an appeal lodged by the
above named appellants against the orders given by an Adjudicator,
Ms E Grinston
on 22 June 2000 appointing Titles Strata Management Pty Limited as compulsory
Strata Managing Agents for a period of
twelve months commencing on 1 July 2000.
The order provided for Titles Strata Management Pty Limited to exercise all the
of the owners corporation and to have and exercise all the functions
of the chairperson, secretary, treasurer and executive committee
of the owners
corporation for strata plan no. 10805 for the duration of that period.
THE ORIGINAL APPLICATION
The original application by J Cordaro, G Franklin and I Ward (the owners
of lots 1, 3 and 4 of the strata plan) was for an order that
"an administrator
be appointed to manage the scheme and that the current executive committee cease
to exist". The reasons given
for this application were:
"1. Hostile
environment currently at hand between owners.
2. The unified voting of four voters representing only 57% of unit entitlement
against all motions put by other owners.
3. The growing number of mediation sessions already held and that will continue
to be necessary on an ongoing basis, there are now
at least six outstanding
issues on which an adjudication could be applied for."
THE ADJUDICATOR’S DELIBERATIONS AND ORDERS
The Adjudicator considered all the submissions made by the various
The adjudicator noted that there were a number of live issues at
that time between some or all of the (original) applicants and the
the executive committee, including challenges to the way in which executive
committee members had used the owners corporation’s
funds to obtain legal
advice purportedly on behalf of the owners corporation, the way in which the
executive committee discharged
its obligation to maintain and repair the common
property and the allocation of exclusive use rights in relation to certain
of the parcel. The adjudicator also observed that there had been seven
extraordinary general meetings in the period from July 1999
to March 2000. The
Adjudicator accepted on the totality of the evidentiary material provided that
voting on issues at general meetings,
at least in the last year had generally,
if not always gone along the lines of the split between the two camps, one
consisting of
the applicants (the owners of lots "...") and the other consisting
of the owners of lots "...".
"Throughout this period there has been friction between the two groups, the
owners of numbers "..." looking for change and numbers
"..." seeking
preservation of the integrity of the property."
Adjudicator observed that the friction between the two camps had resulted in any
disruption of the ordinary proceedings of the
scheme and that at least from the
point of view of the (former) executive committee (members), the disruption of
works which were
then under way, on behalf of the scheme. There had been a
number of applications for mediation and adjudication and more were
foreshadowed.
The attitude of each of the two camps was entrenched. There
appeared to be no willingness to compromise from either side and there
to be a loss of confidence on the part of the present respondents in the current
management of the scheme.
The Adjudicator likened the position of the
scheme to that of a two lot scheme in which the owners are deadlocked and due to
conflict unable to effectively attend to the day to day management issue
which arise, "let alone the more serious intermittent matters".
She observed
that the factionalisation of the scheme together with the hostile environment
was not conducive to a balanced consideration
by all of the lot owners of issues
which arise from time to time. She concluded that she was satisfied that the
management structure
of the scheme was not functioning in a satisfactory way.
NOTICE OF APPEAL
The reasons given for appealing were as follows:
1. Adjudicator’s determination that the scheme was like a two lot scheme
when in fact it is a seven lot scheme.
2. Majority of proprietors made submissions in favour of the executive committee
and the retention of the executive administration
of executive committee and
owners corporation.
3. Misinformation contained in submissions made by the
applicants.
THE HEARING OF THE APPEAL
The hearing of the Appeal concluded on 5 March 2001. It is regrettable
that the matter could not have been determined at an earlier
stage. However the
unavailability of witnesses and the legal representative on different occasions
as well as the amount of evidentiary
material which was presented, (some of it
marginally (if relevant at all)) were all reasons for this delay.
should mention that, following the hearing on 5 March 2001, communications from
both Mr Langtry and Dr Cordaro have been received
by the Registry. I have not
taken into account those communications in arriving at my
THE APPELLANTS’ CASE.
The appeal commenced
with Mr Langtry on behalf of the appellants presenting oral and written
submissions. Mr Le Page, solicitor for
the respondents had initially indicated
that the matter could be disposed of by way of submissions. However, Mr Le Page
later indicated
that he would need to call evidence in the light of some of the
matters that were raised by Mr Langtry.
In short, the appellants’
submissions were based on four points:
1. The Adjudicator erred by appointing an administrator.
2. There were a number of false allegations made by some of the respondents, the
owners of lots "...".
3. Executive committee has managed the scheme properly, and
4. In any event there was a managing agent who assisted with the management of
the Scheme.
The appellants deny that the former executive
committee members had used funds for legal advice improperly or failed in their
to maintain and repair the common property. The submission pointed
to the recently (successfully) completed building works. The
appellants took
issue with the comment made by the Adjudicator about the allocation of exclusive
use rights in relation to certain
portions of the parcel. The appellants also
dispute the Adjudicator’s finding that voting on issues at general
meetings had,
"at least in the last year generally, if not always gone along the
lines of the split between the two camps." In response to this
finding by the
Adjudicator, Mr Langtry produced a record of voting from 22 March 1999 to 19
June 2000 which according to him shows
that this was not the case.
general the appellants’ submission is that certain inferences drawn by the
Adjudicator were not accurate and that in short
the scheme was being managed
adequately. More importantly, it was not correct to have found that the
position of the scheme was
akin to that of a two lot scheme in which the owners
were deadlocked and due to their conflict were unable to effectively to attend
to the day to day issues. The appellants again contend that the executive
committee had not been derelict in any of its duties and
the day to day
management of the scheme had not been affected whatsoever by the disputes
between the owners. The minutes of the
various meetings provided clearly
indicated that there have been a democratic, balanced consideration of all
matters by all lot owners.
The Adjudicator by appointing an
administrator had, according to the appellants, rewarded the apparent contempt
for the system by
the minority owners. The majority should not be disadvantaged
by being deprived of the right to vote. The respondents had a voice,
owners did, at general meetings. The fact that the majority owners chose not to
vote for them on to the executive was a
matter of democratic choice. The
appellants claimed that the word "friction" which is used to describe the
relationship between
the two groups was incorrect. Personal likes or dislikes
were not matters that should be taken into account under the
Strata Schemes
Management Act 1996
The submissions also seek to answer false
allegations in letters from the owners of lots 1, 3 and 4. I do not propose to
any of this material as there is little point in doing so at this stage.
I shall refer to this material later either in the context
of the evidence given
by the respondents to the present appeal or in my reasons for
In summary the case for the appellants was that the Strata
Schemes Board in previous decisions has not accepted unsubstantiated allegations
of mismanagement. The burden of proof has always been on the applicant for the
order for a compulsory strata managing agent. Furthermore
the Board has held in
previous decisions that unhappiness with particular decisions and an
applicant’s frustration were not
grounds for the appointment of a strata
managing agent. In short, there was no evidence, according to Messrs Langtry,
Northey, Smith
and Johnston, that the former executive committee had not
discharged its duty properly. There was no evidence that the management
scheme was not functioning or was not functioning satisfactorily. A minority of
owners feeling aggrieved because of the domination
by the majority was not a
ground for appointment of a strata managing agent. Majority rule underlies
strata living.
Mr Langtry and Ms Northey also gave some oral
THE RESPONDENTS’ CASE
Evidence was then given by G Thomas, of Strata Titles Management Pty
Limited (the strata managing agent), Dr Cordaro, Mr Franklin,
Mr Ward and Ms
The Evidence of Mr Thomas
Mr G Thomas had been appointed as strata managing agent in October 1999
by the Owners Corporation itself. He was appointed in June
2000 as the
compulsory strata managing agent by an Adjudicator’s order which is the
subject of this appeal. This order has
not been stayed.
Mr Thomas gave
evidence that he has had some twelve months to observe the workings of the
strata scheme. During the course of this
twelve months there had been seven
extraordinary general meetings. The two camps could not agree. There was
little prospect of
anything other than an ordinary resolution being passed. Any
resolution proposed by the minority was very likely to be blocked.
resultant decisions were not always the best possible decisions. An example
had been a resolution concerning glass balustrading
for which the owners of lots
"..." were prepared to pay for. This had been unsuccessful. There were other
instances of decisions,
which were contrary to commonsense.
observed animosity between the two camps which appeared to be getting worse.
Any steps which would require a special resolution
were not likely to be taken
given the animosity between the parties. Most put forward by the minority
owners in his experience,
were opposed by the respondents and were usually
withdrawn after it became apparent that they had no chance of getting through.
Generally the two camps were divided, with the appellants seeking to maintain
the status quo (although he stressed that this did
not mean that the common
property was let go into disrepair) and the other camp wishing to see some
Given the fact that this was prime property what he wanted to do
as compulsory administrator was to get all the owners to submit "wish
then to make a judgment as to the priorities to be accorded to any items on this
The evidence given by the respondents G Franklin, I Ward, J Cordaro
(and also Mrs Gibbons) in general terms repeated the written submissions
Adjudicator, that there had been a history of hostility between Mr Langtry, Ms
Northey and other owners who were members of
the executive committee and
constituted the majority on the one hand and the minority owners, (Mr Franklin,
Mr Ward and Dr Cordaro).
The former executive committee members had not
attended to necessary repairs of the buildings and had ignored suggestions from
minority owners who represented 43% of the total unit entitlement. There
had been extensive recourse to litigation, constant threats
of legal action and
applications for apprehended violence orders by the executive committee members
against individual "minority
owners". The majority owners had not managed the
common property and the expenditure of funds for the benefit of all owners.
I am not going to set in detail various examples given of this except to
refer to Mr Ward’s account in relation to the exclusive
use by-law which
he was asked to agree to for works to common property affecting his lot (for
which according to him he should not
have incurred any expenditure
Dr Cordaro referred to a number of alterations to common
property by the former executive which interfered with common property and
which could not find any record of any special resolution for an exclusive use
by-law (which was required to authorise such works).
Reference was made
by both the appellants and the respondents to instances of misbehaviour, abusive
language, intimidation, threats
and so on by the "other side".
said on behalf of the respondents that some of this evidence was given as an
illustration of the bad relationship between the
parties. I should indicate at
this stage that I see little relevance to the present proceedings of all these
accusations and counter
accusations of misbehaviour. However I shall refer in
passing to an allegation made by Mr Franklin (and Ms Gibbons) about Mr Langtry
being observed looking at Ms Gibbons in the shower, through his bedroom window.
This was vigorously denied by Mr Langtry and (understandably)
Mr Langtry was
most indignant that this, (according to him), maliciously false allegation
should have been made. Mr Langtry went
to considerable lengths to rebut this.
In determining this appeal, it is not necessary for me to make a finding in
relation to this
allegation. However I can indicate that I would have little
hesitation in concluding on the evidence that the allegation had no
and for what it is worth, I would accept Mr Langtry’s evidence. I would
add that I have serious doubts about the
appropriateness for such evidentiary
material being adduced on the basis that it indicates that the relationship
between the parties
was hostile, I shall say nothing further about this aspect
of proceedings.
LEGISLATION
Sections 162
and181 of the Act provide as follows:
162 Order appointing strata managing agent to exercise certain
(1) Order appointing strata managing agent to exercise functions of owners
corporation
An Adjudicator may by order appoint a person as a strata managing agent:
(a) to exercise all the functions of an owners corporation, or
(b) to exercise specified functions of an owners corporation,
(c) to exercise all the functions other than specified functions of an owners
corporation.
(2) Order may confer other functions on strata managing
An Adjudicator may also order, when appointing a strata managing agent under
this section, that the strata managing agent is to have
(a) all the functions of the chairperson, secretary, treasurer or executive
committee of the owners corporation, or
(b) specified functions of the chairperson, secretary, treasurer or executive
committee of the owners corporation, or
(c) all the functions of the chairperson, secretary, treasurer or executive
committee of the owners corporation other than specified
(3) Order may be made without application in special
circumstances
An Adjudicator may make an order under this section, whether or not on
application, but only if satisfied that the management structure
of a strata
scheme the subject of an application under this Chapter is not functioning or is
not functioning
satisfactorily.
(4) Qualifications of person appointed
A person appointed as a strata managing agent under this section
(a) hold a strata managing agent's licence issued under the
Property, Stock and
Business Agents Act 1941
(b) have consented in writing to the appointment,
(c) in the case of a person appointed in the circumstances referred to in
subsection (3), be selected by the Adjudicator from a panel
of nominees of
prescribed persons or bodies.
(5) Terms and conditions of appointment
A strata managing agent may be appointed under this section on such terms and
conditions (including terms and conditions relating
to remuneration by the
owners corporation and the duration of appointment) as may be specified in the
order making the appointment.
(6) Revocation of certain appointments
An order made in the circumstances referred to in subsection (3) may be revoked
or varied by an Adjudicator on the application of
a person entitled to make an
application for an order under this section and, unless sooner revoked, ceases
to have effect at the
expiration of such period after its making (not exceeding
12 months) as is specified in the order.
(7) Who may make an application?
An application for an order under this section may be made only
(a) a person who obtained an order under this Act that imposed a duty on the
owners corporation or on its executive committee, chairperson,
secretary or
treasurer and that has not been complied with, or
(b) a person having an estate or interest in a lot in the strata scheme
concerned or, in the case of a leasehold strata scheme, in
a lease of a lot in
the scheme, or
(c) the authority having the benefit of a positive covenant that imposes a duty
on the owners corporation, or
(d) a judgment creditor to whom the owners corporation owes a judgment
181 Determination of appeal from order of
Adjudicator
(1) This section applies to the determination by the Board of an appeal from an
order of an Adjudicator.
(2) The Board may admit new evidence.
(3) Unless the order appealed against is an interim order, the Board may
determine an appeal by an order affirming, amending or revoking
appealed against or substituting its own order for the order appealed
(4) If the order appealed against is an interim order, the Board may determine
the appeal by an order revoking the interim order
or dismissing the appeal.
(5) An order made by the Board under subsection (3) has effect, and the
provisions of this Act (other than the provisions conferring
a right of appeal
to the Board) apply to it, as if it were an order made under the same provision
as the order appealed against.
(6) Subsection (5) does not exclude an appeal from an order of the Board made
under this section.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
First, in my view it would be an affront to commonsense not to conclude
on the evidence that there is friction or indeed hostility
between the
appellants and the respondents. I do not accept that the existence of this
friction or hostility is not a relevant consideration
in determining whether the
management structure is functioning satisfactorily. It is a very relevant
consideration if decisions
made either by the executive committee or at general
meetings are infected by this hostility and friction. It must cast doubt on
whether decisions are indeed made on their merits.
While it is not a
major point, it is facile to take issue with the Adjudicator’s likening
the situation to that of a dispute
in a two lot scheme. This was simply a
figure of speech which vividly describes the nature of problem in this
I am also satisfied on the evidence that it has been established
(as the Adjudicator found) that the factionalisation of the scheme
apparent and that such an environment is not conducive to a balanced
consideration of the issues which arise. The analysis
of the voting patterns at
AGMs submitted by the appellants does not rebut the above finding. In this
regard I accept the evidence
given by Mr Thomas of Titles Strata Management Pty
Limited. Mr Thomas has been in the position to observe the workings of the
for the last year or so. While it true that some resolutions proposed by
the minority were carried, as Mr Thomas observed, the vast
majority of
resolutions proposed by the minority were withdrawn when the attitude of the
majority at the meeting had become apparent
The evidence of Mr
Thomas generally provided unequivocal support for the Adjudicator’s
findings. While Mr Thomas conceded that
he had some stake in the outcome, no
issue was taken by the appellants in relation to his, and his firms,
independence or impartiality.
Titles Strata Management Pty Limited had been
appointed strata manager at an AGM by the owners corporation itself, in the
Most significantly, Mr Thomas observed that, in his view,
the resultant decisions were not always the best possible decisions and
"contradicted commonsense". I am satisfied that the management structure of the
scheme is not functioning satisfactorily.
Mr Thomas gave evidence that,
although the previous executive committee had not let the scheme fall into
disrepair, given that the
parcel was "prime property", there was a need for a
"facelift". I note that he proposes to consult all the lot owners by obtaining
a "wish list" for repairs and renovations. He proposes that he would then, as
the compulsory managing agent, make a judgment as
to the priority to be accorded
to the items appearing on this list.
I should indicate that I gave some
consideration to the submissions made by Mr Langtry on behalf of all the
appellants. It is true
that, on the evidence before me, it has not been
substantiated that the former executive committee had not complied with the
legislation
nor that there was any serious mismanagement. Dr Cordaro’s
evidence in relation to alterations to common property for which
he could not
find appropriate authorisation by way of special resolution lacks sufficient
particularity for any finding to be made.
Nor do I agree with Mr Le Page that
the evidence necessarily discloses that there was any deception of Mr Ward by
the Executive
Committee in requiring him to agree to the exclusive use by-law in
relation to repairs to common property affecting his lot. However,
decided that it is necessary to make an order under Section 162 because as I
have indicated, the management structure is not
functioning satisfactorily.
The fact of the matter is that there is a need in this scheme for "a circuit
breaker", for someone
to stand back and independently assess the needs of the
scheme having regard to the interests of all owners. This is one of the
purposes which the appointment of a strata manager with full powers will serve.
Mr Thomas, and his firm Titles Strata Management
Pty Limited, will have an
opportunity to make an independent and impartial assessment of the needs of the
scheme and will be able
to accord priorities.
One final matter. Given
the length of time that the determination of this appeal has taken it means that
the Adjudicator’s
order will cease to have effect on 30 June 2001. The
only power I have is to make the same order as that made by the Adjudicator.
Section 181(5) provides that an order made by the Board in determining an appeal
has effect, and the provisions of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
apply to it, as if it were an order made under the same provision as the order
appealed against. As there has been no stay of the
operation of the
Adjudicator’s order, in affirming the Adjudicator’s order, I cannot
extend the period of appointment
of a strata managing agent. On my reading of
Section 162
an order ceases to have affect after the period of appointment
expires (which period cannot exceed twelve months from the making
order). I realise that because of the delay in determining this appeal the
strata managing agent will not have much time
at its disposal. However I
believe that, in the circumstances, I can only affirm the order made by the
Adjudicator. Any order extending
the appointment would only be considered on a
further application to an Adjudicator, for such an order.
Orders made
accordingly.
Strata Schemes
Adjudicator
14 May 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter