URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amaca Pty Limited v Telstra Corporation Limited; (re Edwards) [2025] NSWDDT 1 (2 April 2025)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Amaca Pty Limited v Telstra Corporation Limited; (re Edwards)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDDT 1
Hearing Date(s):
26 March 2025
Date of Orders:
2 April 2025
Decision Date:
2 April 2025
Judge Russell SC
(1) Grant leave to Amaca Pty Ltd to amend its cross claim
in accordance with this judgment.
(2) Notice of Motion
filed on 19 February 2025 is otherwise dismissed.
Amaca Pty Ltd to pay its own costs of the Notice of Motion filed on 19 February
(4) Order Amaca Pty Ltd to pay the costs of Telstra
Corporation Limited of the proceedings; such costs are to be assessed on the
ordinary basis up to 19 April 2024 and thereafter on the indemnity basis.
Catchwords:
PROCEDURAL – Notice of Motion to amend identity of cross defendant
and basis of claim against new party– cross defendant
told cross claimant
that it was the wrong party – information from plaintiff’s solicitor
also indicated that the wrong
cross defendant was sued – leave granted to
amend cross claim – amended cross claim should make specific allegations
to identify basis of liability of new cross defendant
amendment effectively discontinues against cross defendant – significant
delay in making application to amend
– no evidence that cross claimant
took steps to check accuracy of claim once advised of the problems –
ordinary costs
– indemnity costs
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Procedural rulings
Amaca Pty Limited (Cross Claimant)
Telstra Corporation Limited (Cross
Representation:
Mr D A Priestley SC (Cross Claimant)
Mr J L Sharpe (Cross
Defendant/Respondent)
Solicitors:
Mills Oakley Lawyers (Cross
Sparke Helmore (Cross Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/00307275
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
Darryl Edwards contracted mesothelioma as a result of exposure to asbestos
cement building products manufactured and supplied by
the defendant Amaca Pty
Limited (Amaca). Mr Edwards commenced proceedings in this Tribunal against
Amaca. His claim proceeded through
the Claims Resolution Process (CRP) and
settled at a mediation on 14 October 2024 for $650,000 inclusive of costs. A
Consent Judgment
was entered on 18 October 2024.
brought a cross claim against Telstra Corporation Limited (Telstra Corporation)
on 28 February 2024. The cross claim alleged
that Telstra Corporation was a
tortfeasor obliged to make contribution towards any damages recovered by Mr
Edwards. Telstra Corporation
was therefore part of the CRP. A Contributions
Assessment Determination (CAD) was made which found Telstra Corporation liable
a percentage of damages. Amaca has paid all of the damages to Mr Edwards and
has not sought to rely upon the CAD, or have Telstra
Corporation pay any money
towards the damages.
Notice of Motion filed on 19 February
filed a Notice of Motion to amend the cross claim against Telstra Corporation to
substitute Telstra Limited as the cross defendant
in place of Telstra
Corporation. Amaca seeks leave to file an Amended Cross Claim. Amaca also seeks
an order that the costs of the
motion be paid by Telstra Limited once leave has
been granted to file an Amended First Cross Claim. Finally, Amaca also seeks
further orders as this Honourable Court deems fit.”
Evidence in Support of the Motion
relies upon an affidavit by its solicitor Mr Cilona dated 19 February 2025 (CCX
1). Mr Cilona sets out the history of the proceedings
which can be summarised as
27 September 2023 Mr Edwards commenced proceedings in this Tribunal against
21 February 2024 Mr Edwards filed his Statement of Particulars which
“Telstra – Sydney, NSW
In about February 2000, I got a job with Telstra in North Sydney, installing and
removing telephone systems. My job required me to
cut and drill into fibro walls
when doing installs and I had some exposure to asbestos during this employment.
I only did this work
for about three or four months.
This period could represent about 5% of my lifetime exposure.”
28 February 2024 Amaca filed its cross claim against Telstra Corporation. The
cross claim alleged that Mr Edwards was employed
by Telstra Corporation and that
his exposure occurred during that period of employment. It is noted that in his
Statement of Particulars
Mr Edwards did not specifically say that he was
employed by Telstra Corporation. Nor did he mention Telstra Corporation at all.
he said, “I got a job with Telstra”.
19 April 2024 Telstra Corporation filed a Reply as part of the CRP. The Reply
annexed an email from the solicitor for Mr Edwards.
The email said that Mr
Edwards had instructed that he applied for a position with Telstra Limited which
was formerly NDC Limited.
The email annexed a copy of the advertisement which
led to Mr Edwards working at the Telstra job in North Sydney. The job was
by an organisation known as Manpower, and referred to engagement of
technicians in the electrical trade to commence work with NDC
Limited in March
2000. The email concluded by saying that Mr Edwards believes that he may have
worked as a contractor as opposed
to an employee.
as at April 2024 when the Telstra Corporation Reply was served, Amaca had
material to suggest that it had sued an incorrect cross
defendant (Telstra
Corporation rather than Telstra Limited) and that the basis for any liability of
the cross defendant was in a
capacity different than that of employer. There is
no evidence in the Affidavit of Mr Cilona as to whether any steps were taken by
Amaca, after receiving that information, to check its accuracy.
6 September 2024 Amaca was served with a Statutory Declaration by Mr Edwards. In
that Statutory Declaration Mr Edwards said that
although his Statement of
Particulars referred to employment with Telstra, upon further reflection Mr
Edwards believed that he worked
on a contract basis as opposed to a worker for
wages. He said that the job he applied for was advertised by a labour hire
called Manpower. Mr Edwards believed that he was engaged on a contract
basis, as opposed to being a worker for wages. This was further
confirmation by
Mr Edwards that the basis for Amaca’s cross claim against Telstra
Corporation was misconceived.
receipt of that Statutory Declaration Mr Cilona wrote to the solicitors for
Telstra Corporation enquiring whether the cross
claim could be amended by
consent “to reflect the correct entity name”. The solicitors for
Telstra Corporation replied
indicating that they wished to take the
plaintiff’s evidence if Mr Edwards’ claim resolved at mediation.
a letter dated 8 October 2024 the solicitors for Telstra Corporation informed Mr
Cilona that Telstra Corporation placed in dispute
all matters pleaded in the
first cross claim. They confirmed that they would not consent to an amendment to
the first cross claim.
That letter reiterated that the plaintiff was not an
employee of any Telstra entity or predecessor. The letter said that the employer
would have been Manpower.
mediation occurred on 14 October 2024 and settled for $650,000 inclusive of
costs on a full and final basis. An Amended Statement
of Claim was filed on 18
October 2024 to plead an additional period of domestic asbestos exposure for
which Amaca was liable. A Consent
Judgment for Mr Edwards was filed on 18
October 2024.
24 October 2024 the plaintiff gave sworn evidence before the mediator. In
summary, that evidence referred to performing work for
NDC, which provided
instructions, supplied a uniform, special tools and all wires and line cables.
Mr Edwards said that he signed
a contract at the Manpower office.
9 January 2025 onwards Mr Cilano was attempting to obtain the consent of the
solicitors of Telstra Corporation to an amendment
of the cross claim. That
consent was not forthcoming, resulting in Amaca filing the Notice of Motion on
19 February 2025.
Power to Amend
power to grant an amendment of the cross claim is found
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) (CPA) which provides as follows:
Amendment of documents generally
(1) At any stage of proceedings, the court may order—
(a) that any document in the proceedings be amended, or
(b) that leave be granted to a party to amend any document in the
proceedings.
(2) Subject to
, all necessary amendments are to be made for the
purpose of determining the real questions raised by or otherwise depending on
proceedings, correcting any defect or error in the proceedings and avoiding
multiplicity of proceedings.
(3) An order under this section may be made even if the amendment would
have the effect of adding or substituting a cause of action
that has arisen
after the commencement of the proceedings but, in that case, the date of
commencement of the proceedings, in relation
to that cause of action, is,
, taken to be the date on which the amendment is made.
(4) If there has been a mistake in the name of a party, this section
applies to the person intended to be made a party as if he
or she were a
(5) This section does not apply to the amendment of a judgment, order or
certificate.
power to amend a pleading is to be exercised subject to
of the CPA, as the
court considers necessary in the interests of justice, and not to punish a party
for its pleadings. These matters
will generally require consideration of the
nature and degree of any prejudice that may be suffered by the grant or refusal
application. Justice to the applicant in permitting amendment is always
to be balanced against any injustice to the respondent. Any
delay in bringing
the application for leave to amend must be taken into account. The explanation
for why the amendment is necessary
must be given by the applicant.
Corporation opposes the amendment sought. In one way this is surprising, as
Telstra Corporation has always maintained that
it was not the correct defendant
and should not have been sued. In correspondence, it relied upon the
“innocent defendant”
provisions in the CRP. However, as an
alternative submission, Telstra Corporation submitted that if the amendment is
granted, in
effect it means that Amaca is discontinuing against Telstra
Corporation and ought to pay Telstra Corporation’s costs to date.
amendment is granted Telstra Corporation will no longer be a party to the
proceedings, but will have incurred legal costs
in raising opposition to the
cross claim, which Amaca effectively now concedes to be correct and well
founded. Telstra Corporation
sought such costs on an indemnity basis.
Consideration
cross claim in its present form is doomed to fail. Amaca acknowledges that it
has sued the wrong company as cross defendant, and
has sued on the wrong basis
(i.e. employment rather than contractor and/or occupier). Counsel for Telstra
Corporation criticised
the form of the proposed Amended Cross Claim, saying that
it did not make clear the basis for Telstra Limited being liable. That
is, in my view, well founded. However, the form of the proposed cross claim does
not determine whether or not the power
of the CPA should be
amendment proposed will result in the real issue on the cross claim being
determined, in the sense that the correct cross defendant
will now be sued (at
least so far as Amaca is presently informed). The amendment will also, when
properly pleaded, enable Telstra
Limited to know the basis upon which it is said
to have been a tortfeasor.
has been significant delay in making the application to amend. When the Telstra
Corporation Reply was served almost a year ago
it contained information provided
by the plaintiff’s solicitor (not just assertions by Telstra Corporation)
which informed
Amaca that it had sued the wrong cross defendant, on the wrong
basis. That information was only confirmed by the Statutory Declaration
later sworn evidence by Mr Edwards. It is surprising that Amaca did not take
steps much earlier to amend the cross claim,
particularly when it was content to
engage in a CAD which, on the evidence it had, would make Telstra Corporation
liable to pay part
of the damages, on a basis which Amaca knew to be
unsupportable. However, the delay has not caused prejudice to Amaca. The delay
has caused prejudice to Telstra Corporation, in that it has incurred legal
costs, among other things, for constantly informing Amaca
that it was suing
Telstra Corporation on an incorrect basis. That prejudice can be cured by an
order for costs.
propose to make an order granting leave to amend the cross claim so that the
real issues between Amaca and Telstra Limited can be
put before a court. The
amendment to change the identity (not just the name) of the cross defendant will
result in Telstra Corporation
being relieved of the burden of incurring further
legal costs. The prejudice suffered by Telstra Corporation, not only by reason
of the amendment, but by reason of Amaca ignoring the information which it has
held for almost a year can be cured by order for costs.
There will be an order
that Amaca pay the costs of Telstra Corporation to date. That order for costs
will be made on the ordinary
basis up until the Telstra Corporation Reply was
filed and thereafter will be on an indemnity basis. As previously recited there
is no evidence as to whether Amaca took any steps to ascertain its rights after
being informed in April 2024, not by Telstra Corporation,
but by material
provided by solicitors for Mr Edwards, that it was going down the wrong
Costs Against Telstra Limited?
3 sought in the Notice of Motion filed on 19 February 2025 is an order that the
costs of the motion be paid by Telstra Limited,
once leave has been granted to
file an amended first cross claim and Telstra Limited is added to the
proceedings and substituted
for Telstra Corporation Limited. I decline to make
that order.
Limited has not been heard in relation to such an order. Further, in no way
could it be said that Telstra Limited has done
anything to cause Amaca Pty Ltd
to sue the wrong cross defendant or to bring the motion for leave to amend.
While Telstra Corporation
and Telstra Limited may well be related entities, they
are in law separate legal persons, and must be treated as such.
Form of the proposed amendment
Cilona annexes to his affidavit a proposed amended cross claim. I will not grant
leave to amend the cross claim in the form of
that proposed pleading.
12 of the proposed amended cross claim states:
“For the purposes of this Statement of Cross Claim, Amaca repeats the
facts, assertions and allegations of negligence against
plaintiff’s Statement of Particulars as allegations against
is confusing, as the allegations of negligence against Amaca appear, not from
the Statement of Particulars, but from the original
Statement of Claim. More
fundamentally, to repeat allegations in a Statement of Particulars, when such
allegations are broad and
uncertain (“I got a job with Telstra in North
Sydney”) does not inform Telstra Limited of the following:
(1) Whether Telstra Limited employed Mr Edwards.
(2) Whether NDC employed Mr Edwards.
(3) Whether Manpower employed Mr Edwards.
(4) Whether Mr Edwards worked not as an employee but as a contractor or
subcontractor, and if so, with whom did he contract?
(5) Whether Telstra Limited is sued as an occupier.
grant of leave to amend will therefore be in general terms, but in my view, the
amended cross claim should be more specific in
making legal allegations against
the Telstra Limited rather than simply reciting the facts and allegations in
previous documents
or previous evidence.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR)
provides as follows:
Pleadings to contain facts, not evidence
, rule 7; DCR
Subject to this Part,
, a party’s pleading must contain
only a summary of the material facts on which the party relies, and not the
evidence by which
those facts are to be proved.
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Grant leave to Amaca Pty Ltd to amend its cross claim in accordance with
this judgment.
(2) Notice of Motion filed on 19 February 2025 is otherwise dismissed.
(3) Order Amaca Pty Ltd to pay its own costs of the Notice of Motion filed on 19
February 2025.
(4) Order Amaca Pty Ltd to pay the costs of Telstra Corporation Limited of the
proceedings; such costs are to be assessed on the
ordinary basis up to 19 April
2024 and thereafter on the indemnity basis.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (243 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter