URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vivolo v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2023] NSWPICMRP 2; (11 August 2023)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Vivolo v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
NSWPICMRP 2
Alessio Vivolo
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Terrence O’Riain, Elizabeth Medland and Kattherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
11 August 2023
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of Merit
Review determination about the amount of weekly payments of statutory benefits
that are payable under Division 3.3;
single Merit Reviewer affirmed the
insurer’s pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE) determination at $529.16;
claimant applied
for review of the Merit Review; application provided new
evidence as amended 2020 financial year taxation return;
Review Panel remitted dispute to the insurer to re-determine PAWE; directions
made for claimant to provide further information, including,
copy of amended
notice of tax assessment with source documents used to prepare the amended tax
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
The reviewable decision is about the amount of weekly payments of statutory
benefits that are payable under Division 3.3 of the
Motor Accident Injuries
(the MAI Act), and is therefore a merit review matter under
Schedule 2(1)(a) of the MAI Act.
relation to the decision made by a single Merit Reviewer, the Review Panel
determines that the reviewable decision is remitted
to the insurer for
re-determination pursuant to the following directions:
(a) By on or before 25 August 2023 the claimant is to provide the following to
the insurer:
(i) a copy of the final, as lodged 2020 amended tax return;
(ii) a copy of the notice of assessment/amended notice of assessment issued by
the ATO in response to the 2020 amended tax return,
(iii) a copy of all source documents used to prepare the supplementary section
of the amended tax return that is, all Uber tax summaries,
all invoices, all
receipts, all bank statements and any other financial records used to calculate
the increased small business earnings
in the amended tax return in the sum of
$24,453 gross ($21,818 net) being an increase from the amount of $13,613 gross
($11,548 net)
declared in the original 2020 tax return.
(b) The insurer may request the above documents and any other information
reasonably required directly from the claimant’s
accountant pursuant to
the claimant’s authority in the application for personal injury benefits.
(c) Upon receipt of further information and documents pursuant to the above
directions the insurer is to re-determine the claimant’s
pre-accident
weekly earnings taking into consideration the amended tax return and further
documents and information provided by the
claimant’s costs are not assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation
, because he is self-represented.
Vivolo (the claimant), was injured in a motor accident on 9 July 2020. IAG Ltd
t/as NRMA Insurance (the insurer) accepted
the claimant’s claim under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act).
was a dispute between the parties about the amount of weekly benefits payable
under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act. In a decision
dated 24 September 2020, the
insurer determined that the claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE)
was $498.06. On internal
review dated 5 November 2020, the insurer determined
that the claimant’s PAWE was $519.16.
is no dispute that the claimant is an earner within the meaning in the MAI Act.
The dispute is in relation to whether the claimant
could include fees paid to
the food delivery service he worked for before the accident in calculating PAWE
and the claimant’s
PAWE amount.
dispute was referred to the Personal Injury Commission (Commission). Merit
Reviewer Sofoulis conducted a merit review and issued
a certificate dated 17 May
2022, affirming the insurer’s decision dated 5 November 2020. The
claimant’s PAWE was calculated
at $519.16 (the Certificate).
3 April 2023, the claimant lodged an amended income tax return for the year
30 June 2020 and submits that the tax return used by the insurer when
determining his PAWE was wrong because he worked four jobs and
the accountant
“got confused”.
claimant has not applied for, and the insurer has not reviewed its original
decision to take into consideration the amended tax
return. The claimant and the
insurer have not provided submissions to this Panel in respect of the amended
tax return.
Presidential delegate surmised that the claimant applied for a review of Merit
Reviewer Sofoulis certificate on the grounds that
the amended tax return may
lead to a different outcome. The claimant has not provided any submissions
containing his own PAWE calculation.
s 7.15 of the MAI Act the President’s delegate was satisfied that there
was reasonable cause to suspect that the decision
determining the review was
incorrect in a material respect, because the claimant had provided an amended
tax return for the relevant
review has been referred to this Review Panel (Panel).
objects of the MAI Act are set out in s 1.3(2). The MAI Act seeks "the early
resolution of motor accident claims and the quick,
cost-effective and just
resolution of disputes” and “to provide early and ongoing financial
support for persons injured
accidents".
1.3(4) says a decision maker should promote the objects of the MAI Act when
interpreting those provisions.
Section 1.3(5)
provides that the decision-maker must act in a way that promotes the objects of
the MAI Act when exercising an MAI
Act discretion. Part 5 of the PIC Act enables
the Commission to make rules regarding the Commission’s practice and
This includes panel proceedings reviewing Merit Reviewers’ or
Medical Assessors’
3 sets out the objectives of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
PIC Act) and includes ensuring the Commission’s decisions are timely,
fair, consistent and of high quality. It also enables
the Commission to decide
matters justly, quickly, cost-effectively and with as little formality as
4 of the PIC Act echoes ss 1.3(4) and (5) of the MAI Act and requires exercising
the powers and discretions to promote the
42(1) of the PIC Act and the Commission Rules contain the Commission’s
‘guiding principle’. The section
requires the Commission to
facilitate “the just, quick and cost-effective resolution of the real
issues in the proceedings”.
42(2) requires the Panel to give effect to the guiding principle when exercising
any power given to a decision-maker under
the PIC Act or the rules.
rules of evidence do not apply to this review. The Panel may look into any
matter relevant to the issues in dispute in such a
manner, subject to providing
procedural fairness to all the parties.
Merit review
5 of the PIC Act enables the Commission to make rules with respect to the
practice and procedure before the Commission including
proceedings before a
panel reviewing a decision of a Merit Reviewer or a Medical
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A Panel determines
how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application.
review is a new assessment of all matters with which the reviewable dispute is
concerned, which is a dispute between the parties
benefits payable under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act.
Panel, comprised of Merit Reviewers, is required to form its own opinion in
accordance with the authorities regarding review panels:
Insurance Australia
Group Ltd v Keen
Insurance Australia Ltd v
Panel is making a fresh assessment of the dispute rather than reviewing the
Merit Reviewer’s decision. The Panel is required
to decide what the
correct and preferable decision is in respect to this merit review
accordance with Procedural Direction PIC2 the Panel is satisfied that sufficient
information has been supplied in connection with
the proceedings, so the Panel
may determine the matter on the papers without holding a teleconference with the
parties or a formal
hearing (see s 52(3) of the PIC Act).
Documents considered
considered the original application and the documentation attached to
the Application and Reply
, as well as the later material lodged after the
merit review decision.
viewed the amended tax return it is apparent that if that document is used to
recalculate PAWE it will lead to a different
outcome. However, the version of
the amended tax return provided by the claimant appears to be a draft version.
It also does not
represent the precise 12-month pre-accident period from 9 July
2019 to 8 July 2020.
are two amendments to the tax return:
(a) an amendment to include Eternal air income, and
(b) an amendment to increase net sole trader income from $11,548 to $21,818.
no submissions have been received from the parties it appears unlikely that the
amendment to the tax return to include Eternal
Air income would be in dispute,
as the insurer allowed for this income in their calculation of PAWE in any
event, despite its omission
from the original tax return. The variation between
the amount allowed by the insurer for the purpose of PAWE and the amount in the
amended tax return can be accounted for by reason that a portion of the Eternal
Air income declared in the amended tax return was
received by the claimant prior
to commencement of the 12-month pre-accident period on 9 July 2019 and is
therefore excluded from
in relation to the amendment to increase sole trader income in the tax return it
appears the claimant has not made available
to the insurer the source documents
such as invoices, receipts, bank statements and to the extent the income came
from Uber, Uber
tax summaries to support the increased amount for sole trader
earnings. In other words, on the current material the amendment to
increase sole
trader income cannot be verified. Accordingly, it is not known whether this is
in dispute.
Panel is of the view that further information is required from the claimant to
support the amended tax return in so far as the
amendment concerns sole trader
earnings and that the insurer ought to be given an opportunity to consider the
new information and
re-determine the claimant’s PAWE rather than call for
further documents and submissions from the parties in the context of
review. The Panel is of the view that in the circumstances of new information
not yet considered by the insurer and a requirement
for further information in
support of that document, the correct and preferable outcome considering the
object of the MAI Act and
the Commission’s guiding principles, is to remit
this dispute back to the insurer to consider the new information and
re-determine
PAWE, taking into account the new information.
the claimant is dissatisfied with the insurer’s re-determination he can
seek an internal review by the insurer and in turn,
a further merit review under
the MAI Act if he remains dissatisfied with the insurer’s
relation to the decision made by a single Merit Reviewer, the Review Panel
determines that the reviewable decision is remitted
to the insurer for
re-determination pursuant to the following directions.
on or before 25 August 2023 the claimant is to provide the following to the
(a) a copy of the final, as lodged 2020 amended tax return;
(b) a copy of the notice of assessment/amended notice of assessment issued by
the ATO in response to the 2020 amended tax return,
(c) a copy of all source documents used to prepare the supplementary section of
the amended tax return that is, all Uber tax summaries,
all invoices, all
receipts, all bank statements and any other financial records used to calculate
the increased small business earnings
in the amended tax return in the sum of
$24,453 gross ($21,818 net) being an increase from the amount of $13,613 gross
($11,548 net)
declared in the original 2020 tax return.
insurer may request the above documents and any other information reasonably
required directly from the claimant’s accountant
pursuant to the
claimant’s authority in the application for personal injury benefits.
receipt of further information and documents pursuant to the above directions
the insurer is to re-determine the claimant’s
PAWE taking into
consideration the amended tax return and further documents and information
provided by the claimant.
claimant’s costs are not assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation
, because he is
self-represented.
Legislation and guidelines
Review Panel considered the following:
Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines), and
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation 2017
Section 41(2) of the PIC Act.
Section 41(2) of the PIC Act.
Rule 128 of the PIC
[2021] NSWCA 287
, [41] and [45].
, [21] and [64].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.07 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter