URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/442.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cinque v Terrone [2025] NSWDC 442 (30 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Cinque v Terrone
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 442
Hearing Date(s):
06 August 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Catsanos SC DCJ
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $105,100,
inclusive of interest.
(2) The defendant is to pay the
plaintiff’s costs.
Catchwords:
CONTRACTS – unexecuted loan agreement – factual dispute –
whether plaintiff intended to gift or loan monies to the
defendant –
weighing competing evidence
Principal judgment
Maria Cinque (Plaintiff)
Roberto Terrone (Defendant)
Representation:
L McGovern (Plaintiff)
Litigant-in-Person
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Turnbull Hill Lawyers (Plaintiff)
File Number(s):
2024/00170892
Publication Restriction:
The Dispute Between the Parties
plaintiff sues to recover the principal sum of $100,000 plus interest allegedly
owed by the defendant pursuant to an unsigned
loan agreement.
defendant, who appeared and conducted the litigation without legal
representation, disputes liability and contends the plaintiff
gifted him the sum
of $100,000.
dispute essentially involves a factual contest, with the outcome dependent upon
whether, in discharging the onus upon her, I accept
the plaintiff’s
account as to the basis upon which the funds were transferred to the defendant.
Factual Background
matters the subject of this litigation have seen the disintegration of what was
previously a very close relationship between the
parties. As the plaintiff
described it, the defendant was like a son to her.
is shared adversity in the background of that relationship. This arose in
circumstances where the plaintiff’s son, who
was also the
defendant’s friend, was murdered in 1997. The defendant provided the
plaintiff with comfort and assistance at
that difficult time.
defendant also provided the plaintiff with assistance after the
plaintiff’s husband died in 2017.
plaintiff, who is now 77 years of age, has an autistic grandson who has formally
been in the plaintiff’s care since late
2023, although it is clear the
plaintiff also had responsibility for her grandson before that. The
plaintiff’s grandson has
special needs and requires care and supervision.
plaintiff says that in 2021 she requested the defendant to be her
grandson’s guardian after she passes away, which the defendant
defendant accepts this was the case. However, as will be seen, as time passed
he developed misgivings about whether he was up
to the task or prepared for that
level of commitment.
plaintiff says in September 2022 the defendant approached her with a request for
a loan of $100,000 because of straitened financial
circumstances arising out of
delays experienced in completing a subdivision in a property development he was
involved with, as well
as financial issues with his estranged wife.
defendant, on the contrary, contends the plaintiff in fact offered to help him
at that time by giving him $100,000 to assist with
his financial commitments. He
said the plaintiff wanted to do this because the defendant had done much for her
and her family over
the years and she wished to give him this gift to help him.
She told the defendant she could afford to do so and, says the defendant,
was clear it was not to be a loan.
defendant’s account is that whilst the plaintiff insisted it was to be a
gift, he did not want to feel indebted to her and
only agreed to receive the
money on the basis that it was a loan.
plaintiff rejects out of hand the proposition that the money was intended as a
gift and says it was expressly only ever a loan.
plaintiff’s case is a simple one, namely the defendant has breached the
loan agreement which was reached between them and
is indebted to her for the
principal sum and accrued interest.
defendant’s case on the other hand, is that whilst he regarded the money
as having been loaned to him, there was never a
meeting of the minds in that
respect. Although the defendant considered himself morally bound to repay the
money provided to him
by the plaintiff, that ultimately changed when the
plaintiff, in the circumstances to which I will come, “crossed a
by, as the defendant saw it, wishing death upon his son. At that
point, with the relationship broken, the defendant took the view
he would keep
the money in the spirit it was given, as a gift only. He disputes the
proposition that the plaintiff has any legal
basis upon which to recover the
appears to be no serious dispute that if the defendant’s version of events
is accepted, there was no meeting of the minds
which would give rise to a legal
obligation to repay the monies.
if the plaintiff’s account is accepted then the defendant is in breach of
a contractual obligation to repay the loan.
The Evidence
is a trail of documents which provide some insight into the dispute between the
Historically,
the defendant was familiar with the firm of solicitors who act on behalf of the
plaintiff in these proceedings, they
having previously prepared documents
appointing the defendant as the plaintiff’s attorney pursuant to an
Enduring Power of
Attorney dated 15 May 2018. With that background, on 14
September 2022 the defendant wrote to Mr Gilbertson, a solicitor at that
attaching a form of loan agreement for review and feedback to the plaintiff
prior to execution. In the body of that email the
defendant said:
“FYI. I’ve asked my godmother for this loan, as my ex-wife (of only
6 months) has effectively robbed me of all my savings
(via legal and court
defendant went on to outline details of the family law legal dispute he was
involved in and also made reference to being in the
process of selling property.
He said at the end of the email:
“Once concluded and I get access to the funds, I will be immediately
paying back my godmother in full”.
21 September 2022, Ms Muchiri, a senior lawyer with the plaintiff’s
solicitors, sent the loan agreement with some marked
up amendments to the
defendant’s solicitor. Those amendments included various strike throughs,
inserted a terminating date,
being six months from the date the advancement was
made, removed provision for repayment by instalments, and noted the principal
sum was due on the terminating date. There was also the insertion of a
requirement for six months of interest in the event of early
repayment, and the
interest rate was prescribed at 2% fixed. There were some other amendments,
largely as to form, of no particular
28 September 2022, the defendant responded to the plaintiff’s solicitors
indicating he had no issue with the proposed changes
“I’ve spoken to my godmother, my plan is to head to Newcastle
sometime next week to sign the loan agreement in person
plaintiff says in October 2022 she instructed her solicitors to finalise the
agreement, after which it was posted to her for signing.
plaintiff describes the defendant attending her home as planned to sign the
agreement, however, she says she forgot to ask him
to sign it.
me, the plaintiff said that on the day the loan was advanced she and the
defendant met at her solicitor’s office, however
the loan agreement was
not signed whilst they were there. The defendant disputes attending the
solicitor’s office on that day.
any event, the plaintiff says she and the defendant attended the Commonwealth
Bank at Charlestown on 11 October 2022 where the
transfer was made. There is no
dispute about that.
to the plaintiff, it was her understanding the loan agreement was in place prior
to making the advance. She said she did
not realise it had not been signed by
herself or the defendant.
plaintiff said after the money was transferred the defendant went back to her
house and they had something to eat, but again,
as I understand her evidence,
she either overlooked or did not realise the loan agreement had not been
defendant says after the money was transferred, he provided the plaintiff with a
copy of the loan agreement for signing and return
to him for signing and filing
with their respective legal representatives.
defendant says the plaintiff accepted the document but immediately indicated she
would not be signing it, reiterating again that
it was a gift.
Muchiri, the solicitor acting for the plaintiff in relation to the loan
agreement, swore an affidavit in these proceedings deposing
to the fact that
after the terms of the loan agreement had been agreed and finalised, the
plaintiff instructed she would arrange
for her and the defendant to sign the
agreement, and no further work was required. This evidence suggests the
plaintiff is wrong
in her recollection of attending her solicitor’s office
on the day the funds were transferred.
the loan funds had been advanced, the plaintiff’s solicitors sent an
invoice to the defendant seeking payment of their
account for work done in the
preparation of the loan agreement. That generated a significant amount of
controversy so far as the
defendant was concerned. There followed an exchange of
emails in relation to that account, with the defendant’s responses being
quite heated, aggressive, and at times rude.
is unnecessary to recite the contents of those communications at length however,
notably in an email dated 25 November 2022 the
defendant, accusing the
plaintiff’s solicitors of overcharging, indicated he was yet to speak to
his lawyer in regard to that
matter but proposed to do so shortly. At one point
in the email the defendant said:
“FYI. The loan agreement was never signed. Because she trusts me with her
life. So I suggest you print it off and use it for
toilet paper next time you
visit the bathroom.”
appears from the emails before me that the defendant subsequently paid the
outstanding invoice.
next relevant piece of correspondence is a letter from the plaintiff’s
solicitors to the defendant dated 17 April 2024 referring
to the loan agreement
and its terms, pointing out the principal sum had been due in April 2023,
contending the defendant was in default
of the agreement, and demanding payment
of slightly more than $128,000 in respect of the principal sum and interest, as
well as costs
incurred, by reason of the defendant’s default, in the sum
email dated 17 April 2024, the defendant responded to that letter in terms which
included the following:
“With respect to the amount owing to your client, I had communicated in
writing to your client that I would be depositing the
loan repayment amount
directly into her account today upon receipt of her banking details.
Given she has referred this matter yourselves, I advise THL of the following:
• The terms of the loan contract (attached) clearly stipulate
payable on the loan amount as TWO PERCENT (2%) PER ANNUM
(original emphasis)
• The entire loan period has spanned 18 months (from October 2022 to April
2024), hence the interest payable per our contract
is precisely $3,000.
Upon receipt of your trust details I will make a deposit of $103,000 and will
consider the matter closed.
If your client wishes to press for further monies she alleges she is owed as
part of this loan contract (and legal costs associated
with pursuit of these
funds), she is welcome to ventilate the matter via the Court. I will of course
then be relying on this response
to your letter of 17 April 2024 on the issue of
a costs application against your client. Wherein I intend to seek costs on an
I will await your trust account details”.
19 April 2024 the defendant again wrote to the plaintiff’s solicitors
complaining the plaintiff had left highly offensive
messages over recent days,
“I have warned her that if she continues this behaviour, I will consider
not fulfilling my obligations under this alleged ‘contract’
her nothing at all.
As you well understand, this alleged loan is unsecured – therefore I could
create far greater headaches for her, if she chooses
to continue her abusive
You will also note that this alleged contract denoted no fixed term penalty. So
I could in effect not pay out this contract indefinitely.
Then simply pay out the principal amount at some point in time, and the
additional 2% interest per annum. And have complied in full
with any legal
obligations I may have here.”
20 April 2024 the defendant sent a further email to the plaintiff’s
solicitors complaining about another abusive text message
received from the
plaintiff and threatening to go to the police. The defendant also dealt with an
issue which was percolating in
relation to the plaintiff’s claim for
interest, and complained the plaintiff’s solicitors had not provided the
with proper advice, saying:
“If you do not [provide evidence that the plaintiff has been requested to
stop her abusive behaviour] all correspondence herein
will be used in future
proceedings to demonstrate to the court that Turnbull Hill ‘Lawyers’
failed to provide sound legal
advice in the best interest of their client. And
instead sought to ignore such requests, and even to foment (sic) (issues with
to the loan contract. Which you understand full well only entitles your
client to $103,000 – if anything. Yet you encourage
deluded thinking that
she is owed $128K. This is legal malfeasance) in order to generate increased
income for your organisation.”
24 April 2024 the defendant again emailed the plaintiff’s solicitors
complaining about another abusive message received from
the plaintiff
“Her latest abusive message suggested she ‘hopes my son is
murdered’. As her son was.
Her behaviour is vile, shocking and has left me speechless. Little does she
realise that the more she continues this campaign of
abuse, the greater the
chances she will NEVER see her money.
As far as denying my accusations, this is pointless. As I have it all in writing
in the form of text message exchanges.
And to be clear, all this unpleasantness started when she attempted to blackmail
me with my previous commitment to act as legal guardian
for her autistic
grandson. After I told her I was no longer willing to do this (when she
suggested she wanted more than $10K in interest),
she then told me that if I
withdrew from this commitment, I then owed her $130,000 instead of $110,000.
At this stage I have no intention of making any payment to your client. If this
changes you will be advised accordingly.
In the interim, if she wishes to ventilate the matter via the courts, she is
welcome to do so.”
defendant tendered into evidence screenshots of text message exchanges between
he and the plaintiff during this time in April
2024. Although they were in
Italian, the contents of the texts were generally agreed in the course of
evidence. The relevant details
of those messages are as follows:
(1) On 12 April 2024, the defendant sent a text message to the plaintiff
“Don’t call me ever again. I never want to hear from you again. Now
that I have come to understand how you truly think.
Send me your bank details.
Next Wednesday I will transfer your precious money. $110,000. That you would not
have earned $10,000 in
interest. You will have even profited on my
shoulders.”
(2) On 23 April 2024, the plaintiff sent the defendant a text message which
contained a reference, which broadly, was to the effect
hope they kill your son like they did my poor son”.
defendant says the text message sent by the plaintiff on 23 April 2024 was a
turning point which led him to decide to keep the
money on the basis that the
plaintiff had always intended it to be a gift. His response to the plaintiff by
text message was:
“You hope that someone kills my son? How do you permit yourself to write
such things? All over money?”
defendant gave evidence that the reason things went downhill in April 2024 was
because he told the plaintiff he could not go through
with his prior promise to
be the guardian of her grandson. The defendant said when he decided to tell the
plaintiff he could no longer
comply with that promise, the thought went through
his mind, “we’ll see if it’s a gift now”.
defendant described the plaintiff reacting angrily and aggressively to his
change of position on the guardianship of her grandson.
Nonetheless, the
defendant said he intended to repay the money right up until the time the
plaintiff, as the defendant saw it, expressed
a wish that his son would die as
plaintiff described a very different scenario. She says the defendant was
refusing to repay the loan, or at least being evasive
rude in the way he spoke to her when she raised that matter with him. The
plaintiff said she then decided
the defendant would not be an appropriate person
to be guardian of her grandson. As a result, she says she told the defendant she
did not want him to be guardian.
Resolving the Competing
the end of the day, both the account of the plaintiff and that of the defendant
as to the transaction being a loan or a gift could
be true. There are many
factual discrepancies and evidence tending to support and refute the respective
versions of the facts advanced
by the parties. I am therefore left to look at
the surrounding evidence as well as my impressions of each party for guidance in
determining
whether the plaintiff has made out her case.
General Observations
following factors generally support the conclusion the monies were intended by
the plaintiff to be a gift:
(1) The close familial nature of the relationship. The plaintiff described the
defendant as being like a son, which whilst not necessarily
rising to a
presumption of advancement, nonetheless provides a credible basis for the monies
being advanced by the plaintiff as a
(2) The loan agreement was never signed. Here the plaintiff’s evidence is
problematic. She says that whilst the defendant attended
her home to sign the
agreement, she forgot to have him do so. The plaintiff then says when the monies
were advanced, she did not
realise the agreement had not been signed. Arguably
there is difficulty reconciling the plaintiff positively adverting to and
to have the document signed with later not realising it had not been
(3) If, as the plaintiff contends, repayment of the loan was a high priority, it
is anomalous that she was not diligent to ensure
the agreement was signed, nor
to seek repayment until a considerable time after the loan had fallen due.
(4) Given the defendant had been the driving force behind having the loan
agreement prepared, it is unlikely he would have forgotten
or otherwise
neglected to have the agreement signed, suggesting the reason lies with the
plaintiff not wanting to sign the document.
Alternatively,
factors that might be seen as weighing generally in favour of the monies being
advanced as a loan include:
(1) It is unlikely the plaintiff would have actively participated in having her
solicitors review and amend the loan agreement if
she did not intend to provide
the funds as a loan.
(2) The evidence of the plaintiff’s solicitor, Ms Muchiri, whilst not
tested and open to the observation that it was not supported
by source material,
is nonetheless consistent with the proposition that the transaction was being
treated as a loan by the plaintiff.
(3) The contemporaneous correspondence lends itself to the conclusion that the
parties intended the arrangement to be governed by
the loan agreement.
of the factors outlined above are necessarily conclusive and the probative value
of each is open to debate.
is the matters to which I now come which have weighed most heavily in my task of
deciding whether the plaintiff has established
there was a loan in
The Breakdown of the Relationship Between the
controversy as to the circumstances leading to the breakdown of the relationship
between the parties is of particular relevance
when considering the competing
accounts as to whether the monies were advanced as a gift or a loan.
noted, the defendant says the relationship broke down when he changed his
position in relation to the guardianship of the plaintiff’s
outlined earlier, the plaintiff, on the other hand, told me when she had
requested repayment of the loan funds from the defendant,
he had been unpleasant
and rude to her, leading her to decide she would remove him from the position as
her Power of Attorney and
also to conclude he was not fit to be the guardian of
her grandson. Clearly that response was reflective of a dramatic change of
on the plaintiff’s part in relation to the defendant’s character.
providing detail of this event, the plaintiff described ringing the defendant on
12 April 2024 about the sale of his property,
which she said triggered her
demands that he repay the money she loaned him. The plaintiff said that
conversation went as follows:
Plaintiff: The property has sold now; I want my money back.
Defendant: I have the money... I told you I would give you the money, just give
me time...whatever you do don’t go to your
solicitor, they steal
Plaintiff: It’s my money, I want my money back.
Defendant: Give me your bank details.
Plaintiff: No, I don’t want to give you my bank details over the phone.
Defendant: I’m very angry about this.
the plaintiff’s evidence this conversation led her to contact her
solicitors. Specifically, the plaintiff said she was concerned
provision of her bank account details would enable the defendant to take further
money from her. The plaintiff described
how in the following days she proceeded
to revoke the defendant’s appointment as her Power of Attorney which had
been in place
since May 2018. Then, on 17 April 2024, the plaintiff caused her
solicitors to issue the letter of demand to the defendant.
plaintiff denied out of hand that the defendant told her he could not go through
with being the guardian of her grandson. She
said based on what had occurred
between her and the defendant, she considered he was no longer an appropriate
person for that role.
conversation which the plaintiff says led to the breakdown of their relationship
appears reasonably non-confrontational, with
the defendant agreeing to repay the
money and wanting the plaintiff’s bank account details for that purpose.
However, on the
plaintiff’s account she now completely distrusted the
defendant, to the extent that she was concerned he would steal money
On any view of it, this was a profound ground shift in the prior relationship of
trust that existed between them.
complete breakdown of the relationship appears quite disproportionate to the
events the plaintiff described, even allowing for
her evidence to me that the
defendant was rude or unpleasant to her. The plaintiff may have been concerned
however it does not appear she had been particularly
proactive in pursuing repayment leading up to that point in time and, in any
event, the defendant in requesting bank details was proposing to repay the
defendant’s version, namely that the relationship disintegrated when he
said he would no longer be the guardian of the plaintiff’s
grandson, in my
view, provides a far more plausible explanation for the plaintiff’s
reaction. It will be recalled the defendant
said in his email to the
plaintiff’s solicitors on 24 April 2024 that the unpleasantness all
started when the plaintiff attempted
to blackmail him with his previous
commitment to act as legal guardian for her autistic grandson.
depth of feeling on the plaintiff’s part was driven home by her demeanour
in Court. The defendant who, as I have said, was
self-represented, asked the
plaintiff only a few questions in cross-examination, at the end of which the
plaintiff was excused. The
plaintiff then started verbally abusing the defendant
which, notwithstanding my direction that she desist, continued as the plaintiff
left the witness box and ultimately the courtroom. These may be the reactions of
someone aggrieved by the fact the defendant had
not paid what she considered to
be a loan given in good faith. However, whatever be the cause, the
plaintiff’s apparent dislike
of the defendant is clearly deep seated.
level of feeling on the plaintiff’s part is reflected in the text message
concerning the defendant’s son in April
2024. The way in which the
relationship disintegrated, and the plaintiff’s emotional response, in my
view, is more consistent
with the plaintiff’s reaction to the defendant
saying he would no longer be the guardian of her grandson.
change of position by the defendant could have been seen by the plaintiff as the
defendant going back on his word to protect
her grandson after the plaintiff
passed away. As I have said, I consider it more readily explains the
plaintiff’s extreme reaction.
my conclusions as to the reliability of the plaintiff’s evidence on this
point do not reflect well on her credit, this
does not necessarily preclude the
existence of a loan agreement. It could be, in line with the defendant’s
case, that in her
account as to the reasons for the breakdown of the
relationship the plaintiff has sought to conceal the fact she changed her
and demanded repayment of monies which had been advanced as a gift out
of anger and malice. However, it might simply demonstrate
the real reason the
plaintiff moved to call in the loan and sever ties with the defendant as
abruptly as she did.
then, the conclusions I have reached in relation to the circumstances leading to
the breakdown of the relationship are
a relevant, but not decisive factor in
determining the issue at hand.
The Contemporaneous
Communications are Decisive
the circumstances, I am drawn back to the contemporaneous documents and
communications for guidance in resolving the dispute. That
evidence is
particularly weighty because it provides an insight into the intentions of the
parties as events were unfolding.
in my view, the overwhelming inference to be drawn and the conclusion to which I
have come, on the balance of probabilities,
is that the monies were advanced by
the plaintiff to the defendant as a loan.
reasons for reaching that conclusion are as follows:
(1) The very first communication from the defendant to the plaintiff’s
solicitors, in the email dated 14 September 2022, commences:
“FYI. I’ve asked my godmother for this loan...”
(2) Before me, the defendant contended that he was concerned to ensure a loan
agreement was in place so he did not feel indebted to
the plaintiff. His
description of the events giving rise to the formation of this arrangement, and
the fundamental platform of his
case, is that the plaintiff offered to give him
the money to help him, not that he asked her for a loan. However, the language
in this very first communication is not the language one would expect if
the monies were a gift. It makes no sense that the defendant
would say he
requested a loan if in fact the funds were being gifted. Conceivably, if
applying a gloss on the competing intentions,
the defendant may have said he
wanted to put in place a loan agreement, or even that his godmother was loaning
him the money. However,
I can see no reason, on the defendant’s version of
events, why he would have misrepresented how the arrangement came about
he asked for a loan when on his account he did not. I find the email of 14
September 2022 compelling evidence as to the
true basis of the arrangement
between the parties.
(3) As noted earlier, in November 2022 the defendant also wrote to the
plaintiff’s solicitors saying:
“FYI. The loan agreement was never signed. Because she trusts me with her
(4) In my view, the most natural reading of those words is that the plaintiff
did not require the defendant to sign the loan agreement
because she trusted him
to repay the money. Of course, that is not a scenario either party advances,
however the defendant’s
wording in the heat of the exchange of
correspondence in which he was involved again points strongly to the conclusion
that the plaintiff
intended it to be a loan.
(5) In the various emails and texts in evidence from April 2024, the
defendant at no time suggested the arrangement he had with the
plaintiff was
considered by her to have been a gift. This is something one would expect him to
say once things had completely broken
down between the parties, if not before.
In particular, when the defendant was responding to the claim being advanced for
which he considered to be extortionate, he did not say there was no
obligation to pay anything because it was a gift. Rather, he
only questioned the
quantum of interest.
(6) Conceivably this may have reflected the fact the defendant still intended
to repay the monies to his godmother as a matter of
principle rather than
obligation. However, that is a tenuous proposition given the level of feeling to
be found in his correspondence.
In any event, in the context of those rather
heated communications, if the defendant was taking the moral high ground, one
expect him at that point to have at least mentioned the fact the monies
were advanced to him by the plaintiff as a gift.
(7) I note in the April 2024 correspondence with the plaintiff’s
solicitors the defendant at various times refers to an “alleged”
contract. However, that is equivocal in the circumstances and may simply refer
to the fact the contract was not signed, as opposed
to the plaintiff having
gifted him the money. If he were referring to the fact the money was a gift, one
would expect the defendant
to describe it as such, rather than adopt a cryptic
reference to an “alleged” contract.
(8) The defendant’s email of 24 April 2024, sent after he received the
plaintiff’s text which he saw as wishing death
upon his son, is also
telling in my view. On the defendant’s case, this was a turning point.
Whereas he had previously intended
to repay the money, he says he considered he
would now retain it as the gift the plaintiff had said it was. However, in the
which the defendant sent to the plaintiff’s solicitors on 24 April
2024, he said nothing of the money having been a gift, rather,
the defendant
said if the plaintiff continued being abusive, she would never see her money. It
is not, in my view, overly semantic
to suggest that it is inconsistent with the
defendant’s account to describe it as “her money”. Notably,
the defendant
says when he told the plaintiff he would not be guardian of her
grandson he thought to himself, “we’ll see if it’s
now”. Overall, I consider there is no good reason why the defendant would
not have stated the money was a gift in the
email on 24 April 2024 if that was
the case, as by then, on his account, he had decided he was going to keep the
money on that basis.
the circumstances, and notwithstanding the competing arguments I have outlined,
I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the plaintiff loaned the
money to the defendant on the terms set out in the loan agreement which, as
noted earlier, was agreed
to in final form by the defendant on 28 September
Disposition
Accordingly,
I find the defendant liable to repay the plaintiff the sum of $100,000 pursuant
to the loan agreement.
loan fell due on 11 April 2023. According to the terms of the loan agreement,
interest is payable on the outstanding loan balance
at a fixed interest rate of
2% per annum. On that basis, I allow interest, in round terms, to the date of
judgment at $5,100.
the circumstances, costs will follow the event.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $105,100, inclusive of interest.
(2) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter