URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/147.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Kang [2025] NSWCATOD 147; (31 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Kang
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 147
Hearing Date(s):
4 August 2025
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Occupational Division
R L Bailey, Senior Member
N Sharma, Senior Member
H Kirkwood, Senior
F Taylor, General Member
(1) Pursuant to section 149C(4)(a) of the National Law,
if the practitioner were still registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled
registration, pursuant to section 149C(1)(b) of the National Law,
Pursuant to section 149C(4)(b) of the National Law, the
practitioner is disqualified from being registered in the health profession
a period of two years from the date of this order;
Pursuant to section 149C(4)(c) of the National Law, the
National Board is required to record the fact that if the practitioner
still registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled her registration, in the
National Register kept by the Board;
(4) Costs are to be
awarded to the applicant, as agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
Occupational Division – registered nurse - non-publication order
– protective, not punitive – failure to maintain
appropriate
professional boundaries – engaging in intimate relationship with mental
health patient – no longer registered
– the Tribunal would have
cancelled the registration – disqualification two years – costs
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Cases Cited:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWCA 264
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Health Care Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA 342
Care Complaints Commission v Ross
[2019] NSWCATOD 153
Oshlack v Richmond
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2013] NSWCA 342
Puri v Medical Council of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024] NSWCATOD 122
Health Care Complaints Commission v Muthukrishna (No. 2)
[2024] NSWCATOD 142
Texts Cited:
Oxford Dictionary
Macquarie Dictionary (5th edition)
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dilnoor Kang
(Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
(self-represented)
File Number(s):
2025/00100890
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the publication of the name of person A is prohibited.
The name of
a person includes a reference to any information, picture or other material that
identifies the person or is likely to
lead to the identification of the person.
The provision of these reasons (with persons identified) is not intended to be a
publication
or broadcasting of an official report of the proceedings.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
matter is an inquiry into a complaint made by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the Commission) about a health practitioner
(the practitioner), who
is a former registered nurse.
practitioner obtained a nursing degree in New Zealand. Between 2014 and 2016,
she worked as a registered nurse in that country.
She was first registered, as a
registered nurse in Australia, on 24 May 2016. She began working at Wagga Wagga
Base Hospital, including
in the Mental Health Inpatient Unit (MHIPU), the Mental
Health Recovery Unit, and the Mental Health Drug and Alcohol Service.
practitioner’s former employer, the Murrumbidgee Local Health District
(MLHD) conducted an investigation into the practitioner’s
conduct. As a
result of the findings of that investigation, the practitioner’s
employment was terminated. The Nursing and Midwifery
Council (the Council)
imposed conditions on the practitioner’s registration. The practitioner
then surrendered her registration.
Commission alleges that the practitioner failed to maintain appropriate
professional boundaries and engaged in an intimate relationship
with one of her
patients, who was a mental health patient. The Commission also alleges that the
practitioner then misled her employer
by asserting that she had only had
professional interaction with the patient.
Tribunal has already made an order prohibiting the publication of the name of
the mental health patient. Therefore, he is referred
to in these Reasons for
Decision as “patient A”.
inquiry concerns three complaints, which are:
(1) Unsatisfactory professional conduct for failure to maintain appropriate
professional boundaries;
(2) Unsatisfactory professional conduct for providing false and misleading
information;
(3) Professional misconduct.
Tribunal must determine three things:
(i) whether the complaint is proven;
(ii) if proven, whether protective orders should be made; and
(iii) whether to make a costs order.
Commission seeks:
(1) an order that, to the extent that leave is required by
Rule 23(3)(b)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
, leave pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(2) an order that if the practitioner was still registered, the Tribunal would
have cancelled her registration pursuant to Section
149C(1)(b) of the
National Law
(3) an order pursuant to Section 149C(4)(b) of the National Law that the
practitioner is disqualified from being registered in the
health profession for
two years from the date of the Tribunal’s order;
(4) an order pursuant to Section 149C(4)(c) of the National Law, that the
National Board is required to record the fact that if the
practitioner were
still registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled her registration, in the
National Register kept by the Board;
(5) an order for costs in the Commission’s favour.
practitioner does not oppose the orders sought, although she does not agree with
all of the facts asserted by the Commission.
the following reasons, we have decided to make all the orders sought.
Legal Framework
Tribunal’s disciplinary powers are set out in subdivision 6 and s 149
of the National Law. The Tribunal may exercise any
power conferred on it by this
subdivision in relation to a registered health practitioner...if:
(a) it finds a subject matter of a complaint against the practitioner or
student to have been proved; or
(b) the practitioner or student admits to it in writing to the Tribunal
Extension of time
Commission seeks an order that, to the extent that leave is required by Rule
23(3)(b) of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Rules 2014 (the CAT Rules),
for leave to apply pursuant to section 41 of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act
(the CAT Act).
is no dispute that the Commission’s application was filed out of time as
set out in the Rules. The practitioner did not
raise any objection to the
Commission’s application for leave, pursuant to section 41 of the CAT
the paramount objective of the enabling legislation, namely the National Law, is
“the protection of the health and safety of the public”
because there was no objection from the practitioner, we granted leave pursuant
to section 41 of the CAT Act.
The Hearing
hearing was conducted on 4 September 2025.
Bayley attended the hearing in person and represented the applicant, instructed
by Ms Rogers.
practitioner appeared by Audio Visual Link (AVL) and represented
Documents and Exhibits
Commission tendered the following material:
(i) Commission’s Bundle, comprising 1049 pages (Exhibit 1);
(ii) AHPRA Evidentiary Certificate (Exhibit 2); and
(iii) Agreed Facts- one version easier to read and the second signed by the
practitioner (Exhibit 3).
practitioner tendered her reply and attachments (Exhibit R1).
also considered the submissions of both parties and the following
(i) Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia Standards of Practice;
(ii) Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia Code of Conduct for Nurses;
(iii) NSW Health Code of Conduct;
(iv) NSW Health Sexual Safety of Mental Health Consumer Guidelines; and
(v) Murrumbidgee Local Health District Procedure (MLHD) responding to sexual
safety incidents and disclosures of recent sexual assault.
Stage One- Are the complaints proven?
first task is to decide whether the complaints are proven. The Commission was
obliged to refer the complaint to the Tribunal,
because it formed the opinion
that the complaint, if substantiated, would provide grounds for the suspension
or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration (s 145D).
are three complaints. There are two complaints of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, for failure to maintain appropriate professional
boundaries, and
providing false and misleading information, and one complaint of professional
misconduct.
the reasons set out below, we have decided that each of the complaints is
relevant legislation is the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (the National Law) (Sections 145C(1)(a) and 145D). The objective of the
National Law is
“the protection of the health and safety of the public
must be paramount consideration”
to maintain appropriate professional boundaries
139B(1)(b) provides that unsatisfactory professional conduct
A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or
omission) of a provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law or
the NSW Regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the contravention.
Commission raised two ‘particulars’ which, if proven, it submits
constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Those two particulars are
allegations that the practitioner failed to maintain professional boundaries,
(1) she engaged in an intimate relationship with patient A, between May 2021 and
January 2024, and
(2) she communicated with him by mobile phone, on thousands of occasions, for
approximately 12 months.
parties agree that Patient A was a Mental Health patient, who had several
admissions to the MHIPU, and that the practitioner provided
nursing care to him.
He was 24 years old. The practitioner was 31 years old.
was initially conveyed, by Ambulance and Police, to the Emergency Department on
20 January 2021, with suicidal ideation. He was
transferred to the MHIPU the
next day and discharged a week later.
A was again brought in by Ambulance and Police, on 5 February 2021, as a result
of expressing homicidal ideation towards family
members. He was discharged ten
days later.
days after that, patient A was re-admitted to the MHIPU, after he asked to be
admitted to the Mental Health Unit. He reported
he was hearing voices. He was
discharged on 4 March 2021.
28 April 2021, patient A was again admitted to MHIPU and discharged on 11 May
each of patient A’s admissions to the MHIPU, the practitioner was involved
in his care.
Intimate relationship
4.6.1 of the NSW Health Code of Conduct prohibits a health practitioner from
engaging in a sexual relationship with a patient.
must decide whether the relationship that existed between the practitioner and
Patient A was intimate in nature.
does not appear to be any precedent to assist us to define “intimate
relationship”. However, Jill Reyment, Director
of Clinical Governance,
MLHD, wrote to the practitioner, on 19 July 2023, and defined
“closely acquainted”
(Oxford dictionary) and an
relationship”
“a relationship involving feelings of
emotional closeness and connectedness”
Commission, citing the Macquarie Dictionary (5th edition), defined
“intimate” as, amongst other things, a “close
relationship” and “maintaining sexual relations”. The
practitioner did not offer any definition of “intimate”.
Commission submitted that it is open to us to infer that a sexual relationship
existed between the practitioner and Patient A.
The practitioner has, on several
occasions, denied a sexual relationship with, or physical attraction to patient
A. She has repeatedly
described him as “a very good friend”.
Commission submitted a document called “Commission’s proposed
statement of agreed facts” (10 pages) (Exhibit
3). This document outlines
the history of the relationship between the practitioner and Patient A.
practitioner signed this document, on each page, on 12 June 2025. She also
submitted a reply to the application for disciplinary
findings, dated 14 July
2025 (Exhibit R1), in which she wrote:
“I agree with the
complete statements of facts established by the HCCC and have also received the
evidence provided by them.
I wish to put no objection on any of their material
or produce any counter evidence...I am agreeable to the HCCC’s request
cancel my registration for two years or more should they wish to do
at the hearing, the practitioner retracted her agreement to some extent. What is
set out below is a summary of the Statement
of Agreed Facts, and the facts that
the practitioner identified as those with which she no longer agrees. She said
she initially
agreed to the information because she does not “have the
resources to fight it”.
parties agree, however, that the practitioner was in a therapeutic relationship
with patient A, who was a patient at the Mental
Health Inpatient Unit (MHIPU).
The practitioner gave evidence that she knew it was important to maintain
professional boundaries;
that it was inappropriate to have a relationship with
her patients; and that she had cautioned other nurses about this. She also
us that she knew that mental health patients are vulnerable. She conceded that
she knew Patient A was particularly vulnerable,
because he had a history of
suicidal ideation.
the Statement of Agreed Facts, it is recorded that the practitioner interacted
with patient A, outside of the MHIPU, on several
occasions. The following is a
summary of those occasions, and her responses to each assertion.
13 May 2021, the practitioner accompanied Patient A to ‘The Riddle
Room’, which is an escape room in Canberra. The
practitioner agreed that
this occurred and that she made the booking for this outing, two days earlier,
which was the day on which
Patient A was discharged from the MHIPU. The
Commission’s material included witness statements and photographs,
including a
photograph of patient A and the practitioner exiting a property
together and standing in front of The Riddle Room in Canberra together
posing for a photograph.
approximately August or September 2022, over a year later, a witness reportedly
observed the practitioner and patient A speaking
to each other in the front yard
of the practitioner’s residence. The practitioner agreed to this in her
reply to the complaint,
but retracted her agreement at the hearing. She told us
that she has a very long driveway and that it would be very hard to observe
someone on her property from the street. Despite this, she agreed that Patient A
had visited her property on occasions, and also
knew her husband.
approximately September 2022, patient A was observed to exit the
practitioner’s house and climb into the passenger seat of
her car. The
practitioner kissed patient A on the lips, in her car, before driving off. The
practitioner retracted her prior agreement
to this assertion at the hearing. She
told us that she had never kissed Patient A, but agreed she had hugged him on
one occasion.
late 2022 or early 2023, the practitioner drove into her driveway, whilst
patient A was standing in her front yard. The practitioner
alighted from her car
and hugged patient A. Although she initially agreed with this allegation, the
practitioner said, at the hearing,
that this did not occur as described. She
agrees that she hugged patient A, at some time during their association, but not
circumstances alleged.
1 August 2022 and 31 August 2023, the practitioner and patient A communicated
with each other by mobile telephone calls, texts,
and other electronic means on
many thousands of occasions. The practitioner’s evidence in relation to
this issue was inconsistent.
She did not deny it, but said that she initially
thought she was communicating with a man she cannot identify, whom she
on Facebook. She said she did not realise it was Patient A,
because she had a different telephone number for him. She added that,
known it was Patient A, she would have blocked the number. The
Commission’s representative accused the practitioner
of “making that
up”, to which the practitioner responded: “I’ll agree to
that”. Despite her denial,
she conceded that she had communicated with
Patient A by telephone on occasion.
18 February 2023, the practitioner and patient A travelled approximately 55
kilometres from Wagga Wagga to patient A’s mother’s
residence, in
the practitioner's car. They arrived at their destination at approximately 9:50
pm. They entered through the back door
of the property. They remained there for
20 minutes, before leaving in the practitioner’s car. The practitioner was
what has been described as “a sparkly party dress”.
Photographs of the practitioner on this occasion were submitted in
evidence. She
agreed that this occurred. She said she had attended a party of a man called
“John” where she unexpectedly
encountered Patient A, and that he
pressured her to drive him to his mother’s house.
approximately late February to early March 2023, a witness observed the
practitioner and patient A alight from the practitioner’s
car in the Sturt
Mall Car Park, in Wagga Wagga, and enter the shopping mall together.
approximately July 2023, a witness observed the practitioner and patient A in
the front garden of the practitioner’s house.
The practitioner told us
that it would be difficult for any witness to observe her in her garden. The
witness also reported that,
in December 2023, she observed patient A speaking to
a delivery driver in the front yard of the practitioner’s house. She added
that, in December 2023, she saw patient A’s car parked in the
practitioner’s driveway.
Commission alleges that, in January 2024, patient A was staying at the
practitioner’s house for an unspecified period. The
practitioner denied
that Patient A lived at her home, but conceded that he visited her and her
husband occasionally.
Inappropriate contact in the MHIPU
Statement of Agreed Fact also outlines certain interactions between the
practitioner and Patient A at Wagga Wagga Hospital. The
Commission asks us to
accept that these add weight to a finding that an intimate relationship existed
between them.
3 December 2022, when she was not on shift, the practitioner attended the
hospital, where patient A had been admitted with acute
psychosis on 30 November
2022. The patient was not formally discharged till 6 January 2023, although he
had a period of ‘gate
leave’ on Christmas Eve. Earlier that day,
Patient A had received a delivery of flowers and other gifts, including money,
a local florist. Hospital progress notes record that patient A refused to
accept the flowers. It is also recorded that the practitioner
mentioned the
flowers to a colleague at the nurses’ station.
hospital progress note recorded that Patient A spoke to another registered
nurse, during this admission, about
“having been involved in a
relationship”
. He said that he believed the practitioner was
“playing with his head”
and requested that she be asked to
leave (Exhibit 1 p 671).
that evening, patient A was found in the bed of another patient. The
practitioner, who, at the time, was the On-call Manager,
but not on shift,
attended the hospital again, despite being advised by staff that it was
unnecessary, because the incident had been
appropriately managed. The progress
notes record that the practitioner advised her colleagues she wished to speak to
patient A alone.
A witness recorded that the practitioner was wearing a short
party dress and rejected an offer of clothing from colleagues to “cover
up” (Exhibit 1 pp25, 28, 37-38). The practitioner now denies this, having
agreed to it previously. She told us that she was
wearing a long coat over her
dress, and was never asked to “cover up”.
practitioner now also denies that she asked to speak to Patient A alone.
However, the progress note records that the practitioner
then spoke to patient
A, in the presence of another registered nurse in a consultation room, with the
door closed (Exhibit 1 pp25,
28, 37-38). During this conversation, it is
reported that the practitioner became emotional, and asked the other nurse to
room. It is also recorded that she asked her colleague not to call
security, when patient A became angry and abusive.
was also recorded that the practitioner then told the other nurse present that
patient A was psychotic. She returned to his room
and had a private conversation
with him, against the advice of her colleagues. After this, the practitioner
hyperventilated and was
taken by colleagues to the Emergency Department.
However, she left before she could be triaged.
parties agree that, from 26 December 2022, the practitioner worked, on a
fulltime basis, as the Nursing Unit Manager (NUM) on
the Mental Health Recovery
Unit (MHRU). Patient A was again admitted to the hospital, on 29 December 2022,
after he was involved
in an incident with police. During this admission, the
practitioner was involved in patient A’s medical care.
24 February 2023, a member of the public, who remains anonymous, contacted the
MLHD and made an allegation that the practitioner
was in a relationship with
Police Incident
the early hours of 3 January 2024, the Police responded to an incident at the
practitioner’s home (Exhibit 1 at 67-72). The
Statement of Constable
Blackburn dated 23 March 24 records his version of events.
was recorded that Patient A returned to the practitioner’s house and
accused her of “cheating on him”. The practitioner
stood in front of
patient A, when he attempted to leave the room, and advised him not to go
outside, due to the stormy weather and
his mental state. Patient A slapped the
practitioner across the face.
Officers attended the practitioner’s house and interviewed both the
practitioner and patient A. The Police recorded the
following conversation with
Police: “So, what’s your
relationship?”
Patient A: “We’re dating”.
Police: “How long have you two been together?”
Patient A: “Oh, ah, three years...It’s her house. I’m just
staying here...I was just talking to the in-laws (referring
practitioner’s family who were at the house)...This is sexual mate. This
is not abuse”.
practitioner’s conversation with the Police included the following
Police: “So you’ve just said to me before
he’s your boyfriend?”
Practitioner:
Police: “How long have you two been together?”
Practitioner:
“Six months”
her reply to the application for disciplinary findings, the practitioner
conceded, that she told the Police that patient A was
‘boyfriend’. However, at the hearing, despite being cautioned about
her obligation to give truthful testimony, the
practitioner’s evidence was
inconsistent and evasive. Consequently, she was an unreliable witness.
told us initially that she had lied to the police about Patient A being her
practitioner said that she had told the police that Patient A was her boyfriend,
because she wanted to end her marriage. The practitioner
gave evidence that she
was the victim of domestic violence and that her judgement was impaired. She
said she had endured “12
years of being beaten down” and wanted to
separate from her husband. She said: “my husband is a cheater, and he
to say I was a cheater as well”.
was put to the practitioner that the police records do not mention her
husband’s presence on that occasion. She responded
that her husband was in
a different room and did not engage with the police. Having given the evidence
set out above, she later said
that she told the police the truth. Therefore, it
was at times difficult to understand the practitioner’s contradictory
Codes approved by the National Board provide evidence of what constitutes
appropriate professional conduct or practice for the
relevant profession
(Section 41 of the National Law). In this instance, the practitioner was
required to comply with the Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia (NMBA)
Standards of Practice, the NSW Health Code of Conduct, and the NSW Health Sexual
Mental Health Consumers Guidelines. The Code of Conduct requires
nurses to maintain professional boundaries in relationships.
parties agree that the practitioner has also completed various education courses
and the Codes of Conduct,
and ethical standards. There is no question that she is therefore aware of her
professional obligations.
emerges from the hospital progress notes, police records, telephone records and
the concessions made by the practitioner, even
if the facts which she no longer
concedes are discounted, is a clear picture of the practitioner maintaining a
close personal relationship
with Patient A whilst she was involved in his
therapeutic care.
are satisfied that, at the very least, she made arrangements to accompany
patient A on an outing to Canberra; communicated with
him on several occasions
electronically; visited his mother’s home alone with him at night after a
party; allowed him to visit
her home; and hugged him. We also know, from the
police records, that patient A was at the practitioner’s home at 3 am on 3
January 2024. All of this material lends weight to the Commission’s
complaint with respect to particular one of complaint one.
practitioner repeated several times, at the hearing, that she considered patient
A to be a “very close friend”, with
whom she discussed personal
matters, such as his childhood and her marriage. She also gave evidence that, at
some stage during the
3 years in which she maintained contact with patient A,
she became aware that he had developed romantic feelings for her. She conceded
that, despite this, she did not seek to be removed from his treating team.
Commission asks us to infer that the relationship was sexual. It is unnecessary
for us to form such a conclusion, because we are
satisfied that the relationship
was a close personal relationship. This alone causes us to be comfortably
satisfied that the practitioner
engaged in an intimate relationship with patient
A, between approximately May 2021 and January 2024, and that, in doing so, she
to maintain appropriate professional boundaries.
4.6.1 of the NSW Health Code of Conduct provides that staff must
take an unfair advantage of, or exploit any relationship with patients or
clients in any way, including not engaging in
online friendships with patients
or clients via social media...”
Commission complains that the practitioner communicated with patient A, by
mobile phone, for approximately 12 months. The Commission
submits that, between
1 August 2022 and 31 August 2023, the practitioner and patient A communicated
with each other by mobile telephone
on occasions numbering between 1,700, as a
minimum, and 5,217, as a maximum. The Commissioner explained that it was not
to estimate the precise number of occasions because of the possibility
of duplication in the records. However, it submitted that
we could be satisfied
that it was on thousands of occasions.
Commission’s material included 98 pages of records outlining telephone,
voice message and SMS contact between the practitioner
and patient A in the
relevant period. The practitioner conceded that she gave Patient A her telephone
practitioner’s response to the allegation that she had knowingly
communicated with patient A on thousands of occasions was
implausible. It is
hard to accept her account that she initially thought she was communicating with
a man, whom she “met”
on Facebook, in circumstances where she was
unable to provide any further identification or information about that person.
she did not realise it was Patient A, because she had a different
telephone number for him. Her evidence that Patient A is a close
friend does not
support her assertion that she did not recognise his voice on the telephone. She
added that, had she known it was
Patient A, she would have blocked the number.
pressed by the Commission’s representative, she apparently capitulated and
agreed that she had fabricated that evidence.
Although it was difficult to
accept the practitioner as a reliable witness, we note she conceded that she had
communicated with Patient
A by telephone on occasion.
fact, when considered with the evidence contained in the telephone communication
records, allows us to be comfortably satisfied
that particular two is made out,
and that the practitioner failed to maintain professional boundaries with
patient A when she communicated
with him, via a mobile phone, on thousands of
occasions, for approximately one year.
all of this into account, we are satisfied that complaint one is proven.
Complaint 2 – False or misleading information
Particular one
are two particulars of this complaint. Particular one is that the practitioner
lied to her employer, in a letter dated 27 March
2023, when she wrote:
“I have not been in an intimate relationship with (patient A)
at any stage of my employment or life in general...The only interactions
had with (patient A) are the ones that I have had at my workplace (in a
professional manner)”.
Commission submits that this was a false and misleading statement. In
circumstances when the practitioner had interacted with
patient A outside of the
MHIPU on several occasions including:
The Riddle Room in Canberra, on 13 May 2021;
the front yard of the practitioner’s residence in approximately August or
September 2022;
approximately September 2022 when patient A got into the passenger seat of the
practitioner’s car, and the practitioner is
alleged to have kissed patient
A on the lips;
late 2022 or early 2023, the practitioner hugged patient A;on 18 February 2023,
when the practitioner and patient A travelled in
the practitioner’s car to
patient A’s mother’s residence; and
1 August 2022 and 31 August 2023, during which time the practitioner and patient
A communicated with each other by mobile
telephone on thousands of occasions.
practitioner agreed that the statement to her employer was untrue. However, she
told us that she had denied being in an intimate
relationship because she
thought that equated to a sexual relationship.
practitioner had made several prior statements to her employer about her
relationship with Patient A. On 7 March 2023, the practitioner
told her Director
of Nursing (DON) that she had inadvertent contact with patient A at a party, in
Melbourne. She disclosed that she
had spoken to him there but had not exchanged
phone numbers, and maintained that she was not in a relationship with him. The
emailed the practitioner with requests for further particulars.
8 March 2023, the practitioner emailed the DON and said:
“I have not had further interactions with (patient A)
outside the party. Because there has only been one interaction, I would
more of an acquaintance now than a friend. He was one of the many people I spoke
to at that party. As per my understanding...I
am fully aware of my duty of care
towards myself and others I have looked after in the past. And I have no
intention of breaching
was a false and misleading statement, because the practitioner had engaged with
patient A outside the MHIPU on several occasions.
20 March 2023, the MLHD wrote to the practitioner suspending her employment. The
MLHD sent an additional letter requesting the
practitioner’s response to
the allegations. It also formally complained to the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Authority
(AHPR). The practitioner responded on 27 March
2023. It is this response which is the subject of particular one of complaint
practitioner also made subsequent statements to her employer about her
relationship with patient A. On 30 March 2023, the MLHD
wrote to the
practitioner and required her to attend an interview. On 4 April 2023, the
practitioner attended an interview and was
“Do you have any
relationship with (patient A)?”
She responded:
“No, I would
say as an acquaintance...in terms of an intimate relationship not at
was a false and misleading statement, because she had engaged in an intimate
relationship with patient A between approximately
May 2021 and 2024.
19 July 2023, the MLHD sent the practitioner a letter inviting her to show cause
as to why her employment should not be terminated.
The practitioner responded,
on the same day, and said:
“The fact that I have not had an intimate
relationship with (patient A) is still true...I’m sure he will be able to
that. In no way, shape or form have I had any intimate connections with
practitioner sent two further emails, on the same day, to the MLHD including one
which said:
“At no point I have attempted to make a formal relationship
with (patient A), or vice versa”
. These emails were false and
misleading, because she had engaged in an intimate relationship with patient A
between May 2021 and
January 2024.
practitioner submitted a further response, on 17 August 2023 where she again
denied having an intimate relationship with patient
A. She wrote:
deny that I have ever been in an intimate relationship with (patient
This was also a false and misleading statement.
5 September 2023, MLHD completed its investigation report. On 11 September 2023,
MLHD wrote to the practitioner and advised her
that her employment was
terminated.
reasons set out above, we are satisfied that the evidence provided in the
Commission’s material, including photographs and
telephone logs, lends
support to the veracity of this particular complaint. Furthermore, the
practitioner does not contest this complaint.
We are, therefore, comfortably
satisfied that the statement made by the practitioner, to her employer on 27
March 2023, was false
and misleading.
Particular two
two of this complaint is that the practitioner lied to the Council. The
Commission submits that the practitioner gave false
and misleading evidence,
during a hearing convened by the Council under Section 150 of the National Law,
on 23 October 2023.
Commission submits that the practitioner denied having patient A’s mobile
number or emailing him privately and that this
constituted a false and
misleading statement, because the practitioner and patient A had communicated
with each other by mobile telephone
on thousands of occasions between 1 August
2022 and 31 August 2023.
16 October 2023, the Council emailed the practitioner and invited her to attend
a hearing convened pursuant to Section 150 of the
National Law.
23 October 2023, the practitioner gave evidence at the Section 150 hearing. In
response to the question:
“During your time at Wagga Wagga, did you
ever have (patient A)’s mobile number or email him privately?”
The practitioner responded:
response to the question:
“So, you don’t have either his mobile
number on your phone, and you’ve not emailed him privately?”
the practitioner responded:
Commission asks us to find that these responses were false and misleading,
because the practitioner and patient A communicated
with each other, via mobile
phone, on between 1,700 and 5,217 occasions, between 1 August 2022 and 31 August
reasons set out above, we accept that the practitioner and patient A did
communicate with each other, as alleged. It follows that
her evidence in the
Section 150 hearing given on 23 October 2023 was false and misleading.
Furthermore, the practitioner has agreed
to those facts.
are, therefore, satisfied that complaint two is proven.
Complaint 3 – professional misconduct
Commission complains that the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct
as defined in s 139E of the National Law.
139E defines professional misconduct as:
139E Meaning of
“professional misconduct” [NSW]
For the purposes of this Law,
professional misconduct
registered health practitioner means—
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amounts to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
is uncontroversial, and we accept that, as a registered nurse, the practitioner
was obliged to comply with the National Law.
have found the practitioner guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct. The
Commission submits that the conduct established
in complaint one is of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify the cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration because:
(a) the practitioner must have known the importance of maintaining professional
boundaries because she had received appropriate qualifications
and had undergone
additional training in relation to the Code of Conduct, boundaries and ethical
issues, and appropriate therapeutic
relationships before breaching boundaries
with patient A;
(b) the practitioner was required to comply with the NMBA Code of Conduct for
(c) the practitioner was required to comply with the NSW Health Code of
(d) given that the practitioner was working in a mental health service, she was
also required to comply with the Sexual Safety of
in Mental Health Consumers
Guidelines;
(e) as a result of this, the practitioner must have known that mental health
patients are a particularly vulnerable group;
(f) the practitioner had provided nursing care to patient A and must have known
that he had serious mental health issues, including
suicidal ideation, and was,
therefore, particularly vulnerable;
(g) given that patient A had had four admissions to the MHIPU, within
approximately 14 weeks, the practitioner must have been aware
that there was a
real possibility he could return to that unit after being discharged on 11 May
(h) the practitioner should have been careful to maintain professional
boundaries with patient A;
(i) the practitioner’s conduct was particularly serious because the
intimate relationship continued for a lengthy period, even
after patient A was
again admitted to the MHIPU with acute psychosis on 1 December 2022;
(j) during that period, on 3 December 2022, the practitioner’s behaviour
with patient A was such that it attracted the concerned
attention of colleagues.
During this admission, patient A disclosed that he was having a relationship
with a nurse who he thought
“playing with his head”
asked her to leave. On the same evening, the practitioner spoke to patient A,
alone in his room, against the advice of her colleagues;
(k) the practitioner was aware that she should not provide clinical care to a
patient with whom she had a personal relationship;
(l) rather than continuing to provide nursing care to patient A, the
practitioner could have sought advice from her manager or colleague.
Furthermore, rather than continuing the intimate relationship with patient A,
the practitioner should have sought guidance from her
Manager, Nurse Unit
Manager, insurer, professional council, or other professional resources;
(m) the practitioner must have known that her conduct was wrong;
(n) the practitioner’s conduct posed a risk of harm to patient A;
(o) the practitioner’s conduct involved repeated breaches of professional
boundaries, including hugging and kissing, and visiting
patient A’s
mother’s home;
(p) the practitioner’s conduct exploited the power imbalance implicit in
the nurse patient relationship. She used her professional
position to establish
a friendship and continued the intimate relationship with him for several years.
Her conduct constituted a
breach of the standards of conduct expected of a
registered nurse and has the capacity to reduce public confidence in the nursing
profession.
practitioner agreed that her conduct was sufficiently serious that it meant
there was a risk she could lose her job. She also
agreed that it presented a
risk of harm to the patient.
Commission also submits that the conduct in complaint two, in isolation, or when
considered together with complaint one, is of
a sufficiently serious nature to
justify cancellation because:
(a) when the practitioner received the letter from her employer requesting her
response to the allegations, she should have provided
an honest response rather
than making a false and misleading statement;
(b) the practitioner’s reply to the application for disciplinary findings
includes her assertion that she was
“scared, lying in certain aspects
to simply save a job”
and that this suggests she was deliberately
concealing her relationship for that reason;
(c) during the Section 150 hearing, the practitioner again provided a false and
misleading response;
(d) the practitioner’s failure to accept responsibility undermines her
trustworthiness as a registered nurse;
(e) the ability to acknowledge errors in judgment is particularly crucial for
health professionals because concealing or minimising
such errors may pose a
risk to the safety of patients.
practitioner provided a seven-page response outlining her personal circumstances
at the time that the unsatisfactory professional
conduct occurred. She stated
that she had been subjected to years of domestic violence and that her judgement
was impaired.
“However, that does not change the fact that Professional
Misconduct happened and I did not disclose my relationship with him
practitioner expressed her remorse for her actions. She wrote:
with the material HCCC has provided and the statements of facts and do not wish
to object to any of it”
our view, it is uncontroversial that the failure to maintain appropriate
professional relationships with a patient, particularly
a vulnerable mental
health patient, over three years, is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
the suspension or cancellation
of the practitioner’s registration. In this
case, the failure to maintain appropriate boundaries endured for three years and
culminated in the patient coming to the attention of the police.
practitioner knowingly made several false and misleading statements to her
employer and to the Council. She compounded that with
her lack of frankness at
the hearing. This is conduct that falls short of the standard expected of a
nurse. The practitioner has
not demonstrated that she is sufficiently
trustworthy to practise in her chosen profession of nursing.
this case, we are satisfied that there has been more than one instance of
unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the instances
are considered
together, they amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the
suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
Protective orders made (Stage Two)
Commission submits that having found the circumstances of the subject matter of
the complaint proved, we ought to exercise the
Tribunal’s discretionary
powers to make protective orders.
relevant principles include disciplinary powers pursuant to s 149 of the
National Law. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is primarily
protective not
punitive. The relevant principles provide that the protection of public safety
and health is paramount (s3B of National
Tribunal must also consider the relevant factual background and the impact of
the misconduct, as well as whether the practitioner
has demonstrated any
insight, contrition or remorse. The Tribunal must also consider the direct risk
to the patient, and the risk
of damage to the public’s trust in the
profession.
Tribunal must consider matters such as the practitioner’s motivation,
insight, and attempts at remediation.
Tribunal must also consider the maintenance of standards of the profession,
preservation of public confidence in the profession,
and, more broadly, the
protection of the community (
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
other words, the objective of protecting the health and safety of the public is
not confined to protecting the patients or potential
patients of a particular
practitioner from the continuing risk of his or her malpractice or incompetence.
It includes protecting
the public from similar misconduct or incompetence of
other practitioners and upholding public confidence in the standards of the
profession. That objective is achieved by maintaining standards and, where
appropriate, cancelling the registration of practitioners
who are not fit to
such conduct also serves as a deterrent to the individual concerned and to the
general body of practitioners and maintains
public confidence by signalling that
those whose conduct does not meet the requisite standard will not be permitted
to practice (
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
assessing its gravity, the offending conduct is not to be measured by reference
to the worst cases but by reference to the extent
to which it departs from
proper standards (
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638)
adverse consequences for a practitioner may require that an order should be made
which is no more restrictive than necessary for
the proper protection of the
community. However, it is unavoidable that protective orders may be incidentally
Cancellation
of a practitioner’s registration may be required in serious cases, to
adequately achieve the objectives of minimising
the risk of recurrence and of
deterring other practitioners of engaging in such conduct, thereby maintaining
public confidence in
the profession.
this case, the practitioner voluntarily surrendered her registration on 4 July
2024. The Commission therefore seeks an order under
s 149C(4)(a) of the
National Law that the Tribunal would have cancelled the practitioner’s
registration pursuant to s 149C(1)(b)
of the National Law, because she is
guilty of professional misconduct, and that such an order is appropriate to
protect the public.
149C(4) provides that if the practitioner is no longer registered the Tribunal
may decide that, if the person were still registered,
the Tribunal would have
suspended or cancelled the practitioner’s registration, and decide that
the practitioner is disqualified
from being registered for a specified period
and require the National Board with which the person was registered to record
that the Tribunal would have suspended or cancelled the person’s
registration in the National Register kept by the Board.
are satisfied that the nature and gravity of the practitioner’s
professional misconduct was objectively serious. It occurred
over several years.
The risk of harm to a mental health patient in those circumstances is
considerable. In this case, it resulted
in Patient A coming to the attention of
the police. The practitioner and patient A communicated with each other on
thousands of occasions.
Patient A was not only a vulnerable patient but was also
several years younger than the practitioner. In these circumstances, the
imbalance between the two parties is exacerbated.
practitioner’s failure to acknowledge her misconduct by several separate
denials that she had an intimate relationship with
patient A increased the
gravity of her overall professional misconduct. It suggests that the
practitioner lacked the level of insight
and judgment that is a basic
expectation of a registered health practitioner.
practitioners are held to a high standard of conduct. They are required to
behave ethically and with integrity and in accordance
with relevant codes of
conduct and practice. It has been established that the practitioner failed to do
so. Indeed, she has admitted
are satisfied that the practitioner must have known that patient A was
vulnerable and that her conduct constituted a breach of
her professional
standards. It is the sort of conduct that would bring the nursing profession
into disrepute and undermine public
confidence in the profession of registered
are, therefore, satisfied that the professional misconduct was sufficiently
serious to warrant the cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration. It
follows that had the practitioner not voluntarily submitted her application to
surrender her registration on 4 July
2024, the Tribunal would have cancelled the
practitioner’s registration, pursuant to Section 149C(1)(b) of the
National Law.
Disqualification period imposed
Commission seeks a two-year disqualification period.
149C(4)(b) of the National Law gives the Tribunal discretion to determine that
disqualification period. The fixing of the
disqualification period, which can be
made when the practitioner is no longer registered, provides for the safety of
the public,
by ensuring that only those who are suitably trained and qualified
to practice in a competent and ethical manner are registered (s
the National Law).
determining the appropriate order to make, the Tribunal is required to exercise
the functions under the National Law and have
regard to the objectives and
guiding principles of the National Registration and Accreditation Scheme set out
evidence demonstrates that the practitioner:
(a) betrayed the trust of patient A, who was a particularly vulnerable mental
health patient, whom she knew had expressed suicidal
(b) deliberately attempted to conceal her intimate relationship with patient
(c) in doing so, breached the code of conduct of the NMBA and NSW Health Code of
(d) and continued to engage in professional misconduct, even after concerns had
been raised by colleagues and her employer.
are satisfied that this is conduct which undermines the confidence that the
public could hold in the profession. We find that it
is appropriate to protect
the health and safety of the public by imposing a disqualification period.
determine the length of the disqualification period does not require an
arithmetical or comparative process. The Tribunal may exercise
its discretion.
this instance, we note that the practitioner is aware of the Commission’s
request that a two-year disqualification period
be imposed. She has indicated
that she agrees to it. There is no evidence that would cause us to come to a
different view. For that
reason, it is appropriate to exercise our discretion to
impose a two-year period.
Commission seeks an order, in accordance with clause 13 of schedule 5D of the
National Law, that the practitioner pay the Commission’s
costs, as agreed
or assessed.
relevant principles include:
The Tribunal has
discretion to make a cost order (clause 13(1) of schedule 5D of the National
The New South
Wales Court of Appeal has found that the purpose of an award of costs is to
compensate the successful party. As a general
rule, costs of proceedings before
the Tribunal should follow the event (
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2013] NSWCA 342
The presumption
that the successful party is entitled to receive their costs is generally only
displaced where there has been some
disentitling conduct by the successful party
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
The Tribunal has
also recently considered applications for costs (
Puri v Medical Council of
New South Wales (No 2)
[2024] NSWCATOD 122
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Muthukrishna (No. 2)
[2024] NSWCATOD 142
In those matters, the Tribunal found that ‘disentitling conduct’
means misconduct relating to the litigation, or circumstances
leading up to the
litigation, and that the onus vests with the unsuccessful party to establish a
basis for any departure from the
general rule.
this matter the Commission submits that there has been no disentitling conduct
by the Commission to warrant such a departure from
the general rule.
practitioner did not make any submissions in relation to costs.
Tribunal is satisfied that there has been no disentitling conduct on the part of
the applicant and no valid basis for departure
from the general rule has been
established by the practitioner. Therefore, the Tribunal orders that costs be
awarded to the applicant,
as agreed or assessed.
(1) Pursuant to section 149C(4)(a) of the National Law, if the practitioner
were still registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled
her registration,
pursuant to section 149C(1)(c) of the National Law, because she is guilty of
professional misconduct.
(2) Pursuant to section 149C(4)(b) of the National Law, the practitioner is
disqualified from being registered in the health profession
for a period of two
years from the date of this order;
(3) Pursuant to section 149C(1)(c) of the National Law, the National Board is
required to record the fact that if the practitioner
were still registered, the
Tribunal would have cancelled her registration, in the National Register kept by
(4) Costs are to be awarded to the applicant, as agreed or assessed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
06 November 2025 - Order 3 amended from 149C(1)(c) to 149C(4)(c)
Paragraph 8 (4) amended from 149C(1)(c) to 149C(4)(c)
Paragraph 130 amended from 149C(1)(c) to 149C(1)(b)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (347 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter