URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/179.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barber v R [2025] NSWCCA 179 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 179
Hearing Date(s):
18 June 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Dismiss
the appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIME – appeals – appeal against conviction – supply
commercial quantity of prohibited drug – 1,4-butanediol
guilty verdict unreasonable – whether commercial quantity of drug in
possession for the purpose of supply –
application of deeming provision
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(NSW) – definite and
indefinite articles – nature of offence – indivisible whole –
where proof of intention
to use part of drug not inconsistent with possession of
whole quantity for the purpose of supply – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Evidence Act 1995
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Weapons Prohibition
Poisons and Narcotic Drugs Ordinance 1978 (ACT), s
Cases Cited:
Alliston v R
[2011] NSWCCA 281
(2011) 217 A Crim R 323
Chapman v R
[2013] NSWCCA 91
(2013) 232 A Crim R 500
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR
[2022] HCA 25
Environment Protection Authority v Truegain Pty Ltd
85 NSWLR 125
[2013] NSWCCA 204
[1942] ArgusLawRp 58
(1983) 49 ALR 110
(1983) 10 A
Johnson v Miller
(1937) 59 CLR 467
[1937] HCA 77
Holdings Pty Ltd v Water NSW
[2020] NSWCCA 263
(2020) 247 LGERA 1
(2018) 265 CLR 196
[2018] HCA 28
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357;
(1998) 99 A Crim R 421
Pearce v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR
[1998] HCA 57
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
(1990) 20 NSWLR 292
(1990) 50 A Crim R 163
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
Salameh v R
[2024] NSWCCA 239
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[1999] HCA 54
Principal judgment
Adrian Hilary Barber (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
I McLachlan (Applicant)
G Wright SC with F Sullivan
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (NSW) (Applicant)
Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2022/00377283
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
19 October 2023
Baker SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2022/00377283
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
On 19 October 2023, following a trial by judge alone before Baker SC DCJ, the
applicant was found guilty of one count of supply of
a commercial quantity of a
prohibited drug, namely 1,105.2 grams of 1,4-butanediol (butanediol), contrary
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(NSW) (DMTA).
On 26 April 2024, the applicant was sentenced by Baker SC DCJ for the offence,
together with a further eight offences.
He received an aggregate term of
imprisonment of 5 years and 7 months with a non-parole period of 3 years and 7
months, commencing
14 December 2022.
The applicant sought leave to appeal against his conviction for the
commercial supply offence on the sole ground that the verdict
was unreasonable
or could not be supported having regard to the evidence. The applicant did not
dispute that he was in possession
of a commercial quantity of a prohibited drug,
nor that he possessed at least some of the drug for the purposes of supply. The
applicant’s
primary contention was that the evidence established he
intended to use a substantial amount of the drug himself such that he was
guilty of supplying a commercial quantity of the drug. This also raised a
question as to the operation of the “deeming
provision” in
of the DMTA.
The Court held
(Garling, Ierace and Dhanji JJ), granting leave to
appeal and dismissing the appeal:
As to the applicant’s primary argument:
Section 29(a)
of the DMTA operates to deem possession of “the
prohibited drug” for the purpose of supply. The definite article
in this context refers to the entirety of the prohibited drug
in the person’s possession. The requirement in
that the person
prove they had possession of “the” prohibited drug for a purpose
other than supply is again a reference
to the drug as a single quantity. A
failure to prove “the” (whole single quantity) of the drug was in
the person’s
possession for a purpose other than supply has the result
is not satisfied (at [27]-[29]).
(2) In the absence of any capacity to distinguish between the four different
quantities of the drug, it became, in effect, an indivisible
whole. As such, it
was not possible to point to any part of the substance and be positively
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that it was possessed by the applicant
for a purpose other than for supply. Thus, the whole quantity was deemed to be
in the applicant’s
possession for the purpose of supply (at [31]).
As to the applicant’s other arguments:
(1) The applicant raised arguments in the alternative that
no application; that his Honour did not apply the deeming provision; and that
his Honour’s reasons were deficient. Each
of these arguments were rejected
(at [37]-[44]).
: The applicant, Adrian Hilary Barber, seeks leave to appeal pursuant
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) against his
conviction on one count of supply a commercial quantity of a prohibited drug,
namely 1,105.2 grams of 1,4-butanediol
(butanediol), contrary to
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(NSW) (DMTA).
sole ground of appeal sought to be raised by the applicant is that the verdict
is unreasonable. Unlike the vast majority of such
complaints, the applicant does
not seek to attack the reliability of the evidence in proof of the case against
him. He accepts that
he was in possession of a commercial quantity of a
prohibited drug. He does not seek to challenge the finding that he was in
of at least some of that drug for the purposes of supply. His
contention is that the evidence established he intended to use a substantial
amount of the drug himself such that the court could not be satisfied he was
guilty of supplying a commercial quantity of the drug.
argument raises a question as to the application of the “deeming
provision” in
of the DMTA. The applicant contends that
did not operate to deem the entirety of the drug in the applicant’s
possession to be for the purpose of supply, and, had the
law been correctly
applied, he would have been found guilty of the lesser offence of supply of a
prohibited drug contrary to
of the DMTA. That being the case, it is
contended that the applicant’s conviction for supplying a commercial
quantity of a
drug is unreasonable. The applicant seeks not an outright
acquittal, but rather a verdict of acquittal with a conviction for supply
prohibited drug be entered in its place.
point has, at least, superficial appeal and we would grant leave. However, for
the reasons set out below, the argument must fail
and the appeal should be
The procedural history
21 June 2023, the applicant was committed for trial on an indictment charging
him with five offences alleged to have occurred on
14 December 2022 at Kiama,
contrary to the DMTA and the
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
pleaded guilty to the following three offences:
Count 1 (Seq
1): Supply a prohibited drug, namely, 25 grams of
methylamphetamine, contrary to
of the DMTA.
Count 3 (Seq 4): Possess a prohibited weapon, namely a
green-handled flick knife, without being authorised to do so by a permit,
contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act
Count 4 (Seq 10): Possess a prohibited weapon, namely a
black-handled flick knife, without being authorised to do so by a permit,
contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act
October 2023, the applicant was tried by judge alone before Baker SC DCJ on a
fresh indictment charging him with the remaining
two offences on the original
indictment:
Count 1 (Seq 3): Supply a prohibited
drug, namely, 1,105.2 grams of butanediol, being an amount which was not less
than the commercial
quantity applicable to that prohibited drug, contrary to
Count 2 (Seq 11): Possess a prohibited weapon, namely a
torch taser, without being authorised to do so by permit, contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act
19 October 2023, Baker SC DCJ found the applicant guilty of count 1 and not
guilty of count 2.
26 April 2024, the applicant was sentenced by his Honour on count 1, count 3 and
count 4 on the first indictment, together with
count 1 on the second indictment.
The applicant received a discount of 10 percent for the offences to which he
pleaded guilty, being
count 1, count 3 and count 4 on the first indictment.
applicant was also sentenced with respect to five related charges, which were
before the court pursuant to
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). Of these, there were three charges of possession of a prohibited drug
contrary to
of the DMTA, one charge of possession of a prescribed
restricted substance contrary to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
(NSW) and one charge of dealing with property suspected to be the
proceeds of crime contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
applicant was sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment of 5 years and 7
months with a non-parole period of 3 years and 7
months, commencing 14 December
2022. The non-parole period will end on 13 July 2026 and the full term will
expire on 13 July 2028.
is an industrial solvent. Despite this being the use for which it is
manufactured, some people choose to drink it. Apparently,
when metabolised, it
has an effect similar to MDMA. As noted above, the applicant’s possession
of a commercial quantity of
the drug was not in dispute, nor that he was a
member of that population who choose to drink it. The limited nature of the
on the appeal is such that the facts can be dealt with briefly.
pulled over by the police. He was the sole occupant
of the vehicle. Both he and
the car were searched. The police found, in the engine bay of the car,
methylamphetamine (the subject
of count 1 on the first indictment) and
buprenorphine (the subject of a possess prohibited drug charge dealt with as a
related charge).
In the boot of the car police found a plunger syringe (which is
apparently a means by which butanediol is administered) and two “ice
pipes”. In a hidden compartment in the boot police found 96.5 grams of
butanediol. Also in the applicant’s possession
was the key to a safe.
applied for, were granted, and executed a search warrant at the
applicant’s property in Kiama. There, they further located
various items
including the items the subject of the remaining charges. In a safe in a
wardrobe, which was opened with the key found
on the applicant, police found a
white bottle, a clear bottle and a green bottle, each of which contained
butanediol. The combined
weight of the drug in the three bottles was 1,008.7
grams. This, together with the 96.5 grams found in the car, made up the total
quantity relied on by the Crown with respect to the commercial supply charge.
the applicant’s bedroom, police found a one-page document with numbers on
it handwritten by the applicant. At trial, the
applicant disputed the
prosecution’s characterisation of this document as a “ledger”
relating to the supply of
butanediol. His case was that he was not involved in
the supply of the drug. His evidence in this regard was rejected. While the
trial judge did not accept that the applicant intended to consume the entirety
of the drug, this did not amount to a rejection of
evidence that the applicant
was a heavy user of the drug and, as such, intended to use at least some of the
drug himself.
Unreasonable verdict?
applicant contends that the verdict of the trial judge on count 1 is
“unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard
evidence” within the meaning of
Criminal Appeal
. The test to be applied in determining whether a verdict is
unreasonable within the first limb of
is that stated in
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
, per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey
JJ. See, more recently,
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
Dansie v The
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
The King v ZT
(2025) 99 ALJR 676.
the present circumstances, it is unnecessary to recite the principles as
developed in the above cases. That is because, as discussed
applicant’s argument is not that the evidence on which his conviction was
founded was unreliable, but that the verdict
was reached based on a
misunderstanding of the law.
The applicant’s primary
was not in dispute that the applicant was in possession of a prohibited drug,
butanediol, in an amount that was not less than the
commercial quantity
applicable to that drug. The amount of butanediol in the applicant’s
possession was 1,105.2 grams. The
commercial quantity prescribed in relation to
the drug, as provided in Sch 1 of the DMTA, is 1 kilogram, with the result
applicant possessed 105.2 grams in excess of that amount.
offence of which the applicant was convicted is created by
of the DMTA.
provides, as presently relevant:
25 Supply of prohibited drugs
(1) A person who supplies, or who knowingly takes part in the
supply of, a prohibited drug is guilty of an offence.
(2) A person who supplies, or who knowingly takes part in the
supply of, an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than
the commercial
quantity applicable to the prohibited drug is guilty of an offence.
(3) Where, on the trial of a person for an offence under
subsection (2) or (2D), the jury are not satisfied that the amount of
drug involved is equal to or more than the commercial quantity applicable to the
prohibited drug, they may acquit the
person of the offence charged and find the
person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) or (2C), respectively, and the
shall be liable to punishment accordingly.
penalty for the offence is provided by s 33, with different maximum penalties
provided for offences involving commercial and large
commercial quantities: see
Salameh v R
[2024] NSWCCA 239.
case against the applicant was based on the extended definition of supply in
of the DMTA:
3 Definitions
(1) In this Act, except in so far as the context or
subject-matter otherwise indicates or requires—
includes sell and distribute, and also includes
agreeing to supply, or offering to supply, or keeping or having in possession
supply, or sending, forwarding, delivering or receiving for supply, or
authorising, directing, causing, suffering, permitting or
attempting any of
those acts or things.
the case against the applicant it was alleged, relying on the above extended
definition, that he was in possession of the butanediol
for the purposes of
supply. The DMTA facilitates proof of an offence of being in possession for the
purposes of supply by means of
the “deeming” provision in
the DMTA: see
Alliston v R
[2011] NSWCCA 281
(2011) 217 A Crim R 323
. A person in possession of an amount of a prohibited drug in excess of the
“traffickable” quantity applying to that drug
is deemed, subject to
stipulated exceptions, to possess the drug for the purposes of supply. While an
argument was raised on the
appeal questioning whether
was in fact relied
on, we will proceed, in the first instance, on the assumption that
The traffickable quantity applicable to butanediol, as set out in Sch 1 of the
DMTA, is 30 grams, with the result that the
applicant possessed an amount (well)
in excess of the traffickable quantity.
29 Traffickable quantity—possession taken to be for
A person who has in his or her possession an amount of a prohibited drug which
is not less than the traffickable quantity of the
prohibited drug shall, for the
purposes of this Division, be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his or her
possession for supply,
(a) the person proves that he or she had the prohibited drug in
his or her possession otherwise than for supply, or
(b) except where the prohibited drug is prepared opium,
cannabis leaf, cannabis oil, cannabis resin, heroin or 6-monoacetylmorphine
any other acetylated derivatives of morphine, the person proves that he or she
obtained possession of the prohibited drug on and
in accordance with the
prescription of a medical practitioner, nurse practitioner, midwife
practitioner, dentist or veterinary practitioner.
can be seen,
has no application to the present case. The applicant was
thus deemed to have been in possession of the drug for the purposes of
unless he proved that he had “the prohibited drug in his possession
otherwise than for supply”. The applicant’s
onus was to prove that
fact on the balance of probabilities:
Evidence Act 1995
(1990) 20 NSWLR 292
(1990) 50 A Crim R
(1998) 99 A Crim R 421.
drugs in the applicant’s possession were in four different containers. One
bottle was found in the applicant’s car
(weighing 96.5 grams) and three
bottles in his wardrobe (weighing 1,008.7 grams). The case against him was,
however, prosecuted as
if it was a single quantity of the drug, that being the
combined total of the four bottles.
might be noted that the combined weight of the three bottles in the wardrobe was
sufficient to sustain a charge of commercial supply
in the absence of the bottle
found in the car. Thus, while the applicant gave a different explanation at
trial for the smaller quantity
of butanediol found in the car, acceptance of
that explanation would not have reduced the amount in the applicant’s
to an amount less than the commercial quantity. These were not, in
any event, distinctions made at trial. Nor was any issue raised
as to duplicity
or that the applicant was otherwise embarrassed in his defence by the inclusion
in the one charge the four different
bottles containing butanediol: see
Johnson v Miller
(1937) 59 CLR 467
[1937] HCA 77
(1989) 168 CLR 266
[1989] HCA 66
Lane v The Queen
[2018] HCA 28
Environment Protection Authority v Truegain Pty Ltd
(2013) 85 NSWLR 125
[2013] NSWCCA 204
Kiangatha Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2020] NSWCCA 263
(2020) 247 LGERA 1.
Chapman v R
[2013] NSWCCA 91
(2013) 232 A Crim R 500
for a discussion in the context of the
possession of distinct parcels of drugs found in different locations.
Crown contended at trial that the applicant intended to supply at least some
part of the drug in his possession. The trial proceeded
on the basis that if the
Crown established this the applicant should be convicted. The applicant, in
order to avoid this result,
contended that the entirety of the drug was for his
personal use.
argument on this appeal is that the trial proceeded on a false premise. In
short, it is now argued on behalf of the applicant
that the prosecution was
required to prove that the applicant intended to supply a commercial quantity of
the drug. As observed above,
there was evidence that the applicant was a heavy
user of butanediol. The applicant’s contention is that he intended to use
a sufficient part of the drug, such that the remainder would have been less than
the commercial quantity, thus precluding his guilt
of commercial supply. We are
prepared to accept for the purposes of the applicant’s argument that, had
the DMTA been construed
in the manner the applicant now contends it should have
been, it would not have been possible to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the applicant intended to supply a commercial quantity of the drug.
applicant’s argument, however, must fail. To understand why, it is
necessary to attend to the terms of
of the DMTA.
Section 29(a)
when a person has in possession “an amount of
drug” which is in excess of the relevant threshold. On this being
established, the person is deemed to possess “
drug” for the purposes of supply. The definite article “the”
in this context refers to the entirety
of the prohibited drug in the
person’s possession. The requirement in
that the person prove they
had possession of “the” prohibited drug for a purpose other than
supply is again a reference
to the drug as a single quantity. A failure to prove
“the” (whole single quantity) of the drug was in the person’s
possession for a purpose other than supply has the result that
not satisfied. The whole of the drug is thus deemed to be in the person’s
possession for supply.
importance of the definite article in the context of the expression “the
prohibited drug” was emphasised in
. The context was the
construction of
of the DMTA
and in particular whether the
accused’s intention to supply a commercial quantity of a prohibited drug
was established by proof
the accused intended to supply a quantity of the drug
in excess of the commercial quantity applicable to the drug actually supplied,
or whether it was necessary for the Crown to prove an intention to supply a
quantity in excess of the commercial quantity of the
prohibited drug which the
accused believed they were supplying. Bell CJ, Payne and Sweeney JJ said (at
“The text of 25(2) first identifies a prohibited drug and next identifies
the prohibited drug. Both parties accepted that the
first reference to
‘a’ prohibited drug was a reference to the actual prohibited drug
the accused has supplied or has
knowingly taken part in the supply of. The
subsequent reference to ‘the’ (definite article) prohibited drug is
best understood
as a reference to the first mentioned prohibited drug, and not
to a prohibited drug that the accused, incorrectly, believed that
he or she has
supplied or has knowingly taken part in supplying.”
reasoning, while not directly applicable, is not dissimilar to the reasoning
that applies in the present case.
of the applicant’s argument also follows from a proper understanding of
the nature of the offence. There is no separate
offence of “deemed
supply”. The offence is one of supply (be it supply simpliciter,
commercial supply or some other variant
provided by the DMTA). When based on the
extended definition, an offence of “supply” can be established by
proving, amongst
other alternatives, the person was in possession of the drug
for the purpose of supply (possibly relying on the deeming provision
The mental element to be established relates to the intention with which, and at
the time, the drug is possessed. It does
not relate to what the person has done
in the past with drugs that were previously in their possession (though evidence
conduct may be relevant to proof of the present intention). Nor is the
mental element proved by speculation as to what the person
have done with the drugs in the future.
the present case, as discussed above, in the absence of any capacity to
distinguish between different quantities of the drug, it
became, in effect, an
indivisible whole. As such, and understanding the intention to be proved as
discussed above, it was not possible
to point to any part of the substance and
be positively satisfied on the balance of probabilities that it was possessed by
the applicant
for a purpose other than for supply. Thus, the whole quantity was
deemed to be in the applicant’s possession for the purpose
of supply. In
other words, proof of an intention to use some part of the drug possessed is not
inconsistent with a failure to prove
that the whole of the drug was possessed
other than for supply.
arguing against the conclusion we have reached above, the applicant sought to
draw support from the reasons of Dhanji J in
[2024] NSWCCA 25.
That was an appeal against the sentence imposed for an offence of supply of a
large commercial quantity of a prohibited drug. The
applicant’s
culpability was found to be diminished by the fact that he intended to consume a
large amount of the drug himself.
(The case was unusual due to the very low
purity of the drug which, in combination with the admixture provision in
the DMTA, meant that the applicant could have consumed a significant proportion
of the large commercial quantity in his possession.)
At [40], Dhanji J
noted that “in the absence of challenge it is unnecessary to
consider” whether an offence of possession
for the purposes of supply
contrary to
of the DMTA is made out where the amount that was
intended to be supplied was less than the large commercial or
commercial quantity
possessed. This observation, while acknowledging a potential
argument, provides no authority in support of the applicant’s
is, in fact, a surprising dearth of authority in relation to the issue.
Reference was made by the applicant to a decision of
the Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia in
[1942] ArgusLawRp 58
(1983) 49 ALR 110
(1983) 10 A
Crim R 125.
That case was decided in the context of a provision similar, though
not identical to,
Section 4(3) of the Poisons and Narcotic Drugs Ordinance
1978 (ACT) (the Ordinance) created an offence of possessing a controlled
substance for the purpose of supplying the substance to another person or
persons. Section 4(4) provided:
“In proceedings for an offence against sub-section (3), a person who has
in his possession a quantity of a controlled substance,
being a quantity that
exceeds the prescribed traffickable quantity for that substance, shall, unless
the contrary is proved or the
person proves that he had lawful authority to have
the substance in his possession, be taken to have the substance in his
for the purpose of supplying the substance to another person or to
other persons.”
was argued in
that an accused to whom the provision otherwise
applied might discharge the onus of proof resting on him if it was proved an
of the drug was for the accused’s own use such that the remainder
was an amount less than the prescribed applicable quantity.
The argument has
parallels to the argument here. It failed. The Court held (at
“We rejected this submission for the following reasons. The ordinary
dictionary definition of ‘contrary’ is ‘the
that is the meaning which the word has here. Thus the accused is deemed to have
the substance for supply unless
he proves the opposite. He will not do so by
establishing that part only was not for supply. Proof that that is so is not
the contrary or opposite of what the presumption involves, namely that
the whole is for supply.
We were reinforced in our conclusion by the consideration that it is an offence
under subs 4(3) to have any quantity of a prohibited
substance in one’s
possession for supply. It is immaterial that the amount may not exceed the
prescribed traffickable quantity.
But if it does not, the presumption provided
for in subs 4(4) will not arise. Where the amount does exceed the prescribed
the presumption will arise. Unless the accused discharges the onus as
to the entirety of the substance in his possession, he will
be deemed to have at
least some of it in his possession for the purpose of supply. That, so it seemed
to us, was plainly the intention
of the legislation.”
applicant arguably draws support from the statement in
accused who does not prove that the possession of the entire quantity of the
drug in their possession was otherwise than
for supply “will be deemed to
have at least some of it in [their] possession for the purpose of supply”.
This conclusion
allows for the possibility that the amount deemed to be in
possession for the purposes of supply might be less than the whole of
quantity possessed. This statement, however, expresses no more than an element
of caution with respect to an issue that was not
the subject of argument and did
not need to be decided. It is, in this regard, not dissimilar to the aside made
by Dhanji J in
. It provides no authority for the applicant’s
argument which must, in any event, fail for the reasons of construction
the reasons given above, the applicant’s primary argument must
Other arguments raised by the applicant
applicant submitted that s 29(a) did not apply at all in circumstances where it
was established that some of the drug was for
personal use (or more correctly,
possessed other than for supply). While making the submission it was also put in
written submissions
that “this issue may not need to be determined in this
matter”, presumably, against the prospect of success on the primary
argument. While there may be a question as to whether, in the absence of
reliance on s 29, the applicant could be found guilty of
having any part of
the drug in his possession for supply, we are content to deal with this
argument, as it was put, in the alternative.
argument appears to go further than that rejected in
as discussed
above. The applicant sought to distinguish
, noting that the
provision with which
was concerned, while similar, was different
to s 29(a) of the DMTA. It was pointed out that, while s 4(4) of the Ordinance
the relevant possession to be for supply “unless the contrary is
proved”, s 29(a) operates to deem possession to be for
supply unless the
accused proves the possession was “otherwise than for supply”. It
is, with respect, difficult to discern
any meaningful difference between the two
formulations.
is nothing in the text of s 29(a) to support the applicant’s argument that
it had no application. The reasoning in
, in the passage set out
above, is equally apposite to the present context. The applicant’s
argument that s 29(a) had no application
applicant also raised an issue as to whether the trial judge in coming to his
conclusion in fact relied on the deeming provision
in s 29(a). It was not
suggested that the prosecution did not rely on the deeming provision before the
trial judge. Given this,
it is open to question whether, if as the applicant
contends the trial judge did not rely on s 29(a), it would have any relevance
establishing that the verdict was unreasonable. It is, in any event, clear that
the trial judge did rely on the deeming provision.
Honour’s reasons are structured by the use of headings. His Honour set out
various matters under the headings “Introduction”
and “General
Directions”. Under the latter heading his Honour set out a number of
general directions including as to
matters such as the onus and burden of proof.
His Honour then, under the heading “The Issues in the Case”,
referred to
the police having found the quantity of butanediol in the
applicant’s possession. His Honour then stated:
“The Crown case is that the accused possessed the combined amount of
[butanediol] for the purposes of supplying and had unauthorised
possession of
the torch taser. [Defence counsel] opened on the basis that the accused’s
response to the Prosecution case is,
that although the accused admits that he
possessed the [butanediol], it was all for his personal use and that in relation
torch taser the Prosecution cannot prove that he possessed that item.
Therefore, as will be seen, the principal issue before me in relation to [the
commercial supply charge] is whether the accused has
established, on the balance
of probabilities, that the entire amount of [butanediol] was in his possession
for a purpose other than
for supply, that is for his own personal use.”
Honour subsequently made reference to the manner in which s 29(a) of the
DMTA operates and said:
“As I am satisfied the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the
substance was a prohibited drug, that the accused
was in possession of not less
than 1,000 grams of the drug, and he knew that he possessed that amount, and
that the amount of the
drug was at least 30 grams, then the Crown has proved all
of the elements of the offence of supply it must prove.
However, it is a defence to this charge if the accused proves that he had the
drug in his possession other than for the purposes
of supply.”
coming to his finding of guilt his Honour said:
“Ultimately, having regard to the whole of the evidence and the
accused’s evidence I am not satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that
the accused possessed the entire amount of the [butanediol] for his own personal
regard to the above, the argument that his Honour did not apply the deeming
provision is untenable. Nor, having regard to
the passages set out above, is
there any substance in the applicant’s submission that his Honour’s
reasons were deficient
with respect to his reliance on the deeming
the reasons given above, the applicant’s appeal against conviction must be
dismissed. Before doing so, however, we pause
to observe that the
applicant’s case with respect to his intended use of the drug had
relevance to the determination of sentence.
Honour on sentence accepted that the applicant was “a heavy and
experienced drug user” and that while he could not
determine how much,
“a portion” of the butanediol was for his own use. While his Honour
did not attempt to determine
whether the amount of the drug in the
applicant’s possession fell above or below the point of demarcation set by
the DMTA for
offences of supply of a commercial quantity of butanediol, no
criticism can be made of his Honour in this regard. Where, relative
maximum penalty, the applicant’s sentence should sit was to be determined
based on the facts as relevant and known to
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[1999] HCA 54.
Here, the maximum penalty was that set
for an offence against s 25(2) involving a commercial quantity. A particular
offence of supply
of a commercial quantity of a prohibited drug against s 25(2)
of the DMTA is, however, not necessarily more serious than an offence
against s 25(1) of the DMTA:
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR
[2005] HCA 25.
By way of example, in
(at [51]), Dhanji J observed
that the objective gravity of the supply in that case, was “lower than
that for most commercial
supply offences, and possibly supply offences in
general”. Ultimately, as was said in
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
per McHugh, Hayne and Callinan JJ, albeit in a
slightly different context, “the punishment to be exacted should reflect
an offender has done; it should not be affected by the way in which the
boundaries of particular offences are drawn”.
applicant’s offence did not become radically more serious at the point at
which the quantity of the drug in his possession
moved from 999 grams to
1 kilogram. Nor could the fact that the applicant did not intend to supply
all of the drug in his possession
be removed from the equation. The absence of
any complaint with respect to the sentence implicitly acknowledges that his
not misunderstand these basic
principles.
make the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Dismiss the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (301 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter