URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2015/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Heather Conyard [2015] NSWNMPSC 3 (29 September 2015)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 169
HEATHER CONYARD
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
NMW0001269155
REASONS FOR DECISON
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
HCCC v Heather Conyard [2015 ]
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms Jaimee Dinihan Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Heather Suzanne Conyard
- represented by Ms Penny Waters,
FILE NUMBER:
Ms Belinda Baker (Chairperson) Ms Leigh Schalk (Nurse
Ms Gerda Tolhurst (Nurse Member) Mr Adam Johnston (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING:
18 September 2015
DATE OF DECISION:
29 September 2015
DATE OF ORDERS:
29 September 2015
11 January 2013, the respondent was the registered nurse in charge of the
afternoon shift at Glen Innes District Hospital ("the
Hospital").
A was an 81 year old patient who had been admitted to the Hospital on 6 January
2013, with shortness of breath, and a number
of other co-morbidities, including
diabetes, leg oedema, tachycardia and hypotension. Patient A's condition failed
to improve over
the days subsequent to her admission on 6
the course of the period ·from 1700 hours on 11 January 2013, Patient A's
condition significantly deteriorated. At approximately
1720 hours, Patient A's
blood pressure was observed to be 89/53, she had a respiratory rate of 40-44
breaths per minute and she had
abdominal pains and diarrhoea. The respondent was
informed of those observations ·at approximately 1810 hours. The respondent
also made further personal observations of Patient A after 1810 hours. The
respondent did not document these latter observations.
Patient A's vital signs remained in the
described in the
"Between the Flags"
policy at all times after 1720 hours on 11 January
2013, and although hospital policies required that a doctor be notified in these
circumstances, the respondent did not notify a doctor of Patient A's condition
until the locum doctor arrived at the Hospital at
2200 hours. At this time,
Patient A was critically ill. Attempts were made, unsuccessfully, to have
Patient A transferred to Armidale
Hospital overnight by ambulance or by air.
Patient A's condition continued to decline overnight. Patient A died whilst she
assessed for transport in the morning of 12 January
complaint alleged that the respondent was guilty of unsatisfactory conduct in
respect of her failure to recognise and respond
to Patient A's deteriorating
condition, and in respect of her failure to document her assessment and plan of
action for Patient A.
The respondent admitted all of the particulars in the
complaint. She also admitted that her conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional
conduct. The Professional Standards Committee ("the Committee") was
satisfied of each of the particulars, and that the particulars
amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Consequential orders were
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
5 January 2013, Patient A, who was 81 years old, presented at the Glen Innes GP
clinic complaining of two nights of breathlessness
when lying flat and shortness
of breath. On examination, Patient A was found to have fine creps at the base of
both lungs and slightly
elevated jugular venous pressure. Her renal function was
normal. She was commenced on oral Lasix and was recommended to have a clinical
review two days later.
6 January 2013, Patient A attended the Hospital again with shortness of breath.
Patient A was admitted to Hospital as the oral
Lasix had not improved her
the course of the following days, Patient A's condition did not improve. On 7
January 2013, the visiting medical officer, Dr
Haron, reviewed Patient A and
planned a chest x-ray and blood tests. On 8 January 2013, Dr Haron reviewed
Patient A again and noted
diarrhoea and right sided tenderness of Patient A's
abdomen. He organised a ventilation/ perfusion (V/Q) lung scan.
9 January 2013, Patient A reported dizziness. This coincided with an atrial
fibrillation (AF) rate of 120/ min. Dr Haron was called
to review Patient A. He
noted that the V/Q scan was
"interdeterminate".
Patient A was refusing
food and liquid at this time, and was complaining of feeling very weak and
having abdominal pain.
0830 hours on 10 January 2013, Dr Haron again assessed Patient A He concluded
that Patient A was depressed and anxious. He encouraged
nursing staff to
mobilise Patient A. The nursing notes that follow Dr Haron's attendance refer to
discharge planning at 1021 hours,
and then, at 1315 hours, comment that Patient
A felt unwell, had refused breakfast and lunch, had no energy and required
encouragement
to mobilise. Patient A's respiratory rate was recorded as 28-30/
minute, but other vital signs were within normal limits.
1820 hours, the progress notes state that Patient A refused to tolerate her
dinner. At 1.910 hours, Patient A was observed to have
a respiratory rate of
40/min and she was tachycardic at 122/min. At 1930 hours, Patient A was
documented as feeling
her skin was cold and clammy and she was
complaining of severe back pain. Her SSL was 16.1mmmol/I. An ECG was conducted,
which showed
a heart rate of 168/min. Dr Haron was again called. He stated that
Patient A should be administered Digoxin and Valium. At 2110 hours,
Patient A's respiratory rate was still at 40/min.
0530 hours on 11 January 2013, nursing notes state that Patient A was unable to
void, was pale and grey, and had clammy skin and
nausea. At 0830 hours on 11
January 2013, Dr Haran assessed Patient A and wrote
"? Significant medical
An abdominal x ray and pathology were ordered. Dr Haran returned
at 1330 hours and noted that Patient A
"won't/ can't mobilise
pain in back and abdo"
and that her white cell count had risen to
17.5, despite an absence of fever. A urinary tract infection was subsequently
and intravenous antibiotics were commenced at approximately 1430
respondent commenced her afternoon shift as the nurse in charge at 1430 hours on
11 January 2013. She read Patient A's progress
notes at approximately 1445
hours. In her evidence before the Committee, the respondent stated that she was
immediately concerned
considered that the Hospital was not equipped to properly care for Patient A.
The respondent said that she had been informed at the handover that Patient A's
treating doctor had
"gone away"
"was unable to be contacted'.
The respondent said that as Patient A's doctor was not available, she
intended that to have Patient A seen by the locum (who usually
arrived at around
2100 hours on Friday evenings).
approximately 1720 hours, Patient A reported to nursing staff that she was
feeling dizzy and had abdominal pain (8/10). She was
observed to have a
respiratory rate of 40 -.44/min, very low blood pressure of 89/53 and a heart
rate of 88.
before 1810 hours, the respondent was advised of Patient A's condition by an
enrolled nurse. The respondent said that she
would have Patient A reviewed once
the locum arrived. At around 1810 hours, the respondent was informed that
Patient A had continual
diarrhoea. The respondent again said that she would have
Patient A reviewed when the locum arrived. After this conversation, the
respondent personally reviewed Patient A. The respondent did not document her
observations. However , in her evidence before this
Committee , the respondent
acknowledged that Patient A's vital signs had not improved at this time.
approximately 1910 hours, the respondent arranged for a further ECG to be
undertaken for Patient A.
approximately 2020 hours, the respondent telephoned the Clinical Nurse Manager,
Ms Catherine Jones, to arrange for medication to
be obtained from the drug safe
(for a patient other than Patient A). At approximately 2030 hours, Ms Jones
attended the Hospital
and signed for the medication. The respondent did not
raise any issues concerning Patient A with Ms Jones at this time.
approximately 2100 hours, the respondent and another registered nurse completed
an ISBAR (Introduction Situation Background Assessment
Recommendation) form. In
that form, the respondent described Patient A as
"deteriorating",
recommended that Patient A's condition be reviewed
stated that Patient A's family had been contacted.
locum, Dr Vallentine, arrived at 2200 hours. By this time, Patient A was
critically unwell. The emergency on-call doctor, Dr Correy,
approximately 2300 hours and inserted a large bore IV cannula to treat Patient
A's severe dehydration. Over the course
of the night, attempts were made to
transport Patient A to a rural referral hospital. The ability to transfer
Patient A was significantly
complicated by Patient A's critical condition.
Tragically, Patient A died whilst she was being assessed by the air evacuation
the following morning. The primary cause of death was stated to be
septicaemia.
complaint was amended by the HCCC with leave, prior to the commencement of the
hearing before the Committee.
amended complaint alleges that the respondent, being a registered nurse under
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of s. 1398 of the
National Law,
in that she engaged in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment " possessed or care
exercised, by her in the
practice of nursing is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
experience.
particulars of the amended complaint are that:
"1. On 11 January 2013 between the hours of 17.10 and 21.00 the Practitioner
failed to recognise and respond to Patient A's deteriorating
clinical condition
including failing to organise a medical review of Patient A in circumstances
where at approximately 17.20:
(a) Patient A's blood pressure was measured at 89/53;
(b) Patient A had a respiratory rate 40-44 breaths per minute;
(c) Patient A had abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
11 January 2013 between the hours of 17. 10 and 21.00 the Practitioner
(i) to document her assessment of Patient A;
(ii) to document and implement a plan of action for Patient A."
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
Chairperson of the Committee made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
the Patient in accordance with provisions of
Clause 7 of Schedule SD of the
National Law.
The name of the Patient is indicated in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked "A" and any information that may identify her is not
to be published. Annexure A will only be attached to the original Reasons for
Decision held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
APPLICABLE LAW
139B of the
National Law
provides as follows:
"139B Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct" of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
registered health practitioner includes each of the
following -
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
practitioner's profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience."
phrase "significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience" is not defined
However, in
Re A Medical Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
(unreported, NSWMT, 3 September 2007), Deputy Chairperson Judge Freeman
stated (in relation to legislation in the same terms as s.
139B of the
National Law)
general principle, the use of the term 'significant' may in law
be taken to mean not trivial, of importance, or substantial."
the complaint was admitted in full, Issues of onus and standard of proof are not
as relevant compared to a matter in which these
are contested issues.
Nonetheless, the Committee observes that the standard of proof is balance of
probabilities, bearing in mind
the principles set out in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362 - 363.
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
folders of documents were tendered by the HCCC. These folders included the
amended complaint, the respondent's registration
certificate, clinical notes,
witness statements, together with statements of a peer reviewer, RN Michelle
Parker, which commented
on the appropriateness of the respondent's actions.
was also tendered on behalf of the respondent. In particular, the Committee
received two statements of the respondent, dated
15 July 2014 and 4 August 2015
respectively, a chronology and other relevant documentation concerning the
respondent's duties on
the evening of 11 January 2013. In the statement dated 4
August 2015 (which was filed after the amendment of the complaint), the
respondent admitted each of the particulars of the amended complaint.
addition to the documentary evidence, the Committee heard oral evidence from RN
Parker (by telephone), and the respondent (in person).
the hearing, the HCCC was represented by Ms Jaimee Dinihan, solicitor of the
HCCC. The respondent was represented by Ms Penny Waters,
solicitor. Ms Dinihan
provided the Committee with thorough written submissions. Both Ms Dinihan and Ms
Waters also addressed the
Committee orally as to the appropriate conditions to
be imposed.
respondent was first registered as a nurse in 1989. She has extensive experience
as a registered nurse, having worked in pathology
for 9 years, before moving to
a general practitioner practice, where she worked between 2002 and 2007. The
respondent has been employed
as a registered nurse at the Hospital since 2008,
and has performed the role of "nurse in charge" since 2009. She is First Line
Care ("FLEC") trained.
Particular 1
1 of the complaint alleges that the respondent failed to recognise and respond
to Patient A's deteriorating condition in
that she did not arrange a medical
review of Patient A between 1710 hours and 2100 hours, in circumstances
(a) Patient A's
blood pressure was 89/53 at approximately 1720 hours;
(b) Patient A
had a respiratory rate of 40-44 breaths per minute at approximately 1720 hours;
(c) Patient A
had abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
HCCC's expert witness, RN Michelle Parker, gave evidence that the respondent
should have arranged for a medical review as soon
as the respondent became aware
that Patient A's blood pressure was 89/53 and that her respiratory rate was 40 -
44. RN Parker also
stated that Patient A's abdominal pain and diarrhoea were
clear indicators that Patient A's condition was deteriorating and that
required urgent assistance. RN Parker was of the view that the respondent's
conduct in failing to arrange for medical attendance
fell significantly below
what is expected of a practitioner of the ·same training and experience. RN
Parker further stated that
this departure from an appropriate standard of care
invited her
"strong criticism".
RN Parker observed, the vital signs observed by' the respondent after 1810 hours
on 11 January 2013 placed Patient A squarely in
"red zone",
accordance with Hunter New England NSW Health policies (including the
""Between the Flags"
policy), required a
"rapid response",
that the patient be assessed by a medical officer or the rapid response team
within 10 minutes. Where this could not occur,
the policies required that the
patient's treating general practitioner or the on-call visiting medical officer
be immediately notified.
It may be observed that, at the time of these events,
the observation charts were coloured, and that Patient A's heart rate and blood
pressure were clearly within the areas coloured red.
Significantly,
as the HCCC submitted, Patient A's blood pressure and respiratory rate remained
at all times after 1720 hours, yet the respondent did
not take action to arrange for Patient A to be seen by a medical practitioner
until the locum arrived at 2200 hours. In addition, the respondent did not raise
Patient A's condition with Ms Jones (the Clinical
Nurse Manager), even though Ms
Jones arrived at the Hospital after Patient A's condition was brought to the
respondent's attention
and some time prior to the expected arrival of the
as the HCCC noted, the respondent was the registered nurse in charge of the
afternoon shift. As there was no Nurse Manager
of the Health Service, the
respondent was therefore the registered nurse in charge of the Hospital. Part of
the respondent's role
as a registered nurse in charge included escalating issues
to the Health Service Manager or Clinical Nurse Manager as required (and
specifically, when "a
clinical review or rapid response escalation protocol
review request was not attended to by
medical officer within an
acceptable time frame",
Glen Innes District Health Service, Registered Nurse
in Charge Policy, January 2010).
respondent accepts that she should have called a doctor as soon as she was made
aware of the patient's vital signs (that is, at
1810 hours) and accepts that her
failure to do so amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Committee
finds that this particular
is made out. The Committee is satisfied that this
particular amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 2
2 alleges ·that the respondent failed to document her assessment of Patient
A, and that she failed to document and
implement a plan of action for Patient
Parker observed that the respondent
"failed to document anything in the
patient's medical record'.
RN Parker stated that the respondent
have documented her assessment
[of the patient],
stating her plan of
action and reason for this".
RN Parker explained that "[a]s
the hospital supervisor; she was responsible
to support the nurses on the ward and escalate care when a patient is
deteriorating."
Documentation
of observations is important at any time. However, in view of the seriousness of
Patient A's condition, it was essential
that the respondent document her own
observations of Patient A's condition, and her plan of action for Patient A. The
admitted that she failed to document her observations and plan of
action, that she should have documented her observations and plan
of action, and
that her failures in these respects amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The Committee finds that this
particular is made out. The Committee is
satisfied that this particular amounts to unsatisfactory professional
CONSEQUENTIAL ORDERS
Relevant principles
the Committee is of the view that the HCCC has made out the complaint and that
the respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the
meaning of s. 139B(1)(a) of the
National Law,
it is appropriate to
proceed to a consideration of the orders that should be made.
Committee's powers on proof of a complaint are set out in s. 146B of the
National Law.
In determining appropriate consequential orders, the
Committee is required to consider the whole of the respondent's conduct:
[2002] NSWCA 111
must be borne in mind that the jurisdiction of the Committee is protective
rather than punitive. The protective role of the Committee
extends to the
maintenance of public confidence in the profession and maintenance of the
reputation of the profession:
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
[2014] NSWCA 307
. Orders of the Committee may operate to have a general deterrent
effect, both for the respondent and for other members of the
profession.
Mitigating factors
accepting that she was guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the
respondent also pointed to a number of matters in
mitigation, which, it was
said, provided some context to her conduct on the day in question.
these mitigating factors are of relevance to the appropriateness of imposing
protective orders, it is convenient to set them out
briefly at this time.
Specifically, the respondent explained that:
afternoon shift was a very busy shift. The respondent was in charge of the
emergency department, as well as the being the nurse
in charge of the
the time that the respondent was first notified of Patient A's deteriorating
state by an enrolled nurse, she was administering
Diazepam, a Schedule 4
medicine drug to a patient in the emergency department, which was a task that
required her undivided attention;
A had been seen by her treating doctor, Dr Haran, at 1330 hours. Dr Haron had
prescribed antibiotics. The administration of
those antibiotics did not commence
until the respondent started her shift, at 1430 hours. The respondent said that
she thought that
Patient A's deteriorating vital signs would be improved by the
continuation of antibiotics;
respondent understood from the handover that Patient A's regular doctor, Dr
Haran, was not available (this turned out to be incorrect),
and she also
understood that the locum was not available until 2100 hours;
from the locum, the only other doctor available was Dr Correy, who was rostered
as the on-call emergency department physician.
The respondent acknowledged that
Dr Correy was in fact physically present in the Hospital until approximately
1800 hours on 11 January
2013. However, the respondent stated that, at the time
of the incident, there was a lack of clarity in the policies and practice
Hospital as to whether the emergency department doctor could be prevailed upon
to examine a patient who was not in the emergency
department where the patient's
doctor was not available. The respondent said that on previous occasions when
she had attempted to
ask the emergency doctor to see a patient in a ward where
the patient had not been admitted by the "on­ call/emergency doctor",
had been told to wait for the locum, The respondent gave evidence that this
informal stance was maintained rather rigidly by
some Visiting Medical Officers,
to the point where nursing staff (including the respondent as nurse-in-charge)
were reticent about
calling them because of the "ear-full" they would receive.
The respondent gave evidence that subsequent to this complaint policies
calling the on-call doctor had been clarified for both nursing staff and
clinicians;
the respondent had received training in respect of the
"Between the Flags"
policy at the time of the incident, she said that she had not been made
aware of the aspect of the policy that required a doctor to
be called when the
patient was in the
Committee acknowledges that there are stresses and pressures that are placed on
rural nurses that do not exist for nurses in hospitals
outside of a .rural
context. In particular, the Committee accepts the respondent's evidence that it
was difficult to arrange for
a doctor to attend to a patient at the Hospital,
particularly when the patient's treating doctor was unavailable. The Committee
acknowledges the particular stresses and demands that were placed on the
respondent by reason of her performing in charge roles in
the emergency
department and in the Hospital as a whole.
raising these matters in mitigation, the respondent appropriately accepted the
particulars of the complaint and also accepted
that she was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. In her evidence before the Committee, the
respondent stated that she
has learnt a great deal from this tragic event. She
said that she would now call a doctor whenever a patient was in the
She said that she insists on doctor attendance, even if it means
being subjected to verbal abuse by a doctor. The respondent said
staff in the hospital will often ask her to contact doctors to insist on
attendance, as she is known as a person who is
prepared to insist upon doctor
attendance. The respondent said that she is still placed in the position of
being required to be in
charge of the emergency department and the Hospital,
although it is something that she tries to avoid. The respondent said that she
also now understands the importance of complete documentation, and that she
always documents her observations, to protect herself
as well as her
Appropriate orders
HCCC submitted that it would be appropriate for conditions to be placed on the
respondent's registration, requiring the completion
of courses relating to the
"Between the Flags"
policy and relating to the recognition of signs of a
deteriorating patient. The HCCC also submitted that the imposition of mentoring
conditions would be appropriate.
Committee agrees that it is appropriate for mentoring conditions to be imposed.
The respondent's conduct ·indicated significant
deficits in either or both
of her recognition of a deteriorating patient, and/or in her assertiveness in a
rural hospital situation.
respondent has demonstrated a deal of insight in respect of both of these
matters. However, the respondent remains in the rural
environment, and remains
subject to the same stressors and pressures that were present at the time of the
events in question. . A
mentoring relationship will assist the respondent in the
development of skills and knowledge to address these situations should they
arise in future.
Committee acknowledges that the sourcing of a mentor may be difficult in the
rural context. For this reason, whilst face to face
mentoring meetings are
obviously preferable, the Committee has determined to permit the Nursing and
Midwifery Council to authorise
mentoring meetings to occur by telephone or
one component of the mentoring conditions requires the respondent to develop
specific educational and professional development
activities in consultation
with her mentor, the Committee does not consider that it is necessary to
condition the respondent's registration
on the completion of any specified
HCCC also submitted that it would be appropriate for the respondent to be
reprimanded in view of the seriousness of the respondent's
Committee agrees that the respondent's failure to obtain medical assistance for
Patient A was very serious. The respondent recognised
the need for Patient A to
be seen by a doctor, but did not recognise the urgency of that need. She made
various assumptions about
why Patient A was in the
likelihood of her recovering, based on matters such as the recency of the
administration of antibiotics. The respondent's
assumptions in this regard were
on no view appropriate assumptions to be made by a registered nurse. Decisions
as to whether there
"explanation"
for a patient being in the
are questions for medical practitioners alone. The respondent
should not have determined, on the basis of these assumptions, that
necessary for a medical practitioner to be called urgently (as Hospital policies
in view of the mitigating matters outlined above, and as the respondent has
demonstrated significant insight, both through
her evidence, and through her
admissions of the particulars of the complaint, and her admission that those
particulars amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct, this Committee is
of the view that a reprimand is not required, and that a caution to the
will suffice.
Nonetheless,
as a caution will not appear on the public register, the Committee considers
that it is necessary for the protection
of the public for the respondent's
current employer, and any future employer, to be informed of the mentoring
conditions whilst the
mentoring conditions are in force.
THE COMMITTEE ORDERS:
The practitioner is hereby cautioned.
The practitioner's registration be subject to the following conditions:
registrant must engage.in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12
months with a registered nurse (Division 1) who
does not have conditions on his/
her practice. The registered nurse mentor must be approved by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council
of New South Wales.
registrant must:
within three (3) months of this Professional Standards Committee decision the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales
with the name, contact details
and resume of the registered nurse who has agreed to act
mentor; and
specified in the conditions.
the mentor:
To notify the Council of any breach of the conditions including any failure to
attend mentoring meetings; and
To exchange information with the Council in relation to the registrant's
compliance with conditions; and
Provide to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by
the mentor indicating awareness of the conditions
authorisation
registrant must submit a mentoring plan developed in consultation with the
mentor within 4 week of the mentor being approved by
the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales. The plan must detail:
objectives/ outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives/ outcomes
must relate to, but are not limited to, the
following areas: deteriorating
patients, emergency patients, competing priorities, note taking, record
education; professional development and learning activities planned to achieve
the specified objectives/ outcomes;
Timeframe/s
for completion of identified activities and outcomes/
objectives;
which will demonstrate objective/ outcomes have been met;
of meetings with the mentor.
registrant must meet with her mentor (once approved by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW) face to face (or by telephone,
or Skype, if approved by the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW) at least once a month for a period of at
least 30 minutes.
registrant must provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a mentoring
report which is co-signed by the approved mentor
addressing:
towards or achievement of specified objectives/ outcomes
challenges/ issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these;
changes to practice resulting from mentoring/ associated
mentoring report must be provided to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
every three months for a period of at least 12 months.
Other conditions
the mentoring condition is current, the registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name and contact details of
all nursing employers (including agency placements)
prior to commencing
each nursing employer
notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any breach of the conditions
or unsafe practice;
exchange information with the Council related to compliance with
conditions.
all current and any future employers of the conditions before commencing work/
employment as a registered nurse.
to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a copy of the conditions signed by
the registrant and by, or on behalf of, each
employer indicating awareness of
the conditions and authorisation within one week of commencing
125 to 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
to apply should the practitioner's principal place of practice be anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so that
the appropriate review body in
those circumstances is the relevant National Board.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of ss. 163-163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
where the practitioner's principal place of practice is in NSW.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of ss. 163-163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
where the practitioner's principal place of practice is in
PUBLICATION
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
Respondent,
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW,
NSW presence of the NMBA via AHPRA (NSW Office),
Glen Innes Hospital,
Agency Australia (Health Care Australia) ,
the Councils and Boards see fit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (1.73 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (54.7 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter