URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young v Vietnam Veterans Keith Payne VC Hostel Limited [2020] NSWWCCPD 66 (19 November 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Young v Vietnam Veterans Keith Payne VC Hostel Limited
[2020] NSWWCCPD
Donelle Young
RESPONDENT:
Vietnam Veterans Keith Payne VC Hostel
AAI Limited t/as GIO
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr J Wynyard
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
1 July 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
19 November 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Factual determination – principles applicable on appeal;
v Toll Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston
Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1833
Leichhardt Municipal Council v
Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
at 419 discussed; whether
surgery was reasonably necessary –
Diab v NRMA Ltd
[2014] NSWWCCPD
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr T Hickey, counsel
Law Advice Compensation Lawyers
Mr P Perry, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
name of the respondent wherever it appears in the arbitral proceedings and on
appeal is amended to read “Vietnam Veterans
Keith Payne VC Hostel
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 1 July 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Donelle Young (the appellant) was employed as an Assistant in Nursing at the
Vietnam Veterans Keith Payne VC Hostel Limited (the
respondent). The appellant
suffered an injury to her lower back on 7 January 2016 when she went to the aid
of a very large resident
who had fallen to the floor in the resident’s
room. The appellant, with the assistance of three other employees, lifted the
resident into a chair using a “Johnny belt” lifting mechanism.
appellant then performed observations on the resident and returned to her
workstation. About 20 minutes later, the appellant experienced
the onset of low
back pain. She sought medical treatment and was certified unfit for work.
appellant lodged a claim for compensation which was accepted by the respondent.
Her symptoms worsened. She underwent numerous
treatment regimes and procedures.
Ultimately, in a report dated 21 June 2019, Dr Marc Coughlan, the
appellant’s treating neurosurgeon,
recommended surgical intervention in
the form of a spinal fusion at the L3/4 level of the lumbar spine. The
respondent disputed that
the surgery was reasonably necessary, as required by
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act). The reasons for
disputing liability were set out in a notice dated 28 August 2019 issued by the
respondent pursuant
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
decision to decline liability was based upon the opinion of Dr Vidyasagar
Casikar, neurosurgeon, who opined that:
(a) the injury consisted of
an aggravation of a pre-existing disease;
(b) the aggravation had ceased;
(c) the surgery was not justified and would have a poor outcome, and
(d) the need for surgery was unrelated to the work-related injury.
appellant commenced proceedings in the Commission. The matter proceeded to
arbitration before Arbitrator Wynyard, who determined
that the surgery was not
reasonably necessary and entered an award for the respondent.
appellant appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content to have the matter determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions
and that the matter does not
require an oral hearing.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties indicating
that the appeal can be
determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed ‘on
the papers’ without holding
any conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met. The
decision is not interlocutory in nature, so leave to appeal pursuant to s
352(3A) of the 1998 Act
is not required.
her application before the Commission and in this appeal, the appellant
nominated the respondent as “Vietnam Veterans Keith
Hostel.” The Reply to Application to Resolve a Dispute (Reply) and
Opposition to Appeal Against Decision of Arbitrator
(Opposition) also described
the respondent in the same manner. Following enquiries made by the Presidential
Unit, the parties agreed
that the correct name of the respondent is
“Vietnam Veterans Keith Payne VC Hostel Limited.” The name of the
respondent,
wherever it appears in the arbitral proceedings and on appeal is
amended accordingly.
THE EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statement evidence
appellant provided a statement dated 23 November
She described how the injury
occurred and that, following the injury, she experienced flare-ups of her low
back symptoms. The appellant
said she was unable to return to full duties and
was medically retired on 15 October 2016.
appellant provided a summary of the medical treatment she received but said
that, despite the treatment, she continued to experience
significant lower back
pain, began to experience daily pain travelling through the middle of her back
into the neck and developed
anxiety as a result of the pain. The appellant
described in detail her ongoing symptoms.
The appellant’s relevant medical evidence
Dr Marc Coughlan, neurosurgeon
Coughlan reported to Dr Varsani, general practitioner, on 11 April
He described the
appellant’s symptoms in the back as significant. Dr Coughlan also noted
severe symptoms in the appellant’s
neck and right wrist and the presence
of bilateral leg pain, which he described as “radicular discomfort.”
He discussed
the results of an MRI Scan and a bone scan, which he reported
showed that there was mild stenosis at the L4/5 level, with facet joint
arthrosis at the L4/5 and L3/4 levels and bilateral inflamed L3/4 facet joints.
In Dr Coughlan’s view, the annular tear seen
on previous investigations
appeared slightly improved and there was no underlying nerve root compression.
He said that, in the absence
of neurological deficit and spinal or nerve root
compression he had reassured the appellant that there was no role for any
intervention and recommended pain management intervention.
21 June 2019, Dr Coughlan again reported to Dr Varsani and advised that the
appellant continued to suffer from significant back
pain. He reported that the
appellant was very frustrated and had exhausted all conservative treatment
options. He recommended the
appellant consider undergoing an L3/4
Coughlan provided a report dated 11 February 2020 (said to be completed on
24 February 2020) for the purpose of these
proceedings.
He advised that the
appellant first consulted him on 1 March 2017. Dr Coughlan confirmed the history
of symptoms recorded in his
report dated 11 April 2017 and the results of the
radiological investigations. Dr Coughlan reiterated that, at that stage, in the
absence of neurological deficit and spinal or nerve root compression, he
considered that conservative treatment was appropriate,
and that the appellant
would benefit from pain management to address her symptoms and analgesic intake.
Coughlan discussed further consultations with the appellant and said he
considered that clinically, the appellant’s severe
pain was compatible
with the severe active inflammation of the L3/4 facet joints. Dr Coughlan said
that he performed radiofrequency
lesioning of the facet joints on 31 July 2017.
He reported that the appellant continued to complain of severe pain and on 8
2019, he performed radiofrequency denervation of the facet joints,
which he considered at the time was more appropriate than invasive
the form of a spinal fusion, which could lead to adjacent segment disease.
Coughlan advised that, following the procedure, the appellant continued to
suffer from significant pain. In the light of the failure
of conservative
treatment, on 27 March 2019, he began to consider surgery to the L3/4 level of
the lumbar spine, despite his previous
aim to try a conservative approach. Dr
Coughlan remarked that surgery was always the last resort, but the appellant had
tried extensive
conservative treatment to no avail and all conservative
treatment options had been exhausted. On 19 June 2019, Dr Coughlan concluded
that a surgical approach was warranted. He recommended an L3/4 spinal fusion and
sought approval from the respondent.
Coughlan saw the appellant again on 6 December 2019, when he discussed the
proposed surgery with her. He was of the view that the
main pain generator was
the L3/4 level, despite the multi-level degenerative changes on the radiological
imaging. Dr Coughlan said
it was this level of the spine that needed to be
addressed by surgery.
Coughlan diagnosed significant facet arthropathy at the L3/4 level with
bilaterally inflamed L3/4 facet joints. Dr Coughlan opined
that the appellant
had no symptoms prior to the work-related injury, that the injury caused the
appellant’s continuing incapacity,
and the appellant’s continuing
back issues were directly related to the injury.
Coughlan considered that the surgery was reasonably necessary to treat the
work-related injury and would best address the severe
arthropathy at that level,
which was the main pain generator shown on the radiological scans. Dr Coughlan
reiterated that all conservative
measures had been ineffective and noted that
the appellant was struggling, with no improvement in her symptoms, despite the
being very compliant and proactive in relation to her treatment. Dr
Coughlan said that the surgery was most certainly worthwhile,
with the aim being
to significantly reduce the appellant’s pain and improve her quality of
Dr Vijay Varsani, general practitioner
Varsani reported to the appellant’s legal representatives on 3 July
He reported that he initially
consulted with the appellant on the day of her injury. He described her symptoms
and advised that he
was unaware of any prior history of back pain. Dr Varsani
noted that the radiological investigations disclosed an L4/5 disc bulge
annular tear. He said that the appellant had returned to work on light duties,
but her pain required escalating doses of opiates
and Endone for pain.
Varsani provided details of the appellant’s continuing symptoms, the
development of anxiety and the appellant’s ongoing
treatment, which
(a) referral to Dr Mitchell Hansen, neurosurgeon;
(b) an exercise programme for her back;
(c) CT guided cortisone injections into the L4/5 disc, with initial but not
lasting improvement;
(d) referral to Dr Russo, pain management specialist;
(e) cognitive behaviour therapy, and
(f) a referral to Dr Coughlan for a second opinion.
Varsani said that the appellant was trialled on Norflex, Lyrica, Palexia, spinal
injections of Etanercept, Sodium Valproate, Targin
and Endone. He advised that
the appellant was seen in the Gosford Hospital Emergency Department [sic Wyong
Hospital] for severe pain
on 3 October 2016, requiring a ketamine infusion.
He said the appellant also underwent intradiscal pulse radiofrequency neurotomy
with PRP injections and also received physiotherapy and treatment from a
dietician because of excessive weight gain.
Varsani confirmed that the appellant’s employment was a substantial
contributing factor to her injury. He described the appellant’s
significant pain and said that the appellant was hopeful that the surgery
proposed by Dr Coughlan would enable her to continue to
work in an appropriate
role. Dr Varsani further confirmed that the appellant had exhausted multiple
conservative, less invasive treatments
without success and in his view, the
spinal fusion, which was a last resort, was now required. He considered that
without the surgery,
the appellant’s prognosis was poor.
Dr Mitchell Hansen, neurosurgeon
appellant was referred to Dr Hansen by Dr Varsani. Dr Hansen reviewed the
appellant on 29 February 2016 and provided a report
of the same
Dr Hansen noted the history
of injury and the appellant’s ongoing symptoms. He observed that the MRI
scan showed degenerate
disc disease at the L4/5 and L5/S1 levels of the spine
and diagnosed musculoskeletal back strain as a result of the injury. He
recommended
continued physiotherapy and consultation with a pain management
The Wyong Hospital
discharge referral from Wyong Hospital indicated that the appellant was admitted
to that facility between 3 October 2016 and 6 October
2016 for treatment of
severe shooting back pain across the L4/5 region with associated bilateral pins
and needles in both
Dr Marc Russo, pain management specialist
appellant attended Dr Marc Russo for management of her pain. He reported to
Dr Varsani on 29 June 2016.
Russo noted the onset of appellant’s low back pain and the continuation of
her symptoms. He described central low back pain,
at approximately the L4/5 and
L5/S1 segment level, radiating down both legs mainly to the knees, with
paraesthesia from the knee
down to and including the right foot, as well as
occasional anaesthesia of the right foot. Dr Russo noted the results of the MRI
scan conducted on 19 January 2016, which he observed showed pathology referrable
to the L4/5 level of the spine. He examined the
appellant, noting lumbosacral
stiffness secondary to muscle spasm, diffuse tenderness of the low back and that
the appellant was
neurologically intact in the lower limbs. Dr Russo remarked
that the appellant demonstrated catastrophic pain behaviour.
Russo provided a treatment plan, which involved:
(a) assistance from
a self-help manual;
(b) cognitive behavioural therapy with Dr Mike Shelley;
(c) pain medication and medication to treat the appellant’s
(d) Etanercept injections to the right L4/5 nerve root, and
(e) if the Etanercept injections were not beneficial, consideration of
intradiscal therapy.
Russo again reported to Dr Varsani on 27 July
and 30 November
and to the respondent on 8
August 2016.
In the report of 13
October 2016, Dr Russo reported that the Etanercept injections did not assist in
controlling the appellant’s
pain. He noted that the appellant had attended
Gosford Hospital [sic, Wyong Hospital] Emergency Department where Ketamine was
intravenously
infused with minimal benefit. Dr Russo considered the remaining
option was to treat the disc by performing an intradiscal radiofrequency
neurotomy. Dr Russo indicated that the alternate treatment would be a spinal
fusion but that Dr Hansen, neurosurgeon, considered
that the appellant was not a
suitable candidate for that procedure. The reports dated 27 July 2016, 8 August
2016 and 30 November
2016 add nothing further to the evidence in terms of
the issue on appeal.
29 August 2017, Dr Russo reported to the appellant’s legal
representatives.
He provided
details of the treatment he provided to the appellant and commented upon the
appellant’s work capacity. Dr Russo
advised that, by his last review on 21
December 2016, the appellant had failed to respond to five different drugs and
intervention pain therapy that had been provided. Dr Russo said that
he therefore had suggested the appellant undergo a spinal fusion
or spinal cord
stimulation.
Dr James Bodel, orthopaedic surgeon
Bodel was qualified by the appellant’s legal representatives to provide an
opinion on behalf of the appellant. He provided
a report dated 26 September
Dr Bodel noted the history
of injury, the appellant’s subsequent attempts to return to work and the
medical treatment received
by the appellant. He observed that MRI scans revealed
definite disc pathology at the L4/5 level with an annular tear but with no
of any nerve root compromise or compression at any level of the lumbar spine. Dr
Bodel further noted that the appellant’s
back pain had deteriorated over
Bodel referred to the recommendation by Dr Coughlan that the appellant undergo
an L3/4 fusion, the liability for which had been
declined by the respondent. Dr
Bodel considered that the disc which appeared abnormal on the radiological
investigations was actually
the L4/5 disc but agreed that the L3/4 facet joints
appeared to be “quite involved.” He said he accepted Dr
explanation that the main pathology was at the L4/5 level, but
there was facet joint arthritis at the L3/4 level which justified
the surgery at
that level. Dr Bodel said he would be surprised if the surgery was to be limited
to the L3/4 level and did not include
the L4/5 level, but said that he did not
have any documentation before him that this was the case. Dr Bodel opined that
disc seemed to be the most symptomatic and would be where he would
entertain the treatment option of a spinal fusion.
Bodel examined the appellant and reviewed MRI scans dated 19 January 2016,
23 February 2016, 9 November 2018 and 15 April 2019,
as well as the bone
scan dated 3 March 2017. He noted that all of the conservative treatment
measures to date had been unsuccessful
and that Dr Coughlan had come to the view
that the surgery was necessary after further investigations and review and the
of those conservative treatments, a decision that Dr Coughlan had not
come to lightly or quickly. Dr Bodel referred to Dr Coughlan’s
description of the appellant’s symptoms as significant and ongoing, and
Dr Coughlan’s observation that the appellant
had severe arthropathy
at the L3/4 level which was the main pain generator on all of the radiological
scans, with certain facet joint
degeneration. Dr Bodel observed that Dr Coughlan
consistently recommended the surgery at the L3/4 level.
Bodel’s diagnosis of the injury was that of a disc rupture at the L4/5
level involving an annular tear. Dr Bodel opined that
he did have some concerns
said he would be reluctant
to consider surgical intervention at the L3/4 level
without a fusion of the L4/5 level. He described the proposed surgery as a
call” to recommend a surgical fusion without hard
objective evidence of neurological compromise which he had been unable to
identify. Further, based on the information he had available to him, he was
unsure of whether the L3/4 level was the pain generator.
Bodel provided a supplementary report dated 11 March 2020 at the request of the
appellant’s legal representatives, after
review Dr Coughlan’s report
dated 11 February 2020.
report, he clarified the opinion he expressed in the first report,
“I accept his explanation as to why he has recommended
the L3/4 level only. I would still express a note of caution about dealing
the L3/4 level only and not the L4/5 level at the same time but I accept his
recommendation for the L3/4 level fusion that he
has indicated as reasonably
necessary for the management of the
Dr Paul Teychenné, consultant neurologist
Teychenné examined the appellant on 16 August 2017 and provided a report
dated 17 September 2017 at the request of the appellant’s
representatives.
He was asked to
provide an opinion on causation and an assessment of the appellant’s whole
person impairment for the purpose
of previous proceedings brought by the
appellant. Dr Teychenné’s report pre-dated
Dr Coughlan’s recommendation
for surgery. Thus,
Dr Teychenné did not comment on whether the proposed surgery was
reasonably necessary. It is relevant,
however, that Dr Teychenné was
of the view that the initial MRI scan performed on 19 January
“showed a small annular tear at L4/5. There was some
minor facet joint arthrosis. The posterior disc contour was maintained.
did not show any significant pathology in regard to the spinal canal nor in
regard to the discs. Significant disc degeneration
was not reported on the MRI
scan of 19 January
Teychenné noted that:
(a) an “MRI scan of the lumbar
spine showed T2 signal at L4/5 with a high intensity zone present in the
posterior annulus”;
(b) the appellant’s complaint to Dr Russo was of central low back pain
at L4/5 and L5/S1 levels with radiating pain to both
(c) the appellant’s initial complaint of pain following the injury was
at the L4/5 level.
Teychenné opined that:
“The initial MRI scan did not
show any significant evidence of a lumbar disc lesion. She did not have any
evidence of lumbar
spinal stenosis. A tear in the disc annulus at L4/5 and some
mild facet joint arthropathy may not in my opinion be insignificant
have resulted in a lumbosacral
radiculopathy.”
Teychenné concluded that, on the basis of the appellant’s clinical
signs, the cause of the appellant’s symptoms
was an incomplete cervical
cord lesion.
Dr Peter Bentivoglio, neurosurgeon
Bentivoglio was qualified by the respondent to examine the appellant and give an
opinion in respect of the respondent’s liability
for the injury. He
provided a report dated 21 April
Relevantly, Dr Bentivoglio
opined that:
“My working diagnosis in this lady, is a lady
with mechanical axial back pain secondary to pre-existing degenerative changes
in her lumbar spine, particularly at the L4/5 level, but no evidence of
neurological compromise or
compression.”
“l do believe [the appellant] is suffering from pre-existing
degenerative changes in her lumbar spine at L4/5 with facet joint
L3/4. L4/5 and to a lesser degree at L5/S1. I feel she has just aggravated this
pre-existing degenerative
Bentivoglio considered that, at that stage, surgical intervention was certainly
not warranted.
Bentivoglio provided further reports dated 6 June
and 30 April
Relevantly, in the report
dated 30 April 2018, Dr Bentivoglio opined that:
stage she does not seem to be making any significant improvements with
conservative treatment. I believe it is probably
worthwhile doing the
Radiofrequency Oblation of the facet joints at the L4/5 level, as all other
conservative measures seem to have
Dr Robin Mitchell, occupational physician
Mitchell was asked to assess the appellant’s capacity for work and provide
an opinion in respect of management of the appellant’s
injury. In his
report dated 8 May 2017, Dr Mitchell reviewed the MRI scans dated 19 January
2016 and 23 February 2016 and diagnosed
a “radiologically stable L4/5
annular tear and disc protrusion without nerve
impingement.”
Dr Vidyasagar Casikar, neurosurgeon
Casikar was also asked to provide a medico-legal opinion in respect of the
appellant’s injury. Dr Casikar provided a report
dated 8 August
He opined that the
“appears to have had an aggravation on a background
of degenerative disease. The description of the event, the clinical findings,
and the radiological appearances are consistent with this diagnosis. The kind of
injury she had, under normal circumstances, should
have recovered in about four
to six weeks. Her continued complaints of symptoms since 2016 suggests
pain-focussed issues. In my opinion,
her work-related symptoms have resolved,
and now this is superseded by significant pain-focussed issues on a background
of emotional
problems. The fusion suggested by Dr Coughlan is not indicated
because of the workplace injury she suffered in
Casikar added that it was well-recognised that a spinal fusion on the background
of degenerative disease in a workers compensation
case would result in a poor
outcome, and if the appellant were to undergo the spinal fusion, there would be
very little prospect
of her returning to work. Dr Casikar suggested alternative
treatment by a psychiatrist or psychologist in order to address the
appellant’s
significant pain-focussed issues, which he said was a
treatment option suggested by most of the appellant’s specialists, other
than Dr Coughlan.
Casikar was asked to review and comment on the reports of Dr Coughlan dated
11 February 2020 (completed on 24 February 2020) and
21 June 2019, as well
as the reports of Dr Bodel dated 26 September 2019 and 11 March 2020. In his
report dated 11 May 2020,
Dr Casikar noted that both Dr Coughlan and Dr Bodel shared the view that the
appellant required a spinal fusion in order to address
the appellant’s
degenerative disease in her back. He noted that there was a difference of
opinion between the two experts as
to which level should be fused. Dr Casikar
remarked that the options were standard treatment for degenerative disease
in the back, but said it would be extremely difficult to accept that
the need for surgery was necessary as a result of the work-related
injury, given
her symptoms were mainly due to degenerative disease. He added that the likely
outcome for such surgery would be poor
and cited the same reasons that he had
put forward in his earlier report.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator noted the issue for determination was whether the surgery proposed by
Dr Coughlan was reasonably necessary. He described
the circumstances of the
injury and referred to the appellant’s continuing back pain since that
day. The Arbitrator provided
a summary of the treatment undertaken by Dr
Varsani, Dr Coughlan and Dr Russo as well as the pain management intervention,
psychological
therapy and exercise physiology.
Arbitrator took into account Dr Coughlan’s earlier opinion that surgery
did not have a part to play in the appellant’s
treatment and the reasons
put forward by Dr Coughlan for subsequently considering a spinal fusion was
reasonably necessary.
Arbitrator considered the opinion of Dr Bodel and quoted a number of paragraphs
in which Dr Bodel proffered and explained his
view. He also considered the
evidence of Dr Teychenné and Dr Mitchell, who he said were of the
view that the appellant’s
symptoms related to the central low back at the
L4/5 and L5/S1 levels and the radiology disclosed an L4/5 disc protrusion with
annular tear. The Arbitrator further considered the opinion of
Dr Bentivoglio that the appellant had pre-existing degenerative changes
the lumbar spine at the L4/5 level with facet joint changes at the L3/4 and L4/5
levels and to a lesser extent at the L5/S1 level,
which were aggravated in the
injury. The Arbitrator summarised the opinion of Dr Casikar. He further
summarised the submissions of
both parties.
Arbitrator referred to and quoted from the decision of
Diab v NRMA
in which Roche DP set
out the test for determining whether treatment was reasonably necessary. He
noted that the appellant had submitted
that the surgery was reasonably necessary
because all other treatment regimes had failed, which the Arbitrator said was a
frequently advanced and was the rationale put forward by Dr
Arbitrator observed that Dr Coughlan had not indicated that he expected the
surgery to be effective or to alleviate the appellant’s
symptoms. The
Arbitrator referred to Dr Coughlan’s initial view, expressed in his
reports dated 11 April 2017 and 29 June 2017,
that there was no role for
surgical intervention. The Arbitrator further observed that the appellant
continued to experience severe
symptoms and underwent physiotherapy,
hydrotherapy, and radiofrequency lesioning, all of which failed to improve her
symptoms and
yet Dr Coughlan still did not consider surgery to be a possible
treatment. The Arbitrator said that instead, Dr Coughlan recommended
radiofrequency denervation in March 2018, which did not occur until February
2019. He said Dr Coughlan first turned his mind to surgery
in March 2019 as a
“last resort,” and that the proposed surgery was a fusion at the
L3/4 level.
Arbitrator observed that while a potentially poor outcome from the surgery is
not determinative of whether the surgery would be
effective, the purpose of the
treatment is to alleviate the injured worker’s suffering, and each case
must be determined on
its own facts. He reasoned that neither Dr Coughlan nor Dr
Bodel put forward a convincing case that the surgery would have the potential
alleviate the appellant’s symptoms. The Arbitrator considered that, at its
highest, Dr Coughlan’s evidence was that
he had not come to the decision
quickly or lightly, and that all other treatment had failed. The Arbitrator
reasoned that the failure
of past treatment was not of itself sufficient to show
that the treatment was appropriate.
Arbitrator referred to Dr Casikar’s view that psychological treatment was
an alternative treatment option. He acknowledged
that the appellant had
undergone pain management with Dr Russo but said that further investigation of
that treatment would be an
alternative option. The Arbitrator noted that there
were no submissions made about the cost of the proposed surgery.
Arbitrator observed that it was not unusual for the medical experts to have
differing opinions and so in those circumstances,
“the medico-legal
referee retained by the worker becomes of some
relevance.”
The Arbitrator
rejected the opinion of Dr Casikar that spinal fusion procedures have poor
outcomes in a workers compensation “scenario”
because it was not
supported by any academic material or medical opinion.
Arbitrator reiterated that there was no evidence that the proposed surgery would
have actual, or even potential, effectiveness.
The Arbitrator reasoned that
there was no unanimity between the medical professionals in the
appellant’s case that the proposed
surgery was appropriate or likely to be
effective. The Arbitrator did not accept that Dr Bodel supported the opinion of
Dr Coughlan
in respect of the surgery being reasonably necessary.
Arbitrator further reasoned that the evidence clearly pointed to the L4/5 disc
as being abnormal, and Dr Bodel had diagnosed a
disc rupture at that level which
was causative of the injury. He said that the opinion was supported by the
opinions of Dr Bentivoglio,
Dr Teychenné and Dr Mitchell. The
Arbitrator noted that Dr Bodel was concerned that Dr Coughlan was
suggesting the fusion
to be at the L3/4 level. The Arbitrator did not accept
that Dr Bodel changed his opinion once he had been appraised of the explanation
provided by Dr Coughlan. The Arbitrator indicated that Dr Coughlan had simply
reiterated that the L3/4 level required surgery because
“certainly” the main issue and was the pain generator on all of the
scans. The Arbitrator considered that Dr Coughlan
did not explain why he reached
that conclusion. The Arbitrator did not accept that Dr Bodel was satisfied with
Dr Coughlan’s
explanation, despite having politely accepted it, when
Dr Bodel maintained some caution about dealing only with the L3/4 level. The
Arbitrator said that he considered Dr Bodel’s acceptance of Dr
Coughlan’s recommendation was simply a professional courtesy
endorsement that the surgery was either appropriate or effective. The Arbitrator
observed that in his first report, Dr
Bodel had already cautioned against
surgery to the L3/4 level without including surgery to the L4/5 level.
Arbitrator said that, finally, it should be observed that the opinion of a
medico-legal expert is to enable the expert to give
an objective assessment of
the party’s case and not to give “some context” to the
treating doctor’s recommendation,
as was submitted by the appellant. The
Arbitrator concluded that Dr Bodel clearly disagreed with Dr Coughlan’s
recommendation
and as a consequence, the appellant had not discharged the onus
of proving that the proposed surgery was reasonably necessary.
Certificate of Determination issued on 1 July 2020
“The Commission determines:
applicant was injured on 7 January 2016;
proposed surgery recommended by Dr Marc Coughlan on 27 June 2019 is not
reasonably necessary.
The Commission orders:
is an award in favour of the respondent.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant brings four grounds of appeal, alleging the Arbitrator erred as
(a) Ground One: error of fact in respect of the opinions
expressed by Dr Coughlan and Dr Bodel in relation to the appropriateness
treatment, thereby causing the Arbitrator to err in the application of the legal
test under s 60(1) of the 1987 Act;
(b) Ground Two: error of fact in respect of the “unanimity” of
the evidence;
(c) Ground Three: error of fact and law in respect of the availability of
alternate treatment, by:
(i) failing to provide sufficient reasons to understand the basis of the
determination or the determination itself;
(ii) making a finding overwhelmingly at odds with the weight of the evidence,
(d) Ground Four: error of law in misapplying the correct test under s 60 of
the 1987 Act.
LEGISLATION
60(1) of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
60 Compensation
for cost of medical or hospital treatment and rehabilitation etc
(1) If, as a result of an injury received by a worker,
it is reasonably necessary that:
(a) any medical or related treatment (other than domestic assistance) be
the worker’s employer is liable to pay, in addition to any other
compensation under this Act, the cost of that treatment or
service and the
related travel expenses specified in subsection (2).”
SUBMISSIONS
Ground One: error of fact in respect of the opinions expressed
by Dr Coughlan and Dr Bodel in relation to the appropriateness of the
treatment, thereby causing the Arbitrator to err in the application of the legal
test under s 60(1) of the 1987 Act
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s consideration of the opinion of Dr
Coughlan, and the Arbitrator’s ultimate determination
that Dr Coughlan had
(a) indicated that he expected the surgery to be effective or
to alleviate the appellant’s symptoms, and
(b) made any convincing case that the surgery would alleviate and would have
the potential to alleviate the appellant’s symptoms.
appellant further refers to the passage from the Arbitrator’s reasons, in
which the Arbitrator said:
“Whilst a potentially poor outcome
from surgery is not necessarily a reason to doubt whether proposed treatment
will be effective,
as the overall purpose of medical treatment is to alleviate
suffering, each case must be decided on its facts. Neither Dr Coughlan
Dr Bodel has made any convincing case that the proposed surgery will alleviate,
or have the potential to alleviate Ms Young’s
symptoms. The highest the
need for surgery has been put was that Dr Coughlan had not come to his decision
quickly or lightly, but
had recommended the surgery because of the failure of
the previous conservative approaches. The failure of previous treatment is
of itself sufficient to establish that a particular treatment is
appropriate.”
appellant submits that it was patently clear that from the outset, Dr
Coughlan’s involvement in the treatment of the appellant
was directed at
alleviating the appellant’s chronic symptoms, improving her quality of
life and achieving functional gains.
The appellant says that Dr Coughlan made it
clear that the proposed surgery was intended to achieve those outcomes, and,
perspective of the treating neurosurgeon, surgical intervention was a
worthy goal. The appellant points out that this view was shared
by the treating
general practitioner, Dr Varsani, who considered that without the spinal fusion,
the appellant’s prognosis
appellant asserts that Dr Coughlan confirmed his opinion that the procedure was
the best measure available to address the appellant’s
severe arthropathy
at the L3/4 level, which was consistently shown to be the main pain generator.
The appellant submits that the
Arbitrator’s observation that Dr
Coughlan’s opinion, “at its highest” was that the decision to
perform surgery
had not been arrived at quickly or lightly, and previous
treatment options had failed, is a misrepresentation of Dr Coughlan’s
evidence. The appellant asserts that Dr Coughlan’s actual opinion was
that the surgery was the best option to address the severe
arthropathy, thereby
achieving functional gains and an improvement in the appellant’s quality
the appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s consideration of the evidence
of Dr Coughlan failed to fairly represent
the opinion of Dr Coughlan and so
the Arbitrator committed an error of fact which in turn infected the
Arbitrator’s findings
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s consideration of the opinion of Dr
Bodel and submits that the Arbitrator’s reasons
were extremely brief in
respect of his conclusion that neither Dr Coughlan nor Dr Bodel put forward
a convincing case that the surgery
would achieve the requisite outcomes. The
appellant contends that the Arbitrator appeared to focus on the initial
difference of opinion
between the doctors as to which level of the spine should
be the subject of the surgery. The appellant asserts that Dr Bodel supported
proposition that the surgery being offered was appropriate, despite his concerns
in relation to the particular level recommended.
The appellant contends that Dr
Bodel confirmed his view in the final paragraph of his report dated 26 September
2019. The appellant
says that after being appraised of Dr Coughlan’s
explanation for the surgery, Dr Bodel issued his further report dated 11 March
2020, in which Dr Bodel accepted Dr Coughlan’s explanation and formed the
view that the L3/4 surgical fusion was reasonably
necessary. The appellant
submits that the opinions of Dr Bodel as expressed in both his reports and the
opinion of Dr Coughlan together
support the proposition that the proposed
surgery was appropriate.
appellant contends that those opinions were supported by Dr Casikar’s
evidence, in that Dr Casikar observed that the proposed
treatment options were
the standard form of treatment for degenerative disease in the lumbar spine. The
appellant says that Dr Casikar’s
issues with the proposed surgery were
that the treatment was to alleviate the symptoms of the degenerative spine,
which was not a
workplace injury, and that spinal surgery in the workers
compensation setting would not have a positive outcome.
appellant submits that it is clear that there was no issue that surgery was the
appropriate medical treatment which would alleviate,
or potentially alleviate,
the appellant’s symptoms and that it was the standard treatment for the
appellant’s condition.
The appellant concludes that the Arbitrator has
misrepresented the opinions as they were in fact expressed.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent refers to the Arbitrator’s determination that neither Dr
Coughlan nor Dr Bodel had made a convincing case that
the proposed surgery was
reasonably necessary. The respondent submits that it was a matter for the
Arbitrator to determine whether
the evidence that appellant’s symptoms
would be improved by the proposed surgery was convincing or otherwise. The
says that the Arbitrator gave his reasons at [104]–[109] and
correctly pointed out that the failure of previous treatment is
not, of itself,
sufficient to establish that a particular treatment is appropriate.
respondent submits that it is important to note that the particular intended
surgery was an extreme lateral interbody fusion at
the L3/4 level. The
respondent says that the extract from Dr Coughlan’s explanation for the
surgery provided by the appellant
was incomplete. The respondent says that the
complete explanation was:
“As I have said previously, the
L3/4 level consistently came up as the main pain generator
.” (emphasis added by the respondent)
respondent maintains that the statement by Dr Coughlan was incorrect in the
light of Dr Bodel’s views that “all along
the pathology appears
to have been localised mostly at the L4/5 level and not at L3/4”. The
respondent indicates that it also
relies on its submissions made in respect of
ground two to address this ground of appeal.
respondent submits that the Arbitrator found that there was no convincing
evidence that to treat L3/4 alone would benefit the
appellant and, in fact,
there was strong evidence to the contrary. In conclusion, the respondent submits
that there was no error.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant asserts that the respondent’s submissions appear to rely upon an
underlying assumption that the L4/5 disc was
the abnormal disc, inferring that
the L3/4 disc was not related to the appellant’s symptomology. The
appellant says that the
totality of the evidence makes it apparent that there
was disc pathology at both levels and that the L3/4 level became the focus
medical intervention.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s reasons at [104]–[109]
clearly indicate that the Arbitrator determined that
Dr Coughlan had not
indicated that he expected the surgery to be effective or alleviate the
appellant’s symptoms. The appellant
maintains that the evidence shows that
there was disc pathology at both levels and that, as the ongoing treatment
progressed from
January 2017 to 31 March 2019, the focus of that treatment was
the L3/4 disc.
appellant further submits that the respondent’s assertion that Dr
Coughlan’s observation that all of the scans pointed
to the L3/4 disc as
the main pain generator was wrong as it is at odds with the investigations and
treatment regime undertaken which
led to Dr Coughlan’s conclusion.
appellant submits that the respondent’s submissions do not engage with the
appeal ground, that is that the Arbitrator failed
to present the opinions in
fact expressed and has thus fallen into error.
Ground Two: error of fact in respect of the
“unanimity” of the evidence
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s determination that there was no
unanimity in the appellant’s medical evidence
that the surgery was
appropriate or likely to be effective, where:
(a) the evidence
pointed to the L4/5 disc as being abnormal;
(b) in his report dated 11 February 2020, Dr Coughlan merely reiterated that
the main issue which required surgery was the L3/4 level
of the spine, and
(c) Dr Bodel did not support Dr Coughlan’s opinion.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator dealt with the evidence in a cursory short
paragraph and did not engage with the evidence
in any meaningful way. The
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator’s finding ignored the weight of the
evidence that the appellant
suffered from degenerative disease throughout the
spinal canal and the L3/4 disc had been consistently recognised as having a
significant
abnormality. The appellant contends that, in arriving at that
determination, the Arbitrator ignored:
(a) the bone scan performed
on 3 March 2017 and the MRI scan of the lumbar spine dated 15 April 2019;
(b) the L3/4 level of the spine was identified by Dr Coughlan as having a
potential role to play as early as 1 March 2017;
(c) the appellant underwent radio frequency lesioning and subsequently
bilateral facet joint denervation at the L3/4 level, the cost
of which was met
by the respondent, and
(d) the appellant’s treating surgeon and general practitioner treated
the appellant over a period of four years, which led to
both doctors forming the
view that the L3/4 level was the main pain generator in her condition.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator, by ignoring that evidence, fell into
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s reasoning that Dr Coughlan
“simply reiterated” that the L3/4 level of the
spine was the main
issue and required surgery was at odds with what in fact Dr Coughlan said in his
report dated 11 February 2020.
The appellant says that Dr Coughlan’s
report provided a detailed overview of the treatment provided to the appellant
path of reasoning, in which he set out:
(a) how he became
aware of the significant facet arthropathy at the L3/4 level;
(b) how that pathology was ultimately identified as the main source of the
appellant’s symptoms;
(c) the course of the treatment regime, and
(d) the outcomes to be achieved, namely reducing the appellant’s pain
and giving her a better quality of life.
appellant submits that Dr Coughlan made a clear attempt to outline his reasons
for reaching his view and the Arbitrator’s
conclusion that Dr Coughlan
merely reiterated the views he had already expressed was at odds with that
evidence and constituted error.
The appellant adds that Dr Bodel’s change
in view in his supplementary report supports the evidence of Dr Coughlan.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator’s reasoning that Dr Bodel was simply
affording Dr Coughlan “professional courtesy”
supplementary report was directly at odds with the comments made by Dr Bodel in
that report. The appellant says that to describe
Dr Bodel’s view as simply
a matter of professional courtesy is a denial of procedural fairness in
circumstances where “it
reads into the report, and attributes to Dr Bodel,
views that are not stated in the report itself by Dr
The appellant adds
that to consider that an independent medical witness would simply accept another
expert’s view as a matter
of professional courtesy would be a breach of
the expert’s code of conduct and would be inconsistent with the very
an independent expert report. The appellant submits that the
Arbitrator erred in fact and law by importing such a concept into an
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the reasons for Dr Bodel’s concern about the
surgery proposed as expressed in his first report,
which was produced after Dr
Bodel had examined the appellant, were persuasive. The respondent refers to the
appellant’s submission
that the Arbitrator did not engage in a meaningful
way with the evidence when he observed that there was a clear implication that
the evidence indicated that the L4/5 disc was abnormal. The respondent contends
that the appellant could not suggest that there was
a lack of evidence that the
L4/5 disc was abnormal. Further, the respondent points to Dr Bodel’s
diagnosis of a disc rupture
at the L4/5 level and asserts that Dr Bodel’s
diagnosis was supported by his reasons, which included observations of the
radiological
investigations. The respondent indicates that the diagnosis was
supported by Dr Bodel’s observation that:
minor dehydration at the L3/4 level
but again, the L4/5 level appears to be
the most damaged disc
. There is a facet joint arthritis at L3/4 on the
left.” (emphasis added by the respondent)
respondent also refers to the history recorded by Dr Teychenné that the
appellant experienced pain across the L4/5 region
on hip flexion and the
evidence of Dr Teychenné that the MRI scan dated 23 February 2016 showed
a T2 signal at the L4/5 level
and a high intensity zone in the annulus. The
respondent remarks that it is difficult to understand why the appellant
that the Arbitrator was required to “make good” his
conclusion that the L4/5 disc was abnormal.
respondent submits that the lack of unanimity between Dr Coughlan’s views
and those of Dr Bodel is clearly apparent, and
it was correct for the Arbitrator
to observe that Dr Bodel clearly disagreed with Dr Coughlan’s proposal.
The respondent adds
that, when Dr Bodel was asked by the appellant to review his
opinion, he “accepted” Dr Coughlan’s explanation,
there was a significant reservation to that acceptance.
respondent asserts that a mere acceptance of an explanation does not remedy the
absence of reasoning by Dr Coughlan. The respondent
says the only reason put
forward by Dr Coughlan was that the L3/4 level was shown on all of the scans as
the main pain generator.
Further, the respondent submits that Dr Coughlan did
not offer any reason why the proposed surgery was isolated to the treatment
the L3/4 level. The respondent points out that this was the specific concern
held by Dr Bodel. The respondent contends that both
Dr Bodel and Dr
Teychenné carefully reviewed the scans and did not interpret them in the
manner suggested by Dr Coughlan,
and nor did the radiologists’ reports of
the scans themselves give that interpretation.
respondent says that the appellant’s characterisation of Dr
Coughlan’s second report as an “attempt” to
provide the basis
of his opinion was appropriate, but for reasons provided by the Arbitrator, the
submission failed. The respondent
contends that the Arbitrator’s
categorisation of Dr Bodel’s opinion as a “professional
courtesy” did not
impact upon the Arbitrator’s reasoning
respondent submits that the onus of proving that the proposed surgery was
reasonably necessary rested on the appellant and the
Arbitrator was required to
determine whether that onus was satisfied. The respondent asserts that the
Arbitrator observed that the
failure of Dr Coughlan to justify his opinion
could not be cured by Dr Bodel simply accepting the explanation by Dr Coughlan.
respondent contends that the appellant could not overcome the problems with
the surgery identified by Dr Bodel, namely that:
(a) the disc which
actually appeared abnormal was the L4/5 disc;
(b) the diagnosis was a rupture of the L4/5 disc, and
(c) “all along” the pathology appeared to be mostly localised to
the L4/5 level and not the L3/4 level.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the proposed surgery
was supported by Dr Varsani, which indicated a
concurrence between medical
practitioners. The respondent submits, however, that in his referral of the
appellant to the Hunter Pain
Clinic on 18 April 2016, Dr Varsani described the
MRI scan dated 7 January 2016 as showing an annular tear at the L4/5 level.
Dr Russo of the Hunter Pain Clinic reported that the appellant
described central low back pain at about the L4/5 or L5/S1 segmental
respondent contends that unanimity was not an expression used by the Arbitrator,
but that, in any event there was a lack of unanimity
in the appellant’s
medical evidence, particularly in relation to the source of the
appellant’s complaints of pain.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant submits that, for the purpose of clarity, her submission was that the
totality of the evidence showed that the L3/4
disc was abnormal, in addition to
the abnormality of the L4/5 disc. The appellant asserts that the respondent has
failed to grapple
with the point being made. That is, that there was ample
evidence of disc pathology at the L3/4 level, and the Arbitrator did not
with that evidence.
appellant refers to the respondent’s reliance on the opinion of Dr
Teychenné and contends that the respondent asserted
that the Arbitrator
was not required to provide adequate reasons, which the appellant says is wrong.
appellant submits that the respondent’s submissions about the medical
reports ignores the manner in which her treatment
progressed.
appellant also submits that the word “unanimity” is precisely the
word used by the Arbitrator in his reasons.
Ground Three: error of fact and law in respect of the
availability of alternate treatment, by
(a) failing to provide sufficient
reasons to understand the basis of the determination or the determination
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that, from the Arbitrator’s comments in relation to
alternative treatment, it is difficult to understand
what precisely the
Arbitrator determined. The appellant reproduces the following relevant passage
from the Arbitrator’s reasons:
“As to the availability
of alternative treatment, I note the suggestion by Dr Casikar that psychiatric
intervention should be
considered. I note also that the applicant has been
referred to psychologists as part of the pain management treatment by Dr Russo.
However, in view of the intransigence of Ms Young’s condition, a further
investigation of that modality of treatment might
be a further option for
alternative treatment. It is certainly true that the many forms of alternative
treatment undertaken by Ms
Young thus far have been
unsuccessful.”
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator did not provide sufficient reasons for
arriving at his determination. Further, the Arbitrator
made no reference to, and
disregarded, the abundant medical evidence as to, the significant treatment
modalities which had been unsuccessful,
following which surgery was considered
to be the last option. Relying on
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v
Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
Waterways Authority v
the appellant
submits that the Arbitrator was required to set out the actual path of reasoning
that led to the decision in order
for the parties to understand how the
Arbitrator arrived at the result.
appellant contends that it is unclear precisely what findings the Arbitrator
made, but if the finding was that there was some
alternate treatment that may be
available, the treatment was not identified or examined, and the Arbitrator did
not point to the
evidence that supported that conclusion. The appellant asserts
that this is an error of law.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that the word “intransigence” in the quote from
the Arbitrator’s reasons has been mis-transcribed
“transience.” The respondent contends that, in any event, this
appeal ground proceeds on the basis of a misapprehension
Arbitrator’s determination was partly influenced by the availability of
alternate treatment. The respondent contends
that this is not the case and the
Arbitrator’s final sentence at [110] of his reasons acknowledged that
alternate treatment
has not been successful. The respondent submits that the
reason for the Arbitrator’s conclusion was that the failure of the
alternative treatment of itself was not sufficient to justify the proposed
surgery, which has not been shown to be beneficial.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant indicates that she relies on her submissions already made in respect
of this ground of appeal.
Ground Three: error of fact and law in respect of the
availability of alternate treatment, by
(b) making a finding overwhelmingly
at odds with the weight of the evidence
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that, if the finding was that there was some alternate
treatment that may be available, then such a finding
was contrary to the
overwhelming weight of the evidence and was erroneous. The appellant says that
the evidence of the treatment
provided over a lengthy course clearly established
that those treatment modalities were not successful and ultimately led to the
conclusion that surgery was the last available option to address the
appellant’s symptoms and functional limitations.
appellant refers to the various therapies, programs and interventions provided
to the appellant by her general practitioner, physiotherapist,
psychologist,
neurosurgeons and her pain management specialists. The appellant further refers
to the ultimate conclusion reached
by Dr Coughlan that because the appellant had
tried and exhausted all conservative options, he did not believe there were any
alternatives to the proposed fusion. The appellant submits that this view
was also expressed by Dr Varsani, who also indicated that
the prognosis was
unknown, but that he was hopeful that the surgery would lead to some improvement
in the appellant’s pain
and capacity for work.
appellant contends that the Arbitrator’s finding was so against the weight
of the evidence that it is plainly obvious that
his discretionary judgment was
not fairly or lawfully exercised, as expressed by Fleming DP in
Eyles Nominees Pty Ltd /as Processed Forest
and Bryon DP in
JD & PA Lowey v
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the appellant’s assertion that the Arbitrator fell
into error by making findings against the weight
of the evidence is not
established because the Arbitrator did not make the finding suggested by the
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant indicates that she relies on her submissions already made in respect
of this ground of appeal.
Ground Four: error of law in misapplying the correct test under
s 60 of the 1987 Act
The appellant’s submissions
appellant points out that the Arbitrator referred to the decision in
when considering whether the surgery was reasonably necessary. The appellant
agrees that
remains good authority for the statutory task of making
such a determination. The appellant submits that, in accordance with
, the phrase “reasonably necessary” in s 60(1) of the
1987 Act does not mean “absolutely necessary,” and a
different treatments may qualify as being reasonably necessary.
appellant refers to the criteria set out in
, and says that,
ultimately, whether the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary is to be
determined on a case by case basis, and
an arbitrator is required to exercise
prudence, sound judgment and good sense, as discussed in
Ajay Fibreglass
Industries Pty Ltd t/as Duraplas Industries v
The appellant asserts
that the Arbitrator “simplified” the argument put forward by her.
The appellant submits that her
argument was not simply that the surgery was
appropriate because all other treatment failed. She says her submission was that
surgery was the only reasonably available option to try to alleviate her
pain and improve her functional limits.
appellant submits that, in the application of s 60 of the 1987 Act, the
Arbitrator erred by:
(a) mischaracterising the nature of the case
she presented in evidence and submissions;
(b) committing the factual errors outlined above in submissions relevant to
the three grounds of appeal, which infected the Arbitrator’s
application
, and led the Arbitrator into legal error;
(c) in his consideration of the evidence, failing to apply prudence, sound
judgment, and good sense to determine whether the surgery
undertaken;
(d) treating each of the criteria in
as a pre-requisite to
finding the treatment was reasonably necessary, when those matters which are
relevant are descriptive, rather
than prescriptive, and
(e) failing to note that the respondent’s own medico-legal expert
conceded that the proposed surgery was the standard form of
treatment for the
appellant’s condition (except in a workers compensation setting, which the
Arbitrator rejected).
appellant submits that the Arbitrator erred by determining that she had failed
to meet her onus on the basis that Dr Bodel had
disagreed with Dr Coughlan. The
appellant submits that the Arbitrator erred by requiring complete unanimity
between the treating
surgeon’s recommendation and the appellant’s
medico-legal expert, and by disregarding Dr Bodel’s ultimate conclusion.
The appellant contends that, by requiring such unanimity, the Arbitrator placed
a higher onus on her.
appellant says that for the purpose of s 60, she was required to demonstrate, on
the basis of the totality of the evidence, that
there was a reasonable chance of
a successful outcome and that it was better for her to have the surgery than
not. The appellant
contends that a divergence of opinion between the treating
surgeon and a medico-legal expert in relation to the precise nature of
surgery does not, of itself, disqualify her from meeting her onus.
appellant asserts that in his report dated 11 March 2020, Dr Bodel accepted
Dr Coughlan’s recommendation of an L3/4 fusion
and said that such
treatment was reasonably necessary for the management of the appellant’s
injury. The appellant submits that
the Arbitrator’s reasoning that Dr
Bodel’s evidence was at odds with that of Dr Coughlan does not justify the
onus placed
on the appellant by the Arbitrator.
appellant submits that for the above reasons, the Arbitrator fell into
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Arbitrator did not mischaracterise the
appellant’s case by observing that the appellant had
argued that the
proposed treatment was appropriate because all other treatment modalities
failed. The respondent points to the transcript,
which shows that the appellant
advanced the argument that the failure of all other treatment was a reason to
conclude that the proposed
surgery was reasonably necessary. The respondent
submits that the Arbitrator acknowledged that argument at [104] of his reasons,
but then went on to correctly note that the references to the surgery being a
“last resort” were an acknowledgment that
the surgery was
“fraught with the risk of a potentially poor
respondent contends that the risk of a poor outcome made the proposed surgery a
last resort and that risk made it crucial to justify
the recommendation for a
fusion at a different level of the spine to the level which was the site of the
injury and the appellant’s
complaints. The respondent refers to the
evidence of Dr Russo, Dr Teychenné and Dr Bodel to that effect. The
respondent says
that the justification for the surgery was absent or, at best,
unconvincing.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the
Arbitrator’s factual errors infected his analysis of the
and says it is difficult to understand that concept. The respondent
points out that the Arbitrator noted that both parties agreed
that the indicia
was relevant, and he considered the five indicia suggested in
that decision, which were consistent with those set out by Burke CCJ
v Health Commission of NSW
The respondent submits that the Arbitrator acknowledged that matters relevant to
the issue were not limited to those five indicia,
but appropriately considered
each of those indicia which had been the subject of submissions before him.
respondent further refers to the Arbitrator’s observation that neither Dr
Coughlan nor Dr Bodel made a convincing case that
the surgery would
alleviate or have potential to alleviate the appellant’s symptoms, which
the respondent submits is a critical
observation. The respondent submits that it
is quite apparent that the Arbitrator was troubled by the assertion that it
beneficial for the appellant to undergo the
The respondent asserts that the Arbitrator was obliged to consider whether the
evidence from the doctors was convincing in
respect of the potential benefit
from the surgery and provided a well-reasoned conclusion that the evidence was
unconvincing. The
respondent says that the
analysis was not
“infected.”
respondent submits that the allegation that the Arbitrator failed to apply
prudence, sound judgment and good sense when weighing
the evidence should be
rejected. The respondent says that the Arbitrator noted that he was invited to
apply the principles in
v Rianthelle
, and there is no justification for the proposition put by the
respondent points to the appellant’s assertion that the Arbitrator treated
the indicia in
as pre-requisites and contends that there is no
justification for that assertion either. The respondent submits that the
specifically noted that the criteria were relevant but not
exhaustive.
respondent notes the appellant’s assertion that the Arbitrator failed to
take into account that Dr Casikar considered the
proposed surgery was an
accepted, standard form of treatment for degenerative disease in the lumbar
spine. The respondent submits
that the Arbitrator, at [109] of his reasons,
acknowledged that spinal surgery was, in some cases, an accepted standard form
of treatment
for that condition.
respondent contends that the appellant has avoided the central issue in the
case, which was that the Arbitrator was not convinced
that the proposed
treatment would be beneficial for the appellant. The respondent says that the
Arbitrator gave clearly articulated
reasons for coming to that conclusion. That
is, there was cogent evidence before him that there were serious concerns about
treatment, which had not been addressed or countered by the treating
respondent submits that the assertion that the Arbitrator considered that
complete unity between the surgeons was a requirement
is incorrect. The
respondent asserts that it is apparent that the Arbitrator did not state such an
onus or proceed on the basis of
such an onus. The respondent submits that the
Arbitrator considered that Dr Coughlan’s opinion could not be endorsed by
Bodel’s evidence because Dr Bodel had concerns about the level of the
spine that was to be addressed. The respondent contends
that Dr Bodel expressed
the same concern in his second report. The respondent submits that, in observing
that Dr Bodel disagreed
with Dr Coughlan’s proposal and thus the appellant
had failed to discharge her onus, the Arbitrator was speaking of the conflict
the evidence between purporting to support the particular treatment option but
casting doubt on the wisdom of that treatment path.
respondent concludes that the Arbitrator did not err in fact or in
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant submits that the respondent has repeated the Arbitrator’s error
in respect of the characterisation of her case
and explains that her case was
founded upon her significantly debilitating pain and discomfort, her significant
loss of function
and the failure of the non-surgical approach.
appellant maintains that the Arbitrator, in saying that the highest the
appellant’s case reached was that Dr Coughlan had
not come to his decision
lightly or quickly, ignored Dr Coughlan’s opinion that the aim of the
surgery was to:
(a) significantly reduce the appellant’s
(b) give the appellant a better quality of life, and
(c) obtain functional gains for the appellant.
appellant asserts that the respondent has failed to engage with the
Arbitrator’s reasoning, in which the Arbitrator determined
that because Dr
Bodel clearly disagreed with Dr Coughlan’s proposal, the appellant has
failed to discharge her onus. The appellant
refers to the respondent’s
assertion that the Arbitrator’s finding was supported by all of the
evidence before him. The
appellant maintains that this submission ignores the
fact that the Arbitrator’s finding that Dr Bodel disagreed with Dr
was incorrect because Dr Bodel’s view was to the contrary.
Further, the Arbitrator did not refer to any other evidence when
he determined
that because of that disagreement, the appellant was unable to satisfy her
RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination
revoked and the matter remitted to another arbitrator
for re-determination. The
respondent does not seek any orders.
appeal from a decision of an Arbitrator to a Presidential member is limited to
the identification of error of either fact, law
or discretion and to the
correction of such error.
is clear that the issue in this matter turns upon whether the particular
surgery, namely a spinal fusion at the L3/4 level, is
reasonably necessary. As
is not uncommon in cases such as this, there is a divergence of medical opinion,
as to whether the particular
surgery is reasonably necessary to address the
pathology in the appellant’s lumbar spine that is causative of the
appellant’s
symptoms. It was certainly a live dispute as to whether the
appellant’s symptoms were mainly emanating from the L3/4 level
spine or whether the culprit was the pathology identified at the L4/5 level, or
both. The Arbitrator’s task was to evaluate
that evidence in order to
reach a factual conclusion as to whether he was satisfied that the surgery
proposed was reasonably necessary.
The Commission has often discussed and
applied the principles that apply to an appeal from an Arbitrator’s
factual determination.
As summarised by Roche DP in
Raulston v Toll Pty
arbitrator’s preference for one view of facts over another will not be
disturbed on appeal unless other probabilities
so outweigh the view taken by the
Arbitrator that the arbitrator’s conclusion must be wrong;
(b) an arbitrator’s finding of fact must be displaced before an
inference drawn from those facts can be set aside;
(c) if it can be shown that material facts were overlooked, given undue
weight or given too little weight in deciding the inference
to be drawn, it may
show that the Arbitrator was wrong, or,
(d) if, on the evidence, the opposite inference was so preponderant, then the
Arbitrator must be wrong.
a choice between conclusions is finely balanced and equally open to the
Arbitrator, the Presidential member will not interfere
merely on the basis that
it preferred a different
Further, any error on
the part of an Arbitrator must have affected the outcome before a Presidential
member can intervene.
above principles were considered applicable to appeals from an
Arbitrator’s decision to a Presidential member by the Court
of Appeal in
Northern NSW Local Health Network
Compensation Nominal Insurer v
The appellant is
therefore required to establish error of the kind described in order to disturb
the Arbitrator’s factual conclusions.
matters relevant to a consideration of whether treatment is “reasonably
necessary” were set out by Burke CCJ in
“3. Any necessity for relevant treatment results
from the injury where its purpose and potential effect is to alleviate the
consequences of injury.
is reasonably necessary that such treatment be afforded a worker if this Court
concludes, exercising prudence, sound judgment
and good sense, that it is so.
That involves the Court in deciding, on the facts as it finds them, that the
particular treatment
is essential to, should be afforded to, and should not be
forborne by, the worker.
so deciding, the Court will have regard to medical opinion as to the relevance
and appropriateness of the particular treatment,
any available alternative
treatment, the cost factor, the actual or potential effectiveness of the
treatment and its place in the
usual medical armoury of treatments for the
condition.”
President Roche applied Burke CCJ’s criteria in
also made the following
observation (citations
“While the above matters are ‘useful heads for
consideration,’ the ‘essential question remains whether the
treatment was reasonably necessary.’ Thus, it is not simply a matter of
asking, as was suggested in
, is it better that the worker have
the treatment or not.”
was no dispute between the parties that the principles in
apply to this case.
Ground One: error of fact in respect of the opinions expressed
by Dr Coughlan and Dr Bodel in relation to the appropriateness of the
treatment, thereby causing the Arbitrator to err in the application of the legal
test under s 60(1) of the 1987 Act
errors identified by the appellant in respect of this ground are that the
Arbitrator misrepresented the opinions of Dr Bodel and
Dr Coughlan
(a) concluding that neither Dr Bodel nor Dr Coughlan provided
convincing evidence that the proposed surgery would alleviate, or potentially
alleviate, the appellant’s symptoms, and
(b) considering that Dr Coughlan’s evidence, at its
“highest,” was that the decision had not been arrived at easily
all previous options had failed.
his report dated 11 February 2020, Dr Coughlan provided the following reasons as
to why the proposed surgery was reasonably
“Firstly, I do believe the surgery is deemed
reasonable and necessary to treat her work related condition. I have recommended
an L3/4 lateral fusion with posterior screws. As I have said previously, the
L3/4 level consistently came up as the main pain generator
on all her scans. We
have tried conservative measures without any effect. In my opinion, I believe
the procedure will best address
the severe arthropathy at L3/4. [The appellant]
continues to struggle and has not progressed. I feel it would be most certainly
pursing the surgery with the aim of significantly reducing [the
appellant’s] pain so she can have a better quality of
in the same report, Dr Coughlan set out the treatment path, commencing with a
bone scan investigation of the appellant’s
lumbar spine, which disclosed,
among other pathology, bilateral inflamed L3/4 facet joints. Dr Coughlan
directed treatment to the
facet joints. He described the appellant’s
quality of life as “very poor,” said that the appellant had been in
pain since 2016 and was attempting to walk in order to prepare for the surgery.
Dr Coughlan clearly expressed the view that the surgery
was certainly worthwhile
and was intended to significantly reduce the appellant’s pain and improve
her quality of life.
Arbitrator’s reasons did not “misrepresent” the evidence of Dr
Coughlan. The Arbitrator quoted the above passage
from Dr Coughlan’s
report before proceeding to determine whether he could accept that evidence. In
the context of Dr Bodel
having maintained a “note of caution about dealing
with the L3/4 level only,”
the Arbitrator concluded that:
“Neither Dr Coughlan nor Dr
Bodel has made any convincing case that the proposed surgery will alleviate, or
have the potential
to alleviate, Ms Young’s
other words, having acknowledged that Dr Coughlan said that the surgery could
likely reduce the appellant’s pain, the Arbitrator
was not convinced by Dr
Coughlan’s evidence that the surgery had the potential to alleviate the
appellant’s symptoms.
The Arbitrator was not satisfied that Dr
Coughlan’s opinion in that regard should be accepted.
Arbitrator impliedly accepted that the appellant’s past treatment had
failed and considered that further psychological intervention
might be an option
but had not assisted in the past. He concluded that the only
established
reasons for performing the surgery were that Dr Coughlan had not come to the
decision quickly or lightly, and that all other treatment
had failed. In the
context of having rejected the proposition that the surgery would potentially
relieve the appellant’s symptoms,
there was no error in the Arbitrator
describing the appellant’s case as being, at its highest, that the
decision had not been
made quickly or lightly, and all other treatment had
Varsani’s opinion goes no further than the accepted evidence of Dr
Coughlan. Dr Varsani did not address the fundamental issue
in this case,
which was whether the surgery performed should solely involve the L3/4
follows that this ground of appeal fails.
Ground Two: error of fact in respect of the
“unanimity” of the evidence
the appellant contends that the Arbitrator’s conclusion that Dr Bodel did
not support the opinion of Dr Coughlan was
wrong. Part of the appellant’s
complaint is that the Arbitrator categorised Dr Bodel’s acceptance of Dr
explanation for the surgery as a “professional
courtesy.” I do not accept that describing Dr Bodel’s acceptance
the opinion in that manner amounts to error. Dr Bodel merely expressed an
acceptance, which was in the context of maintaining
some caution for the surgery
as proposed. His evidence did not go so far as to say, in any reasoned way, that
he was of the view
that the surgery was appropriate or that it would have the
potential to alleviate the appellant’s symptoms. That the Arbitrator
unconvinced that Dr Bodel’s evidence supported the proposition that the
surgery could alleviate the appellant’s pain
is not surprising, given that
Dr Bodel did not proffer a view on that possibility.
the appellant asserts that the Arbitrator did not deal with the evidence in any
meaningful way in coming to his conclusions
(a) Dr Bodel did
not support Dr Coughlan’s opinion;
(b) Dr Coughlan merely reiterated his opinion that the main issue was the
L3/4 level of the spine, and
(c) the evidence pointed to the L4/5 disc as being abnormal.
submission cannot be accepted. The Arbitrator extensively reviewed the reports
of Dr Coughlan at [21] to [42] and Dr Bodel at
[43] to [54]. The Arbitrator
also reviewed the evidence from Dr Teychenné and Dr Mitchell, who
recorded the appellant’s
pain as coming from the central low back at the
L4/5 and L5/S1 levels. Additionally, the Arbitrator summarised the evidence of
Bentivoglio and noted that Dr Bentivoglio diagnosed that the appellant had
aggravated the degenerative changes at the L3/4, L4/5
and L5/S1 levels of the
lumbar spine. The Arbitrator referred to that evidence in concluding that
“[t]he evidence clearly indicates
the implication of the L4/5 disc as
being abnormal.”
Arbitrator’s conclusion was, therefore, that the disc at the L4/5 level
was implicated in the appellant’s symptomology.
That conclusion was
supported by all of the evidence reviewed by the Arbitrator, with the exception
of Dr Coughlan. It should be
noted that the Arbitrator did not make a finding
that the L4/5 disc was the only level causing the appellant pain.
Arbitrator’s reference to there being no “unanimity” in the
appellant’s medical case was simply an observation
that there was no
agreement amongst the medical experts, particularly between Dr Bodel and Dr
Coughlan, that the proposed surgery
to the L3/4 level alone was the appropriate
treatment to address the appellant’s symptoms. That observation was
undoubtedly
correct in the context of Dr Bodel having preserved his reservations
Arbitrator was
clearly looking for some corroborative evidence to support Dr Coughlan’s
appellant further submits that the Arbitrator erred by considering that Dr
Coughlan had “merely reiterated” his view
that the L3/4 level of the
spine was the main issue. Dr Coughlan did not provide any reasons as to why the
L4/5 level disc abnormality
was not being addressed by the surgery, despite Dr
Bodel having opined that the additional disc should be included. In that sense,
Dr Coughlan’s reason that the L3/4 level of the spine was the main issue
and required surgery was, in fact, a reiteration of
his view already expressed
when he turned his mind to surgery on 31 March 2019. The appellant’s
submission does not establish
error on the part of the Arbitrator.
those reasons, this ground of appeal fails.
Ground Three: error of fact and law in respect of the
availability of alternate treatment, by
(a) failing to provide sufficient
reasons to understand the basis of the determination or the determination
itself, and
(b) making a finding overwhelmingly at odds with the weight of
the evidence
appellant submits that, if the Arbitrator made a finding that there was some
alternate treatment that may be available, then he
did not provide sufficient
reasons for that conclusion, such a finding was contrary to the overwhelming
weight of the evidence and
was erroneous. The Arbitrator
“As to the availability of alternative treatment, I
note the suggestion by Dr Casikar that psychiatric intervention should be
considered. I note also that the applicant has been referred to psychologists as
part of the pain management treatment by Dr Russo.
However, in view of the
intransigence of Ms Young’s condition, a further investigation of that
modality of treatment might
be a further option for alternative treatment. It is
certainly true that the many forms of alternative treatment undertaken by Ms
Young thus far have been
unsuccessful.”
do not accept that the Arbitrator went so far as to conclude that there was
alternate treatment available. The Arbitrator expressed
his view that
psychological treatment
be an option, but then acknowledged that it
had been unsuccessful in the past. The basis upon which the Arbitrator
determined that
the proposed surgery was not reasonably necessary was that he
was not satisfied that the surgery would alleviate, or have the potential
alleviate, appellant’s symptoms.
follows that Ground Three of the appeal is not made out.
Ground Four: error of law in misapplying the correct test under
s 60 of the 1987 Act
appellant contends that, because the Arbitrator made the factual errors alleged
in the first three grounds of appeal, he erred
in law by failing to apply
prudence, sound judgment and good sense, as required by
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator “simplified” her case by
reducing it to a proposition that the surgery was
appropriate because all other
treatment failed. The Arbitrator did not do so. The Arbitrator’s reasons
disclose that he considered
the evidence of Dr Coughlan that the intention of
the surgery was to alleviate the appellant’s symptoms and found that
not convincing and not corroborated by other evidence. I have discussed
in Ground One of the appeal the Arbitrator’s conclusion
that, at its
highest, the decision to perform the surgery was not made lightly or quickly and
all other treatment had failed. For
the reasons set out under that ground, the
Arbitrator did not err in so concluding.
Arbitrator did not treat each of the criteria in
“pre-requisites.” He considered the criteria in the context of the
evidence before him and was not satisfied that
the failure of past treatment and
that the decision was not made hastily or without due consideration were
sufficient reasons to
say that the proposed surgery was reasonably necessary.
That was a determination of fact and it was open to the Arbitrator to conclude
accordingly.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator failed to take into account that the
respondent’s medico-legal expert, Dr Casikar,
conceded that the type of
surgery proposed was the standard form of treatment for a degenerative back
condition. As the respondent
submits, the Arbitrator acknowledged that spinal
surgery was, in some cases, an accepted form of treatment. As Dr Casikar was the
only expert to offer that opinion, it is clear that the Arbitrator took into
account that evidence. In any event, Dr Casikar’s
opinion in that regard
does not assist the appellant. A general view that spinal surgery is an accepted
form of treatment does not
address the reasonableness of performing surgery to
one level of the spine over another, or without the other. The concern expressed
by Dr Bodel was that consideration should be given to fusing both levels of the
spine. In those circumstances, even if the Arbitrator
had failed to consider
that evidence from Dr Casikar, the error would not have affected the outcome of
any event, the Arbitrator did not make the factual errors alleged, which is
sufficient to dispose of this ground of appeal. It
follows that Ground Four of
the appeal also fails.
appellant has failed to establish error on the part of the Arbitrator and the
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination
is confirmed.
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 1 July 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
19 November 2020
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp
Reply, p 3.
Application to Admit
Late Documents dated 20 May 2020, pp
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72
Young v Vietnam Veterans
Keith Payne VC Hostel
[2020] NSWWCC 217 (reasons), [112].
Appellant’s
submissions, [5.7].
Reasons, [110].
252 CLR 480.
[2005] HCA 57
221 ALR 402.
[2004] NSWWCCPD
[2006] NSWWCCPD
[2012] NSWWCCPD
Respondent’s
submissions, [60].
2 NSWCCR 32.
NSWWCCPD 53.
Section 352(5)
of the 1998 Act.
NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156.
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
[2001] FCA 1833
per Allsop J (as his Honour then was) (Drummond and
Mansfield JJ agreeing),
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
at 419 cited in
Trazivuk v Motor
Accidents Authority of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 287
[2013] NSWCA 255
Sackville AJA,
[70]–‑[72].
[2020] NSWCA 54
, per Basten JA,
Reasons, [110].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.88 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter