URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/288.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Farrugia v The Hour Glass (Australia) Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 288; (11 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Farrugia v The Hour Glass (Australia) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 288
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Appeal Panel
G Blake AM SC, Principal Member
(1) The application of the appellant lodged on 13 October 2025 is
(2) A hearing of the application of the appellant lodged
on 3 October 2025 is dispensed with.
(3) The application of the
appellant lodged on 3 October 2025 is dismissed.
Catchwords:
APPEAL – application to vary interlocutory order - whether
application can be used as a mechanism of appeal – application
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), rr 38, 38A
Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
AIN v Medical Council of New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAP 36
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Geraghty
[2000] NSWSC 228
Jeray v Information and
[2024] NSWCATAP 239
Kimber v Clark as trustee of the
estate of Kimber (Review of orders)
[2025] FCA 1181
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
Jacob Farrugia (Appellant)
The Hour Glass Australia Pty Ltd (First
Respondent)
LVMH Watch and Jewellery Australia Pty Ltd (Second
Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-represented)
First Respondent (No
appearance)
J Courtenay (Second Respondent)
Solicitors:
Lawyers (Second Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00341569
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
11 August 2025
K George, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2024/00393525
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an internal appeal from the decision of the Tribunal made on 11 August 2025
in proceedings between the appellant, Jacob Farrugia
(Mr Farrugia) and the first
respondent, The Hour Glass Australia Pty Ltd (Hour Glass) and the second
respondent, LVMH Watch and Jewellery
Australia Pty Ltd (LVMH).
26 September 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by Deputy President
G Sarginson granted leave to LVMH to be legally represented
in the appeal
(the AP representation order).
3 October 2025, Mr Farrugia applied for an order that the AP representation
order be varied by adding a condition that each party
is to bear their own costs
in the appeal regardless of outcome (the 3 October 2025 Farrugia
application).
have decided to dismiss the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application because the
Appeal Panel has no jurisdiction to make the order sought.
considering the issues arising for determination, I have set out or made
observations on the following matters:
(1) the key statutory provisions;
(2) the background to the appeal;
(3) the appeal.
The key statutory provisions
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT
Act) contains preliminary provisions.
contains definitions and
relevantly states:
4 Definitions
(1) In this Act—
interlocutory decision
of the Tribunal means a decision made by
the Tribunal under legislation concerning any of the following—
(h1) the granting of leave for a person to represent a party to
proceedings,
) contains provisions dealing with the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
deals with the internal appeal jurisdiction of the Tribunal and
relevantly states:
32 Internal appeal jurisdiction of Tribunal
(3) However, the internal appeal jurisdiction of the Tribunal
does not extend to—
(a) any decision of an Appeal Panel, or
) contains provisions dealing with the practice and procedure
of the Tribunal.
deals with the representation of parties and
relevantly states:
45 Representation of parties
(1) A party to proceedings in the Tribunal—
(b) may be represented by another person only if the Tribunal
grants leave—
(ii) in the case of representation by an Australian legal
practitioner—for a particular or any Australian legal practitioner
represent the party.
(3) The Tribunal may at its discretion—
(a) grant or refuse leave under subsection (1)(b), and
(b) revoke any leave that it has granted.
NCAT Regulation
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
(NCAT Regulation) contains miscellaneous provisions.
Regulation 9
additional power to set aside or vary a decision determining proceedings and
relevantly states:
9 Additional power to set aside or vary decision determining
proceedings—the Act, s 90(2)(a)
(1) In addition to a power that is expressly conferred on the
Tribunal by the Act or enabling legislation to set aside or vary
its decisions,
the Tribunal may order that a decision it has made that determines proceedings
be set aside or varied if—
(a) all of the parties to the proceedings have consented to the
making of the order to set aside or vary the decision, or
(b) the decision was made in the absence of a party and the
Tribunal is satisfied that the party’s absence has resulted in
party’s case not being adequately put to the Tribunal.
The background to the appeal
2022, Mr Farrugia purchased a Hublot watch from Hour Glass for $40,800.00.
Farrugia, after returning the watch to Hour Glass on four occasions for repairs,
remained dissatisfied with the performance of
the watch. LVMH carried the
repairs to the watch.
23 October 2024, Mr Farrugia commenced proceedings 2024/00393525 in the Consumer
and Commercial Division of the Tribunal under
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) against Hour Glass (the CCD proceedings) by lodging an application form in
which he claimed various remedies (the Farrugia
application).
8 May 2025, the Tribunal constituted by Senior Member D Charles granted leave
for LVMH, which had been joined as a respondent on
the application of Mr
Farrugia, to be represented by an Australian legal practitioner, on condition
that it does not seek an order
for costs in the proceedings (the CCD
representation order).
11 August 2025, the Tribunal constituted by Senior Member K George made an order
dismissing the Farrugia application (the 11 August
5 September 2025, Mr Farrugia appealed against the 11 August 2025 order by
lodging a notice of appeal.
26 September 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by Deputy President
G Sarginson made procedural orders for the hearing of the appeal
September 2025 AP orders) including by order 2 making the AP representation
order. In order 3 the Appeal Panel provided the
following reasons for the AP
representation order:
“The second respondent, LVMH Watch and Jewellery Pty Ltd, seeks leave to
be legally represented in the appeal. The appellant
opposes leave being granted.
The parties made submissions on this issue on 26 September 2025. The appellant
asserts he will be disadvantaged
as he does not intend to obtain legal
representation. The Appeal Panel has considered the applicable principles in
respect of the
grant of legal representation under s 45 of the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013 (NCAT Act) and the procedural guideline
representation in Consumer and Commercial Division matters (the same principles
are relevant to the grant of legal representation
in an appeal). The amount
claimed or in dispute in the original proceedings exceeded $40,000, and the
appeal seeks to set aside the
orders dismissing the proceedings. By reason of
the amount in dispute and the complexity of the legal issues, the Appeal Panel
satisfied that leave for legal representation should be granted, and it is
not satisfied that it is appropriate to impose any condition.
Further, the
appellant should obtain advice about the operation of
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
on the issue of costs and how those
Rules affect the operation of s 60 of the NCAT Act. Although a condition
restricting the Solicitors
for the second respondent was imposed in the Tribunal
proceedings that they not be able to claim costs, it is the Appellant who has
chosen to appeal and the legal issues in the appeal are not the same legal
issues as in the Tribunal at first instance. The Appeal
Panel often deals with
hearings where one party is legally represented and another is self-represented.
That, of itself, does not
obviously create disadvantage. The Appellant can
obtain his own legal advice, and the Appeal Panel can manage a hearing that is
procedurally
fair to a self-represented litigant. There is no evidence of the
Appellant having a disadvantage such as a disability.”
3 October 2025, Mr Farrugia sent an email to the Appeal Registry, which was not
copied to Hour Glass and LVMH’s solicitors,
relevantly attaching the 3
October 2025 Farrugia application in which he:
(1) states the following orders are sought:
“1. That Order 2 made by the Appeal Panel on 26 September 2025 be varied
to add the following condition:
“Each party is to bear their own costs in the appeal, regardless of
2. That this application be determined on the papers, or otherwise listed for
short submissions if the Panel prefers.”
(2) includes the following statement of reasons:
“1. Consistency with prior NCAT orders in this matter
1.1 0n 8 May 2025, the Tribunal (Senior Member P. Charles, Legal) granted the
Respondent LVMH Watch and Jewellery Australia Pty Ltd
leave for legal
representation on condition that it would not seek an order for costs in that
proceeding (Case No. 2024/00393525).
(Annexure A)
1.2 The Appeal Panel’s orders of 26 September 2025 depart from that
protective condition without stated justification. Given
the same parties and
substantially the same dispute, procedural consistency favours the re-imposition
of a no-costs condition in
this appeal.
2. NCAT Act statutory objectives and fairness
Section 3(d)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
[NSW) (NCAT
Act) requires that the Tribunal be accessible, eefficient and fair, with minimal
2.2 Section 38 requires the Tribunal to act with as little formality as is
consistent with the proper consideration of the matters
and to ensure
proceedings are conducted to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution a
the real Issues.
2.3 Allowing the Respondents to seek costs against an unrepresented Appellant
creates an economic barrier that undermines access
to justice and the ability to
advance the appeal on its merits.
3 Section 60 costs framework
3.1 Section 60 of the NCAT Act provides that, in general, each party is to pay
their own costs unless the Tribunal is satisfied there
are special/exceptional
circumstances justifying a costs order.
3.2 Varying Order 2 to state expressly that each party is to bear their own
costs does not prejudice the Respondents, it confirms
and preserves the
statutory starting point and prevents costs exposure from operating as a
deterrent to the continuation of the appeal.
4. Imbalance of resources and practical effect
4.1 The Appellant is a self-represented individual. The Respondents are
well-resourced corporate entities represented by specialist
4.2 If costs exposure remains open, the financial risk to the Appellant is so
disproportionate that it may become Impracticable to
continue the appeal- not
for lack of merit, but due solely to fear of financial ruin. Such an outcome is
contrary to the Tribunal’s
statutory objectives.
5. Disposition sought
5.1 The Panel should vary Order 2 to add the condition that each party bear
their own costs in the appeal. This preserves access
to justice and aligns with
the prior NCAT order in the same dispute (Annexure A).”
9 October 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by myself made procedural orders
for the hearing of the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application
including for
submissions on whether it should be dismissed for want of jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and which included the following
“(1) The Appeal Panel notes that
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act) provides that the internal
appeal jurisdiction of the Tribunal does not extend to any decision of an Appeal
The parties will need to address the question of whether the 3 October
2025 Farrugia Application should be dismissed pursuant to
s 55(1)(b) of the NCAT
Act on the basis that it is in substance an appeal against order 2 made on 26
September 2025.”
13 October 2025, Mr Farrugia sent an email to the Appeal Registry, which was not
copied to Hour Glass and LVMH’s solicitors,
in which he requested a stay
of the 26 September 2025 AP orders pending the determination of the 3 October
2025 Farrugia application
(the 13 October 2025 Farrugia application).
14 October 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by myself made procedural orders
for the hearing of the 13 October 2025 Farrugia
application.
5 November 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by myself reserved my decision on
the 13 October 2025 Farrugia application.
The issues for
determination
following issues arise for determination:
(1) whether the 13 October 2025 Farrugia application should be dismissed;
(2) whether a hearing of the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application should be
dispensed with;
(3) the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application.
Whether the 13 October 2025 Farrugia application should be
this decision contains my decision on the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application,
there is no utility in determining the 13 October
2025 Farrugia application. It
follows that the 13 October 2025 Farrugia application should be
Whether a hearing of the 3 October 2025 Farrugia
application should be dispensed with
of Mr Farrugia and LVMH consents to a hearing of the 3 October 2025 Farrugia
application being dispensed with.
am satisfied that the issues for determination in respect of the 3 October 2025
Farrugia application can be adequately determined
in the absence of the parties
by considering their written submissions. Accordingly, I have decided pursuant
to s 50(2) of the NCAT
Act to make an order dispensing with a hearing in
relation to this application.
The 3 October 2025 Farrugia
application
considering this issue, I have summarised the submissions of the
Mr Farrugia’s submissions in chief
Farrugia in summary submits:
(1) the Appeal Panel plainly has jurisdiction to consider the 3 October 2025
Farrugia application. ft falls squarely within the Appeal
case-management powers and does not amount to an internal appeal under s
32(3)(a) of the NCAT Act;
(2) the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application is a procedural request to vary an
interlocutory order within the same proceedings;
(3) the Appeal Panel has jurisdiction to vary its own interlocutory directions
and conditions, including orders for legal representation;
(4) regulation 9 of the NCAT Regulation empowers the Tribunal to “set
aside, revoke or vary” interlocutory decisions,
on application or on its
own motion;
(5) the AP representation order is an interlocutory decision, as expressly
defined in the NCAT Act;
(6) accordingly, the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application is not misconceived and
should not be dismissed under s 55(1)(b) of the
Farrugia advances four submissions as follows:
(1) firstly, s 32(3)(a) of the NCAT Act does not bar the 3 October 2025 Farrugia
application because:
(a) it prevents internal appeals against Appeal Panel decisions;
(b) he is not appealing; he is asking the Appeal Panel to exercise its own
procedural power to vary its earlier interlocutory order;
(c) the relief sought is case-management in nature not appellate;
(2) secondly, the Appeal Panel has power to vary interlocutory orders because:
(a) regulation 9 of the NCAT Regulation confirms power to vary interlocutory
decisions and does not limit any other variation powers;
(b) the AP representation order is expressly identified by the NCAT Act as an
interlocutory decision;
(c) sections 36 and 38 of the NCAT Act reinforce the Tribunal’s control
over its own procedure to ensure the just, quick and
cheap resolution of issues.
Varying the AP representation order now promotes efficiency by resolving costs
exposure early and allowing
the appeal to proceed on the real issues;
(3) thirdly, the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application is not misconceived under s
55(1)(b) of the NCAT Act because:
(a) section 55(1)(b) permits dismissal where proceedings are misconceived or
lacking in substance;
(b) the application is well founded. It advances a clear statutory pathway (NCAT
Regulation, reg 9) and seeks a modest procedural
variation to safeguard
(c) it therefore cannot be dismissed as misconceived;
(4) fourthly, granting the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application promotes
consistency and fairness because:
(a) in the CCD proceedings, the Tribunal made the CCD representation order only
on a no-costs condition. The application simply
seeks procedural consistency
and fairness in the appeal context,
(b) denying this protection risks shutting out a self-represented party due to
financial intimidation rather than the merits of the
(c) the Tribunal’s own Service Charter reinforces that NCAT must (a)
resolve, the real issues in proceedings justly, quickly,
cheaply and with as
little formality as possible, and (b) ensure that its decisions are timely,
fair, consistent and of a high quality.
The variation sought aligns directly
with these commitments.
Farrugia submits that the Appeal Panel should confirm it has jurisdiction to
determine the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application,
decline dismissal under
s 55(l)(b) of the NCAT Act, and vary the AP representation order
accordingly by adding “Each party
is to bear their own costs in the appeal
regardless of outcome.”
LVMH’s submissions
opposes the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application for want of jurisdiction and
because it is inconsistent with the costs provisions
in the NCAT Act and the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules).
after referring to ss 5 and 32(3) of the NCAT Act, submits that the 26 September
2025 AP orders constitute a decision of the
Appeal Panel over which the Tribunal
does not have internal appeal jurisdiction. It relies on
Jeray v Information
and Privacy Commission
[2024] NSWCATAP 239
) at [51] where the
Appeal Panel held that it did not have jurisdiction to review an interlocutory
decision of a differently constituted
Appeal Panel. The Appeal Panel determined
the question of whether to impose the condition sought by Mr Farrugia after
hearing submissions
of the parties on 26 September 2025. The Appeal Panel has
made its decision, and absent any new circumstances having been put before
him that were not available at that hearing, Mr Farrugia is seeking to put
forward an appeal which the Appeal Panel has no
the alternative, if the Appeal Panel were to accept that Mr Farrugia is
technically putting forward an application to vary rather
than strictly an
appeal, then LVMH submits that the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application should
still not be entertained. Absent
changed circumstances from the 26 September
2025 hearing, then the application remains in substance an appeal of the kind
32(3) of the NCAT Act prohibits. Where an application to vary is in
substance an appeal it ought not be entertained:
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Geraghty
[2000] NSWSC 228
) at [3]-[9].
Otherwise, a variation to an interlocutory order will not be made absent changed
circumstances or material that was
unavailable at the hearing:
AIN v Medical
Council of New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAP 36
) at [23]. Nothing
of that nature has been identified.
the Appeal Panel does not accept that the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application
should be dismissed on the basis it lacks jurisdiction
pursuant to s 32(3)
of the NCAT Act, LVMH also submits that the application should be dismissed as
the order sought is necessarily
one the Appeal Panel cannot make, being
inconsistent with s 60 of the NCAT Act and rr 38 and 38A of the NCAT Rules. The
Appeal Panel
is not entitled to fetter, in advance, its jurisdiction to order
costs. The parties will be entitled to be heard on the question
conclusion of the proceedings. Accordingly, the Appeal Panel cannot impose the
condition sought by Mr Farrugia and it is beyond
there is no jurisdiction for the Appeal Panel to determine the 3 October 2025
Farrugia application, or alternatively as the application
is misconceived and
lacking in substance, it would be frivolous and vexatious to LVMH for the
application to be determined by the
Appeal Panel. LVMH submits that the
application should therefore be dismissed under s 55(1)(b) of the NCAT Act for
want of jurisdiction.
Mr Farrugia’s submissions in
Farrugia in reply submits:
(1) the Appeal Panel plainly has jurisdiction to determine the 3 October 2025
Farrugia application. LVMH mischaracterises it as
an “internal
appeal” under s 32(3) of the NCAT Act; in truth it is a procedural
variation sought within the same proceedings;
(2) section 32(3)(a) of the NCAT Act bars an appeal from one Appeal Panel to
another. It does not prevent the same Panel from revisiting
interlocutory directions where the Interests of justice so require. That power
arises under reg 9 of the of the NCAT Regulation
and s 64(1) of the NCAT Act,
which authorise the Appeal Panel to set aside, revoke or vary interlocutory
orders at any time;
(3) the AP representation order is plainly interlocutory: it does not determine
any substantive right or the outcome of the appeal.
Authorities such as
concern attempts to re-appeal or reopen
decisions of a differently constituted Appeal Panel, and are therefore
inapposite;
(4) LVMH’s reliance on rr 38 and 38A of the NCAT Rules and s 60 of the
NCAT Act misconceives the relief sought. He does not
seek to fetter the Appeal
Panel’s eventual costs discretion, but rather to maintain procedural
parity consistent with the first
instance “no costs” condition.
Such a safeguard promotes, not restricts the Tribunal’s statutory
obligation under
s 36 of the NCAT Act to ensure proceedings are conducted
justly, quickly cheaply and with as little formality as possible;
(5) the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application is neither frivolous nor vexatious
within s 55(1)(b) of the NCAT Act; it raises a bona
fide question of procedural
fairness. LVMH’s suggestion that it be dismissed for want of jurisdiction
lacks foundation in
either statute or principle;
(6) accordingly, the Appeal Panel retains jurisdiction to consider and determine
the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application and should
proceed to hear it on its
Consideration
Appeal Panel AP made the AP representation order under s 45(1)(b)(ii) and (3)(a)
of the NCAT Act after a contested hearing, and
provided written reason for this
accept that the AP representation order is an interlocutory decision of the
Appeal Panel within s 4(1)(h1) of the NCAT Act.
Farrugia in the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application seeks to vary the AP
representation order by adding a condition. He has not
sought to revoke the AP
representation order under s 45(3)(b) of the NCAT Act.
, Hidden J considered an application to set aside an order made,
by consent, by Simpson J under the
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
preliminary question which arose was whether the proper course was for the
applicant to seek leave to appeal against that
order to the Court of Appeal,
pursuant to
s 101(2)(e)
Supreme Court Act
Honour at [6] noted earlier authorities recognised a distinction between a
challenge to an interlocutory order upon the
basis that it was wrong in law or
without jurisdiction, on the one hand, and an application to rescind or vary an
interlocutory order
in the light of changed circumstances, on the other.
Accordingly, His Honour at [9] was satisfied that the application was not
brought in the Common Law Division of the Supreme Court.
at [23], the Appeal Panel set out the principles that constrain the
Tribunal when confronted with an application to re-agitate an
interlocutory decision:
“[23] ... The principles relating to the variation or discharge of
interlocutory orders otherwise than by appeal were set out
by McLelland J in
Brimaud v Honeysett Instant Print Pty Ltd
(1988) 217 ALR 44
at 46-7. In
that case, his Honour, in a passage often cited, said:
The overriding principle governing the approach of the court to interlocutory
applications is that the court should do whatever the
interests of justice
require in the particular circumstances of the case. In giving effect to that
general principle, and in recognition
of the public and private interests
earlier referred to, rules of practice have been developed in accordance with
which the discretionary
power of the court to set aside, vary or discharge
interlocutory orders will ordinarily be exercised. Not all kinds of
interlocutory
orders attract the same considerations. For present purposes one
may put to one side orders of a merely procedural nature (as to
which see for
Wilkshire & Coffey v Commonwealth
(1976) 9 ALR 325)
injunctions (or undertakings) made or given by agreement and without contest
"until further order" (as to which see for example
Warringah Shire Council v
Industrial Acceptance Corp
(unreported, SC(NSW), McLelland J, 22 November
In the present case I am dealing with an interlocutory order of a substantive
nature made after a contested hearing in contemplation
that it would operate
until the final disposition of the proceedings. In such a case the ordinary rule
of practice is that an application
to set aside, vary or discharge the order
must be founded on a material change of circumstances since the original
application was
heard, or the discovery of new material which could not
reasonably have been put before the court on the hearing of the original
application: see
Woods v Sheriff of Queensland
(1895) 6 QLJ 163 at 164-5;
Hutchinson v Nominal Defendant
[1972] 1 NSWLR 443
v F W Woolworth & Co
[1981] 1 All ER 745
[1981] 1 WLR 485
Brown Male Fashions v Philip Morris
[1981] HCA 39
(1981) 148 CLR 170
[1981] HCA 39
Butt v Butt
[1987] 1 WLR 1351
Gordano Building
Contractors Ltd v Burgess
[1988] 1 WLR 890
at [51], the Appeal Panel disagreed with the submission of the
appellant that the Appeal Panel can, under s 32(2)(a) of the NCAT
Act, review an
interlocutory decision made in the appeal by a differently constituted
“[51] ... Section 32(2)(a) provides that the Tribunal has, in exercise of
its internal review jurisdiction, the jurisdiction
to make ancillary and
interlocutory decisions of the Tribunal. Significantly, s 32(3)(a) then provides
that the internal appeal jurisdiction
of the Tribunal does not extend to any
decision of an Appeal Panel. This precludes us from reviewing an interlocutory
decision of
the differently constituted Appeal Panel in exercise of our internal
review jurisdiction. An appeal against such an interlocutory
decision can only
be made to the Supreme Court on a question of law with the leave of the Court:
NCAT Act, s 83(1). Accordingly,
the current miscellaneous application must be
dismissed.”
Kimber v Clark as trustee of the estate of Kimber (Review of orders)
[2025] FCA 1181
), Perram J considered an interlocutory
application of Ms Kimber which sought to review earlier orders made by
Charlesworth J who
had dismissed her earlier application to extend the time to
seek leave to appeal. His Honour, having referred to r 39.04 of the
Court Rules 2011
(Cth), found at [8]:
“[8] ... in effect, what Ms Kimber is seeking through her review
application is in substance an appeal. In my view, a review
application under r
39.04 cannot be used as a backdoor or de facto mechanism of appeal. This is
particularly so in this case where
there is no appeal from Charlesworth
J’s orders of 20 August 2025. It is often said in various areas of legal
discourse that
one cannot achieve indirectly what cannot be achieved directly. I
therefore do not accept that the review application, framed as
it is, is one
which the Court ought to entertain and I therefore would dismiss Ms
Kimber’s application for a review of the
regard to the principles in
, I am satisfied that the 3 October 2025 Farrugia application is in
substance an appeal against the AP representation order. It is
not founded on a
material change of circumstances since the original application was heard, or
the discovery of new material which
could not reasonably have been put before
the Appeal Panel on the hearing of the original application. It has been made in
circumstances
where Mr Farrugia has not sought leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court under s 83(1) of the NCAT Act against the AP representation
32(3)(a) of the NCAT Act states that the internal appeal jurisdiction of the
Tribunal does not extend to any decision of an
Appeal Panel. It follows that in
the exercise of the internal appeal jurisdiction of the Tribunal I am precluded
from varying or
setting aside the AP representation order. The submissions of Mr
Farrugia are misconceived. In particular, Mr Farrugia’s reliance
of the of the NCAT Regulation and ss 36, 38 and 64(1) of the NCAT Act as the
source of the power to make the order sought
is misplaced. Even if the AP
representation order can be characterised as a decision “that determines
proceedings” within
reg 9(1), neither of the conditions for the exercise
of this power in pars (a) and (b) have been satisfied. Further, none of ss 36,
38 and 64 of the NCAT Act is a source of power. Section 36 stipulates the
guiding principle to be applied to the practice and procedure
of the Tribunal.
Section 38 contains general provisions dealing with the procedure of the
Tribunal. Section 64(1) provides for the
making of non-disclosure orders. If the
reference to s 64(1) of the NCAT Act is a mistaken reference to s 63(1), then
this subsection
is not a source of power as it is predicated on “an
obvious error in the text of ... a written statement of reasons for the
is unnecessary to consider LVMH’s other submissions. It follows that the 3
October 2025 Farrugia application should be
make the following orders:
(1) The application of the appellant lodged on 13 October 2025 is dismissed.
(2) A hearing of the application of the appellant lodged on 3 October 2025 is
dispensed with.
(3) The application of the appellant lodged on 3 October 2025 is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (306 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter