URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inspector Erinn Stevens v Hobartville Stud Pty Limited (Acn 001 061 954) [2006] NSWCIMC 78 (13 June 2006)
reproduction, except under authority from the Crown, of the contents of
transcript for any purpose other than the conduct of these proceedings is
prohibited.
Coram: G A Miller
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
CIM 20351385/05/2 OF 2005
INSPECTOR ERINN STEVENS
HOBARTVILLE STUD PTY LIMITED
(ACN 001 061 954)
OHS Act 2000, Section 8(1)
The Defendant has pleaded guilty to a breach of s.8 (1) of the Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2003 that occurred at the defendant’s
horse stud at
Richmond during the stud breeding season between about 12 September and about 8
December 20003.
The particular of the charge alleges the defendant failed “ to undertake
an adequate risk assessment to identify the hazards
associated with conducting
the task of restraining mares during fertility and pregnancy testing procedures
and to formally address
such risks”.
Tendered to the Court were the following:
Documents tendered by the Prosecution:
Statement of Facts (“
Factual Inspection Report dated 6 August 2004;
Colour photographs 1 to 6 taken by Inspector Erinn Stevens;
Prior Convictions Report;
Amended Court Attendance Notice; and
a Schedule of Costs and Disbursements.
Documents tendered by the Defendant:
Affidavit of Mrs Dianne White filed and served on 31 May 2006;
Affidavit of Mr Trevor Robson filed and served on 31 May 2006;
Hobartville Stud Occupational Health, Safety and Injury Management System
Manual served on Prosecution on 31 May 2006 (“
”) (available at Court); and
the Defendant’s submissions on the plea in mitigation.
The agreed Statement of Facts relevantly stated:
1 At all material times the Prosecutor was an Inspector appointed under
Division 1 of Part 5 and empowered by
Section 106
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2000
to institute proceedings in this matter.
2 At all material times Hobartville Stud Pty Limited (ACN 001 061
954) was an incorporated company with its registered office
at 22 Albany
Street, St Leonards in the State of New South Wales (
alleged breach occurred at 16 William Cox Drive, Richmond in the State of New
South Wales (
3 At all material times the Defendant:
3.1 was an employer engaged in the business of stud farming at the
undertaking
3.2 utilised the premises as a place of work in the course of the
undertaking.
4 During the Stud breeding season between about 12 September 2003 and
Stud breeding season
4.1 The Defendant's employees, including Laurel Jane O'Leary, 41 years of
), stable hand, and Dianne Elizabeth White (
manager, were engaged in restraining mares at the premises;
5 Veterinary personnel, in particular, Trevor Noel Robson (
were engaged in fertility and pregnancy testing procedures at the premises
Robson was not employed by the Defendant and his services
were supplied to the
Defendant by the Hawkesbury Equine Veterinarian Centre (ABN 31 737 600 787).
6 During the Stud breeding season, O'Leary, in the course of her ordinary
duties, was engaged in the task of holding and restraining
mares whilst Robson
conducted fertility and pregnancy testing and other examinations on the mares
testing procedures
). This was performed pursuant to an in-house
breeding program conducted at the premises, which commenced on about 12
September 2003.
7 O'Leary has had approximately 22 years of experience within the breeding
industry and with handling horses. The Defendant employed
O'Leary on or about
14 February 2001. O'Leary worked approximately 35 hours per week.
8 Prior to the commencement of the 2003 Stud breeding season, the mares on
the Defendant's premises were sent to another stud farm
to be bred. The
Defendant first introduced the in-house breeding program at the premises on
9 The breeding program involved serving between 15 to 20 mares. Each mare
required approximately one to two tests per service and
approximately two
pregnancy tests per mare. If the pregnancy tests revealed a negative result,
the mare is served and tested again.
10 The mares were required to be restrained during the testing procedures
in order to keep the mares stationary while the testing
procedures were carried
out by Robson and thereby reducing the risk of injuries to Robson.
11 The mares were physically restrained by a handler and with the use of a
twitch, which is a looped cord tied around the upper lip
of a mare used to
restrain the mare.
12 O'Leary undertook the task of restraining the mares 20 to 30 times
between the period of about 12 September 2003 to about 1 November
testing procedure on each occasion lasts for approximately 5 minutes. O'Leary
performed this task by holding the lead
rope in her right hand and the twitch in
her left hand. O'Leary was required to twist her left arm and wrist to tighten
and, where necessary, used her right hand to push the mare against
the stable door in order to ensure that the mare remained stationary.
of each horse was in the range of 500kg to 600kg.
13 A timber crush that was used by the Defendant for approximately 23
years to restrain mares at the premises was demolished approximately
prior to the commencement of the 2003 Stud breeding season and was not replaced
prior to the incident.
14 On or about 1 November 2003, O'Leary sustained injuries to her left
arm, which were subsequently diagnosed as a tear in the left
supraspinatus
tendon. She also experienced left lateral and medial epicondylitis. O'Leary
did not return to work in the period
between 1 November 2003 and 4 November
2004, being the date of her resignation from the Defendant. However, in the six
weeks prior
to her resignation from the Defendant, O'Leary was on sick leave in
relation to a non-workers' compensation related right arm injury.
15 Dr Kanetkar, O'Leary's nominated treating doctor, and Dr Johnson,
Rheumatologist, agreed that O'Leary would not be able to return
to pre-injury
duties. A Transferable Skills Assessment (
) was conducted by
Quality Occupational Health at the request of CGU Insurance. The Assessment
found that the tear to O'Leary's left
supraspinatus tendon and left lateral and
medial epicondylitis were sustained in the course of O'Leary's employment as a
stable hand
with the Defendant.
16 Ms Kerrie-Anne Agnew, Occupational Therapist of Quality Occupational
Health, was advised by the manager of Hobartville Stud that
all duties on a stud
farm are heavy and that O'Leary should not return to work until capable of her
normal pre-injury duties
Improvement Notices and Subsequent Actions
17 On 24 February 2004, the Prosecutor issued the following Improvement
17.1 7–49093 requiring the Defendant to conduct a risk assessment on
the tasks of servicing mares and conducting fertility and
pregnancy tests, and
to provide and maintain a safe system of work for carrying out those
17.2 On 10 August 2004, the Prosecutor issued Improvement Notice
7–62158, requiring the Defendant to provide and maintain a
safe system of
work for carrying out the task of servicing mares and conducting fertility and
pregnancy test, following the Defendant's
partial non-compliance with
Improvement Notice 7–49093.
18 On 24 February 2004, the Prosecutor issued the following Improvement
18.1 7-49099 requiring the Defendant to establish an Occupational Health
and Safety consultative process; and
18.2 7-49099 requiring the Defendant to eliminate the risks associated
with manual handling tasks and implement necessary design or
control measures
where risks cannot be eliminated.
19 On 25 February 2004, the Prosecutor issued Instruction Notice 2-63585
for failure to establish a return to work program and to
display or notify
20 Following the incident, the Defendant has:
20.1 Arranged for the construction of a new crush at the premises;
20.2 Undertaken risk assessment on the task of servicing mares and
conducting fertility and pregnancy tests, in accordance with Improvement
20.3 Provided written procedures for the handling of horses including the
use of the crush;
20.4 Held formal meetings with staff to discuss occupational health and
safety issues, in accordance with Improvement Notice
Systems of Work
21 Prior to the Stud breeding season, there was no written procedures for
the task of holding and restraining mares or the tasks associated
conducting testing procedures on the mares.
22 The following steps were taken to conduct testing procedures on the
22.1 A mare was confined to a stable with its rear backed up to the stable
22.2 The handler applies a twitch to the nose of the mare.
22.3 The handler stands in front of the mare, while the Veterinarian
stands to the rear of the mare behind the stable door.
22.4 The handler holds the mare by the lead rope in her right hand and the
twitch in her left hand, while the veterinarian conducts
testing procedures on
the mare over the stable door. The handler pushes the horse against stable door
to prevent the mare from travelling
forward away from the veterinarian and to
ensure that the mare remains stationary.
23 The steps to conduct testing procedures on the mares, as set out in
paragraph 22 of the Agreed Statement of Facts, were taken in
the absence of a
Risk Assessment
24 The Defendant did not undertake an adequate risk assessment to identify
the risks associated with the task of holding and restraining
a mare during
fertility and pregnancy testing procedures and to formally address such
25 Prior to the incident, the Defendant did not have a Occupational Health
and Safety consultative process.
The relevant principles governing the assessment of penalty
The following cases continue to set out the relevant principles governing the
assessment of penalty in matters such as the present:
Lawrenson Diecasting Pty Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
(1998) 90 IR pp 473-477;
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
(Inspector Petar Ankucic) v McDonald’s Australia Ltd and Another
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
(2000) 95 IR 383
pp 427-438;
Camilleri’s Stock Feeds Pty Ltd v
Environment Protection Authority
(1993) 32 NSWLR 683:
see pp 697-704;
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover of New South Wales
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
(2000) 99 IR 29
generally and pp 31-42;
Warman International Limited v WorkCover Authority of
New South Wales
(1998) 80 IR 326
Mainbrace Construction Pty Ltd v
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Charles)
[2000] NSWIRComm 239
(2000) 102 IR 84
Markarian v the Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213.
Objective factors for assessment
The primary factors in the assessment of penalty are:
the maximum penalty;
the nature and quality of the offence charged;
the foreseeability of the risk;
the policy of the Act in relation to the establishment of safe standards and
the protection of the workforce; and
any previous offences:
Lawrenson Diecasting
(1998) 90 IR
464 at 474 at 474; and at 475.
Subjective factors for assessment
Subjective factors are subsidiary to the objective factors and should not be
permitted to produce a sentence which fails to adequately
reflect the
seriousness of the offence:
Lawrenson Diecasting
(at 475.6-8)
(referring to
Dowling v Overtop Pty
(1998) 86 IR 316
Hungerford J).
However, it is clear that the process involves a balancing of the objective
and subjective factors:
Lawrenson Diecasting
at 474 to 475.
OBJECTIVE FACTORS RELEVANT TO ASSESSMENT OF PENALTY
Maximum penalty
The maximum penalty for a breach of this section of the Act for a corporation
being a first offender is $550,000. The jurisdictional
limit of the Chief
Industrial Magistrate is $55,000.
The nature and quality of the offence charged
An assessment of the nature and quality of the offence must focus on the
offence as particularised:
The particulars of the breach are as follows:
A failure to undertake an adequate risk assessment to identify the hazards
associated with conducting the task of restraining mares
during fertility and
pregnancy testing procedures and to formally address such risks.
The risk to safety identified by the Prosecution
Ms O’Leary sustained injuries to her left arm, which were subsequently
diagnosed as a tear in the left supraspinatus tendon.
She also experienced left
lateral and medial epicondylitis. O'Leary did not return to work in the period
between 1 November 2003
and 4 November 2004, being the date of her resignation
from the Defendant.
The nature and quality of the offence
The nature and quality of the particular offence charged should be assessed
the potential gravity of the risk; and
the likelihood of the risk occurring.
The Defendant is not charged with a failure to provide a safe system of work.
The relevant breach arises from the failure of the Defendant
to conduct an
adequate risk assessment. The inadequacy arises from the failure of the
Defendant to formalise the risk assessment
which otherwise took place between
Mrs White and Mr Robson (“
”) prior to commencing
the 2003 Breeding Program (“
”) (White para 18; Robson
para 10). Previously, horses had been taken off site for insemination in the
presence of Mrs White.
Mrs White has over 40 years experience working with horses (White para 2 and
6). Mr Robson has over 30 years experience in equine
veterinary practice (Robson
para 5) and enjoys a high reputation in the horse breeding industry.
During the Discussion, the following risks were identified:
Mr Robson could be kicked by a mare while carrying out the Procedure (White
para 21(a); Robson para 12);
Mr Robson could suffer an injury to his arm during the Procedure due to a
mare sitting down whilst his arm was inside her, thus bringing
his arm into
the horse handler could be could knocked or kicked by a mare that was
unrestrained and unsettled (White para 23).
The following controls were introduced as a result of the Discussions:
the selection of highly experienced staff, such as Mrs White and Ms
O’Leary, the latter being employed at the Defendant’s
premises and
having 22 years experience in the handling of horses. Both Mrs White and Ms
O’Leary were familiar with the mares
at the Defendant’s premises,
and who had a demonstrated ability to handle the mares during the Procedure
(White para 24(a));
(i) the mares were required to be restrained by use of a twitch during the
testing Procedure to ensure they remained stationary while
Mr Robson carried out
the Procedure, thereby reducing the risk of injuries to Mr Robson. The use of
the twitch is a method that
is very familiar to the horses (White para 22(a);
Robson para 19).
(ii) the selection of stables with doors that were high enough to protect Mr
Robson should the mare kick during the Procedure were
used during the Procedure
(White para 22(b); Robson para 21(a));
(iii) Mr Robson was elevated approximately 50 centimetres above the ground,
behind the stable door so as to prevent the risk of injury
to his arm during the
Procedure (White para 22(c); Robson para 21(b));
(iv) the mare was positioned between the handler and the side of the wall, so
as to prevent the sideways movement of the mare (White
para 22(d)); and
(v) Mrs White selected a physical environment within which to conduct the
Procedure which was familiar and calming to the mares, thereby
making them
easier to handle (White para 24(b));
(vi) Mrs White selected particular stables in which to conduct the Procedure,
which were sufficiently removed from the paddock area
to prevent the mares from
becoming distracted, anxious or otherwise difficult to handle (White para
(vii) Mrs White individually assessed the suitability of the nature and
temperament of each mare, with any mare that was deemed to
be too easily
startled being tranquilized by Mr Robson prior to undergoing the Procedure;
particularly ‘maiden mares’
who are unaccustomed to the Procedure
(White para 24(d));
(viii) if a mare was reluctant to move or otherwise agitated, despite
repeated attempts at being backed toward the stable door, they
would be removed
from the stable and tranquilized by Mr Robson before testing (White para 24(e));
(ix) Mrs White ensured that the Procedure was observed by at least one other
member of the Hobartville staff who could add pressure
to the mare when being
pushed back toward the stable door. That person would also stand near the mare
during the process (as required),
which would reduce any anxiety that the mare
may be experiencing. If she was not actually the handler at the time, Mrs White
be the other member of staff present (White para 24(f));
(x) prior to being led into the stable, the mouth of the mare would be fitted
with an anti-rearing bit. This prevents the mare from
rearing up on its hind
legs during the Procedure (White para 24(g)); and
(xi) Mrs White was present at the majority
of the Procedures, and was
the handler of the horse for the majority of them (White para 24(i)).
Gravity of the risk
In the circumstances the potential gravity of the risks identified and the
risk as particularised (which needs be balanced against
foreseeability and
likelihood) was low. The persons involved “were not inexperienced people
on a fools errand”. In fact
they were experienced people conducting the
task and cognisant of the risks they endeavoured to eliminate.
Likelihood of risk occurring
The likelihood of the risk of incurring an injury of the type described, was
at the lowest end of the range for the following reasons:
the unlikelihood of a repetitive strain injury being sustained during a
process that lasts approximately 3 to 5 minutes; the unlikelihood
repetitive strain injury being sustained during a process that was performed by
Ms O’Leary for only a limited part of
the entire procedure; the
unlikelihood of this type of injury occurring during the Procedure; the
unlikelihood of a formal assessment
necessarily identifying this type of risk;
and the fact that at no time prior to or since the incident has this type of
injury occurred.
Foreseeability of the risk arising
For the reasons outlined above the foreseeability of the risk of incurring a
strain injury of the type described was very low. In
fact the medical opinion
was inconclusive as to the cause of the injury to Ms O’Leary. The likely
cause was a repetitive strain
injury but this would appear unlikely given the
use of the twitch for a short period. However if the twitch and a crush had been
used this specific risk may not have eventuated.
General and specific deterrence
The Defendant acknowledges the relevant authorities in relation to general
and specific deterrence.
There is a need for a general deterrence factor to stress the need for a
comprehensive approach to the full completion of a risk assessment.
particularly in relation to specific deterrence, the above factors significantly
mitigate against the need for such deterrence.
Overall nature and quality of the offence
Overall the nature and quality of the offence in this case should be assessed
at the lowest end of the range of offences given the
above factors.
SUBJECTIVE FACTORS RELEVANT TO ASSESSMENT OF PENALTY
Good prior and subsequent safety record
The Defendant was established in 1828, and in the 175 years prior to the
Incident has had no convictions for any safety related offences
Convictions Report as tendered by Prosecution). The Defendant is a small
organisation, employing at most four to five full-time
and four to five casual
employees at any given time (White para 10). This is an exemplary record.
Since the Incident there have been no further breaches, and the Defendant has
taken steps to ensure that there are no further breaches
(SOF para 20; White
para 49; Safety Manual).
The Defendant prides itself on the fact that it provides a safe place to
work. The Defendant selects employees on the basis of their
extensive experience
in the handling of horses. These experienced and dedicated horse people are
highly valued by the Defendant
for the skills that they bring to their work that
safeguard the health and safety of the horses as well as the other employees of
the Defendant.
Since the Incident, the Defendant has taken steps that demonstrate its
commitment to safety in the workplace, and illustrate its contrition
for the incident. The Defendant has:
undertaken a risk assessment on the procedures involved in serving mares and
conducting fertility and pregnancy testing (SOF para
held formal meetings with staff to discuss occupational health and safety
issues (SOF para 20.4;White para 49(b));
provided written instructions to employees for the handling of horses and the
operation of the crush (SOF para 20.3);
hired an accredited risk assessor to assess the entire workplace to ensure
there are no other risks to health and safety (White para
49(a); Safety Manual);
acted as quickly as possible in reaction to Improvement Notices issued by
Contrition and Remorse
The Defendant’s contrition and remorse regarding the Incident are
evidenced by the statement of Mrs White (White para 48), as
well as by the
actions taken subsequent to that day, as described at paragraph 5.4 above and
the presence at court of Mrs White and
Mr Paul Seddon.
Co-operation with WorkCover
The Defendant has co-operated actively with WorkCover throughout the conduct
of the matter including:
properly assisting with the provision of information during the
investigation; properly and fully co-operating with various WorkCover
investigators in relation to interviews; and conducting itself in a manner to
assist the Court in dealing with the matter expeditiously.
Guilty plea at an early stage
I will accept the plea as being made at the earliest occasion attracting a
25% discount.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
The Defendant submitted that this is a case in which the Court should
exercise its discretion under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
and make an order in favour of the Defendant under that section.
The Defendant relies on the following factors- the Defendant’s
exemplary safety record in an industry that involves risks that cannot be
entirely eradicated; that the Defendant had turned
its mind to the safety of the
system of work and some form of safety measures were in place; and the fact that
the breach was remedied
as soon as possible after the Incident.
The prosecutor opposes the defendant’s application, as the risk of a
manual handling injury was present and foreseeable.
Inspector Gregory Maddaford v Graham Gerard Coleman & Anor
(2004) 168 IR 21
, a Full Bench of the New South Wales Industrial Relations
Commission reviewed the principles applicable to an application
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
with particular
reference to
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Hopkins) v
Profab Industries Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
(2000) 49 NSWLR 700.
The Defendant accepts that the authorities cited stand for the principle that
in an occupational health and safety case, the exercise
of the discretion under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
considered as extraordinary and highly exceptional” (
, at [26]).
I agree that whilst acknowledging the potential gravity of the hazard that
the objective seriousness of this offence is significantly
reduced on the basis
of the matters put to the Court. Furthermore, the subjective factors presented
attract a discount at the highest
end of the range. However, I am very mindful
of the provisions of the Occupational Health and safety Regulation 2001 which
specifically
provides for risk management and other matters.
In fact, a reason behind the introduction of the 2000 Act and 2001 Regulation
was to emphasise the need for formal risk assessments,
risk management and the
need to consult with employees in the establishment of safe systems of work. In
this regard I note the maximum
penalty introduced for a breach of Clause 11,
Employer to Eliminate or Control Risk, and similar clauses dealing with risk
management,
is graded at a level 4 penalty, that is by application of clause
3(2), 250 penalty points (or $27,500).
In all the circumstances given the importance of risk management I cannot
regard this offence as a “trivial breach” or
a breach that is
“extraordinary and highly exceptional”, despite all the
circumstances surrounding the incident and the
excellent antecedents of the
defendant, to attract the benefit of s10. However, the fine to be imposed will
be at the lower end of
The defendant is convicted and fined $5,000.
There is a moiety of the fine to the prosecutor.
The above moneys are to be paid to the Downing Centre Local court within 28
The defendant is to pay the prosecutor’s costs as agreed or
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter