URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/237.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corporation SP6534 v Elkhouri (No 2) [2025] NSWCA 237 (29 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Owners Corporation SP6534 v Elkhouri (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 237
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Ward P, McHugh JA, Griffiths AJA
The notice of motion is dismissed with costs.
Catchwords:
JUDGMENTS AND ORDERS — Application to vary orders — Where head
of claim dismissed by primary judge on particular basis
— Where basis
successfully disturbed on appeal — Where head of claim not reagitated on
appeal — Where Court of
Appeal referred “remaining amounts
claimed” to referee — Whether head of claim included in reference
orders should be varied to include head of claim in
Legislation Cited:
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), rr 31.16, 36.17
Cases Cited:
Owners Corporation SP6534 v Elkhouri; Owners Corporation SP6534 v Perpetual
Corporate Trust Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 279
Perpetual Corporate Trust Ltd v Owners
Corporation SP6534; El Khouri v Owners Corporation SP6534
[2024] NSWSC 173
Consequential orders
Owners Corporation SP6534 (Appellant/Cross-Respondent)
Karam Elkhouri
(First Respondent/First Cross-Appellant)
Philippe Elkhouri (Second
Respondent/Second Cross-Appellant)
Representation:
T Rollo (Appellant/Cross-Respondent)
H Altan (First
Respondent/First Cross-Appellant; Second Respondent/Second
Cross-Appellant)
Solicitors:
Carroll & O’Dea Lawyers
(Appellant/Cross-Respondent)
Bartier Perry Lawyers (First Respondent/First
Cross-Appellant; Second Respondent/Second Cross-Appellant)
File Number(s):
2024/00115025; 2024/00164446
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 173
[2024] NSWSC 358
[2024] NSWSC 537
Date of Decision:
28 February 2024; 8 April 2024; 19 April 2024
File Number(s):
2018/93444; 2022/98817
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
: The principal judgment of some 338 paragraphs was given in this
matter on 27 November 2024:
Owners Corporation SP6534 v Elkhouri; Owners
Corporation SP6534 v Perpetual Corporate Trust Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 279
Principal Judgment
). These reasons assume familiarity with that judgment and
with the terms used in it.
orders made on 27 November 2024 provided for a complex regime of references in
order to address, among other things, “the
remaining amounts claimed by
the [appellant] Owners Corporation”: Order 3(2A). As to the reference with
respect to that aspect
of the matter, McHugh JA (with whom Ward P and Griffiths
AJA agreed) said at [268]:
“The terms of the reference should otherwise be closely circumscribed.
These proceedings have already continued for too long,
have consumed too much of
the limited public resources provided by the Tribunal and the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, and no
doubt have cost the parties much money, too.”
12 granted “Liberty to apply to McHugh JA’s associate on 7
days’ notice for any variation of the orders made
by order 3 above in
relation to the referrals out and remittal of the matter to the Equity
Division”. The parties took up that
liberty in respect of matters that are
not presently relevant, and amended final orders were made on 18 December
notice of motion filed on 28 July 2025, the Owners Corporation now seeks the
following order:
“Pursuant to leave granted by order 12 of the orders of this Court made on
18 December 2024, or alternatively pursuant to UCPR
36.17, order 3 of the orders
of this Court made on 18 December 2024 is amended by inserting, after
subparagraph 3(2C), a new subparagraph
3(2D) in the following terms:
For the avoidance of doubt, the remaining amounts claimed by the
Owners Corporation, as referred to in paragraph 3(2A), include the
claimed by the Owners Corporation in the Court below in respect of future
notice of motion has been determined on the papers following an exchange of
written submissions that concluded on 25 September
circumstances in which the issue arises are as follows.
respondents/cross-appellants in this Court are the executors of the estate of
the late Mr Said Elkhouri (
the Executors
), the registered proprietor of
Lot 11 in a strata title apartment building located at Point Piper in Sydney, of
which the appellant/cross-respondent
is the Owners Corporation. The Owners
Corporation claimed at first instance that it was entitled to recover certain
sums from Mr
Elkhouri under a combination of certain provisions of by-law 30 of
the strata scheme and
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
Section 145(3)
relevantly provides that an owners
corporation may recover as a debt any “money payable by an owner to the
owners corporation
under a common property rights by-law”.
30 was such a “common property rights by-law”. It granted rights to
the exclusive use of parts of the common property
in the building in favour of
the owner of Lot 11. It also imposed obligations of repair and maintenance of
those parts of the common
property on the owner of Lot 11. Paragraph 30.3 of the
by-law provided that the continuation of the exclusive use rights after a
Sunset Date
was conditional on various matters, including that the owner
of Lot 11 complete certain works by the Sunset Date. By par 30.7, in
event that the owner of Lot 11 failed to complete that work, the Owners
Corporation could complete the work and was given certain
reimbursement, damages and indemnity against the owner of Lot 11.
Owners Corporation claimed that Mr Elkhouri had failed to complete the work by
the Sunset Date. It brought money claims under
various provisions of by-law 30;
these were the subject of detailed consideration in the Principal Judgment. The
Executors claimed
that par 30.3 was “unjust” within the meaning of
s 149(1)(c)
of the SSMA. That section, which was also the subject of
detailed consideration in the Principal Judgment, confers power on the NSW
and Administrative Tribunal to make “an order prescribing a change to a
by-law if the Tribunal finds ... that the conditions
of a common property rights
by-law relating to the maintenance or upkeep of any common property are
for present purposes, in
Perpetual Corporate Trust Ltd v Owners Corporation
SP6534; El Khouri v Owners Corporation SP 6534
[2024] NSWSC 173
Primary Judgment
), the primary judge, Elkaim AJ, found that Mr Elkhouri
had not completed the necessary works by the Sunset Date; that Lot 11’s
exclusive use rights ceased by operation of par 30.3; and that the Owners
Corporation was entitled to recover certain costs and liabilities
pursuant to
par 30.7. However, the primary judge also made a declaration that par 30.3 was
“unjust” within the meaning
s 149(1)(c)
, and remitted the matter
to the Tribunal for it to make orders about par 30.3 arising out of the
declaration.
primary judge described the Owners Corporation’s money claims as follows
at [173]-[174]:
“173 The Owners Corporation asked for the following
discrete amounts:
(1) $779,250.72 for building related costs;
(2) $75,000 for GST;
(3) $354,541.53 for associated claims by lot
owners; and
(4) legal costs (to be determined by a referee or costs
174 The $779,250.72 is made up of:
(1) work done by
Core: $15,048.00;
(2) work done by
Renfay: $269,155.70;
(3) work done by Partridge: $88,894.16; and
work: $406,152.86”.
is the amount claimed on account of “future work” (one of the four
components of the claim for “building related
costs”) with which the
present notice of motion is concerned. His Honour said at [176]:
“The final figure for future work immediately falls away because of my
finding in respect of By-law 30. This is because without
forfeiture clause the existing use rights continued, together with the attendant
obligations, which included responsibility for
maintenance. This leaves the total of the claim for work at
$373,097.86. Although the whole of this amount has already been
paid, the Owners Corporation (and Perpetual) did not accept that the
amounts had been reasonably incurred.”
was no other reference to the claim for an amount on account of future work in
the Primary Judgment. Importantly for present
purposes, as was pointed out at
[221] of the Principal Judgment:
“His Honour found that the figure for future work ($406,152.86) fell away
because of his Honour’s finding in respect
of by-law 30. No party on the
appeal sought to reagitate the primary judge’s dismissal of the head of
claim for future work.”
Owners Corporation does not suggest that there was any error in the statement
that no party sought to reagitate the issue on the
appeal. That statement was
made in the context of the issues that were actually litigated in this Court
with respect to the Owners
Corporation’s claim “for building related
costs”. Those issues arose (on the Executors’ notice of
cross-appeal,
not on the Owners Corporation’s notice of appeal) as
effect of the primary judge’s dismissal of the component of the Owners
Corporation’s claim for “building related
costs” that had
concerned future work was that the balance of the claim for building related
costs was the sum of $373,097.86
(being the total of the three components for
Core, Renfay and Partridge). As to those three components of the claim for
related costs, the primary judge found in favour of the Owners
Corporation in part, concluding at [192]: “The total for the
claim ... for
work done by Core, Renfay and Partridge is $283,585.39”. That figure was
the amount that the primary judge awarded
on account of the Owners
Corporation’s entire claim for “building related costs”,
including the component of the
claim for “future work” (which had
fallen away). His Honour separately allowed a figure of $166,783.98 on account
what were described in this Court as the Lot owner claims (in effect, damages
the Owners Corporation claimed from the Executors on
account of liabilities of
the Owners Corporation to other Lot owners). Together, those sums became part of
the total figure in the
primary judge’s Order 2, being amounts awarded in
favour of the Owners Corporation pursuant to
of the SSMA: see Primary
Judgment at [240] and [250(2)].
primary judge’s Order 2 thus gave effect to his Honour’s decision as
to the whole of the Owners Corporation’s
claim to recover “building
related costs”, including his Honour’s dismissal of the claim for
“future work”.
way in which the parties approached Order 2 on the appeal is important. In its
notice of appeal, the Owners Corporation did not
seek to have Order 2 set aside,
or otherwise criticise it. Nor was there any ground of appeal to the effect that
the primary judge
had erred in failing to make an award on account of
“future work”. That was so, notwithstanding that the Owners
Corporation
expressly challenged, by Grounds 1 and 2, the primary judge’s
conclusion that by-law 30.3 was unjust, and by prayer 2 sought
an order setting
aside his Honour’s declaration to that effect. Yet that declaration had
been the basis upon which the primary
judge determined that the claim for
“future work” had fallen away.
the Owners Corporation’s written submissions on the main appeal addressed
a number of matters going to the correctness
of the declaration that by-law 30.3
was unjust. But those submissions made no mention of any claim for “future
The submissions also addressed Ground 5 of the notice of appeal,
which was that the primary judge had “erred by failing to
make an order
that the respondent pay to the appellant the costs and expenses incurred within
the meaning of By-law 30 pursuant to
” of the SSMA. The
complaint advanced at pars 30 and 35 of the written submissions in relation to
Ground 5 was that the Owners
Corporation had been entitled to recover
“legal and consultant costs”, and that the primary judge had neither
those parts of the claim nor referred them to a referee. (Those parts
of the claim were addressed in Order 3(2C) in this Court.)
There was no
suggestion in the Owners Corporation’s written or oral submissions on the
appeal that there was a different kind
of error in his Honour’s approach
to the amount recoverable pursuant to
, namely, that his Honour had
awarded nothing on account of building related costs for “future
contrast, by their cross-appeal, the Executors sought to have Order 2 set aside
on the basis that the primary judge had not made
findings necessary to establish
the Executors’ liability. Ground 3 in the notice of cross-appeal included
the express complaint
that the primary judge “erred in awarding damages
against the Cross-Appellants for building related costs ...”
Owners Corporation resisted the cross-appeal on the basis that “the
primary judge was correct to so order”. This was
clearly a reference to
the primary judge’s Order 2: see
“Appellant’s/Cross-Respondent’s Submissions on the
Cross-Appeal” dated 13 August 2024 at pars 2-3. The Owners
Corporation’s written submissions on the cross-appeal were
directed to
showing that the amounts which were the subject of Order 2 at first instance
were properly awarded against the Executors.
Thus, a table at par 22 of the
Owners Corporation’s written submissions identified the four components
into which the “award
of the monetary amount by the primary judge was
separated”: work done by each of Core ($15,048.00), Renfay ($201,866.77)
Partridge ($66,670.62) (being together the “building related
costs”), and the Lot owner claims ($166,783.98).
there was no suggestion in those written submissions that there was an error
lurking in the primary judge’s Order 2,
in that it failed to award an
amount on account of the Owners Corporation’s claim for future work. The
written submissions
on the cross-appeal did not refer to that claim at all. Nor
did any party refer to the claim for future work in the course of the
the appeal.
the claim for future work was being pressed on the appeal, on the ground that
the basis on which the primary judge had said that
claim fell away (i.e., that
by-law 30.3 was unjust) was itself an error, one would expect that to appear
somewhere in the Owners
Corporation’s notice of appeal, or in its written
submissions, or in its oral submissions at the hearing of the appeal. None
those things occurred.
the Owners Corporation made a glancing reference to the claim for future works
in a quite different context. At par 27 of
their separate Reply Submissions on
Costs, the Owners Corporation submitted (appeal book references
“Next, the ‘
Building related cost
s’ (~$1.1m) claimed by
the Owners included a claim of ~$400k as to damages for future works to a part
of the Building (Level
6). This was not granted by the primary judge on the
express premise that such future works would be the responsibility of the owner
of Lot 11 because they had assumed responsibility for the repair and maintenance
of those areas: PJ [176]; CJ [28]. That the Owners
subsequently reduced their
claim based on the evidence that arose during the hearing is a reasonable and
indeed appropriate concession
light of that submission, it could not be suggested that the Owners Corporation
had overlooked its claim for “future works”.
There was no suggestion
in this submission that in this Court the Owners Corporation was challenging the
primary judge’s finding
dismissing the future work claim. To the contrary,
the submission effectively embraced the failure of that claim.
Executors succeeded on their cross-appeal, such that Order 2 made by the primary
judge was set aside: Principal Judgment at [255]-[257]
and Order 3. However, as
this Court was not in a position to determine for itself what findings should
have been made in relation
to the Owners Corporation’s money claims that
had been the subject of the primary judge’s Order 2, the Court determined
to refer those questions out on the basis stated at [267]:
“The reference should be as to entitlement and quantum with respect to the
Owners Corporation’s
claims remaining in issue
. (The Owners
Corporation’s claims to recover costs and expenses are separately
addressed below in connection with Grounds 4
and 5 in the notice of
(Emphasis supplied.)
to the “claims remaining in issue”, the Principal Judgment had
pointed out at [264] that “there were aspects
of the Owners
Corporation’s money claims that the Executors conceded below or on the
appeal”. These concerned three discrete
sums. The structure of Order 3
made on the appeal was thus to set aside Order 2 made by the primary judge, and
to order in lieu thereof:
(1) that the Executors pay the Owners Corporation the three undisputed sums:
Order 3(2);
(2) that “the remaining amounts claimed by the Owners Corporation”,
other than those referred to at [267] of the Principal
Judgment, be referred to
a referee: Order 3(2A);
(3) that the Owners Corporation’s separate claim pursuant to
the SSMA for the reasonable legal costs incurred in recovering certain special
levies (which had been the subject of Ground 4
in the Owners Corporation’s
notice of appeal) be referred to a costs assessor to act as referee: Order
(4) that the Owners Corporation’s claim pursuant to
of the SSMA
“to recover any costs or expenses referred to at [267] of the judgment in
this Court, including legal and consultant
costs” (which had been the
subject of Ground 5 in the Owners Corporation’s notice of appeal) be
referred to the referee:
Order 3(2C).
words “the Owners Corporation’s
claims remaining
issue” in Principal Judgment [267] were echoed in Order 3(2A): “the
by the Owners Corporation
...” Those words were directed to referring out the Owners
Corporation’s claims, including
the claims for building related costs,
that had been litigated in this Court but which this Court had been unable to
determine for
itself. Those words were not directed to a claim in respect of
“future work” which had been the subject of no analysis
Primary Judgment and no ground of appeal or submission in this Court.
the notice of motion, the Owners Corporation now submits the following at pars
11, 14 and 18 about the primary judge’s orders:
“... There was no order dismissing the head of claim for future work.
Rather, Order 2(2) provided for payment of a judgment
sum in favour of the
Owners Corporation that omitted the amount for future work. That is, the only
order that could even arguably
be regarded as dealing with the head of claim for
future work is the order providing for the judgment sum, by way of not including
any amount on account of that. That order was set aside by order 3 made by this
Court on 18 December 2024.
There was no order dismissing the claim for future works. Accordingly there was
no order from which to appeal on the claim for future
works (because only orders
can be appealed, not the bare reasons), other than the orders for the
declaration and for remittal to
Moreover, even to the extent that order 2(2) might be argued to have had the
implicit effect of dismissing the claim for future works,
that order was set
aside by order 3 of this Court made on 18 December 2024. There was no need for
the Owners Corporation to seek
further orders addressing that issue.”
can be no doubt in light of the primary judge’s reasons that he dismissed
the component of the claim for “future
work”. It was unnecessary for
his Honour to make an order separately referring to that component of the claim,
when Order 2,
which gave effect to his Honour’s decision about the Owners
Corporation’s claims for building related costs, necessarily
dismissal of the component of those claims constituted by the claim for
“future work”. If the Owners Corporation
was dissatisfied with Order
2, it was open to the Owners Corporation to challenge that order on the basis
that the amount awarded
on account of building related costs should have
included an amount for future work. The mere fact that Order 2 was set aside in
this Court — on the Executors’ cross-appeal — does not mean
that it is now open to the Owners Corporation to reinvigorate
a claim that was
not pressed on appeal. That the order was set aside says nothing about the scope
of the reference to determine the
Owners Corporation’s remaining claims.
The question is, what are the Owners Corporation’s “claims remaining
issue” to which [267] of the Principal Judgment and Order 3(2A) are
Owners Corporation submits that the primary judge’s orders were varied on
19 April 2024 so as to grant “liberty to
apply in the event that the New
South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal declines to make an order removing
cl 30.3 of By-law
30”. The Owners Corporation points to the
transcript of the application that led to that variation, which included the
“HIS HONOUR: I understand. You’re worried that if it goes back to
NCAT and they say no, we’re not changing bylaw
30, then you’ve got a
bit of a problem because—
CHESHIRE: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Because then the 403 won’t be—
CHESHIRE: Exactly.
HIS HONOUR: —on—
CHESHIRE: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Will be your obligation.”
Tcpt, 19 April 2024, 6.2-16; affidavit of Selwyn Leslie Black dated 24 July
2025, p.24.
for the Executors ultimately stated: “I’m happy with the alternative
order that’s been suggested ... that
there be liberty to apply”: at
Owners Corporation submits that the reference to “403” should be
understood as a reference to the claim for future
work in the sum of
$406,152.86. The Owners Corporation submits that this amounts to a recognition
below that “if (as is now
the case), the exclusive use right was not
reinstated [i.e. by the Tribunal], the future costs would need to be
revisited”:
at par 6; see also at pars 13 and 15. Even assuming the
correctness of those propositions (which are contested by the Executors on
notice of motion), that says nothing about what was in issue in this Court. The
submission made for the Owners Corporation at
par 17 that “it was not
necessary for the Owners Corporation to seek specific orders on the appeal
dealing with the cost of
future works,
or even to mention that
(emphasis supplied) must be rejected.
meaning of Order 3(2A) is to be determined objectively, including in light of
this Court’s reasons for judgment. As noted
above, the reasons stated
— correctly — at [221]: “No party on the appeal sought to
reagitate the primary judge’s
dismissal of the head of claim for future
work”. That claim was thus not among those contemplated by [267] as one of
the “claims
remaining in issue”. On the proper construction of the
Court’s orders, the claim for “future work” is not
Order 3(2A) as a “remaining amount[] claimed”.
Owners Corporation thus needs a variation to the existing orders. Its notice of
motion refers to the leave granted by Order 12
of the orders of the Court made
on 18 December 2024, and to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
), r 36.17. Its written submissions further invoke UCPR,
r 36.16(3): at par 4(b).
is not necessary to determine whether any of r 36.17 (which is concerned
with “an accidental slip or omission”), r
36.16(3) (which does not
apply to a judgment or order that “determines any claim for relief, or
determines any question ...
arising on any claim for relief”), or Order 12
(which was directed to the means by which to seek a variation of, most
the mechanics of the orders for referral) would permit the Court to
make the variation sought. Even assuming that the Court has power
to vary its
orders, no such variation should be made in the exercise of the Court’s
discretion.
will be apparent to anyone reading the Court’s reasons and the six pages
of orders made in this case, a good deal of attention
was paid to the
construction of the relevant provisions of by-law 30 in light of the claims that
were advanced in this Court, and
to the interaction between by-law 30 and the
provisions of the SSMA. The Court was not addressed on the claim for future
the Executors submit on the notice of motion, they were denied the
chance to make any submission on the claim for future work at
the hearing of the
appeal. The Executors submit that the whole of the claim for future work related
to level 6: at par 3. They submit
that the issues at both the trial and the
appeal were essentially concerned with level 5 only. They submit that in those
circumstances
“there is a real prospect of prejudice to the Executors
which is self-evident”: at par 18. That submission was not developed.
it is at least conceivable that submissions might have been made in this Court
as to the construction of the provisions of the
by-law which might have had a
significant bearing on their application by any referee to the Owners
Corporation’s claim for
future work. For example, there might be a
question whether any liability arising under par 30.7.9, which provided that
owner of Lot 11 must
the Owners Corporation for its
those works”, extended to work
that had not yet been done.
there is a still more basic issue here. No explanation has been proffered for
why the claim for future work was not raised in
the notice of appeal or in the
written or oral submissions in this Court as something that remained to be
determined. It is appropriate
to proceed on the footing that there was a
forensic choice not to raise the issue. It is not hard to think of reasons for
not to raise such an issue (which would attach substantial baggage to
the central issue on the appeal, namely, whether the by-law
was unjust). The
Owners Corporation should be held to the case that it ran on appeal.
notice of motion must be dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (279 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter