URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2010/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V CLARKE-SAUNDERS [2010] NSWPST 8 (10 December 2010)
PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
MATTER NUMBER: PST 005/2009
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 109
Psychologists Act 2001
IN THE MATTER OF
PETER MARK JOSEPH CLARK–SAUNDERS
CLARK, PETER CLARK SAUNDERS, PETER McCANN)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
_____________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Clark–Saunders [2010]
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Ms C Stern, of Counsel, instructed by Ms F Westwood,
Peter Clark-Saunders
(Respondent) initially represented by Mr M
Corbin, Solicitor, then by Mr C Jurd, Solicitor.
FILE NUMBER: 005/2009
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Dr Judy Hyde (Psychologist Member)
Chris Lennings (Psychologist Member)
Dr Sue Liew (Lay
DATES OF HEARING: 22 and 24 March and 23, 24, 25, 30 & 31 August 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 10 December 2010
The Tribunal orders, that the Respondent’s name be
cancelled from the Register, (noting that the name of the Respondent has
removed from the Register of Psychologists by the Board at the
Respondent’s request), that the Respondent is not entitled
to reapply for
registration for a minimum period of three years. Prohibition Order made. Costs
in favour of the Complainant (save
for costs of 24 March).
CATCHWORDS: unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional
misconduct - inappropriate conduct during counselling sessions
to maintain professional boundaries – inappropriate personal relationships
– allowing third parties into
sessions – taking drugs with clients
during sessions – continuing to work when impaired by reason of alcoholism
failure to keep adequate clinical notes.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
Psychologists Act 2001
of schedule 5,
Health Registration Legislation
Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1),
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act (No 2)(2004
(Schedule 4),
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Public Health Act 1991
CASES CITED:
Momot & Anor
NSWCA 17 April
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Health Care
Complaint Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and ors
[2005] NSWSC 614.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tribunal convened on 22 March 2010 to conduct an Inquiry into complaints made by
Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC), dated 4 August 2009 in relation to a previously registered psychologist,
Peter Clark-Saunders
(‘the Respondent’). The Respondent is now known
as Peter McCann. The Inquiry continued over seven hearing days.
Complaints arose from reports relating to the Respondent’s conduct whilst
working with clients referred to him by Victims
Services which forms part of the
Attorney General’s Department (VSA-G). The Respondent had been engaged by
VSA-G under a Memorandum
of Understanding to provide counselling to victims of
crime under the Approved Counselling Scheme,
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
. By letter dated 27 March 2006, the Director of
Victims Services notified the HCCC of allegation of misconduct on the part of
Respondent and provided supporting documentation (exhibit 2(i)).
The Complaint
Complaint alleged that Mr Peter Clark-Saunders, being a person previously
registered as a psychologist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that the
psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
Between mid-2004 and around March 2005 the psychologist provided therapy to a
female client (
) as an approved counsellor pursuant to the
Approved Counselling Scheme established by the Attorney General’s
Department of
New South Wales.
The psychologist:
to provide appropriate treatment services in that the psychologist:
more than one occasion was late for treatment sessions with Client
more than one occasion cancelled treatment sessions;
more than one occasion spoke on the telephone to friends during treatment
sessions with Client A; and
his own personal issues, including his sex life, during treatment sessions with
details of his personal and sexual relationships to Client A.
to maintain appropriate boundaries in his professional relationship with Client
A in that he:
Client A to go to his home on a social basis;
prior arrangement went out to dinner with Client A in George Street,
Parramatta;
two or three further occasions, by arrangement went out to nightclubs with
Client A; and
Client A not to tell anybody about having gone out in the evening with the
psychologist.
not keep adequate contemporaneous clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Client A.
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
Act, in that the psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
The Particulars of Complaint Two are identical to those of Complaint One.
COMPLAINT THREE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that the
psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
Between around May 1999 and 2007 the psychologist provided therapy to a
female client (
) as an approved counsellor pursuant to the
Approved Counselling Scheme established by the Attorney General’s
Department of
New South Wales.
The psychologist:
to provide appropriate treatment services in that the psychologist on more than
one occasion invited a friend Mark to attend
during a treatment session with
to maintain appropriate boundaries in his professional relationship with Client
B in that he:
treatment sessions on occasion at the psychologist’s home, in coffee
shops, or at Client B’s home.
one or more occasions allowed Mark, a friend of the psychologist, to attend
during a treatment session with Client C;
to Client B that she should engage in sexual activities with other persons known
himself with substances in the presence of Client B.
Client B, if asked, to tell the Department of Community Services that he was
providing treatment services to her son when he
knew that this was not
illicit drugs in the presence of Client B.
the consent of Client B disclosed confidential information about Client B in
that the psychologist:
confidential information about Client B to his friend Mark;
confidential information about Client B to Client C;
a treatment session with LP, the daughter of Client B, informed LP that Client B
was a lesbian;
February 2006 sent an SMS message to LP, the daughter of Client B, which stated:
“[LP] your mum told me she using herion and sellin her self to use she
needs help”
12 February 2006 sent SMS messages to Client B stating:
Centrelink ur fraud, tell docs WILL COPY U TREATHS TO MENTAL HEALTH worker u are
a junkie and inject, this time I DOCS
Keith foster and copy to
told [LP] about u, Mark on his way to get my light machine
sendin e mail to victims about your fraud, heroin and how I found out u lied to
me about pat I let u know when I finish”
withdraw all my report u are on your own and u will need to start all over again
kept all your messages for AVO”.
not keep adequate contemporaneous clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Client B.
COMPLAINT FOUR
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
Act, in that the psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
The Particulars of Complaint Four are identical to those of Complaint
COMPLAINT FIVE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that the
psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FIVE
Between around June 2005 until around December 2005 the psychologist provided
therapy to a female patient (
) as an approved counsellor pursuant
to the Approved Counselling Scheme established by the Attorney General’s
Department of
New South Wales.
The psychologist:
to provide appropriate treatment services in that the psychologist:
more than one occasion cancelled a treatment session;
more than one occasion spoke on the telephone to friends during treatment
sessions with Client C;
on more than one occasion to provide treatment services for the full period of
the appointment.
his own personal and sexual relationships during treatment sessions with Client
one occasion invited his sister in to join a treatment session with Client
one occasion invited a friend Mark to attend during a treatment session with
light and sound apparatus on himself during treatment sessions with Client
to maintain appropriate boundaries in his professional relationship with Client
C in that he:
details of his personal and sexual relationships to Client C;
Client C text messages of a social nature;
one occasion invited his sister in to join a treatment session with Client
one occasion invited a friend Mark to attend during a treatment session with
Client C to his home;
other patients, including Client B, with Client C during treatment
a treatment session, requested Client C to make telephone calls to locate an
abortion clinic for the purposes of another client;
treatment session;
one occasion injected a substance into his stomach whilst he was at his home
with Client C.
in intimate contact with another man in the presence of Client C and her
illicit drugs in the presence of Client C.
the consent of Client C, disclosed confidential information about Client C to
Mark, a friend of the psychologist.
Client C to sign invoices for Victims Services acknowledging that treatment
services had been provided prior to those forms
being completed to show the
hours of treatment provided and prior to those treatment services being
not keep adequate contemporaneous clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Client C.
not make any or any appropriate arrangements for the ongoing treatment of Client
C upon terminating treatment services to Client
COMPLAINT SIX
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
Act, in that the psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT SIX
The Particulars of Complaint Six are identical to those of Complaint
COMPLAINT SEVEN
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that the
psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT SEVEN
to provide psychological treatment to patients at a time when he knew or ought
to have known that his physical and/or mental
capacity to practise psychology
was impaired by reason of alcoholism.
COMPLAINT EIGHT
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
Act, in that the psychologist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of psychology is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience
(ii) has been guilty of other improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT EIGHT
The Particulars of Complaint Eight are identical to those of Complaint
Appearances
per headnote.
Suppression Order & Closure of the Inquiry
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 6 of Schedule 5 of the
Psychologists Act 2001
(the Act) that the names and any details that tend
to identify a number of people mentioned in the evidence in this matter must not
be published. These included Client A, Client B, Client C, Miss D, Master E,
Miss F, Ms G, Miss H and Miss I. A schedule marked
‘Annexure D’
containing their identities will be attached only to the original Reasons for
Decision document and the
copies that are forwarded to the parties. This
schedule should not be reproduced if copies of the Reasons document are made for
purpose other than to provide it to an appeals court. The parties are
directed to take care to ensure that the schedule is not copied.
transcript of the proceedings is legally provided to any entity, the Registry
must ensure that it is appropriately de-identified
in accordance with the
annexed Schedule.
19 March 2010 the HCCC made application to have the Inquiry closed to the public
while Client B and Client C gave their evidence.
The Respondent did not oppose
this application.
of the Act provides:
111 Conduct of proceedings
(1) The Tribunal is to conduct proceedings on an inquiry or appeal as it
thinks fit.
(2) Proceedings of the Tribunal are to be open to the public except when the
Tribunal otherwise directs.
(3) The Tribunal is not to direct that proceedings are to be closed to the
public unless satisfied that it is desirable to do so
in the public interest for
reasons connected with the subject-matter of the inquiry or appeal or the nature
of the evidence to be
(4) The Tribunal may proceed to determine an inquiry or appeal in the
absence of the psychologist.
(5) Schedule 5 has effect with respect to the conduct of any inquiry and the
hearing of any appeal by the Tribunal.
the nature of the evidence the Tribunal is satisfied that it is desirable in the
public interest due to reasons connected with
the subject matter of the nature
of the evidence to be given that it is in the public interest to holding the
proceedings in the
absence of the public and exercised the discretion under
section 111
of the Act to close the Inquiry for these
following people where called to give evidence in addition to the Respondent:
Client A, Client B, Client C, Miss D, Ms Elna Martin
(VSA-G), Ms Caroline Gatty
and Ms Janis Layton.
Documentation
HCCC tendered documents which came into evidence as Volume 1 exhibits 1-26 and
Volume 2 exhibits 1-3 as itemised in Annexure ‘A’
hereto. The
Respondent tendered a Statement on the first day of the Inquiry which came into
evidence as exhibits R1. After Mr Jurd
came into the matter three further
documents were provided (R2-R4).
Relevant Law
Standard of proof
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362-363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of the Act is as follows:
Meaning of ‘unsatisfactory professional
For the purposes of this Act, unsatisfactory professional conduct, in
relation to a registered psychologist, includes any of the
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the psychologist in the
practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience,
(b) a contravention by the psychologist of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the psychologist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the psychologist to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the psychologist,
(d) a failure by the psychologist to comply with an order made or a direction
given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the psychologist of section
34A (4) (Power of Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a psychologist in the course
of the practice or purported practice of psychology.
definition of ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ was amended by
Health Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1),
which commenced on 1 March 2005. The amendment, in summary, added the reference
to the standard reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience. The Particular of Complaint One relates to a period of
1 March 2005 and pursuant to the transitional provisions of the
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No. 2)
(Schedule 4), the
relevant law to be applied by this Tribunal is that which was in force at the
time these Complaints were filed.
The Complaint currently before the Tribunal
is dated 10 October 2008. Consequently, the definition of
‘unsatisfactory professional
conduct’ applicable in these
proceedings is the definition contained in the legislation as at the date of the
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one
of the deficiencies or inadequacies that
are set out in section 25. The Complaint currently before the Tribunal alleges
conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of this section – specifically sub-section
Psychologists Registration Board (Board) published a Code of Conduct dated 1 May
1990. This was superseded by the Code of Ethical
Conduct dated 3 November 1997,
which in turn was superseded by the Code dated 1 November 2004 (which was
provided to all registered
psychologists in June 2005). It is this most recent
Code that applies to the conduct alleged in this matter.
Meaning of Professional Misconduct
24 meaning of ‘professional misconduct’:
For the purposes of this Act, ‘professional
misconduct’, in relation to a registered psychologist, means
unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
making findings in relation to the Particulars and the Complaints the Tribunal
then needs to consider the appropriate Order(s)
to be made in the circumstances.
20 of the Act provides:
20 Annual Return to be submitted
(1) A registered psychologist must, on or before the return date in each
year, furnish in writing to the Board in a form approved
by the Board a return
for the return period specifying the following information:
(a) details of any conviction of the psychologist for an offence, in this
State or elsewhere, during the return period (together
with details of any
penalty imposed for the offence),
(b) details of the making of a sex/violence criminal finding against the
psychologist for an offence, in this State or elsewhere,
during the return
period (together with details of any penalty imposed for the offence),
(c) details of the making of a criminal finding against the psychologist for
an offence committed in the course of the practice or
purported practice of
psychology, in this State or elsewhere, during the return period (together with
details of any penalty imposed
for the offence),
(d) details of any criminal proceedings pending against the psychologist at
the end of the return period, in this State or elsewhere,
for a sex/violence
offence alleged to have been committed in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology,
(e) details of any criminal proceedings pending against the psychologist at
the end of the return period, in this State or elsewhere,
for a sex/violence
offence alleged to have been committed against a minor or to involve child
pornography (whether or not alleged
to have been committed in the course of the
practice or purported practice of psychology),
details of any significant illness (physical or mental) from which
the psychologist suffered at any time during the return period
and that may
reasonably be thought likely to detrimentally affect the psychologist's physical
or mental capacity to practise psychology,
emphasis added
(g) details of any suspension of, cancellation of, or imposition of
conditions on, the registration of the psychologist as a psychologist
(h) details of any suspension of, cancellation of, or imposition of
conditions on, any registration of the psychologist under a health
registration
Act during the return period,
(i) a statement as to whether the psychologist is registered under a health
registration Act as at the date of the return,
(j) a statement as to whether the psychologist has been refused registration
as a psychologist in another jurisdiction (either within
Australia or elsewhere)
during the return period,
(k) details of any continuing professional development undertaken by the
psychologist during the return period,
(l) such other information as may be prescribed by the regulations.
(2) The Board may require a return under this section to be verified by
statutory declaration.
(3) The regulations may provide that subsection (1) (a) does not apply in
respect of particular offences.
(4) In this section: "return date" means a date notified to psychologists by
the Board in writing at least 1 month in advance. "return
period" means the
period of 12 months ending 2 months before the return date.
Act clearly contemplates that a person who habitually abuses alcohol is
considered impaired for the purposes of the Act and that
such impairment should
be declared to the Board. These sections are relevant to the Tribunal’s
consideration of Complaints
Seven and Eight.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that
abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 53,
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act
on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under
subsection (2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses
a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”)
do any one or more of the
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal thinks appropriate
on the provision of health services or specified health services by the
for the period specified in the order or permanently.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
[1998] NSWSC 16
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
de-registered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
Background material
Background of the Respondent
of the information regarding the Respondent’s background comes from
medical reports, the Respondent’s resume and
his statements (exhibits R1
Respondent was born in 1964 and at the time of this Decision is 45 years old. He
is single. He completed his initial training
in psychology at the University of
Canberra in 1993 and his graduate diploma in Applied Psychology in 1993. The
degree was awarded
on the April 1994 and he was granted registration on 1
October, 1996 under his original name of Peter Mark Joseph Clark. He later
the surname Clark-Saunders and at the current time is using McCann. The
Respondent was also awarded a Master in Social Science
(Criminology) in April
1999. It appears at some time he contemplated enrolling in a PhD program in
criminology, although the evidence
suggests this was never completed. It is
unclear whether the Respondent even ever actually formally enrolled in the PhD
course despite
nominating it on his CV and recording on his reports ‘PhD
in Progress’.
Respondent’s experience working as a psychologist therefore extends from
1996 to 2006. He described himself as a forensic
psychologist, and worked
providing treatment and expert reports to organisations such as Legal Aid and
the Victims Compensation Tribunal.
The Respondent was working in private
practice for much of this time. However, as detailed herein his practice ceased
following complaints about his performance, a downturn in referrals
due to his poor performance, and the combination of mental health
and alcohol
related difficulties impairing his practice. Following the cessation of his
formal work as a psychologist he continued
to exercise roles in the
counselling-welfare area until September, 2010 when he resigned as a gambling
counsellor from Bet Safe.
Earlier in 2010 he had been working at Wayback, a
mental health and substance abuse treatment program but following concerns about
his behaviour in that job had left there, seemingly as part of a mutual decision
to terminate his employment.
Respondent’s personal background was a difficult one and on the basis of
the information provided to his consulting psychiatrists
he was exposed to
multiple child protection risks, his mother was young at the time of his birth
(15 years old) after which he was
adopted at the age of six weeks into an
abusive family and he reports being exposed to physically abusive and neglectful
practices. He was an only child in his adoptive family but has three
half sisters from his natural mother and natural father. He
was allegedly
sexually abused by both his mother and a Hypnotherapist he reported seeing at
the age of 15. He reported he had severe
behavioural disturbances as a teenager,
resulting in his first in-patient treatment for substance abuse at the age of
age of 17 he reportedly experienced a major head injury with a long
period of coma and consequent memory loss. As a consequence of
this injury he
became deaf in one ear and had some form of implant to correct this hearing
loss. He reports having a learning disorder
as a child (dyslexia) and also being
inattentive and oppositional in class. He remains single and reports himself as
homosexual.
He retains some reasonable relationships with family members, and
now knows his birth family.
than three admissions at age 14 for drug and alcohol issues, he reported to his
psychiatrists that he was also admitted into
a psychiatric service for a drug
related psychosis in 2001. The Tribunal has no record of this being reported to
the Board. The Respondent
reports at least one prior assessment and diagnosis of
Bipolar Disorder (date unknown) before his attendance on Dr Prior in February
2010 and subsequent attendance on Dr Wright in May 2010. Both psychiatrists also
diagnosed him with Bipolar Disorder. Dr Prior indicated
the presence of
Borderline traits, and Dr Wright thought the behaviour revealed by the
Respondent in 2005/6 was probably due to untreated
Bipolar and Alcohol
Dependence conditions. On the account of his behaviour in February 2010 recorded
in clinical notes it appears
the Respondent had elevated mood consistent with a
severe hypomanic state and there was some evidence of grandiosity and paranoid
beliefs, these symptoms having moderated significantly by May, 2010 when he saw
Dr Wright. There is thus evidence of both long-standing
poly-substance abuse
disorders and severe mental health problems.
seems his underlying personality was marked by significant impulse control
problems, especially when younger when he allegedly
self reported as being
excessively angry, risk taking, and sexually adventurous. His severe head injury
at age 17 was an outcome
of a motorcycle accident. Sexual adventuresomeness
appears to have been a symptom of his hypomanic state and formed a core concern
for him as late as 2010; we note he was having HIV tests on a monthly basis.
Respondent had developed a substance abuse problem by the time he was 14. His
reported history indicates a pattern of heavy, intermittent
alcohol consumption
associated with significant psychosocial harms such as memory loss, blackouts,
and work related failure. He reports
periods of time of abstinence, his latest
period of abstinence being now three years on self report. He also admits to a
significant
pattern of Amphetamine Type Stimulant drug use (ATS) although across
the various documents it is unclear how regular such use was,
but appears to
have begun when he was a young man and continued in some form up to, and
including, the period of time of the current
Complaints. There are grounds to
suggest he also made use of cannabis although to what extent is unclear. There
is, as noted above,
one admission for a drug related psychosis in 2001. In
addition he also reports some abuse of sedative medications, with records
indicating his use of Tramadol (an opioid pain killer) and at least recreational
use of Valium (the stealing of this drug being a
trigger for his referral by his
employer at the time to Dr Prior). Dr Prior also notes the Respondent’s
abusive pattern with
his psychotropic medications up to February, 2010. Thus
during the period of time that the Respondent was sober there remained some
concern about substance use.
respect to treatment, the Respondent reports a long history of psychotropic
medication. It appears he was first placed on anti-depressants
when he initially
worked for the Wayback Program in the middle 1990’s (about 1997) and again
being placed on anti-psychotics
from 2001. On the reports, it seems he has used
both anti-psychotics and anti-depressants in a somewhat haphazard way at times
his medication was recently reviewed by Dr Prior. Dr Prior took him off
anti-depressants and modified his dose of anti-psychotics.
At the same time he
prescribed Epilim, a major antipsychotic medication, to what seems to have been
good effect given the marked
change in presentation across February to May, 2010
as recorded in the reports of Dr Prior and Dr Wright.
Respondent reports having consulted psychologist, Tom Goss, sometime prior to
February 2010 for ‘20 sessions’ to deal
with issues related to his
own sexual abuse as a child. He reported to Dr Wright he had been seeing Dr
Prior fortnightly since February
2010 to May 2010 (when the report of Dr Wright
was furnished). He reported to both doctors regular attendance at AA (5 times a
to Dr Prior, 2 to 4 times a week to Dr Wright) since 2008.
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 31 October 2007 (exhibit 19(i)) stating that he
was supplying medical evidence that he was suffering
from Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) as a result of the threats that had been made by Client B. The
Respondent stated that
despite taking ‘
Psych medication
had suffered from a relapse and had only stabilised in August 2006. The medical
evidence provided was a Medical Certificate
from Dr Kwan dated 31 October 2007
(also part of exhibit 19(i)).
Background to the Complaint
noted above, allegations regarding the Respondent were drawn to the attention of
the HCCC in 2006 (letter dated 27 March 2006 –
exhibit 2(i)) from VSA-G.
VSA-G wrote to the Respondent on 20 February 2006 detailing complaints raised
with them by Client B (exhibit 2(ii)). The letter
(which was also forwarded by
email) itemised particular matters complained of and invited the
Respondent’s urgent response.
VSA-G advised the Respondent that his
listing on the Approved Counsellors list had been made inactive and his clients
moved to other
counsellors.
Respondent wrote to VSA-G on 24 February 2006 by email (exhibit 2(xiv))
requesting copies of the text messages sent to him by
Client B be provided to
him by facsimile as his computer ‘
’ which had
resulted in him having lost some data. He claimed some of the messages he had
received contained various threats
and allegations about his conduct. The
Respondent also indicated he had a witness who was willing to verify the content
messages. VSA-G responded on the same day (exhibit 2(v)) indicating
they were unable to provide copies of the text messages and noted
Respondent had advised he had contacted Sim plus to recover copies of the
Respondent provided a substantive reply to the complaint by way of a facsimile
dated 2 March 2006 (exhibit 2(vi)). After expressing
his extreme and complete
horror regarding the allegations of inappropriate and unprofessional conduct,
the Respondent advised that
he is suffering financially as a result. He
expressed the view that the loss of income would ‘
warrant a claim for
compensation’
. The Respondent states that the allegations are
‘completely untrue and vexatious’
. The itemised areas of
complaint were not individually addressed. The Respondent stated that he
believed Client B was responsible
for a recent robbery of his business premises,
and alleges that Client B has an extensive criminal, mental illness and drug
history. The Respondent requested the Director of VSA-G to resign from
his position. The letter concluded ‘
This matter is likely to gain
extensive media coverage as well’
8 March 2006 the Director of VSA-G (exhibit 2(vii)) wrote to the Respondent
offering him a further opportunity to address the specific
areas of complaint
raised in the initial letter of 20 February 2006.
16 March 2006 the Respondent sent a letter by facsimile (exhibit 2(viii))
stating that he had ‘
clearly stated
’ his response in his
letter dated 2 March 2006 and that
‘a former client with PTSD is
prepared to make a statement outlining the trauma inflicted by you for
suspending my duties as
a victim’s psychologist and
criminologist’
. The letter repeats the call for the Director’s
resignation and adds that the media had been contacted
Director of VSA-G wrote to the Respondent on 22 March 2006 (exhibit 2(ix)). This
letter advises of further complaints that had
been received by VSA-G from
other victims
’ (meaning clients of the service). The letter
further advised that the allegations had been referred to the HCCC.
Background of Client A
A was referred to the Respondent by VSA-G. She required the assistance of an
interpreter due to her hearing impairment.
Background of Client B
B was referred to the Respondent by VSA-G, having requested this referral on the
recommendation of her friend, Client C.
Background of Client C
C was referred to the Respondent by VSA-G. One reason for this referral was to
assist her to deal with the effects of her
daughter being the victim of a
serious crime.
Photocopies of text messages (exhibit 2(x) and (xi))
Photocopies
of text messages allegedly sent by the Respondent to Client B and her daughter,
Miss D are contained in exhibits 2(x)
contents of these text messages are essentially reproduced in the relevant
Particulars of Complaint. The Respondent ultimately
did not deny sending these
Correspondence between the Respondent and VSA-G
Respondent wrote numerous letters, emails and facsimile transmissions to VSA-G.
Many of these pieces of correspondence are detailed
13 February 2006 the Respondent sent an email to VSA-G (exhibit 2(xii)) stating
that he had received information from ‘
a close relative
Client B that Client B was a heroin user, that she was
‘selling herself
to support her addiction’
and that she had not given him the truthful
explanation for why her children had been taken into foster care. The Respondent
that he had ‘
’ Client B with the allegations
and gave her an opportunity to respond thereto. The Respondent stated that
subsequently Client
B had made ‘
damning and serious
allegations
’ about his professional integrity. He informed Client B
that he had an obligation to inform VSA-G she had made death threats
against him
and his family and defamed him. The email reported that the Respondent had
initiated an investigation by ‘sim plus’
to recover the text
messages he says were sent to him by Client B making threats against him. He
also stated that he had made a
report to the police. The Respondent stated that
he wished to withdraw his previous reports and statutory declarations. The
reported that he was undertaking professional supervision due to his
distress and has changed his mobile number to avoid the numerous
missed calls
and hang ups for which he was sure Client B was responsible.
16 February 2006 the Respondent again emailed VSA-G. (exhibit 2(xiii)) The
Respondent stated that the SMS messages he had received
from Client B were
extremely abusive and threatening, but that he had deleted them due to his
distress. He confirmed that he had
recover these messages as he had been informed by the Local Court that they
would assist
an AVO application. The email makes further allegations about
Client B. The Respondent stated that he had terminated the lease on
his business
premises because he had taken the threats made by Client B seriously.
2 March 2006 the Respondent wrote to VSA-G Exhibit 2(vi). The Respondent stated
that the allegations made by Client B were false.
The Respondent stated that
‘As of last week I closed my office due to a robbery which is being
investigated’
. The Respondent adopts a bombastic approach in this
letter. He claims to be suffering a loss of income which amounted to thousands
of dollars which he indicates will form the basis for a claim for compensation
against VSA-G. He further states ‘
You [meaning VSA–G] are
responsible for my final decision to shut down my office due to loss of
’. He went on to deny all of the allegations and to allege VSA-G
were unethical. He concluded the letter by stating that the
likely to gain extensive media coverage
’ – and signed off as
‘Peter Clark-Saunders, DIRECTOR’. The Tribunal notes that by the
time the Respondent
made the statement that was tendered to the Tribunal on the
first day of the Inquiry he had admitted sending the text messages to
Respondent wrote a facsimile transmission to VSA-G dated 16 March 2006 (exhibit
2(viii)) headed ‘LAW SUIT Clark v Victim’s
Services’. In this
fax he advised he had contacted the media and that he had a former client
‘to make a statement outlining the trauma inflicted by you for
suspending my duties as a victim’s psychologist and
criminologist’
. The Respondent stated he now refused to respond to the
issues, claiming to have responded in his earlier letter of 2 March 2006.
the Tribunal’s reading of the letter of 2 March 2006 he had not addressed
the issues raised by VSA-G. This correspondence
is signed ‘Peter
wrote to the Respondent on 22 March 2006 (exhibit 2(ix)). The letter deals with
a number of aspects of the issues but importantly
states that a decision had
been made by VSA-G to refer the matter to the HCCC for investigation. At this
point the Tribunal notes
that such a referral would be expected to focus a
health practitioner on the allegations.
Respondent sent an email to VSA-G on 13 February 2006 (exhibit 2Ixii)). In this
email the Respondent breaches Client B’s
confidentiality by providing
information beyond that relevant to the referral. The Respondent also stated
that an investigation by
‘sim plus’ was underway to recover the text
messages he had received from Client B. The Respondent also states that he
wished to withdraw his ‘
previous reports, Stat Decs
the context of the email means all those that he had written to VSA-G regarding
Client B. He signs off this email
as ‘Peter Clark SAUDERS PhD (in
progress)’.
2(xiv) is an email from the Respondent to VSA-G. The Respondent requests VSA-G
to fax him all of the previous emails that
he has sent to them as he had
’ them due to a ‘
computer. The Respondent alleges that over 30 messages came from Client B which
‘threats of Lebanese
gangs, threats to my family,
FALSE allegations of drug use, extremely defaming allegations of being a sex
offender and phedifile
(sic)’. The Respondent wrote that he will
messages and curiously states that he was writing the email at 1.29 am. This
email is signed off
‘Peter Clark-Saunders DIRECTOR, VCT PSYCH (10
6(i) is an email from the Respondent to VSA-G dated 21 May 2006. In this email
the Respondent demands to be advised of the
qualifications of a particular
senior staff member of VSA-G. The email also advised that a former client was
providing information
to the HCCC regarding her complaint that she had suffered
harm by the termination of counselling with the Respondent by VSA-G and
subsequently not receiving referral to another counsellor. The email also stated
that the former client would be seeking compensation
from VSA-G. The Respondent
stated that he would be contacting
‘previous VCT client’s as I
have a duty of care to protect them’
. This email is signed
‘Peter Clark, Director’
record of a telephone call between Ms Martin and the Respondent is found in a
file note dated 24 February 2006 (exhibit 6(v)). Ms
Martin repeated much of the
content of this file note and verified the entire content of the file note in a
statement made to the
HCCC on 14 November 2008 (exhibit 18). The file note
records that the Respondent alleged that Client B had a relationship with a
manager and that he suspected that someone was hacking into his internet banking
account. The Respondent is recorded as having
stated that he had
his faith in God’
, that he had closed his practice as his clients had
been taken away from him, that he was scared of the ‘Lebanese
that the text messages had been written by him in anger (cf. his
claim that the allegations made by Client B were untrue and vexatious
see exhibit 2(vi), his statement in R1 that it was out of fear and his denial
and claim that Ms Layton sent messages in exhibit
4B), that he was the
’ in this matter but that he had ‘
’ had a threat made against him.
Respondent sent an email to VSA-G dated 3 April 2006 (exhibit 6(vi)). In this
email the Respondent appears to claim to have an
understanding of the legal
system on the basis of his Masters degree. He stated that it is unethical for a
suspension to occur prior
all evidence
’ being provided by
both parties. The Respondent then goes on to disclose confidential information
regarding Client B and Client
C. The Respondent states that he had never used
drugs or been involved with people using drugs. At this point the Tribunal notes
that the Respondent gave evidence that this is what he
’ at the time but that he now knows that this is not
true. The Respondent infers that the issues may be a result of sexual
vilification
on the basis that he is a gay man. The Respondent stated that he
had a second appointment with a Member of Parliament (MP) regarding
action that
will be part of his
. The Respondent states that
his accountant was in the process of preparing a statement that would indicate
the loss in income he
had suffered as a result of not receiving any further
referrals from VSA-G. From the contents of this email it appears that the
knew the appropriate circumstances for when a breach of
confidentiality is permissable.
File Notes of Interviews with Clients B and C
6(ii) is a file note that was written by Ms Martin regarding an interview she
had with Client C on 24 February 2006. Ms Martin
identified the document when
she gave evidence before the Tribunal and verified that the contents were an
accurate record of the
interview. Client C also gave evidence that the file note
accurately recorded the interview. The content of this file note relevant
Particulars of Complaint were for the best part repeated in the evidence
provided by Client C. The Tribunal notes that senior
staff from VSA-G were also
in attendance and that Client B was accompanied to the office of VSA-G by Client
C (however it is unclear
as to whether she was actually present during the
interview).
6(iii) is another file note made by Ms Martin. This file note records an
interview that occurred with Client B and her daughter,
Miss D, on 17 February
2006. The contents of this document were also verified in oral evidence and are
substantially contained in
documents authored by Client B and Miss D.
Other VSA-G Correspondence
record of an interview held between Ms Martin and Client C was forwarded to the
Director VSA-G by way of email dated 21 March 2006
((exhibit 2(xvii)). The
recorded details are substantially the matter raised in the Particulars of the
Complaint relating to Client
Martin wrote an email dated 21 March 2006 (exhibit 2(xvi)) to senior staff in
VSA-G regarding information received from Client
C and Client B which is
substantially detailed elsewhere.
The HCCC investigation
Letter received by HCCC on 11 May 2006
27 April 2006 the HCCC wrote to the Respondent outlining issues raised by Client
B and Client C and requesting a response within
28 days (exhibit 4A). The
Respondent provided a written response by way of a letter received by the HCCC
on 11 May 2006 (exhibit
4B). The letter provides a more detailed account of
what the Respondent alleged to be Client B’s criminal record, it provides
details of alleged criminal activities of Client C, reports that Client B had
known Client C for eight years. The letter also advised
that Dr Kwan (his
general practitioner) and Dr Dalton (his mentor) are
‘completely
by the decision of VSA-G to suspend his services. He states
that Channel 9
‘is keen on a story due to the serious criminality of
[Client B] and [Client c] and my life being in danger as [Client B] and
C] are member’s of an outlaw gang
Respondent’s letter also stated that he was forced to close his office due
to the loss of income he experienced as a result
of the loss of the VSA-G work
(cf. reason for his leaving these business premises given in exhibit 2(xiii)),
stated he believed that
Client B and Client C had been responsible for the
robbery of his business premises as they were members of an ‘
Lebanese Bikie Gang
’, that Client B sent him a text message stating
that the Lebanese Bikie gang had been ‘
’ to murder
him and his family, and that Ms Layton was a ‘witness’ to these
messages. In the letter the Respondent
denied breaching confidentiality by
passing information on to other parties and stated he would only do this if the
patient was a
danger to themselves or others or was intending to commit a
serious criminal offence. He accepted that he informed DoCS that Client
heroin, in circumstances were Client B had two of her children made Wards of the
State. The Respondent denied sending SMS
messages to Client B or Miss D.
Respondent’s letter also stated that Ms Layton was undertaking a
‘welfare placement’
in his practice at the time these
messages were sent and it was Ms Layton who had sent these messages as a result
of a conversation
she had with Client B wherein Client B threatened
get me and my family murdered if I reported her to DoCS
Respondent denied holding appointments in his home, and stated that a neighbour
was prepared to make a statement in support
of this claim.
Respondent stated he would not ever contemplate inviting a client in to his
such as Client B and Client C
but admitted that he would occasionally meet Client B or Client C at the tables
and chairs downstairs
from his office while coffee was being purchased to take
Respondent stated he was able to provide a reference from the hairdresser as
evidence that he did not ‘
socialise with client’s
(sic)’ and that the former owner of the coffee shop would also
that he did not hold appointments in the coffee
shop. The Respondent stated he had never interrupted a counselling session for
reasons or allow a third party to interrupt.
this letter (and in various other pieces of correspondence) the Respondent
described himself as a ‘
Criminal/Forensic Psychologist
Respondent denied approaching Client A, Client B or Client C for social contact
outside of a counselling session. He stated that
he had seen Client A on two
occasions outside of work when she approached him with her partner and a
short conversation transpired
’. As to the complaints made
and the Respondent considered they should not be pursued.
He stated that Client A’s partner (Ms G) had falsified the stories
his professional conduct ‘
as revenge after [he had] disclosed to police
[a] theft where [Ms G] took $500 from a client and did not return to my
’. The Tribunal notes at this point that the Respondent had
previously employed Ms G as his receptionist.
Respondent denied divulging personal information regarding Client B and Client C
and stated that as an ‘
experienced psychologist
careful not to do so. He confirmed that he had
‘previously
VSA-G that Client B and Client C had approached him for
sexual contact. Further, Dr Kwan had agreed with the Respondent’s view
that informing Client B and Client C that he was homosexual was an appropriate
response in this situation.
Respondent stated that counselling with Client B had been terminated by him but
later resumed on the basis that she did not approach
him for sex and he had
documented this in his file. The Respondent denied ever using illicit drugs or
offering them to clients and
this could be supported by Ms Layton. The
Respondent stated that Ms Layton was of good character, that she held a
university degree
and had been a ‘volunteer’ in his business for
activity with others as part of his counselling session(s). He also stated he
was of the view that the allegations made
against him were evil and
warrant a law suit which is highly likely according to legal advise
(sic) by a QC
Respondent stated that he could supply references from Dr Stella Dalton (who had
been his mentor and former employer), Dr Kwan
(his GP), Karen Macgregor (his
next door neighbour) and his former partner, James Trestrail. The Respondent
provided personal references
from Dr Kwan and Ms Chantal Boustead. Details of
all of the References actually provided are set out below.
Letter received by HCCC on 17 May 2006
Respondent sent a letter to the HCCC which was received on 17 May 2006 (exhibit
5). The letter was sent to the HCCC by facsimile
transmission and the header
reads ‘[Ms G]
. In this letter the Respondent makes a
formal complaint
’ about a senior person within VSA-G for his
lack of care and lack of referral for my previous patients
The Respondent stated that the decision made by the senior person within VSA-G
to terminate his services had rendered him
unemployed due to the subsequent loss
of income. The Respondent alleged that VSA-G did not appropriately refer on the
clients that
were current as at the time his services were terminated. The
Respondent stated that he intended to contact each of those clients.
This letter
was signed off
‘Peter J Clark, BSc, Dip Psych, MA Soc Sc, PhD (in
Letter dated 8 July 2005 (should read 2006) to HCCC
Respondent sent a letter dated 8 July 2005 by facsimile transmission to the
HCCC. The header on the facsimile indicates that it
was sent on 9 July 2006,
with the sender still recorded as ‘[Ms G]-
’. The letter
includes the following (quoted):
months for a reply is
totally unacceptable
counterproductive to
psychological health eg., HCCC has not provided me with any
HCCC with a witness, Ms Janis Layton (BSc, REM) in relation to death threats
made by [Client B] towards me & my family.
This witness has not been
something happens to me.
My depression
and anxiety has not improved despite taking psychiatric medication.
I am leaving
Sydney 14 July 2006 and will not be leaving a forwarding address.
record, I have raised concerns with police concerning personal safety, but as
there is “no proof of threat of violence”,
police are unable to act.
In my view, police are unable to apprehend there criminal’s anyway as
supported by life events and
previous crimes.
I am taking
the advice of my Doctor (Dr Kwan,
[address omitted]
) by dissociating my
self completely from this matter.
Tribunal notes that a letter dated 10 August 2008 sent to the Respondent’s
PO Box address (exhibit 9) was returned to the
Board with an indication that the
Respondent had left that address.
Correspondence with the Board
Letter to the Board dated 19 May 2005
Respondent (signed Peter Mark Joseph Clark) and Mr Corbin (signed as Michael A
Corbin) co-authored a letter dated 19 May 2005
to the Board (exhibit 7). It
appears to the Tribunal to be quite unusual for a letter to be co-authored by a
legal representative.
Nothing, however, turns on this matter. The letter is
written on Peter Clark-Saunders letterhead. In paragraph 3 of this letter
appears Mr Corbin is providing evidence regarding information he had received
from his other clients regarding the manner appointments
with the Respondent are
generally cancelled (i.e. it is the client that does the cancelling 90% of the
time). In paragraph 4 it is
disclosed that the Respondent discusses his own
experiences of
‘coming out’
as a gay person if he was dealing
with a client suffering from
‘internalised homophobia’
this point the Tribunal notes there is nothing in the clinical notes kept by the
Respondent or in the other evidence before the
Tribunal to indicate that Client
A, Client B or Client C were suffering from
‘internalised
homophobia’
or any sexual identity problems. The letter advised that
the Respondent had received grief counselling from Dr Kwan around the time
his father’s death in 2004. The letter records that Ms G had already left
her employment with the Respondent in
‘unfortunate’
circumstances.
co-authored letter dated 19 May 2005 annexed various references. Details of the
References are set out below. One of these references
‘Anonymous client’. This is not a document that the Tribunal can
attribute weight to in the circumstances.
Letter to the Board dated 7 September 2007
Respondent wrote to the Board from a new address in Sydney on 7 September 2007.
The letter requested that his registration be
reinstated. The letter states that
Dr Dalton (Psychiatrist) ‘
speaks of my professionalism of a high
’, that the HCCC had advised him ‘
there was no issue
with my counselling services
’, that one of the two clients that had
made a claim against him had a three page criminal history and that the other
was being investigated by police for being involved in a serious criminal
matter, that he had been cleared of misconduct by the HCCC
and that VSA-G
suspended him without giving him the opportunity to reply to the allegations. He
concluded by requesting that the
Board waive the registration fee on
compassionate grounds citing being the victim of a robbery and his recent return
to Sydney as
examples of grounds that should be considered relevant by the
Evidence - Other witnesses
Evidence of Client A
are a number of documents that set out the evidence of Client A. Client A also
gave extensive oral evidence before the Tribunal.
Some of her oral evidence is
set out under the relevant Particulars in the Findings section of this Reasons
document. The bulk of
her written evidence is covered by paragraphs 6 to 18
inclusive and paragraphs 20 and 21 of Exhibit 14 which read as follows:
began to see Peter Clark-Saunders in mid 2004 for about six or eight months, and
then it was about six months after I stopped seeing
him that I wrote my
statutory declaration in March 2005.
saw him roughly once a week to start with and then maybe once or twice a
was seeing Peter because I was having trouble with my husband and I had
attempted suicide. I had been in hospital a number of times
due to several
suicide attempts in the past. Also I had been raped in the past. The Victims
of Crime Tribunal had allocated me
a certain number of hours to get
counselling.
I was not happy with the sessions Peter gave me, a friend or myself arranged for
VCT (Victims of Crime Tribunal) to allow
me to see a different counsellor. I
was referred to another psychologist who was also practicing at
Parramatta.
I was seeing the other psychologist I put in the complaint about Peter because
the number of hours I had been allocated ran
out. I wanted to get back the
hours I believe were wasted when I saw Peter.
I started to see the other psychologist the sessions were very different to what
I had with Peter.
I was seeing Peter there were problems with him cancelling sessions, him being
late and him talking about his own issues.
was sometimes 30 minutes to one hour late and I would see him when he finally
arrived. Sometimes I would only see him for twenty
minutes once he actually got
there. Sometimes I would to my appointment and wait for one hour and Peter
would not turn up. I would
then sms my brother who would phone Peter to make
another appointment. The next time I saw Peter he would apologise for not
it the last time and say that he just didn’t want to work on that
particular day.
would tell me many different things as to why he was late. One reason was that
he was meeting his boyfriend. He would often
treat me like a friend and talk
very casually about what he had been up to and what was going on in his life.
He would tell me about
how he would have sex with men who he met out. He had an
active sex life and only spoke about sex with men.
told me that he was gay and had a boyfriend, whose name I think was Wayne.
After a while Peter asked me to go to his home which
he said was at Dundas off
Kissing Point Road, I think it was a town house. He seemed to want me to go to
his home to be a friend
with him and go out to gay night clubs in the city.
Once club was the Imperial in Newtown – he told me he liked to go to this
went out in Parramatta for dinner to the Lighting (or Lightening) House
Restaurant which was on George Street in Parramatta. We
ended up going out two
or three times to nightclubs in Oxford Street. We went to Stonewall and I think
to the Imperial at Newtown.
I would drive myself there and back and we would
meet inside the club. At the end of the first night out he told me that we
really go out and I should not tell anyone. He told me this
more than once, probably to remind me not to tell anyone. I started
uncomfortable when he told me we shouldn’t be going out socially and so I
stopped going after about three times.
don’t remember Peter talking about drinking, but I think he told me that
he was taking drugs, but I don’t remember what
sort. He often seemed as
though he could not sit still and he kept moving around in his chair. He would
get up and down and not
maintain eye contact and I thought he was taking some
sort of drugs at those times. He would often talk on the phone to friends
up to ten minutes during my sessions and then he would tell me what the
conversation was about. One conversation was about him
being asked to a
friend’s house to have sex or an orgy.
Peter didn’t seem to talk about any of the things that were worrying me, I
made a list of issues which I wanted to talk
page long. The issues were things that were important to me at the time. I was
feeling down
but he was not interested in listening to my problems. I told him
I had the sheet of paper but he did not take it or read it. He
continued to
talk about himself. I took the paper to him more than once and he never took it
investigators asked me whether I know any other people who have made complaints
has complained about him. I do
have concerns about him working as a psychologist.
investigators asked me whether I know Client B or Client C. I definitely do not
know either of them.
Evidence of Client B
are a number of documents that set out the evidence of Client B. These included
exhibits 12 and 25a. Client B also gave extensive
oral evidence. Some of her
oral evidence is set out under the relevant Particulars in the Findings section
of this Reasons document.
The bulk of her written evidence is covered by
paragraphs 2 to 31 of annexure 1 to exhibit 12 which read as follows:
have been seeing Peter in his office in Parramatta for counselling for the last
eight or nine years. Prior to two years ago, I
felt the counselling sessions
were formal and professional but they had not been like that for some time. I
used to think highly
of him however, during the last two years I felt I received
no real counselling from Peter.
as I had a lot of paperwork for different Departments, such as the Department of
Community Services (DoCS), Victims Services
and Centrelink that Peter had been
counsellors. I felt
that Peter had started to develop problems himself,
primarily drug related, and he wasn’t helping me much as a psychologist.
once told me that DoCs were paying him to counsel my son, but I knew he
wasn’t seeing my son and hadn’t been for
six months previous. On my
last home visit with Peter he asked me to lie to DoCS and say he was seeing my
son, if they ever asked
our counselling sessions, we would meet in coffee shops, at his home and at my
place. I understood at the time that it was
unusual for counselling to take
place outside of the office but at the time I felt like I had to do everything
that Peter said.
Because of this I would agree to go with him when he went for
a swim with him at his place after a session, for example.
main reason he would ask me to visit him at his place was so that he could help
me fill in certain forms. This happened on two
or three occasions. I felt that
if I did not agree to have the sessions where he wanted, he would not help me
with the applications
to Victims Services and help with DoCS.
the occasions when I did see him at his office for a counselling session, there
would be lots of interruptions by his friends coming
had a friend named Mark who ran a hairdressing salon a few doors down from
Peter’s office. I believe Mark was a ‘heavy’
‘bikie’. Mark would often knock on Peter’s door during one of
my counselling sessions with him and Peter
would let him in. Mark would stay
and chat to me and Peter.
told me that this would happen with all of his clients and that afterwards, Mark
would give his own views to Peter on what was
being discussed, his opinion of
the client and their ability to pay Peter’s counselling fees.
believe Peter spoke about me to other clients of his. I had referred my friend,
Client C, to Peter and she told me that Peter told
her information about me
during their sessions. Peter also told my daughter, Miss D, that I was a
lesbian during a counselling session
she was having with Peter. He also sent
Miss D a text message stating that I was a heroin addict.
last time I visited Peter at his house, he suggested to me that myself, Mark and
Mark’s bisexual girlfriend have a threesome
and that they would be willing
to pay me. I said no and Peter and Mark then went into his bedroom together.
Mark came out shortly
afterwards and said to me that he “would rather fuck
a horse.” From this comment I presumed that Peter and Mark had
talking about me in the bedroom.
would often have other bisexual ‘friends’ around, who I believe were
rent boys. It was often suggested that I have
a threesome with them and Peter
for money but I never did.
would often have a friend of his, named Janis, sit in sessions with him and I.
I presumed she was another psychologist. One
day when I asked her, she said she
wasn’t a psychologist but she went to uni with Peter.
I became upset by Peter’s actions I would confront him about it but he
would threaten to report me to the mental health
authorities. He specifically
said he would report me to the Victims Compensation Tribunal. I have text
messages on my mobile phone
from Peter showing this.
often used cocaine and steroids. He took cocaine in front of me once and
offered it to me. On the last home visit he made
to me, he shot up steroids and
asked me to push in the syringe. When I refused he did it himself in front of
once accompanied me on a visit to the Department of Health to fill in some forms
and he went into the toilet to take drugs.
He showed me these drugs
beforehand.
became highly distressed by his change in behaviour in the last two years. I
had earlier trusted him but he changed. For example
his dress used to be
appropriate and formal but in the last two years he dressed in shorts. He also
became late for appointments.
believe that Peter also began altering the invoices for payment by Victims
Services. On the 9 June 2005 and 5 July 2005, it states
that he had seen me for
a home visit for five hours. He did not see me for that length of time
did not sign any invoice for 10 June 2005 and on the invoice for 12 February
2001, the signature is not mine. The Health Care Complaints
Commission has
photocopies of these invoices, which are attached to this statement marked
“Annexure A”.
12 February 2006, at 10.30am, I received an SMS text message from Peter (mobile
number: 0412 266 788) on my mobile phone. The
content of the message was,
“Telling Centrelink ur fraud, tell docs WILL COPY U THREATS TO MENTAL
HEALTH worker u are a junkie
and inject, this time I DOCS. Keith foster and
copy to victims.”
Sunday, 12 February 2006, at 10.41am, my daughter Miss D received an SMS text
message from Peter (mobile number: 0412 266 788).
The content of the message
was, “...your mum told me she using heroin and sellin her self to use she
needs help.”
12 February 2006, I received an SMS text message from Peter (mobile number: 0412
266 788) on my mobile phone. The content of the
message was, “Just told
... about u, Mark on his way to get my light machine thanks”.
12 February 2006, at 10.59am, I received an SMS text message from Peter (mobile
number: 0412 266 788) on my mobile phone. The
content of the message was,
“Just sendin e mail to victims about your fraud, heroin and how I found
out u lied to me about
pat I let u know when I finish”.
12 February 2006, at 12.15pm, I received an SMS text message on my mobile phone
from mobile number: 0432 358 953, who I believe
to be the mobile number of
Peter’s friend Janis. The content of the message was, “Im very
sorry for what hapnd I shud
hav stayd with u. Think u had a phsyhotit episode in
the car brought on by too much of the green and wite stuff”.
12 February 2006, at 12.16pm, I received an SMS text message from Peter (mobile
number: 0412 266 788) on my mobile phone. The
content of the message was,
12 February 2006, at 12.47pm, I received an SMS text message on my mobile phone
from mobile number: 0432 358 953, who I believe
to be the mobile number of
Peter’s friend Janis. The content of the message was, “No
didn’t talk to peter He wud
disagree with me anywayI told him what I told
u as soon as u left He said no I no what a psychotic episode is like Had one
He didn’t diagnose took it personaly”.
12 February 2006, at 12.56pm, I received an SMS text message from Peter (mobile
number: 0412 266 788) on my mobile phone. The
content of the message was,
“I withdraw all my report u are on your own and u will need to start all
over again kept all your
messages for AVO”.
12 February 2006, at 1.04pm, I received an SMS text message on my mobile phone
from mobile number: 0432 358 953, who I believe
to be the mobile number of
Peter’s friend Janis. The content of the message was,
“Definately”.
13 February 2006, at 6.19pm, I received an SMS text message on my mobile phone
from mobile number: 0432 358 953, who I believe
to be the mobile number of
Peter’s friend Janis. The content of the message was, “Im very
sorry to hear that”.
13 February 2006, at 8.58pm, I received an SMS text message on my mobile phone
from mobile number: 0432 358 953, who I believe
to be the mobile number of
Peter’s friend Janis. The content of the message was, “He has also
breached his duty of care”.
still have these messages in my mobile phone for future reference. The Health
Care Complaints Commission has photocopies of some
of these text messages, which
are attached to this statement marked “Annexure
file note recording an interview between staff from VSA-G and Client B is noted
above (exhibit 6(iii)). This accords with the statement
of Client B as set out
Evidence of Client C
are a number of documents that set out the evidence of Client C, the bulk of her
written evidence being found in exhibit 13.
Client C also gave extensive oral
evidence. Some of her oral evidence is set out under the relevant Particulars in
the Findings section
of this Reasons document. The bulk of her written evidence
is covered by paragraphs 2 to 40 which state:
had my first appointment with Peter at the end of June to about December 2005 at
his office in Parramatta. My daughter was involved
in a serious criminal case
and I felt I needed personal counselling, as I was really sick. My friend,
Client B, recommended I see
Peter as she had been receiving counselling from
him. She told me a bit about him including that he was gay.
the beginning the counselling with Peter was good. H would have a girl named
Chantelle – who I think was his secretary –
in the sessions with
Peter and myself. I think she also may have been training as a psychologist,
which was why she was sitting
in, as she would take notes.
first session began by Peter asking me what had happened and I told him about
the case. I cried a lot. He subsequently applied
for hours of counselling from
Victims Services. I contacted a solicitor at Fosters Lawyers, who were
providing legal services to
would see Peter for counselling about two to three times a week in the beginning
and then it dropped down. Victims Services paid
for all of my sessions. The
counselling sessions were fine at first, until Chantelle quit and left (I cannot
recall when this was).
Peter told me all about her leaving, I didn’t
think it was very professional of him to do this.
began doing unprofessional things during counselling sessions such as telling me
counselling sessions. I knew that
my friend, Client B, was still seeing Peter for counselling and we had
previously made an agreement
not to talk about each other during our counselling
sessions with Peter.
would ask me questions about Client B but I wouldn’t talk about her. He
asked if Client B was a lesbian. He’d
mention things such as a time when
Client B had gone to his place to go swimming in his pool. He said he had a
friend there who
liked Client B in a sexual way. When I asked Client B about it
later, she said it was completely different to the way Peter had
made out. She
said she had been swimming but the bit about the other guy was untrue. Peter
had made it sound a lot more sexual
than it was.
time Peter talked about a gay guy in prison that the visited as a psychologist.
It wasn’t nice the way he talked about
him. It would always make me
scared that he would talk about me to other clients of his, especially Client B.
I kept saying to him
that what I would tell him is very personal to me and I
didn’t want him talking about it to Client B.
when I would ring up to make an appointment with Peter he would say things like
“Client B is here.” I had his
office and mobile numbers and Peter
also gave me his home number, as he was going to move his office to his house
(to my knowledge
he never did). I didn’t ring him on his home number but
I did have one appointment at his place. He would send me text messages
occasionally – nothing bad. These were more of a social nature such as
asking, “What are you up to?”
time, during a counselling session, Peter and I were talking about medication
and he recommended I go on antidepressants. I have
a fear of medication and was
scared to take anything. We made an appointment with a GP, Dr Edmond Kwan
(at Peter’s suggestion), whose surgery was near
Peter’s office. The surgery address is 90 George Street,
Parramatta.
the day of the appointment, I arrived at Peter’s office, as he was going
to go with me, but Peter was stuffing around doing
things. By the time we made
it to Dr Kwan I had missed my appointment and Dr Kwan was too busy to see me. I
had never seen Dr Kwan
before that day.
we couldn’t see Dr Kwan, Peter suggested we have lunch at a pub instead.
This pub was walking distance from his office
(I can’t recall the name).
I cannot recall exactly when this was but it was around the time of Chantelle
quitting as I recall
him telling me about it, as he was upset. We went back to
his office after lunch but very little counselling was done. Peter charged
Victims Services for the counselling session. I have never gone to lunch or had
coffee with any of my other counsellors.
the session we had after returning from the pub on another occasion, Peter and I
had started an in depth conversation when
his sister arrived. He invited her
into our session and introduced her to me. She sat in the session for about
half an hour talking
with us. After she left, I had just started talking to
Peter again about me when the next client arrived therefore I had to leave.
was annoyed that I didn’t get a proper counselling session. I was also
annoyed that it was clear that his sister knew who
I was from my name and it was
obvious that Peter had talked about me to her.
my appointments with Peter, he constantly made phone calls and we would go for
coffee often at the shop downstairs. The whole
day would be filled up with
phone calls, coffee etc. I would have a one-hour appointment but would only
receive about five minutes
of so-called counselling.
I would be at Peter’s office for two or three hours, while he messes
around. He arranged a lot of two-hour appointments.
We also bought lunch a
couple of times during a session. We would buy it from the shops downstairs and
then bring it up to his
office and eat it. I recall two occasions where Peter
would use light and sound apparatus on himself, which entailed him using glasses
with strobing lights and headphones with music – he would sit there and
could not hear me talk.
once introduced me to a friend of his, a hairdresser, named Mark who worked near
his office. I cannot recall the name of the
salon but it was to the left of his
office, maybe five shops up. On about my second or third visit Peter suggested
I change my hair
colour for safety reasons. He therefore took me to
Mark’s hair salon. I ended up paying $60 for a hair cut!
took my daughter, Miss I, then aged 15years old in with me once for a
counselling session. She’d been raped and needed help
so Peter offered to
see her. We arrived at his office and he straightaway suggested we go and get a
coffee first. We went to a
coffee lounge in the mall nearby. During this time
Peter was talking to his boyfriend on the phone a lot. He seemed to be having
troubles with his relationship and he asked Miss I what he should do about it.
I couldn’t believe that we were there trying
to get help from him and he
was asking us for relationship advice. He didn’t provide any
counselling.
went over to Peter’s house once with Client B, I can’t recall why,
it may have been for her counselling or just social,
but he had invited her
over. He would also invite me over. In general I felt quite comfortable with
him, we were all cool together
but he overstepped the mark as my counsellor. I
looked at Peter as both a friend and a professional, I trusted him.
was at Peter’s house one time and he lifted up his shirt to show me his
bare stomach. He then injected stuff into his stomach
and asked me to look at
his muscles. He said the stuff was Human Growth Hormone.
saw Peter smoke marijuana twice. The first time was when I was at his place and
another time was when Peter, a female psychologist
friend of his (whose name I
can’t recall) from Canberra and Client B came to visit me at my
reason for their visit was just to say hello. They all started smoking
marijuana, except for me. I thought the marijuana belonged
to Peter. I also
saw Peter give Client B some marijuana at his place once. He brought a male
friend with him and suggested his
friend give me a massage as I was suffering
from a migraine. Peter and Client B left the house and I proceeded to go to the
with Peter’s friend and we had sex. Peter later told me he had
been outside and was watching us through the blinds having
sex. I feel he set
this situation up so he could watch.
had to attend my daughter’s rape trial. I attended with Miss I and her
friend, Miss H, (who was also a victim of the gang
rape). Peter came to court
with us as well for support and he brought his psychologist friend from
Canberra. I wanted to introduce
Peter to Miss H as she has bulimia and needed
the trial Client B met us in the city and we went to a pub for a drink. Peter
went with Miss H to get a drink and when he returned
he was with a gay guy he
had just met. They were both sitting with us, there was a lot of sexual contact
happening between them
and they were clearly touching each other up in front of
us. I had a couple of photos of Peter and this man on my mobile phone.
that this behaviour was completely inappropriate in front of Miss H who was a
rape victim and also myself as he was there
to be my psychologist.
finally said, “I’m just going to go for 10min and come back”.
He then left with the other man – presumably
for some sort of sexual
interaction. The other psychologist was really angry with him for doing this.
He was gone for about an
hour, we kept ringing him but he wouldn’t answer.
We felt like idiots waiting for him. I was really angry with him for doing
right after my daughter’s rape trial but he didn’t seem to have a
problem with it.
following week we needed to go back to court. Peter was going to come but he
didn’t turn up. I later rang him to ask him
why he had not attended the
court case and he said he felt too traumatised. I noticed that he still billed
Victims Services for
four hours worth of counselling.
another occasion, in about October/November 2005, another client rang Peter
during our session as the client needed to find an
abortion clinic for his
girlfriend. Peter put me on the phone to him and then asked me to ring around
places to find somewhere.
I recall ringing a few places including Westmead
Hospital and then ended up with the number for Dr Kwan. His secretary gave me
the number of a place in Westmead, which I passed on to the client.
during a counselling session with me. I think
he wanted to get advice about
the guys who I was afraid of, as they had a similar character to Mark (as he
looked like a heavy to
asked me to tell Mark what had happened and so I did. Afterwards, Mark
didn’t say much but from his look I knew he wasn’t
thinking good
things (I found out later that Mark had told Client B I was a dog).
Mark left, I said to Peter, “what did you do that for?” referring to
having me talk to Mark about what had happened
to me. I became scared for my
safety, but Peter just but it back onto me and said I was the one who agreed to
talk to him. I was
very confused.
was obvious that Peter had talked to Mark previously about me. Mark knew my
personal business and knew why I was seeing Peter.
It appeared to me that Mark
was judgemental of me and I was frightened of Mark. Peter did nothing to
support me or make me feel
safe. Peter made out that he hadn’t told Mark
anything and it was me who told Mark, but obviously he had told him. Not long
after me talking to Mark, Peter wanted to refer me to someone else for
counselling. He told me this without explaining why but then
rang back and said
it was ok and not to worry about it, he would still counsel me.
Occasionally
I would turn up for an appointment that had already been made but Peter
wasn’t there. This was very frustrating
for me as I had driven all the
way to Parramatta.
time I arrived and Peter wasn’t there so I rang him on the mobile and he
was still at home in bed. I had to sit in the
coffee shop and wait while he
came in. Mark’s father owned the coffee lounge downstairs and was
obviously getting good business
from Peter.
didn’t feel like I was getting any help from Peter. Often, we would meet
at his office and go down to get a coffee. During
the sessions, talk always got
around to him and his business, just trivial stuff about him. There was nothing
was always talking about sex and his boyfriends during counselling sessions. He
would ask me what he should do about certain
situations in his relationships.
He liked me to counsel him. He would often talk about young boys as well (young
adults, not children)
and his sex life. I went along with it but was quite
disgusted in my head.
would make social phone calls to me occasionally and tell me that he had blokes
over. I would say things like “can I
watch” – mucking around,
but then he would act strange and be concerned about me. I had to clear it up
with him and
explain that I was only joking. I was careful what I said to him
after that.
soon as I would enter his office for a counselling session, Peter would ask me
to sign the paperwork for Victims Services. The
hours were never filled out
when I was signing them. I recall one time Peter suggested using Miss H’s
hours for me, as Miss
H wasn’t using them. We talked about it but I
don’t think it happened.
rang up Peter in December 2005 to make an appointment and Peter said,
“I’ve referred you”. When I asked him why
he wouldn’t
never spoke to Peter again after that. Before Peter referred me to another
counsellor I had already contacted Fosters Lawyers to
ask for another
counsellor, because I felt disturbed by Peter’s behaviour and felt that I
was worse off after seeing him than
I was before I saw him. When I first saw
Peter I was very depressed and suicidal, I was very scared and would not leave
I feel I did not receive any proper treatment from Peter. I felt I
had to rebuild a rapport with a new psychologist all over again.
I was crying
out for psychological help but Peter treated me more as a friend than a patient.
I feel I did not get any psychological
benefit from Peter. My new psychologist
has helped me one hundred times more than Peter did.
am not, nor ever have been, a member of a gang. I have previously been
intimidated by a gang, which Peter would be aware of, as
this was part of the
reason for my counselling.
am frightened of Mark and Peter. I have moved address and want my address kept
confidential.
Evidence of Miss D – Client B’s
15 is a statement made by Miss D to the HCCC in late 2007 and it forms the
substantial written documentary evidence of this
witness. Miss D also gave oral
evidence. Paragraphs 5 to 10 of exhibit 15 state:
am 23 years old.
first began to see Peter Clarke-Saunders in Harris Park when I was about 13
years old for counselling. I began to see him in his
offices in Parramatta in
around 1999 or 2000 for counselling. I didn’t see him regularly, it was a
bit all over the place.
There was a big gap between 2000 and when I saw him
again roughly 5 years later for a little bit of counselling.
was generally professional – but some times acted a bit funny –
laughing and crazy. He seemed much more professional
at Harris Park but seemed
to change over the years and didn’t seem to care anymore. He originally
wore smart suits and then
later began wearing shorts, t-shirts and
also recall visiting his home, which I think was in Zetland. I visited him with
my mother who was receiving counselling at his
is very hard to remember but I don’t recall him talking about my mother
recall receiving text messages about mum doing stuff, bad stuff – He was
trying to make out she was mad and was trying to
put into my head things about
her that weren’t true. I think I remember him saying that she was a
prostitute. But can’t
remember for sure.
Evidence of Ms Elna Martin
Martin is employed by VSA-G. She gave evidence to the Tribunal regarding her
Martin confirmed the content of all of the file notes, letters and records of
telephone conversations mentioned elsewhere.
T 67.40-50 and 68.1-10 (23/8/10) Ms Martin confirmed that the Respondent stated
that when he was sending the text messages to Client
B he had been acting in
anger. We note this is contrary to the Respondent’s submission that he did
so out of ‘fear’.
Evidence of Janis Layton
Respondent called Ms Layton to give oral evidence before the Tribunal. Ms Layton
had provided three statements in this matter.
Two statements were provided to
the HCCC. The first was dated 29 November 2007 (exhibit 16) which annexed a
letter from Ms Layton
to the HCCC dated 29 October 2007 and the second dated 27
October 2008 annexed a transcript of text messages that she had sent from
mobile telephone on 12 and 13 February 2006.
Layton also provided a statement through the solicitor for the Respondent on 23
August 2010.
Layton confirmed that she had been a friend of the Respondent’s since 1989
when they met at University. Sometime thereafter
she commenced visiting the
Respondent in Sydney and staying with him for a week or two at a time every two
or three months. In 2006
she came to Sydney and spent a number of weeks with the
Respondent. He had told her that he was depressed and that he could not do
housework. At around this time she noticed that the Respondent’s moods
were changing. She came to Sydney for a few weeks
but shortly after she returned
to Canberra she accepted the Respondent’s invitation to move in to his
time basis. This occurred in November 2006. She
remained living with the Respondent for about twelve months.
Layton stated that she accepted the Respondent’s invitation to undertake
voluntary work in the Respondent’s office
and to clean his home. Ms Layton
initially described the work as ‘
filing and answering
’ and then went on to state that the only telephone in the
practice was in the Respondent’s office and that she worked
Respondent’s office and was present during counselling sessions with
clients. Ms Layton recalled that Client B and Client
C did attend the
Respondent’s office together but could not recall how frequently that
Layton emphatically stated that she had never been to the home of Client C or
seen her at the home of the Respondent. Client C
was not challenged in
cross-examination regarding her evidence that Ms Layton was at the
Respondent’s home on one occasion
that she visited.
Layton stated she did not recall going into a court in Sydney with the
Respondent and other people.
one of the text messages transcribed in the annexure to the statement dated 27
October 2008, Ms Layton stated that the reference
was a reference to marijuana and the reference to
‘wite stuff’
was a reference to heroin or cocaine.
asked about the other text messages transcribed, Ms Layton stated she could not
recall what the reference to
‘Definitely’
or the statement
‘I’m very sorry to hear that’
meant. As to the fifth
text message (‘
He has also breached his duty of care’
Layton stated this was a reference to the fact that the Respondent would not get
out of his car and escort Client B to the station
(after having driven her to
the station).
Tribunal notes that the second text message transcribed read:
No didn’t talk to peter He wud disagree with me anyway I
told him what I hold u as soon as u left He said no I no what a psychotic
episode is like Had one myself He didn’t diagnose took it personally
Layton stated that the second text message was sent because Client B had been
crying in the car, talking about nothing’
, wanted the
Respondent to drive her home (not just to the station). The Respondent did not
want to drive Client B home as he had
other clients to see. Ms Layton thought
that Client B may have been suffering a psychotic episode but the Respondent
informed her
that it was not a psychotic episode. When Ms Layton asked him how
he would know that he replied with words to the effect of he would
had suffered from one himself.
Layton knew of a person called ‘Mark’ who was a hairdresser working
in the area around the Respondent’s office.
Initially she stated that she
did not know if Mark had been into the Respondent’s office. Then she
recalled Mark had attended
the Respondent’s office on one occasion. When
Mark arrived in the office the Respondent handed the banking to her and she
to it immediately by leaving the office. Ms Layton stated that there
were no clients in the rooms at the time Mark attended.
Layton stated that during the time she was staying in the Respondent’s
story villa above a garage.
Layton stated that she had never visited a client’s home with the
Respondent.
Layton stated that she had given her mobile telephone number to Client B as she
‘was scared not to’
Layton confirmed that she had been wearing a hearing aid for the past two
cross-examination Ms Layton stated that there had been no social contact with
clients outside of the office. However, there
’ on which Client B and Client C attended the office without
an appointment, not for the purpose of counselling. They talked
normal everyday things
’ and tried to make another
appointment.
Layton confirmed she was in the Respondent’s office during counselling
sessions with clients.
Layton stated that she understood Client B was an illicit drug user because she
had discussions with the Respondent and had seen
drugs in Client B’s
handbag (along with a dog). Ms Layton stated that she had heard the Respondent
asking Client B for her
consent to tell Ms Layton about Client B’s drug
use. Ms Layton stated that Client B thought this was a
asked about the views she expressed in her letter to the HCCC dated 29 October
2007 about Client B, Ms Layton stated that her
knowledge of these matters had
come from the Respondent. Ms Layton made the following statement in that
I am aware that [Client B] has a criminal record of drug
offences, kidnapping and other offences.
Layton also stated that the Respondent had given her Client B’s file to
read and some of this information was contained in
Layton stated that the Respondent had told her that he had never taken any drugs
and to the best of her knowledge she believed
he had not taken any illicit
drugs. This included ecstasy, speed and methamphetamines.
Layton stated that she was not working in the Respondent’s practice as
some form of a ‘
welfare placement
’ and later confirmed that
she had no qualifications in psychology or counselling. She confirmed she had a
Bachelor of Science
with a major in Resource and Environment Management (REM).
to the date of the threatening text messages received by the Respondent sent
from Client B, Ms Layton was unable to remember when
this occurred. When asked
made in 2010 she stated
that long term memory was better than short term memory.
Ms Layton was able to confirm that she was with the Respondent when he received
the text messages but did not see any messages from the Respondent to Client B.
While he was receiving the messages from Client B,
Ms Layton stated that she saw
the Respondent trying to ensure that Client B received some psychiatric help on
the basis that she
was adversely affected by her drugs by talking to her on at
least one occasion by telephone.
asked why she had not mentioned this telephone conversation between the
Respondent and Client B in her previous statements, Ms
Layton stated she had
‘honestly forgotten’
it, but she was sure it had taken place.
the Respondent received these messages from Client B Ms Layton states that she
saw the Respondent delete these messages immediately.
the lunch adjournment, in answer to a cross-examination question, Ms Layton
stated that she was in the car with the Respondent
while he was driving Client B
to the station because the Respondent had finished work for the day and Ms
Layton was accompanying
him home. This contrasted with the evidence she gave in
chief earlier in the day that the Respondent had to return to the practice
attend to other patients.
asked about whether the Respondent had shown her the allegations made against
him as referred to in paragraph 14 of her statement
dated 29 November 2007, Ms
Layton initially replied that she had been present when the conversation
regarding the setting up of a
sex business
’ occurred. When
she was again referred to the specific content of paragraph 14 Ms Layton stated
that she was unsure as to what
allegations she was referring to.
14 of this statement reads:
Since I have known Peter I am of the opinion that he is
dedicated to his clients, honest and trustworthy. I am of the opinion that
allegations made by Client B and Client C are untrue.
Layton stated that it was the Respondent’s practice to type up notes
because his handwriting was so illegible. She witnessed
him hand writing notes
during a session and then typing them up later on. Mr Layton was unsure if the
Respondent had typed up any
notes with respect to Client B or Client C.
Layton stated that she had only ever seen Client C on one or two occasions. She
confirmed her evidence that she had not been to
Client C’s home. She could
not remember going to a pub for lunch with Client C and the Respondent although
she agreed that
it was a possibility.
re-examination Ms Layton stated, after careful consideration, that when she
moved in with the Respondent in November 2006 he was
working as a psychologist.
Other Documentary Evidence
letter dated 28 March 2006 was written by a solicitor to VSA-G (exhibit 3). The
letter noted that they had become aware of the concerns
held by the Victims
Compensation Tribunal regarding the Respondent and his ability to assist clients
of VSA-G. The letter from the
solicitor advised he also had concerns regarding
the Respondent and had ceased referring clients to him. The letter informs
that one client (being a client both of the solicitor and the Respondent)
had informed him that they had been told personal information
the Respondent’s clients during treatment sessions. The letter raised
other concerns regarding the Respondent
not directly relevant to the Particulars
of this Complaint.
Evidence – the Respondent
Respondent specifically sought to rely upon the documents contained in exhibit
19 of the HCCC evidence. Much of this evidence
from the Respondent has been
dealt with above. Other documents relied upon by the Respondent came into
evidence as exhibits R1 –
19(ii) is a letter from the Respondent to the HCCC dated 4 November 2007. In
this letter the Respondent stated that he had
read various cases from the HCCC
website and as a result he had a better understanding of the type of information
that was relevant.
He confirmed that he had suffered from chronic PTSD due to
the threats made by Client B and Client C that a Lebanese gang would murder
The Respondent reported that after he had closed his private practice he had
eventually overcome his fear of going into the
area where this practice was
located with the assistance of changing his hair colour and the support of Ms
Layton. The purpose for
entering this area was to attend the ‘Centre
Link’ Office to apply for sickness benefits. The Respondent admitted
Client B text messages in a
‘releasing (fright)’
response to her threatening messages. The Respondent then provides details of
the nature of the flight and fright response. The
Respondent stated that he had
stabilised on psychiatric medication and his psychological functioning was
19(iii) is a letter dated 25 July 2008 from the Respondent to the Board (and
copied to the HCCC). The Respondent provided
details regarding his alcohol use
which he stated he had withheld previously as he thought it may have resulted in
discrimination
against him. The letter continued:
At age 20 years, I joined Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) after only a
few years of drinking. I felt blessed that I identified alcohol
as a problem at
such an early age. I stayed sober and active in AA, helping others by attending
AA meetings and visiting Hospitals
to carry the AA message of hope and recovery.
I subsequently attended university and completed a Bachelor of Science (Psych)
by a Graduate Diploma in Applied Psychology (Counselling). I secured
employment as a Child Psychologist (provisional) and my career
progressed very
well. I never relapsed over a 10 year period.
At age 31 years, I started to seriously doubt my AA membership and being
an alcoholic. I was plagued by thoughts of controlled drinking.
I subsequently
attended a social outing with friends from the gym and started to drink alcohol.
I recall getting drunk without any
negative consequences aside from a
“hangover” the following day. I continued to “binge”
and within 12 months
I began to experience memory lapses and alcoholic
‘blackouts’ progressively getting worse. In 1999, I commenced a
degree in Social Science (Criminology). My academic record was above
average while working full time and studying part time. I
thought to myself
“how can I be an alcoholic, work full time and successfully complete a
degree at Masters level?”.
I continued to “binge” and friends
and family remarked on a personality change (for the worse) but I was already in
blaming other people and not taking responsibility.
Prior to this Complaint, I was drinking alcoholically and experienced
alcoholic ‘blackouts’ on a regular basis becoming
socially isolated
from family, friends and professional colleagues. My isolation was compounded
by working in private practice with
limited contact with other Psychologists. I
managed to supervise Mr. Glenn Moat and conceal my alcoholism. Thankfully, Mr.
has provided you a reference dated 7/11/06.
When I received complaint from Victims Service’s I was angry and
threatened to sue Victim Services. I was horrified by sexual
allegations which are completely false.
I surrendered my Psychological registration following the closure of Clark
Saunders Psychological Services and went onto Sickness
Allowance for a period of
time. During this time of illness, I discovered some AA literature and started
to get honest about my
drinking, consequences of my drinking, for example, my
boyfriend leaving me because of my preoccupation with alcohol and not being
“emotionally available”.
I telephoned an AA member who visited very rarely and he suggested that I
I returned to
Alcoholics Anonymous on 12 June 2007 and have remained continuously sober
‘one day at a time’ without
relapse. Ms Caroline Gatty (33 years
sober) is my AA Sponsor and she is willing to provide a verbal evidence
regarding my progress
and return to health. I am activity
in Service work (unpaid) devoting many hours and time assisting new people
coming into AA for the first time including outreach
to St. John of God
(Burwood) AOD patients. Alcoholics represent all ‘walks of life’
and I feel privileged when helping
the alcoholic who still suffers.
My cognitive and higher planning skills have fully returned to normal and
I plan to stay sober for the rest of my life with assistance.
consulting with Ms. Julie Searl (Psychologist) on a fortnightly basis as part of
my recovery. Julie has been a great
supervision.
I believe that my untreated alcoholism was a contributing factor in
relation to breaching confidentially and reacting to death threats
messaging. Seeking professional supervision at that time would have no doubt
prevented the onset of the current matter
/ complaint. However, my active
alcoholism prevented me from thinking clearly and concisely. I am willing to
attend at meeting
with you and / or HCCC to demonstrate my progress, commitment
in staying sober and accepting any type of training and supervision
I believe that I can be a worthwhile Psychologist, for example, I have
always been committed to assisting people as part of my career
extending 12
years as a Psychologist. I have a wealth of experience and wish to make a
contribution to Society. I have provided
you with several references from
professionals who hold my professionalism in high esteem.
25 November 2008 the Respondent wrote to the HCCC (exhibit 19(v)). The
Respondent provided a copy of his record of employment at
the Cabramatta
Community Centre. The Respondent stated that he had both attended and delivered
the Traffic Offender Intervention
Program at the Fairfield/Cabramatta PCYC. The
record of employment indicated that the Respondent had worked there from 25
2008 until 18 September 2008. The work undertaken by the Respondent is
described as involving dealing with young people (and their
parents) who had
drug and alcohol problems.
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 30 January 2009 (exhibit 19 (vi)). This letter
provided a detailed summary of the investigation
of the complaints. The
Respondent also reports working for the Dunrossill Challenge Foundation from 25
July 2007 until February 2008.
The Respondent stated that he was also
undertaking voluntary work for AA in various ways such as by visiting inpatients
John of God Hospital.
R1 was a Statement of the Respondent provided by Mr Corbin on behalf of the
Respondent on the first day of the Inquiry. This
statement had been prepared
with the assistance of Mr Corbin. Exhibit R2 is a statement dated 6 August 2010
from Ms Caroline Gatty.
Exhibit R3 is a further statement made by the Respondent
dated 18 August 2010. Exhibit R4 is a statement made by Ms Layton on 23
exhibit R1 the Respondent makes the following statement regarding Particular 4
of Complaint One:
Whilst I acknowledge that my records would objectively be viewed
as being insufficient, I can indicate that they were sufficient to
allow me to
recall details and to prepare reports as required. In saying this I have had
the opportunity of reviewing the statement
of the expert psychologist and accept
that he views those records as being less than what he deemed
appropriate.
in the statement the Respondent acknowledges that the deficits in his record
keeping may be sufficient to
‘ground an allegation of unsatisfactory
the statement substantially contains denials of the Particulars the Respondent
makes the following admissions:
With respect to Particular 5(d) of Complaint Three:
Admitted. I did not at the time however believe this was a breach of
confidentiality as I was advising the adult daughter of the
client that her
mother needed help and that information was provided to highlight some of the
serious issues confronting her mother.
In retrospect, I would concede that I
should have dealt with the matter differently.
With respect to Particular 6 of Complaint Three:
I admit sending these text messages. Having said this I did so in a state
of great distress as this client had threatened me and
my family with harm. I
was of the view that they were in a position to enact said harm upon me and my
family. Knowing what I did
of their history in relation to this client I was of
the view that they would carry out their threats and used these messages to
and get them to “back off”. I am now in a position to say that this
was obviously the wrong way to handle this matter.
The appropriate response
would have been to contact the police and report the relevant events and
allegations.
With respect to Particular 1(a) of Complaint Five:
It is admitted that I was late for the start of sessions on two or three
occasions but sessions still ran for the full time period
allocated. As
previously stated, I note that it is not unusual for psychologists and other
health professionals to run late for
appointments if earlier appointments run
over time. Additionally, it is not uncommon for emergencies to arise which
would prevent
commencement of sessions on time.
With respect to Particular 1(b) of Complaint Five:
My recollection is that 2 or three sessions were cancelled but those
sessions were re-scheduled. These cancellations were due to
family emergencies
based on my recollection. I also note that the complainant cancelled a number
of sessions with limited explanations.
Inevitably, it was the case that each
client tended to have appointments on the same day, sometimes coming
With respect to Particular 2(f) of Complaint Five:
The only discussion regarding client B were whilst client B was also
present, and that presence was with the approval of client B
circumstances where consent had been given. I do not specifically recall what
was discussed but I believe it had to do with
the status of client C’s
siblings who were State Wards.
With respect to Particular 2(j) of Complaint Five:
Client C does not have a daughter to my knowledge. I engaged in no
With respect to Complaint Seven:
In respect of complaint 7, Whilst I acknowledge that I handed in my own
registration once it was apparent to me that my issues were
detrimental to the
treatment of my clients. I could not have in all honesty known or realized I
was impaired by reason of alcoholism.
It is an acknowledged fact that people
always have difficulty seeing in themselves what they can identify as issues in
What I believe happened was that I was so focused on trying to meet all
my obligations that I ignored or otherwise failed to see
that the indicators in
my own behaviour which would have normally set “alarm bells”
ringing. I accept that this was
unsatisfactory. I should have seen the issues
coming sooner. I have in the past set a very high standard for my treatment of
It has been over 4 years since the initial complaint and during this time
I have had long enough time for rehabilitation as indicated
by my work and
personal references to ensure that my personal recovery stays on track. It was
never my intention to deliberately
set out to harm, importune or otherwise
disadvantage my clients in any way shape or form and further it was never my
intention to
use my position of authority to gain any personal benefit
whatsoever.
In respect to complaint 8, I am deeply regretful that I did not seek help
for my alcoholism any sooner but wish to acknowledge that
I did voluntarily
surrender my Psychological registration so that I could focus on my personal
recovery as well as closing my entire
business not long after the complaint by
victim services to ensure that I was not causing any harm to other clients who
were attending
my practice. I acknowledge around 20 counseling sessions with
Psychologist Tom Gross and we both agreed that I would benefit from
supervision
for as long as deemed appropriate.
I do not honestly believe my actions were sufficient to categorise them as
professional misconduct. Given that I have categorically
denied those
allegations that might constitute professional misconduct, if the Tribunal finds
them not proven then I would hold the
view that that allegation ought to be
R2 is the statement from Ms Gatty. Ms Gatty stated that she had known the
Respondent for 12 years, having been referred to
him for treatment by Dr Stella
Dalton. She ceased treatment with the Respondent after about one year. About
three years ago she met
him at an AA meeting and became his sponsor. They attend
believe that Peter has been improving over the three (3) years of which I have
been his sponsor and it seems to me that he has improved
even further after he
was diagnosed with a bi-polar condition and had the appropriate treatment. He
has told me the work he has
been doing throughout the three (3) years.
find Peter to be a very nice fellow and I believe he is also very honest. He is
making many steps to improve himself and looks
better, seems to be thinking more
clearly and is dedicated to the AA cause. I am very optimistic for him.
understanding is that Peter went for a period of some ten (10) years without
drinking then started again and became a binge drinker.
I have had much
experience with binge drinkers over the thirty five (35) years I have been in AA
and I have commonly found that
they lose memory of events both before and after
the binge. I have also come across a number of people at AA who were bi-polar
it seems to be that the percentage of people at AA with bi-polar problems is
higher than it is in the general community.
stay sober is a very difficult job. To stay sober and have bi-polar would be, I
believe an even more difficult job.
R3 is a statement from the Respondent dated 18 August 2010. The entire
statement has been considered by the Tribunal.
Respondent’s Resume
Respondent provided a resume to the HCCC under cover of a letter dated 9 May
2007 (part exhibit 4B). The Tribunal is unsure as
to what the Respondent means
to convey by recording he has a ‘
Double Major in Psychology
as part of his Bachelor of Science, The CV notes that he was currently
supervising Ms Chantal Boustead as a ‘forensic
student’ and that she
was employed three days per week in his practice. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent does not appear
to have the relevant post graduate qualification to
supervise a forensic student nor is it clear that Ms Boustead was a post
student (undergraduate students generally do not undertake clinical
placements). The Tribunal is also uncertain what qualifications
the Respondent
relies upon to make the claim that he is a specialist in the treatment of
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. The only
work experience as a psychologist
(apart from private practice) listed by the Respondent post registration is a
position in Queanbeyan
from April 1996 to November 1996.
Oral evidence of the Respondent
Respondent gave oral evidence before the Inquiry. The Tribunal has had regard to
the entirety of his oral evidence. This evidence
clarified some points and
further admissions were made by the Respondent by the end of cross-examination,
questioning by the Tribunal
and re-examination.
Respondent’s References
Chantal Boustead
Boustead provided a reference to the Board dated 19 May 2005 (part of exhibit
4B). Ms Boustead stated she was a ‘
student in psychology
the University of Western Sydney (but does not indicate whether she was an
undergraduate or graduate student). She stated
that she had been employed by the
Respondent as a receptionist from January 2005 but that she had known the
Respondent personally
since 2001. The reference continues:
I have not once witnessed Mr Clark disclose privileged
information, socialize with his clients or act in a manner unforthcoming as
professional in his field.
I hold Mr Clark in the highest regard and with the utmost respect.Mr Clark
is a highly intelligent individual who builds a fantastic
rapport with his
clients on a professional level. Further to this, Mr Clark has not only been a
wonderful employer and teacher, but
a great example to me, as someone who will
be pursuing a career in the field of psychology.
I find the allegations against Mr Clark to be completely false.
Erin Wheeler
Wheeler provided a reference for the Respondent dated 13 May 2005. Ms Wheeler
stated she was a third year apprentice hairdresser
and that she had known the
Respondent for about seven months as he was a customer of the hairdressing salon
in which she worked.
Ms Wheeler reports the Respondent
‘is friendly and
his conduct is very good’
. She further states that she often sees the
Respondent with his ‘
forensic student
’ and that they both
impress her as being professional and respectful of information about their
services and clients. She further
reports that she had never seen the Respondent
socializing with his clients.
Kwan provided a reference to the Board dated 19 May 2005 (part of exhibit 4B).
Dr Kwan reports that the Respondent had contributed
his own (unpaid) time to
assist mutual clients with mental health issues and court appearances. Dr Kwan
stated that he had not received
any complaints regarding the Respondent’s
professionalism and that he had found his assessment of patients to be accurate.
The footer on Dr Kwan’s reference reads
sick who need a doctor and the sinner who needs Jesus.”
reference from Dr Kwan is dated 23 May 2005 (part of exhibit 7). This reference
provided details of family matters that had
created significant stress for the
Respondent in around 2004. Dr Kwan also reported that the Respondent had used
him as a ‘sounding
board’ with respect to issues of counter
transference that had arisen in his practice. Dr Kwan expressed the view that he
no concerns about the Respondent’s ability to continue treating
further reference came from Dr Kwan on 10 November 2006 (part exhibit 11). The
reference records that the Respondent would refer
patients to him if they
required medication but did not have a regular GP. He stated that he had found
the Respondent’s assessments
of patients to be accurate and when he
thought they required medication the Respondent had
‘tended to be
. He noted that if a patient was particularly disturbed then
the Respondent may accompany them to the first consultation. The reference
[the Respondent]
impressed me as a psychologist who
showed concern for his patient’s well being, and would often telephone
myself, concerning
the ongoing treatment of his clients.
Moat provided a reference dated 9 November 2006 (exhibit 11). He stated that he
had known the Respondent for six years in various
professional settings. As at
2006 Mr Moat was a registered psychologist and a
‘Correctional Practice
Consultant’
. Mr Moat noted that he had been informed by the Respondent
of the serious nature of the allegations he faced.
reference advised that between 2000 and 2003 Mr Moat worked as a Probation and
Parole Officer and the Respondent undertook Legal
Aid Psychological Assessments
on some of his clients which required there to be telephone contact between
Moat completed his fourth year of his course work in psychology in 2002 and
asked the Respondent to be his Principal Supervisor
‘internship’
. Supervision in accordance with the Board
Supervision Program commenced in January 2003 (the time Mr Moat was granted
provisional
registration) and ended in January 2005. Mr Moat was then granted
full registration. Mr Moat provides details of the supervision
underwent with the Respondent on a regular basis during this two year period.
Moat expresses the opinion that the Respondent
‘professional in his
attitude, ethical in his practices, and demonstrated a high level of integrity
in all his professional
Further, he had found his reports
‘informative, honest and succinct’.
Moat states that he had observed the Respondent providing psychological services
on many occasions and recounts the following:
There were also many interventions undertaken during supervision
where Mr Clark-Saunders and this practitioner
[meaning Mr Moat]
their knowledge, experience, and skill set equally, in the provision of
psychological services to difficult clientele. On
two occasions this was the
case with one of the client’s who made the current allegations of
unprofessional conduct.
Moat later provided information that allows the Tribunal to identify this client
as Client B.
Moat goes on to express the view that it is uncommon for an intern to complete
the whole of their two year supervision period with
the same supervisor. He is
of the view that this demonstrates the Respondent’s professionalism and
ethical practice in psychology
as if this had not been the case the professional
relationship and the supervision process would have
‘collapsed’
and not lasted for the two years.
Moat concludes his report as follows:
This practitioner finds it difficult to accept that Mr.
Clark-Saunders is in error, or has practiced unethically in relation to the
serious professional allegations that have been levelled against him. Firstly,
I have been fully aware for some years since the
commencement of the supervision
relationship in 2003 that Mr. Clark-Saunders sexual preference is in fact one of
the same sex. He
openly disclosed to the undersigned shortly after the
supervision relationship commenced that he was a homosexual. Mr. Clark-Saunders
did not behave in an unethical sexual manner in my presence on any occasion over
In terms of any other unprofessional behaviors leveled against Mr.
Clark-Saunders (and as I do not have a copy of the allegations)
the information
provided to the undersigned was made via a verbal telephone conversation. Mr.
Clark-Saunders stated the name of
one of the client’s that made the
complaint against him. As I was known to this person from my professional
practices with
this client, I reminded him of my log-book notes that existed in
relation to her case. The notes relate to the length of time that
with this person from 1999 onwards and the fact that other authorities had
questioned her validity on certain issues in
this period. The other client
making the above allegations I have never met at any time.
I wish Mr. Clark-Saunders well in this enquiry and respect him as a
psychologist who practices with honesty and integrity at all times.
not hesitate to contact the undersigned for any further information that may be
Karen MacGregor
MacGregor provided a reference dated 29 October 2006 for the Respondent (part
exhibit 11). Ms MacGregor stated that she had known
the Respondent for three
years as his neighbour, with her front door being opposite his, sharing a common
staircase. She stated that
to the best of her knowledge he has not conducted
business of any kind from his residence. Further, in her capacity as a member of
the Body Corporate Executive of the property she has never received any
complaints from other residents that the Respondent had been
using his residence
‘or any part of the complex’
for the purpose of business.
J provided a reference for the Respondent dated 7 November 2007 (part of exhibit
11). This reference read as follows:
My former Psychologist has asked me for a written
Peter was taking care of my welfare from May 2005 to late last
Peter has helped me and my friend, who also witnessed a murder of our
friends at The Rocks, Sydney.
Peter took care of us and went out of his way to help us with all our
Peter took me to the doctor and gave me support letters and spent extra
time with me to help me.
Peter is not doing victim work and I have not seen anyone else.
Today I called Dr Kwan’s surgery to get Peter’s contact number
as I am still in crisis. He is helping me with letters
without pay. There are
few people like this.
Peter has always been professional and helped my friend as well.
Please read this letter because Peter asked me for a written letter for
something personal.
Yvonne Lenders
Lenders provided the Respondent with a reference dated 18 December 2007. The
Reference was addressed ‘
To whom it may concern
I have known Peter McCann for 12 years in the following
capacities:
1. Personally for 12 years
2. Professionally for 4 years.
3. Academically for 3 years.
Peter is a mature, well-mannered individual who gets on very well with
most people. I have at all times found him to be hard working,
conscientious
and dependable.
He demonstrated a high level of courtesy, professional responsibility as
well as empathy and compassion in his management and treatment
of clients as
well as in his dealings with students who had been seconded to his practice.
I can be contacted to elaborate further if required.
John Dingle
Respondent forwarded two references to the HCCC under cover of a letter dated 29
July 2007 (this letter and the attached references
form exhibit 19(iv)). He
explained that he was forwarding them himself as his solicitor, Mr Michael
Corbin was away. One reference
was from ‘Dr John Dingle’ the other
from a former patient, Ms K.
Reference from John Dingle (who uses the title Medical Practitioner after his
signature) is dated 11 June 2007 and stated:
I have known Peter McCann since 1984.
He has always presented with homosexual orientation. He has never to my
knowledge had any heterosexual experience, and it is unbelievable
to me that he
would have made sexual advances to a female.
K is a former Client of the Respondent. She provided a reference dated 4 July
2007. She stated that she had first met the Respondent
three years earlier
having been referred to him for psychological treatment. The reference
During the course of my treatment Peter was ethical and
appropriate and his manner was caring and professional. I later came to know
Peter in a professional way.
Peter appeared to me to be a person of the highest standards. He was
knowledgeable regarding the sexual abuse issues that I was dealing
at the time
and he helped me a great deal. When necessary he also referred me to
appropriate doctors for additional care. Peter
also helped me to gain the
confidence to resume my PhD study.
It is without hesitation that I recommend Peter. I also know Peter in a
professional capacity and am now aware of the disciplinary
matters he is facing.
I believe that Peter is someone who offers help to individuals in need who may
have had difficulties in the
past. I firmly believe that he does this with the
best intentions and in a professional and honest manner. I would be happy to
recommend Peter to a friend or family member for psychological
assistance.
Pam Freeland
Freeland provided a reference for the Respondent dated 13 October 2006 (exhibit
19 (viii)). Ms Freeland had previously been employed
by the ‘OSA Group
Pty. Ltd.’ This company had contracted the Respondent to provide
psychological services to staff that
had suffered after a traumatic incident.
She stated that during the course of her employment she had dealt with over 150
psychologists.
The reference continued:
I found Peter to be a man of integrity and a professional in his
work. He was always willing to assist with urgent referrals and
relation to his work was consistently positive. I always felt confident with
referring clients to Peter that he would
provide them with a high and consistent
level of care.
Caroline Gatty
reference dated 8 February 2009 from Ms Gatty was provided to the HCCC (exhibit
19 (vii)). The reference confirmed that she had
been the Respondent’s
sponsor at AA and that he was
‘very enthusiastic and honest about his
. When Ms Gatty gave evidence she stated she had not applied
her signature to this particular document, however, the original was
produced to
the Tribunal shortly after she gave evidence and it appeared to bear an original
signature. The Tribunal provided both
parties an opportunity to inspect the
document and to comment thereon. Neither party did so. The Tribunal is of the
view that nothing
turns on the evidence of Ms Gatty regarding the signature on
this document.
Peer Review Report
Sam Borenstein was asked to provide reports in the nature of a peer review. His
reports dated 26 February and 10 March 2007 and
30 April 2009 form part of
exhibit 21. The Tribunal notes that although Mr Borenstein had a number of
documents, he was not provided
with the entirety of the documentary evidence
that came before the Tribunal.
Borenstein was not required by the Respondent or the Tribunal for
cross-examination. Some of the matters Mr Borenstein was asked
to comment upon
did not ultimately form the basis for Particulars of Complaint.
area commented upon by Mr Borenstein that did form the basis of Particulars of
Complaint relate to the Respondent’s record
keeping. Mr Borenstein
identifies a number of deficits in the records kept by the Respondent which
accords with the views of the
Tribunal. Mr Borenstein lists a failure to record
what transpired in therapy sessions, goals and techniques employed as some of
areas in which the notes were deficient. Mr Borenstein also commented that
the correspondence to bodies such as the VCT did not record
the treatment plans
as they were written in the hand written notes (which he assumed were the
Respondent’s clinical notes).
Borenstein provided a further report dated 15 March 2010 wherein he addressed
Particular 1 of Complaints One and Two, Particular
3 of Complaints Three and
Four, Particular 5 and 7 of Complaints Five and Six and Complaint Seven.
Tribunal concurs with the opinions expressed by Mr Borenstein with respect to
these Particulars (and Complaint) and note that
his views accord with the
Findings of the Tribunal made herein.
Submissions – HCCC
HCCC made submissions in writing. A copy of the submissions is attached hereto
and marked ‘B’.
Submissions - Respondent
Respondent made submissions in writing. A copy of the submissions is attached
hereto and marked ‘C’. Comments regarding
these submissions are
contained elsewhere (under the Findings and Orders headings) however the
Tribunal notes that the submission
made as follows:
References in 33(l) to sound and light therapy raises confusion
only, as the clients did not have the treatment.
is not supported by the evidence. At T9.5 (30/8/10) Client B gave evidence
light and sound machine
’ had been used on her son,
her daughter and herself during the course of therapy. The text message sent by
the Respondent also
clearly refers to this machine.
respect to paragraph 3 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes
the Respondent’s evidence regarding having
experienced paranoia at various
times. The Tribunal also notes that it was not put to either Client B or Client
C that they had criminal
connections or that there was a reason why the
Respondent should fear being harmed.
respect to paragraph 4 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes
that the final ‘frank’ disclosure
of the Respondent with respect to
his alcohol and drug usage only came after cross-examination and questioning
from the members of
the Tribunal.
respect to paragraph 5 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
reiterates the comments made elsewhere in this document
that the contents of the
text messages that were sent by Client B do not have any bearing on the
characterisation of the Respondent’s
conduct or the findings made herein.
It is the messages sent by the Respondent to Client B that are of concern.
respect to paragraph 6 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
comments that the conduct may also be seen as demonstrating
a lack of insight
rather then a deep state of panic.
respect to paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
notes that the submission does not apply to
the Complaints relating to conduct
that occurred in 2002.
respect to paragraph 11 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes
that Client B gave an explanation as to why
she had not provided certain
information at any earlier time. Client B was involved in interactions with DoCS
and had at various
times lost the custody of her children and therefore did not
indicate that she had taken cocaine with the Respondent. The Tribunal
out elsewhere observations regarding the manner in which Client B gave
respect to paragraph 12 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes
that Client B and Client C were, at least in
part, recalling shared experiences
rather than sharing false information or memories. The evidence before the
Tribunal was not conclusive
as to whether Client B and Client C were interviewed
together by VSA-G. Despite this, the Tribunal took a cautious approach to the
evidence. However, the Tribunal also notes the consistency of their evidence and
the evidence given by Client A. The issue of whether
there was any contact
between Client A and Clients B & C was fully canvassed during the Inquiry.
While Client A had become aware
that other clients were also making complaints
Clients B and C gave evidence they did not know Client A. (See
Zaidi v Health Care Complaints Commission
NSWSC 335).
respect to paragraph 13 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accept that it was perhaps unreasonable for the Respondent
to be in a state of
fear and panic. The conduct described by the Respondent was consistent with
paranoia. Correspondence from the
Respondent states that the closure of his
private practice was due to financial considerations. The Tribunal is also of
there is a fundamental inconsistency between submitting that the
Respondent was acting out of panic and fear and then to submit he
with some level of responsibility and or insight.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(d) the Tribunal
has not made any findings based
on these issues despite the potential for these matters to reflect poorly on the
ability of the Respondent
to account for his practices.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(f) the Tribunal
accepts that there was nothing
in the evidence to suggest that the Respondent had in fact provided Mark with
Client B’s address.
There is however evidence that the Respondent did
threaten to send Mark to Client B’s home which would raise an apprehension
in Client B’s mind that he was going to provide Mark with the address.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(g) the Tribunal
would have to characterise any
such error as either a monumental error or a symptom of a serious impairment
given the scope of the
referral of Client C to the Respondent.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(h) the Tribunal
is concerned that the Board was
not notified about the hospital admissions in 2001. Indeed, had this occurred it
may well have been
that the Respondent would have been referred to the Impaired
Practitioners Panel which may have assisted him to establish an appropriate
treatment plan. The Tribunal notes that AA is considered by the National Drug
and Alcohol Research Centre as an adjunct to formal
treatment. The Tribunal does
not accept that the disclosures made by the Respondent of his drug abuse can be
to his credit given
that the account came so late in time and the obligation
placed upon registered health care providers to make such disclosure.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(l) the Tribunal
notes the evidence of Client C
that it was used by her son, her daughter and herself during therapy sessions.
Further, if it was
not in fact used then there would be no cause for it to have
been demonstrated or indeed discussed during therapy sessions and why
Respondent have sent an SMS message making reference to it.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(m) the Tribunal
considers the treatment
received by the Respondent for his alcoholism is limited. While it may be that
the standard appears to be
onerous and high, the legislation places
responsibility on the people holding registration to disclose impairment.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(n) the Tribunal
notes that the confusion
regarding the role of Ms Layton has substantially arisen because of the
Respondent’s inability to
explain her role.
respect to the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraph 13 regarding the
HCCC submissions at paragraph 33(p) the Tribunal
repeats the comments that the
content of messages from Client B is not the relevant consideration, rather it
is the content of the
messages sent by the Respondent that is relevant.
respect to paragraph 14 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal does
not accept that there is evidence to support
a submission that the Respondent
had undertaken ‘
substantial treatment and rehabilitation’
There is evidence that he received consistent treatment from Dr Prior between
February and May 2010. There is no evidence that would
allow the Tribunal to
accept that the Respondent suffered from
‘panic attacks’
While the Tribunal accepts that if the Respondent’s psychiatric
illness/alcoholism had been identified and treated he may
have been able to
identify his mistakes more readily, the role of this Tribunal is to regulate the
profession. In any case, as set
out above, had the Respondent reported his 2001
admissions he may well have received appropriate treatment from that time.
respect to paragraph 15 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts the actions of the Respondent in seeking assistance
from Ms Layton is
evidence of a lack of insight into the nature of his problems. The Tribunal also
accepts that the evidence of Ms
Layton did not assist the Respondent’s
position in any significant manner.
respect to paragraph 16 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes
that it has not accepted that the Respondent
ceased private practice for
anything other than financial reasons. In his report dated 11 February 2010 Dr
Prior reports that the
Respondent told him that the reason why he ceased working
as a psychologist was due to his relapse into alcoholism and the allegations
against him. The Respondent is recorded as informing Dr Wright (as stated in the
report dated 19 July 2010) that he ceased private
practice due to a serious
downturn in referrals.
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent has not shown insight by continuing to
work in related areas since the time he ceased
private practice as a
psychologist. The Tribunal notes comments have already been made in this
document that it is not of the view
that the Respondent has received at this
time substantial medical treatment. The Tribunal also has regard to the evidence
Respondent recently misappropriated Valium from a workplace, and has
reported to his treating doctor misusing medications such as
his prescribed
psychotropic medication.
respect to paragraph 17 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts Client A’s evidence that the social
events were by arrangement.
Even if the Respondent was not privy to the arrangements prior to the first
occasion it was a matter
for him to deal with that situation appropriately (i.e.
in this circumstance by leaving the event/venue) and then taking steps to
it did not again occur.
respect to paragraph 19 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal is of
the view that there is no evidence that the
Respondent has currently developed
genuine remorse.
respect to the Respondent’s submissions at the end of paragraph 20, the
Tribunal is of the view that not only would the
Respondent’s Bi-polar
Disorder have to be in ‘remission’ he will have to have in place a
proper treatment plan
whereby regular medication and treatment is ensured and he
will also have to address his alcoholism and the significant deficits
practice identified in this Reasons document. This will, of course, be a matter
for the consideration of any future Tribunal
that may deal with this matter.
Submissions in Reply
HCCC made no submissions in reply.
Findings in relation to Particulars of Complaint
HCCC made submissions regarding the credibility of the Respondent at paragraphs
22 to 37 inclusive. These submissions are accepted
by the Tribunal subject to
the following comments:
The evidence of
Client B was delivered in an emotive manner. The breakdown of the therapeutic
relationship between Client B and the
Respondent and the breaches of boundaries
that occurred may well have coloured Client B’s evidence to some extent.
her evidence is significantly supported or validated by other evidence
and on that basis is accepted by the Tribunal.
With respect to
the contents of paragraph 21 of the HCCC submissions the Tribunal notes it has
no evidence to the contrary before
With respect to
the submission made at paragraph 29, the Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct of the Respondent noted by Dr Prior
is consistent with the conduct
alleged by the Client B and Client C to have occurred in 2004/5. At this point
the Tribunal notes
that the evidence regarding the conduct of the Respondent as
at 2010 also supports the Tribunal’s view that the Respondent
2010, unable to function in a professional manner.
The submission
at paragraph 33(d) is noted by the Tribunal as not relating to a Particular of
the Complaint and has not been relied
upon by the Tribunal.
With respect to
the submission made at paragraph 33(g) the Tribunal notes the content of the
report written by the Respondent to the
Victims’ Compensation Tribunal
(VCT) dated 21 June 2005 (volume 2, exhibit 3, page 60) wherein the Respondent
clearly makes
reference to Client C’s daughter being a victim of crime.
This fact formed, at least in good part, the reason for the referral
of Client C
to his care.
With respect to
the submission made at paragraph 33(p), the Tribunal is of the view that the
content of any messages that were sent
by Client B (and/or Miss D) to the
Respondent (and/or Ms Layton) is irrelevant. What is relevant is the contents of
the Respondent’s
messages. If the messages from Client B contained threats
then there are appropriate ways for that matter to be dealt with. Sending
messages of the nature sent by the Respondent was not an appropriate response no
matter what the content of the received text messages
may have been.
The Tribunal is
extremely concerned by the conduct of the Respondent detailed in paragraph 33(q)
which does not form part of the Particulars.
It has however been considered as
relevant to the appropriate Orders to be made, although it was not determinative
thereof i.e. the
same Orders would have been made by the Tribunal had this issue
not been considered.
to the submission made by the HCCC at paragraph 34, the Tribunal comments that
the pattern of ‘
memory loss
’ described by the Respondent is
not typical of that encountered as a result of severe alcohol abuse. Nothing
turns on this
point, in the view of the Tribunal.
to the submission made at paragraph 35 the Tribunal notes that his conduct at
this time still showed a level of inherent organisation.
He could still write
reports, respond to correspondence. There may be some memory loss however the
Tribunal observes that after having
had the opportunity to observe the
Respondent giving evidence that there may well be an element of hiding behind
his impairment.
The statement regarding taking the matter to ‘
’ has an air of grandiosity about it consistent with bi-polar
symptoms and indicates the steps he was at least contemplating
in order to
avoid any further trouble.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC regarding the credibility of Ms
Layton (see paragraph 37). The Tribunal sets out above
the inconsistencies in Ms
Layton’s oral evidence. This combined with the matters submitted as
relevant by the HCCC (in particular
the submission made at paragraph 37(d))
supports the Tribunal’s view that little weight should be placed upon the
of Ms Layton. The Tribunal also notes the Respondent’s
submissions regarding the evidence of Ms Layton (see paragraph 15).
Ultimately,
the Tribunal has carefully considered each occasion on which the evidence of the
Respondent differed from the evidence
of the other witnesses to decide which
evidence is preferred.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 1(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [12 - 13] and 14AA [8]. The Tribunal does
not consider that exhibit 14AA
paragraph 8 supports this Particular. Client A’s evidence at paragraphs 12
to 13 of exhibit
14AA is accepted. The Tribunal also notes the following oral
evidence given by Client A (please note that Client A gave evidence
assistance of an interpreter) as follows (from T11.35, 24/8/2010):
Q. JURD The questions I have for you are first going to
follow a line of complaints that have been made and I'm going to ask you about
those and I'm going to suggest things about them and I want you to consider my
suggestion and say whether it's true or false. I'm
going to suggest to you that
Peter was not late more than once.
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: False.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established. The
Tribunal notes that ultimately the Respondent accepted
that he was late to
appointments.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 1(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [12-13] and 14AA [9]. The following evidence
was given by Client A during
cross-examination (from T11.4, 24/8/10):
Q. JURD I'm going to say that Peter did not cancel treatment
sessions more than once?
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: False.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established. The Tribunal notes
that the Respondent had admitted in correspondence that he may have missed some
appointments and
ultimately during the Inquiry the Respondent agreed he may well
not have attended some appointments.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 1(c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
14A [17]. Client A also gave the following evidence
under cross-examination
(from T12.12, 24/8/10):
Q. What I'm going to say to you now is when you gave your
evidence before about telephone calls you did not know whether Peter was
speaking to friends. What do you say about that?
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: He said it was his friend. I don't know what they
were talking about but he told me that it was his friend.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 1(d)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [14-15] [17-18] and 14AA [5][8]. Client A
also gave the following oral
evidence (from T12.23, 24/8/10):
Q. I'm going to suggest as well that Peter did not give you
details of his personal and sexual relationships; is that correct or
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: You mean he never, that would be false.
Tribunal does not find the contents of paragraph 8 of exhibit 14AA relevant to
this Particular. The Tribunal accepts the balance
of the evidence of Client A
relied upon by the HCCC with respect to this Particular and is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular
is established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 2
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [14-15] and [17-18]. The Tribunal also notes
Client A’s evidence in
relation to the Particular above. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A
with respect to this
Particular and is reasonably satisfied that this Particular
is established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 3(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [15] and 14B. Client A gave the following
evidence under cross-examination
(from T12.27, 24/8/10):
Q. JURD Thank you. I suggest to you that Peter did not invite
you to his house, is that correct or not?
A. WITNESS: False.
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: False.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 3(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [16], 14AA [7], and 14B. Client A gave the
following evidence under
cross-examination (T13, 24/8/10):
Q. JURD In relation to going to the nightclubs was the
arrangement made by Peter or by [Ms G]?
A. WITNESS: Both.
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: Both.
Q. And I suggest that Peter did not do that, what do you say to
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: That would be false.
Q. JURD When you went out for dinner to the Lightning or Lightening House
on George Street, Parramatta?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
INTERPRETER
Tribunal does not find that the evidence at exhibit 14AA paragraph 7 assists
with respect to this Particular. However, the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of
Client A at paragraph 16 of exhibit 14A and in exhibit 14B and is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular
is established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 3(c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
14A [16]. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of
Client A with respect to this
Particular and is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
Complaints One/Two – Particular 3(d)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
14A [16]. Client A gave the following evidence
under cross-examination (T 14,
Q. JURD Yes. I'm asking you a question about a conversation
you had with Peter regarding going out with him and I'm suggesting to
Peter did not tell you that you were to keep it a secret from everybody
A. INTERPRETER RYDE: That's not true.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established. At this point the
Tribunal notes that the conduct of the Respondent illustrates a level of
knowledge with respect to
his conduct (or rather misconduct) and a degree of
guilt. The Tribunal also notes that it was Client A who decided not to continue
with the social contact because she had become uncomfortable with the knowledge
that the Respondent was breaching his professional
Complaints One/Two – Particular 4
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at Volume 2
of the HCCC exhibits. The keeping of appropriate
records is an essential part of
the practice of all health care practitioners. The Respondent acknowledged the
deficits in his records.
The Tribunal is reasonable satisfied that this
Particular is established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 1
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
12 [8] and 6(iii). The Tribunal notes that the
references provided by the HCCC
as being to exhibit 12 are actually to annexure 1 of exhibit 12. Client
B’s evidence was that
Mark would knock at the door at any time and come in
during sessions to ‘chat’. Client B gave the following evidence
8, 30/8/10):
Q. STERN On the first time when Mark came into a session, did
you know Mark already or was he a complete stranger to you?
A. Complete stranger to me.
Q. Did you ever see Mark on a social occasion?
Q. You never. Did you ever see Mark at Mr Clark-Saunders'
Q. Could you explain the context in which you were at
Mr Clark-Saunders' home together with Mark?
A. I would have an appointment at Peter's house, and then he would have
visitors that would come over in between the consultations
that I was having
with Peter, and Mark would come to visit at his place.
Q. Thank you. Did that happen once or more than once?
A. More than once.
Q. Did you ever go to anyone else's house with Peter when Mark was
Q. Could you explain the context in which that happened?
A. I have been with Peter and a friend of his, Janice, to his friend's
place, Mark.
Q. So did you go to Mark's home?
A. With Peter and Janice.
Q. Was anybody else present?
A. Yes. It was Mark's brother and his girlfriend.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 2(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
12 [5-6] and 6(iii). Client B gave the following
evidence (T14, 15 and 53,
Q. I'm sorry, I interrupted you. The first thing you said is
that it changed when Peter started drug taking. What was the effect
change, how did your counselling sessions change around 2004?
A. Well, they changed, they were quite odd. There was no more sort of
consultations in his office, he was making his consultations
at his home, or at
my home, or it was - I felt really stood over and I had to sort of do
what Peter said - wherever the consultations
were to take place, his
odd behaviour, taking drugs in front of me.
Q. In paragraph 5 of the statement in front of you, you've
"During our counselling sessions we would meet in coffee shops, at his
Now, you've just told the tribunal that at times you had counselling
sessions at your home and at times you had counselling sessions
at his home.
But as regards the coffee shops, would you have a session in the coffee shop or
would you just meet in the coffee shop
and then go upstairs to Peter's office
for the session?
A. We would be having a session in his office and halfway through he'd
say, "Well, let's go down to the coffee shop now," which was
out the front of
Mark's shop. His friend's shop was next-door to his office and that's where he
had coffee, and that's where the
rest of the consultation was supposed to take
place, but he was mainly having coffee and talking to his friend Mark for the
of the session.
Q. You said it was mainly having coffee and talking to his friend, Mark.
Was Mark always there when you were in a coffee shop with
Peter, or only
A. Either Mark or his brother was always there - either one of
Q. JURD I put it to you that that's not the case and that there were no
sessions at Peter's home?
A. Yes, there was. With my daughter there. Peter went away to Canberra
at one stage and he gave me the key to his house to ask
me to feed his cat, so I
looked after his cat while he was away, for about a week. Remember that, Pete?
You remember that.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 2(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
12 [8] and 6(iii). The Tribunal notes that this
Particular refers to Patient C.
While the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this
Particular would be reasonably
satisfied that if the Particular referred to
Client B this Particular would be established it is not established as
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 2(c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a) and 12 [11-12]. Client B gave the following
evidence under
cross-examination (T40, 30/8/10):
Q. JURD And I put it to you you just made that up.
A. Really? I don't think so. I'm not here to make things up about
somebody and destroy their life, I'm here to tell the truth.
Q. And the threesome that you're talking about with Mark's brother and
his girlfriend--
Q. --was that on the day where Peter gave you, you say, the
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a) and 12 [15]. The Tribunal accepts the evidence
of Client B with respect to
this Particular and is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
The Tribunal notes Client
B’s evidence that she had not mentioned her use
of Cocaine at the time she provided her initial statement as her children were
in the care of DoCS.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 3
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a), 12 [4], 6(iii), and volume 2, Client B
tab, pp. 19, 21, 23, 27. 29, 33,
36, 39, 40, 44, 49 and 60. The HCCC also rely upon T46:29 – 56:23
(31/08/10). Client B gave
the following evidence in chief (T10.5, 30/8/10):
Q. STERN Why is it that you believe that Peter had billed DOCS
for services which hadn't been provided to your son [Master E]?
A. On one of my consultations with Peter at my home, he did tell me that
he had been billing the Department of Community Services
for [Master E] for
coming for consultations, "but don't tell DOCS that I'm actually billing them
for [Master E] coming," as [Master
E] wasn't going to see Peter at all.
Q. How did you know that [Master E] wasn't going to see Peter at all at
A. Because [Master E] lived with me, and I wasn't taking him. [Master E]
had only visited Peter's office two to three times at the
B gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T55.8, 30/8/10):
Q. JURD I put it to you that at no stage did he say you should
lie to DOCS about him giving treatment to your son?
A. He definitely did. And my poor son has missed out now on all that
funding. He never - he can't get any more counselling thanks
taking all his money. 30.8.2010 p. 55, line 8
Tribunal has not relied upon the documents found in Volume 2 as the Particular
does not require the Tribunal to make a finding
that the Respondent actually
made any false claims to DoCS. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B
with respect to this Particular
as set out in the transcript and the documentary
evidence and is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 4
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a), 12 [15-16], 6(iii) and 6(iv). Client B
gave the following evidence under
cross-examination (T 42.27, 30/8/10):
Q. JURD And she refers there to, "too much of the green and
white stuff." Do you know what she's talking about there?
A. Yes. Janice was having some white stuff with Peter and myself. She
knows exactly what it's about, it's about too much of the
white stuff
that - the cocaine that I had at Peter's, and the marijuana that Peter
gave me to smoke.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 5(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
12 [8] and 6(iii). Client B gave the following
evidence (T51.34, 30/8/10):
Q. Okay. And you weren't worried about him contacting
A. No. No, not at all. Contact Centrelink, contact DOCS. That's right.
Nothing to hide. He told Mark that he was doing a compensation
claim for me
that was worth $90,000. I don't know why he told Mark that, it wasn't worth
$90,000 anyway - in his office.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular. The
Tribunal notes that Client B’s evidence goes
to Mark coming into therapy
sessions and chatting to her and the Respondent. Even the fact that a person is
receiving psychological
treatment is confidential information. In this regard
the Respondent has disclosed confidential information about Client B to Mark.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 5(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(iii) and 13 [7][9]. Client B gave the following
evidence under
cross-examination (T 55.27, 30/8/10):
Q JURD. Thank you. And I put it to you that he didn't disclose
any information about you to Client C?
A. Yes, he did.
Q. Why do you say that?
A. Because he rang her up and said that I was flirting with his boy,
swimming in the pool and I was all over him. So how would Client
C know that
there was a boy there and that we were swimming? Well, I wasn't actually
swimming, my daughter and I were just paddling
at the side of the pool while
Peter was swimming with his boy. That was his lunch break during my sessions.
We had to go down to
the pool. We had no choice, we had to do what Peter said.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 5 (c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a) and 6(iii). The Tribunal does not find
that any of the contents of exhibit
25(a) supports this Particular. Client B gave the following evidence relevant to
this Particular
(T47.34, 30/8/10):
Q. JURD Sorry, I'm just going through a few things. If I
suggest to you that you attempted to put your hands down the front of
trousers on one occasion in his room, what would you say?
A. I would swear on my children's death that that's never happened, ever.
Peter said he'd like to have sex with me to show me how
gentle a man can
MCCANN: I'm gay.
WITNESS: I know you're gay, Peter, but you did say it, and you know that
you said it, Peter, okay. You were asking my daughter if
I was gay, lesbian,
because I don't like men. Just because I don't like men doesn't mean that I'm
gay, and if I don't like men I
certainly wouldn't put my hands down Peter's
pants. Why would I? He's gay. Geez.
T55.39, 30/8/10 Client B gave the following evidence:
Q. And how do you know that during a session Peter
disclosed that you were a lesbian to your daughter?
A. My daughter told me.
Q. I put it to you that that isn't the case?
A. Well, my daughter - why would my daughter come to me and say
that, "Peter says that he thinks that you're gay or you're a lesbian?"
upsetting for my daughter, actually.
Tribunal is of the view that the evidence in exhibit 6(iii) supports this
Particular. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client
B set out in exhibit
6(iii) respect to this Particular and is reasonably satisfied that this
Particular is established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 5 (d)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(a), 6(iii) and 2(xi) and notes this Particular
was admitted by the
Respondent. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to this
Particular and is reasonably satisfied
that this Particular is established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 6
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
2(x), 12 [20-24], 18 and 19(ii) and notes that
this Particular was admitted by
the Respondent. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client B with respect to
this Particular and
is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Three/Four – Particular 7
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
Volume 2. The keeping of appropriate records is
an essential part of the
practice of all health care practitioners. The Respondent acknowledged the
deficits in his records. The
Tribunal is reasonable satisfied that this
Particular is established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13 [25][31][32]. Client C gave evidence on 22
March 2010 and 23 March 2010. At T
10, 11 on 22 March 2010 she confirmed the contents of each of the documents she
had authored or
related to an interview she had participated in which were
relied upon by the HCCC in this matter.
Tribunal notes Client C gave the following evidence in chief (at T34. 15 –
35.20, 22/03/10 and T28.30-45, 23/03/10):
Q. And I wonder if I could just turn now over the page to
paragraph 31 and 32 and you've said that occasionally you would turn up
an appointment which had been made but that Mr Clarke-Saunders wasn't
Q. You've said it happened occasionally, did it happen more than
A. It happened more than once I know that and I'd been there and I had to
ring Peter up and go, where are you and he was, I'm coming,
I'm coming and one
time I rang him up and he was in bed. Yeah, so I had to wait like an hour or so
for him to get there, yeah.
Q. And was it ever the case that he didn't come at all or did he always
come but it just would've been a bit late?
A. I think that happened maybe once that I'd gone there and I
had - I went home. You know like and I just said well I'm not waiting
around. I'll phone him. He isn't there.
Q. And when you described waiting around is this something that would be
five or 10 minutes, half an hour or more than that?
A. Well, I'm usually flexible, I'll wait half an hour, yeah.
Q. Okay but can you remember on the occasions when you were there and you
had to wait is this a matter of five or 10 minutes or was
it usually longer
A. On my usual appointments, yeah, like I wouldn't have to wait. Peter
would - well, might have been one customer before me and
I'd just be
waiting 10 minutes.
Q. Okay and on the occasions when you'd turn up, had already been made
and he wasn't there which is what you've described in paragraph
A. Yeah, yeah.
Q. How long on average if you can remember would you then have to wait
for him to come to the office to continue the appointment?
A. Well, I had - I had - like that time he was in bed
I had to wait an hour for him to come.
Q. Okay and how is it that you would contact him in those occasions, was
there a receptionist who would get in touch with him?
A. No, I'd ring his mobile.
Q. You'd ring his mobile?
Q. And is that something that you felt quite comfortable doing, calling
him on his mobile?
Q. And equally was it the case that on occasion he just called you on
your mobile?
Q. And did he sometimes call you to reschedule sessions or was it usually
A. Sometime he had, like rescheduled I think, changed it, yeah.
....................
Q. And there was only the one cancelled appointment that you can recall
with Peter?
A. Might have been a couple but we rearranged it for a different time, it
was like, that wasn't a problem.
Q. So you are just not sure?
A. There might have been a couple of times but, like I said, we
rearranged the appointment.
Q. You say he cancelled. Did he telephone you to advise they were
A. Yes, or I'd rung him.
A. I'd rung him or he'd rung me.
Tribunal notes the Respondent gave the following evidence under
cross-examination (T73.20, 31/3/10):
Q. I think I was asking you whether you could be sure that you
had, in fact, contacted clients A, B and C before cancelling sessions?
A. Most of the time.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13 [14][17].
Tribunal notes Client C gave the following evidence (T18.15-20 & T22.10-50,
Q. I wonder whether I could ask you first of all to ask about
paragraph 6 of your statement and you said in paragraph 6 that
Mr Clarke-Saunders
began doing unprofessional things during counselling and
I want to ask you first about the word unprofessional. Why is it that you
regarded the things that you describe in that paragraph as
unprofessional?
A. I've normally gone to a counselling session after that with a
counsellor, they've just sat in the chair opposite and made the
room comfortable
for me and it's not flit round and answer phone calls and answer the door and go
out for lunch and all the rest
of it, yeah. It wasn't like that.
Q. And in the next paragraph, paragraph 14, which is over the page,
you've talked about appointments with Mr Clarke-Saunders and
constantly made phone calls, and that's the first bit I want to ask you about.
Was this during social interaction or during
counselling appointments that
Mr Clarke-Saunders--
A. No, I took it as soon as I go into that office, isn't that my time?
Isn't that - I understood that that was my time with him,
phone would be ringing, Peter would answer it, or otherwise he would make phone
calls he needed to make. Sometimes they
were personal phone calls to his male
Q. And would these phone calls take place within the office where you
were present?
A. Yes, yes.
Q. And would they take place during the time of the counselling
Q. And would additional time be added at the end of the session to make
up for any time that had been taken?
A. Not that I was aware of, no.
Q. Did Mr Clarke-Saunders ever ask you whether you minded if he took
a telephone call or made a telephone call?
A. I can't remember.
Q. During the course of these telephone conversations could you hear
Mr Clarke-Saunders' side of the conversation, as it were?
Q. And would these always be matters of a professional matter?
Q. And could you describe what sorts of matters might be covered by
Mr Clarke-Saunders during these conversations, just to give
A. I don't really want to go into - it's just--
CHAIRPERSON
Q. Sorry, I didn't hear your answer.
A. I don't really want to go into it. It's just disgusting and I don't
really want to talk about it.
Tribunal notes the following oral evidence in chief from the Respondent
(T21.45-22.1, 31/03/10) that he could not recall whether
he had conducted
telephone conversations with friends while Client B and Client C were present
during sessions.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13 [11-13][33]. The Tribunal considers
paragraphs 14 and 15 of exhibit
13 to also be relevant to this Particular.
C gave the following evidence in chief (T23 & 27, 22/3/10):
Q. And you've said at the end of that paragraph, the next line
of that paragraph is that "We would go for coffee often at the shop
downstairs".
Again, was that during treatment sessions or was that during social interactions
outside of treatment sessions?
A. No, that was during my session.
Q. And again--
A. He'd go "Well, let's go down and get a coffee".
Q. And so that, if we can again go back to the sort of mechanics of it,
you would arrive for your session and you would go into Mr
Clarke-Saunders
Q. And then on occasion he might suggest "Let's go down and get a
Q. And you would go down together?
Q. And would you continue the therapy, as it were, whilst you were down
in the coffee shop?
A. Just general conversation. It was just general, yeah. I don't know
if it was part - that's why I said I'm confused because I
what was part of my session and what wasn't, what was, because a lot of it was
social stuff.
Q. And when you'd go down for coffee would you then take the coffee back
up to the office and continue the treatment session?
A. Sometimes we did; other times we sat downstairs.
Q. And if you sat downstairs and had your coffee, would you stay down
there and then the treatment session would end or would you
invariably go back
up to the office?
A. No, I think we back to the - we went back to the
Q. And again it may be you can't recall, but would the time spent in
those coffee outings, if I can call them that, be added to the
end of your
treatment sessions?
A. Not that I was aware of.
Q. And you've said in that paragraph 14 that you would have a
one-hour appointment, going to the last three lines of the paragraph,
only receive about five minutes of so-called counselling". Is that a bit of an
exaggeration?
A. No, it felt like that.
Q. And when you were discussing or having conversations with
Mr Clarke-Saunders in the coffee shop, et cetera, would you regard that,
from your perspective, as part of your counselling?
A. No, not professional counselling that I've had afterwards, no.
............
Q. And then you undertook to assist the person on the other end of the
Q. And that involved you making various telephone calls?
Q. And was this all during a therapeutic session with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And at the end of the session, it may be you can't remember, but do
you recall whether additional time was added to the end of
your treatment
A. I can't remember. I don't think it would have been.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T82.40 -83.1,
Q. You agree also that it's likely that during that period this
less professional attitude also reflected the timing of the sessions,
period of time you allocated to each session?
A. I don't recall.
Q. You can't recall.
A. I would say, yes, more towards the end of 2005. I think timing may
have become - I was a lot more erratic at that time and obviously
medicated for bipolar, but that's all changed now.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(d)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13[7][17][33-34].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T29.30-45, 22/03/10):
Q. Now in your statement, and I'm going back now to
paragraph 17, you've described taking your daughter?
Q. To see Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And did they have a treatment session of some sort?
A. No, I was trying to encourage my daughter to go to counselling because
she had troubles in Mental Health with counselling there,
and I had explained
that to Peter and told Peter I was finding it hard to get my teenage daughter to
do that, and so Peter was acting
all friendly, bubbly himself and we were trying
to encourage her to go, and yeah, he - the first day of meeting her,
we were in a
coffee shop and he had a domestic or he was fighting with his
boyfriend on the phone and he comes back and discusses it and
- tries to get counselling off my daughter about his
relationship.
Q. So is it the case that he discussed personal details of his
relationship in front of your daughter?
the Tribunal does not rely on the evidence contained in paragraph 7 of exhibit
13, the Tribunal accepts the balance of the
evidence of Client C with respect to
this Particular and is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(e)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13[13].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T19.40 – 22.5, 22/03/10):
Q. And what you've said in paragraph 13 of your statement
is that you started an in-depth conversation with Mr Clarke-Saunders when
his sister arrived and that "he invited her into our session and introduced her
Q. And then you said "She sat in the session for about half an hour
talking with us"?
Q. Now I wonder if you could just tell me exactly how did that happen and
if we could kind of take it down to basics. So is it the
case that you were
sitting with Mr Clarke-Saunders in his office?
A. Yes. I was having a session with Peter and I was sitting down, and I
don't think that's on the right date because I don't think
it was after I
returned from the pub. This was on another occasion, yeah.
Q. So this is--
A. I think that bit's wrong, yeah.
Q. --on another occasion?
A. Yeah, because - I was sitting in the session, I
hadn't - I'd been in there for about half an hour.
Peter - yeah, there was a
knock at the door and Peter invited his
sister in, but we were - I was, you know, in a personal conversation
with Peter, and interrupted
me and made me feel like "Oh, I've got to stop
here", and then she came in and she sat down and had began yadda-yadda-yadda to
brother, that she knew me. It was like she knew me. Peter had obviously
discussed me to her.
Q. What gave you the impression that he'd discussed you with his sister
prior to that session?
A. She goes "Oh, you're Client C", dah-dah-dah. Peter and I had things
in common. I was adopted and so Peter was - yeah, obviously
her, yeah, "There's a client of mine who's adopted" because how would she know
all of that stuff? She knew who I was.
Q. What gave you the impression that she knew that you were
A. She was talking - "Oh you're the one?", "Yeah", and I said
"Oh yeah, Peter and I are". Yeah, so she already knew about me. Her
conversation to me, she already knew who I was.
Q. I'm just trying to understand precisely what made you think that she
knew who you were when she walked in?
A. The way she was talking to me. You don't approach people unless
you've heard about - like, she just wouldn't have.
Q. And did she say anything which indicated that she knew any details
A. I know we were talking about Peter being adopted, like we were talking
Q. And was it your impression that she knew that information about you
being adopted before she walked into the room?
Q. And what precisely did she say that made you think that she knew
A. I don't remember the holus-bolus conversation, but my impression was
that she knew about me.
Q. Did that cause you any concern at the time?
A. Not at that time, no. I thought about it later. Later on I thought
think at the time
that was going on. I was messed up.
Q. Did Mr Clarke-Saunders ask you whether you minded whether or not
his sister came in?
A. I can't remember. I can't really remember that. He just answered the
door, yeah.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T112.20,
Q. Alongside the letter D. Did any of your sisters, to the
best of your recollection, ever attend a session or any of your
Q. Did any of them ever come to your room?
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(f)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13[27]. The Tribunal has also taken
the contents of paragraph 28 of
exhibit 13 into account with respect to this Particular.
C gave the following evidence in chief (T27.25-29.25, 22/03/10):
Q. In the next paragraph, paragraph 16 of your statement,
you refer to Mr Clarke-Saunders introducing you to a friend of his by the
name of Mark. Is that the person that you referred to at the start of your oral
evidence when you were indicating that you were
scared in February 2006?
Q. Had you met that person Mark before you met him through
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And could you just explain how it is that you first met Mark with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. I think I met him downstairs at the coffee shop.
Q. And did this person called Mark ever, to your knowledge, come to
Mr Clarke-Saunders' office?
Q. And did he ever come into a treatment session that you were attending
with Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Yes. I don't know if it was after my session, but he came up and I
was there in the office. It may have been, but whether it
wasn't I'm not sure.
I can't remember.
Q. And again if we could go back to sort of the basics, were you sitting
in Mr Clarke-Saunders' office and there's a knock on the
Q. Is that the way it happened?
Q. And then did Mr Clarke-Saunders open the door?
Q. And this person by the name of Mark then came into your treatment
session; is that right?
Q. And were you asked whether or not you were happy for this person to
come into the treatment session?
A. No, I don't think so.
Q. Can you remember how you responded to that or how it made you
A. I felt uncomfortable. I know I felt uncomfortable because I didn't
really know what his objective was to be - you know, like
know, why he was there. Yeah, Peter kind of put me on-the-spot and said to him
in front of me "I'm telling you, I'm telling
what's happened to you".
Q. And did you form any view as to whether or not Mark knew about you
before walking into the treatment session?
A. Well, I had the - like the same feeling with his sister. He
had been made aware of my problem - problems and he knew about
Q. What gave you that impression?
A. His reaction, yeah.
Q. Can you just give us one example, just to give us a flavour of what it
A. He was just really a scary guy and the way he put it, like he answered
me like I told him my situation and it was virtually like
I - he made
me feel even more scared, this guy. Like he put me on-the-spot, yeah. He put
me like on-the-spot and made me feel like
I was going to get hurt.
Q. What I really want to know is what - you said today and then
in paragraph 30 of your statement, which is a couple of pages further
page 5, you said of this particular interaction that "It was obvious that
Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked to Mark previously
personal business and knew why I was seeing Mr Clarke-Saunders", and you
said it appeared to you that Mark
was judgmental of you?
Q. And I just want to know, doing the best you can now, why it is that
you say that it was obvious that Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked
previously about you?
A. Because the way - someone doesn't approach you, if they know
you and they - they don't know you, they don't act like he was acting.
Like you just - I don't know. I've met you before and stuff, like I
know how to approach you, but when I meet a person new I don't
approach people
like that. It was like he knew all about me.
Q. Did he say anything to you which indicated that he knew any of your
personal details?
A. His response was he already knew about it, like he acted like he
already knew about it.
Q. But he didn't say he already knew about it?
A. I can't remember the exact words, but it was just I knew in my gut
that he knew.
Q. And you've described two incidents then. You've described, firstly,
that on one occasion Mr Clarke-Saunders' sister came into
a treatment
Q. And then you've described on another occasion Mark came into a
treatment session?
Q. Are they the only two occasions when anybody came into a treatment
session that you were attending with Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. There might have been a couple of other times when people came, but it
wasn't like that. It wasn't like those experiences.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 1(g)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13 [15].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T24.5 – 25.35, 22/3/10):
Q. Now in the next paragraph you've described, and I'm looking
five or six lines into it, two occasions when Mr Clarke-Saunders used
light and sound apparatus on himself. Now if I could ask you first just
describe what that apparatus is?
A. I don't know. It was just a funny pair of glasses things. I don't
even know what they were. I never tried them on, I didn't
want to try them on.
He sat there in the chair with them on.
Q. And did he suggest that you use them?
A. Not that I can remember. He talked about, like, "Oh, have you tried
this, Client C?", but I said "No, I haven't and I've never
seen them", and they
didn't interest me whatsoever in my treatment.
Q. And in your understanding, or what was your understanding of why
Mr Clarke-Saunders used this apparatus whilst you were in a counselling
A. Well, he was just fluffing around in every session. It was like he
sat back and he was on the lounge with his feet up on the
lounge and I was
sitting behind his desk and somebody - I was sitting at his desk and
then somebody rings up for a termination and
he asked me to take the call
because he couldn't deal with her, he didn't know what to do.
Q. Can we take it in stages? I'm sorry to interrupt you.
A. That's what happened when he was there, yeah.
Q. Okay, so we start off with the position that you're in, within the
room, and I wonder if I could just ask you about that?
Q. You've just described that Mr Clarke-Saunders was
on - was it a lounge or a sofa of some sort?
A. Yeah, a lounge. A lounge.
Q. And you were sitting behind the desk?
A. No, I was on the - there is a chair, just a single chair,
and I sat on the single chair and then the phone rang. Peter dealt
phone call and then put me on the phone and I dealt with the problem.
Q. Can I ask first of all just the actual position in which you were
sitting in with Mr Clarke-Saunders on the sofa and you on a
chair. If I
just sort of - if you look at that desk--
A. I was here and he would have been like that.
Q. And was that normally what would happen during sessions or would
normally Mr Clarke-Saunders be behind a desk or sitting at a
you'd be on the sofa?
A. All over, all over the room he was, yeah.
Q. Did you ever see Mr Clarke-Saunders taking notes during treatment
A. At the beginning his - I don't know what she was, she was a
psychologist or training, she was training or a secretary, I don't
know what she
was, she was there and she was taking notes in the first couple of sessions,
Q. And did you ever see Mr Clarke-Saunders himself take any notes
during treatment sessions?
A. I can't remember, no.
Q. If we just go back to the session you were describing, in your
statement in paragraph 15 you've said that you can recall two occasions
where Mr Clarke-Saunders used light and sound apparatus on himself, and
were both of those occasions in the manner that you've just
described, that he
was on the sofa and you were sitting on the chair?
A. Yeah, I think that's right, because I can only remember one occasion,
so yeah, that's right, yeah.
Q. So one occasion when that happened?
Q. And I asked you whether you knew or whether you had any understanding
as to why he was using it on that occasion, whether he told
you anything about
why he was using it?
A. To relax.
Q. Can you remember that?
A. To relax.
Q. And did he say "I'm using it to relax", or is this just what you were
A. No, he made a statement because I said "Oh, what's it do?", you know,
"What's it do?", and he said "Oh, it's to relax your mind",
Q. And did he indicate to you in any way that he wanted to relax during
the session; was that any part of the conversation?
A. He was stressed out all the time, yeah.
Q. What gave you that impression?
A. The way he behaved.
C gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T38.45- 39.10,
Q. You talk about some strange machine he put on his head. Was
he demonstrating to you how it worked?
A. Not really demonstrating, he was just using it himself.
Q. How long did he use it for?
A. Well he was laying on the lounge for a while.
Q. A while?
A. A good 15, 20 minutes.
Q. Fifteen to 20 minutes?
A. Yes, maybe yes.
Q. I put it to you that is not the case?
A. Like I say, I'm saying what I saw.
Q. I put it to you that he was showing you how this machine
A. He didn't even put it on me. He didn't show me how it worked. I
didn't even know what he was looking at in the funny things.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(a)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13 [33-34]. The Tribunal has also had regard to
paragraphs 17 and 25 of exhibit
C also gave the following evidence in chief (T29.30-45, 22/03/10):
Q. Now in your statement, and I'm going back now to
paragraph 17, you've described taking your daughter?
Q. To see Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And did they have a treatment session of some sort?
A. No, I was trying to encourage my daughter to go to counselling because
she had troubles in Mental Health with counselling there,
and I had explained
that to Peter and told Peter I was finding it hard to get my teenage daughter to
do that, and so Peter was acting
all friendly, bubbly himself and we were trying
to encourage her to go, and yeah, he - the first day of meeting her,
we were in a
coffee shop and he had a domestic or he was fighting with his
boyfriend on the phone and he comes back and discusses it and
- tries to get counselling off my daughter about his
relationship.
Q. So is it the case that he discussed personal details of his
relationship in front of your daughter?
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(b)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13[9]. Client C gave the following evidence in
chief (T32-34 & 18,
Q. Okay and then you've said that there was another time when
that occurred was when Mr Clarke-Saunders and a psychologist friend
from Canberra, Client B came to visit you at your place?
Q. So is it the case that Mr Clarke-Saunders came to your house as a
social visit or as a therapeutic visit?
A. I - as I recall he's only ever come to my place twice.
Might have been once or twice, yeah, it wasn't - it
wasn't - it was only
minimal and he only came that night and we went
Q. Okay, so when he came that night was it your understanding that he was
coming for counselling, to counsel you?
A. No, we were socialising.
Q. And was this something that had been arranged in advance or did he
just turn up at your--
A. No, no, we arranged it.
Q. And did you arrange it during a counselling session?
Q. Was it arranged--
A. It would've been over the phone, just, yeah.
Q. And did you sometimes arrange things over the phone or sometimes by
text message?
A. Yeah, yeah.
Q. And so is it right that on occasion you would have had social text
message interaction with Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. Okay so this occasion when he came over with others, was that during
the period of approximately six months whilst he was your
counsellor?
Q. And you've said in the next paragraph that the reason for the visit
was just to say hello and then you've described various different
interactions
there. This is all in the context of a general social interaction?
Q. And was that the only occasion that he came to your house for a social
Q. Okay and you said I think that you thought he'd come to your house
Q. And would that mean that the other occasion when he came to your house
was to give you counselling?
A. No, we went out. I know we went out one night and he came over and,
yeah, it was not long. He didn't stay long.
Q. Okay, so you've just described two different occasions when you either
had Mr - once you had Mr Clarke-Saunders socially over
house and once you went out with him socially?
Q. Okay and was that with a group of people or just with the two of
A. No, there was that Janice lady and Client B was with us also.
Q. And when you say that Janice lady, is that the person you've referred
to as the female psychologist friend of his from Canberra
or is that someone
A. Yeah, yeah, no, that's the girl.
.............
Q. And then if you turn over to paragraph 7 of your statement,
you've said in paragraph 7 that on occasion Mr Clarke-Saunders
things such as a time when Client B had gone to his place to go
swimming in his pool and some other incidents?
Q. Is that something that you can recall sitting here now?
A. Yeah. I know I was on the phone - I was on the phone to
him. I rang Peter up and he said that Client B was there and they were
in the pool, and then later on I rang back later and - he was like
telling me sexual stuff, like this guy liked Client B
and Client B liked him
back and talking in a sexual way.
Q. And were these telephone conversations social conversations or were
they conversations with Mr Clarke-Saunders in his capacity
therapist, as your counsellor?
A. I took it more as a friend. Yeah, he was just letting me know Client
B was there, yep.
Q. And can you remember with these telephone conversations, did you call
him or did he call you?
A. I think I'd rung him. Sometimes he rang me, yeah.
Q. And did you have telephone contact with Mr Clarke-Saunders that
was of a social nature?
A. Yeah, yep. I would say it was social, yeah.
Q. And was that simply sort of chitchat in the context of arranging
appointments or would you have telephone conversations with him
that were, if
you like, unrelated to arranging appointments?
A. Yeah, unrelated, yep.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(c)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13[13].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T19.40 -22.5, 22/03/10):
Q. And what you've said in paragraph 13 of your statement
is that you started an in-depth conversation with Mr Clarke-Saunders when
his sister arrived and that "he invited her into our session and introduced her
Q. And then you said "She sat in the session for about half an hour
talking with us"?
Q. Now I wonder if you could just tell me exactly how did that happen and
if we could kind of take it down to basics. So is it the
case that you were
sitting with Mr Clarke-Saunders in his office?
A. Yes. I was having a session with Peter and I was sitting down, and I
don't think that's on the right date because I don't think
it was after I
returned from the pub. This was on another occasion, yeah.
Q. So this is--
A. I think that bit's wrong, yeah.
Q. --on another occasion?
A. Yeah, because - I was sitting in the session, I
hadn't - I'd been in there for about half an hour.
Peter - yeah, there was a
knock at the door and Peter invited his
sister in, but we were - I was, you know, in a personal conversation
with Peter, and interrupted
me and made me feel like "Oh, I've got to stop
here", and then she came in and she sat down and had began yadda-yadda-yadda to
brother, that she knew me. It was like she knew me. Peter had obviously
discussed me to her.
Q. What gave you the impression that he'd discussed you with his sister
prior to that session?
A. She goes "Oh, you're Client C", dah-dah-dah. Peter and I had things
in common. I was adopted and so Peter was - yeah, obviously
her, yeah, "There's a client of mine who's adopted" because how would she know
all of that stuff? She knew who I was.
Q. What gave you the impression that she knew that you were
A. She was talking - "Oh you're the one?", "Yeah", and I said
"Oh yeah, Peter and I are". Yeah, so she already knew about me. Her
conversation to me, she already knew who I was.
Q. I'm just trying to understand precisely what made you think that she
knew who you were when she walked in?
A. The way she was talking to me. You don't approach people unless
you've heard about - like, she just wouldn't have.
Q. And did she say anything which indicated that she knew any details
A. I know we were talking about Peter being adopted, like we were talking
Q. And was it your impression that she knew that information about you
being adopted before she walked into the room?
Q. And what precisely did she say that made you think that she knew
A. I don't remember the holus-bolus conversation, but my impression was
that she knew about me.
Q. Did that cause you any concern at the time?
A. Not at that time, no. I thought about it later. Later on I thought
think at the time
that was going on. I was messed up.
Q. Did Mr Clarke-Saunders ask you whether you minded whether or not
his sister came in?
A. I can't remember. I can't really remember that. He just answered the
door, yeah.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T110.10,
Q. Alongside the letter D. Did any of your sisters,
to the best of your recollection, ever attend a session or any of your
Q. Did any of them ever come to your room?
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(d)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13 [27].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T27.25-29.25, 22/03/10):
Q. In the next paragraph, paragraph 16 of your statement,
you refer to Mr Clarke-Saunders introducing you to a friend of his by the
name of Mark. Is that the person that you referred to at the start of your oral
evidence when you were indicating that you were
scared in February 2006?
Q. Had you met that person Mark before you met him through
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And could you just explain how it is that you first met Mark with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. I think I met him downstairs at the coffee shop.
Q. And did this person called Mark ever, to your knowledge, come to
Mr Clarke-Saunders' office?
Q. And did he ever come into a treatment session that you were attending
with Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Yes. I don't know if it was after my session, but he came up and I
was there in the office. It may have been, but whether it
wasn't I'm not sure.
I can't remember.
Q. And again if we could go back to sort of the basics, were you sitting
in Mr Clarke-Saunders' office and there's a knock on the
Q. Is that the way it happened?
Q. And then did Mr Clarke-Saunders open the door?
Q. And this person by the name of Mark then came into your treatment
session; is that right?
Q. And were you asked whether or not you were happy for this person to
come into the treatment session?
A. No, I don't think so.
Q. Can you remember how you responded to that or how it made you
A. I felt uncomfortable. I know I felt uncomfortable because I didn't
really know what his objective was to be - you know, like
know, why he was there. Yeah, Peter kind of put me on-the-spot and said to him
in front of me "I'm telling you, I'm telling
what's happened to you".
Q. And did you form any view as to whether or not Mark knew about you
before walking into the treatment session?
A. Well, I had the - like the same feeling with his sister. He
had been made aware of my problem - problems and he knew about
Q. What gave you that impression?
A. His reaction, yeah.
Q. Can you just give us one example, just to give us a flavour of what it
A. He was just really a scary guy and the way he put it, like he answered
me like I told him my situation and it was virtually like
I - he made
me feel even more scared, this guy. Like he put me on-the-spot, yeah. He put
me like on-the-spot and made me feel like
I was going to get hurt.
Q. What I really want to know is what - you said today and then
in paragraph 30 of your statement, which is a couple of pages further
page 5, you said of this particular interaction that "It was obvious that
Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked to Mark previously
personal business and knew why I was seeing Mr Clarke-Saunders", and you
said it appeared to you that Mark
was judgmental of you?
Q. And I just want to know, doing the best you can now, why it is that
you say that it was obvious that Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked
previously about you?
A. Because the way - someone doesn't approach you, if they know
you and they - they don't know you, they don't act like he was acting.
Like you just - I don't know. I've met you before and stuff, like I
know how to approach you, but when I meet a person new I don't
approach people
like that. It was like he knew all about me.
Q. Did he say anything to you which indicated that he knew any of your
personal details?
A. His response was he already knew about it, like he acted like he
already knew about it.
Q. But he didn't say he already knew about it?
A. I can't remember the exact words, but it was just I knew in my gut
that he knew.
Q. And you've described two incidents then. You've described, firstly,
that on one occasion Mr Clarke-Saunders' sister came into
a treatment
Q. And then you've described on another occasion Mark came into a
treatment session?
Q. Are they the only two occasions when anybody came into a treatment
session that you were attending with Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. There might have been a couple of other times when people came, but it
wasn't like that. It wasn't like those experiences.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(e)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13 [9][18-21]. Client C gave the following evidence
in chief (T30.30-31.30,
Q. Now I just want to ask you a little about going over to
Mr Clarke-Saunders' house, and you've said in paragraph 18 of your
that you went over to Mr Clarke-Saunders' house once with Client
Q. And you said it may have been for her counselling or just social that
he'd invited her over. On that particular occasion can
you remember whether you
were attending Mr Clarke-Saunders' house for the purposes of your own
treatment or on a purely social visit?
A. I can't remember if it was that occasion, but I know that I had
one - one counselling session at Peter's house, and I don't know
was that because we had to do something on the computer. I can't recall, and I
know Client B was there.
Q. And was Client B there during the counselling session--
A. No, we--
Q. At a designated office?
A. No, we didn't have a counselling - I - as I recall, whatever
we had to do on the computer, we counted that in our counselling.
Well, I was
counting that as a counselling session because I had something to do on the
computer and so we used Peter's computer
at home, yep.
Q. And so when you say a "counselling session", it was a session directed
to achieving a particular task on the computer?
A. Yeah, there was something we were doing, yeah.
Q. And was there any therapeutic interaction other than that?
Q. And was Client B present for the whole of the time that you were with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Yeah, she was there, yeah.
Q. Can you remember whether or not you signed a form in relation to that
session for Victim Services?
A. I can't remember, no.
Q. Now in paragraph 18 you've said that he'd invited Client B over,
and then you say "He would also invite me over"; do you see that
Q. When you say he would "invite" you over, was that as a social visit or
was that for counselling?
A. Well, I assume it would have been social, yeah.
Q. And was that on more than one occasion or just on one
A. I really - a couple of times, I think. Yeah, a couple of
times I went to Peter's place.
Q. And you've described going to Mr Clarke-Saunders' house once and
using his computer for a specific purpose?
Q. And that was something that you wanted to achieve?
Q. Is that the only time you went to his house or did you go to his house
on other occasions?
A. No, it was a few times, there were three or four times I went to his
Q. Did you ever go to his house on your own or was it always with Client
A. No, Client B was there.
C gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T20.5-25 & 21.1-10,
Q. So you can't remember anything much about the home
A. I remember the layout of the house.
Q. It was a house, was it?
A. Yes, like his house, whatever it is.
Q. Was it a flat?
A. Like a villa unit or something like that.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. I can’t hear you?
A. Like a villa unit.
Q. Upstairs or downstairs?
A. It had stairs going up to it.
Q. Where were the stairs, on the inside of the building?
A. My god, they were up to the house, to get up to it.
Q. There seems to be some confusion to me about how many times you
actually went to the house. It might be something that you can
explain for me.
Can you tell me just how many times you went there?
A. I suppose I can remember it was two times. I remember two
Q. So it is wrong to suggest three or four?
A. It could have been three.
Q. Definitely not four?
B gave the following evidence in chief (T16.20-30, 30/03/10):
Q. Now, we've already looked at the text messages. Did he make
those threats to you on other occasions or just in those mobile phone
you showed me earlier?
A. Other threats, besides the mobile phone.
Q. Was that during counselling sessions?
A. How can I explain it. Can I explain, those threats to me
were - Peter didn't know who to trust out of Client C and myself, and
so he organised with Client C to try and get myself and Client C to come to his
place, and he had Mark waiting there to be the judge
of, out of Client C and I,
who's lying. And I found that very threatening. Neither of us actually turned
up, and I'm glad that
we didn't, because Peter said to me, "I have Mark here to
judge either out of you two who's lying." So I found it very
threatening.
B gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T46.45-47.1,
Q. You mentioned going to Client C's on the one occasion when
she rang you. Was there any other time you went there to Client C's
Peter was there?
A. Not at Client C's home, but Client C and I had been to Peter's home
Q. How many times did you and Client C go to Peter's home
A. I think I'd been there once with her or twice, not quite sure.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T110.10,
Q. Were any of your consultations with any of Client A, B,
C, Client B, Client C, or Client A, held at your home?
A. I can't recall to be quite honest with you.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(f)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
C gave the following evidence in chief (T18.25-40 & 19. 20-35,
Q. So I wonder whether we could take those things in turn.
Firstly, if we look at what's in paragraph 6, you've said that
Mr Clarke-Saunders
would tell you about other client's stories during
counselling sessions?
Q. Did he tell you about other clients in a way that enabled you to
identify those other clients?
A. No, I didn't know and I wasn't aware who they were.
Q. Did he ever tell you anything about Client B?
A. Asked me questions about Client B. Yeah, he asked questions.
Q. He asked you questions. Did he impart any information to you about
Client B during your own treatment sessions with him?
Q. And then if you turn over to paragraph 7 of your statement,
you've said in paragraph 7 that on occasion Mr Clarke-Saunders
things such as a time when Client B had gone to his place to go
swimming in his pool and some other incidents?
Q. Is that something that you can recall sitting here now?
A. Yeah. I know I was on the phone - I was on the phone to
him. I rang Peter up and he said that Client B was there and they were
in the pool, and then later on I rang back later and - he was like
telling me sexual stuff, like this guy liked Client B
and Client B liked him
back and talking in a sexual way.
............
Q. And in paragraph 8 of your statement you've described
Mr Clarke-Saunders talking about another client of his, and you've said
that that made you scared in your statement. Do you see that in the third line
of your statement, you've said that it made you scared
that he would talk about
you to other clients. Was it something that concerned you as regards your
relationship with Mr Clarke-Saunders,
that he would discuss other clients
A. Yeah, it made me think that "Oh wow, is he going discuss it with", and
I'd made a big issue about Client B. Like I didn't want
him to discuss my
personal business to Client B, and it made me think that he was going to go and
do that when he started talking
Q. And did you ever actually raise with him that you specifically didn't
want your--
A. I kept emphasising to Peter "I hope you're not
doing - discussing my personal business with Client B".
Q. And how did he respond to that?
A. "Oh no, no, no"; like that.
C gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T39.25-40, 23/03/10):
Q. You say that Peter spoke to you about other
A. Sometimes, not names specifically.
Q. No names, he just talked about particular types of problems that other
people have?
A. Yes, problems.
Q. But you have also agreed that he never discussed Client B with
A. We had an agreement when I started there, that was meant to be the
agreement, that we didn't discuss what we said in that office.
Q. He never discussed her with you?
A. Sometimes he tried to.
Q. When you say he tried to, you said previously in your evidence that he
never discussed her with you?
A. Well that's what I said, it was confusing. On a social level we were
discussing things, it was really complicated, like one time
I rang up and he was
in the swimming pool with her, but I didn't know that was meant to be her
session. So Client B had gone right
off because he'd told me that she was there
with him in the swimming pool.
Respondent denied giving details of Client C to Client B in his evidence in
chief (T14.50-15.1, 31/03/10).
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(g)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
C gave the following evidence in chief (T25.10-27.25, 22/03/10):
Q. If we then just go back to the session that you were
describing, you were sitting near the desk and the phone rang and I think
said that Mr Clarke-Saunders answered the telephone; is that right?
Q. How is it that he then referred the telephone call to you as you
described earlier?
A. He didn't know where to refer them to, refer this guy on the other end
of the phone, his girlfriend or whatever she was, I don't
know, she needed a
termination and he didn't need - he didn't know where to refer them
and I have tried to ring that Dr Kwan, and
I rang Westmead Hospital and
then I found somewhere for the guy and yeah.
Q. I wonder if we could go back to the start?
Q. The telephone rang and Mr Clarke-Saunders took the call. Is it
the case that you could then overhear his side of the conversation?
A. He actually talked about - like, yeah, yeah, I could hear
his conversation, yep.
Q. So you could hear his conversation?
Q. And then did there come a time when he, if you like, put the phone to
one side and addressed questions to you?
A. He goes "Client C, you know, there's somebody here who needs a
termination. I don't know where to look. How do I deal with that?".
I said "Yeah, I'll do it", because I'm not - yeah.
Q. And then did you have any telephone interaction with the person on the
A. Yes, I did.
Q. So is it the case that Mr Clarke-Saunders then handed the
telephone to you?
Q. And so you talked to the person at the other end. Did you know who
the person at the other end was?
Q. Were you aware of whether or not this person was a client of
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Well, I gathered it was, yeah.
Q. So did Mr Clarke-Saunders say anything to you to indicate whether
or not it was a client or a friend?
A. I can't remember if he said that. I'm pretty sure it was a
Q. And then you undertook to assist the person on the other end of the
Q. And that involved you making various telephone calls?
Q. And was this all during a therapeutic session with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And at the end of the session, it may be you can't remember, but do
you recall whether additional time was added to the end of
your treatment
A. I can't remember. I don't think it would have been.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(h)
Particular was not pressed by the HCCC as it was covered by Particular 2(d).
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(i)
HCCC did not press this Particular.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 2(j)
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii) and 13 [23-4].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T29.30 -30.30, 22/03/10):
Q. Now in your statement, and I'm going back now to
paragraph 17, you've described taking your daughter?
Q. To see Mr Clarke-Saunders?
Q. And did they have a treatment session of some sort?
A. No, I was trying to encourage my daughter to go to counselling because
she had troubles in Mental Health with counselling there,
and I had explained
that to Peter and told Peter I was finding it hard to get my teenage daughter to
do that, and so Peter was acting
all friendly, bubbly himself and we were trying
to encourage her to go, and yeah, he - the first day of meeting her,
we were in a
coffee shop and he had a domestic or he was fighting with his
boyfriend on the phone and he comes back and discusses it and
- tries to get counselling off my daughter about his
relationship.
Q. So is it the case that he discussed personal details of his
relationship in front of your daughter?
Q. And another occasion you've described going with
Mr Clarke-Saunders during the course of a trial that your daughter was
Q. And you then had a lunch; is that right?
Q. During the trial, and was your daughter with you at that
A. No. Miss H was there, another rape victim.
Q. And this is a friend of your daughter's or someone
unconnected?
A. No, someone unconnected.
Q. And so you had lunch at this time and you've described here at
paragraph 23 of your statement that Mr Clarke-Saunders was present
with you at lunch at a pub in the city?
Q. And that he met someone?
Q. And then you indicated that there was sexual contact happening between
them in front of you?
Q. And was this in front of the other individual Miss H as
Q. And then you've described here that Mr Clarke-Saunders then left
and then came back during that interaction?
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established in so far as it relates
to the Respondent engaging in intimate contact with another man in the presence
of Client C but
not her daughter. The entire Particular is not established. This
Particular will not be considered by the Tribunal in considerations
of Findings
with respect to the Complaint.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 3
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibit
13 [20-21].
C gave the following evidence in chief (T32.15, 22/03/10):
Q. And then in paragraph 20 you've described that there
were two occasions when you witnessed Mr Clarke-Saunders smoke
C gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T21.35-50, 23/03/10):
Q. And in one of the notes that has been prepared by Elma
Martin, she says you told her that Mr McCann had provided weed to Client
while you were there in his rooms?
A. Not in his rooms. I remember it at his house.
Q. So if there is a note saying it was in his visiting rooms, that is
incorrect is it?
A. I can't, I don't know, I can't remember.
Q. You are a bit faint, we are struggling to hear?
A. I can't remember. I know I seen him in his house give Client
Q. So in his house you believe he provided marijuana to
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 4
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
6(ii), 13 [30] and 13B [13]. The Tribunal is
of the view that paragraphs 27 to
29 of exhibit 13 are also relevant.
C gave the following evidence in chief (T28.25-29.10):
Q. And did you form any view as to whether or not Mark knew
A. Well, I had the - like the same feeling with his sister. He
had been made aware of my problem - problems and he knew about
Q. What gave you that impression?
A. His reaction, yeah.
Q. Can you just give us one example, just to give us a flavour of what it
A. He was just really a scary guy and the way he put it, like he answered
me like I told him my situation and it was virtually like
I - he made
me feel even more scared, this guy. Like he put me on-the-spot, yeah. He put
me like on-the-spot and made me feel like
I was going to get hurt.
Q. What I really want to know is what - you said today and then
in paragraph 30 of your statement, which is a couple of pages further
page 5, you said of this particular interaction that "It was obvious that
Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked to Mark previously
personal business and knew why I was seeing Mr Clarke-Saunders", and you
said it appeared to you that Mark
was judgmental of you?
Q. And I just want to know, doing the best you can now, why it is that
you say that it was obvious that Mr Clarke-Saunders had talked
previously about you?
A. Because the way - someone doesn't approach you, if they know
you and they - they don't know you, they don't act like he was acting.
Like you just - I don't know. I've met you before and stuff, like I
know how to approach you, but when I meet a person new I don't
approach people
like that. It was like he knew all about me.
Q. Did he say anything to you which indicated that he knew any of your
personal details?
A. His response was he already knew about it, like he acted like he
already knew about it.
Q. But he didn't say he already knew about it?
A. I can't remember the exact words, but it was just I knew in my gut
that he knew.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established. This Particular would
be satisfied even if the Tribunal had found that the only information disclosed
by the Respondent
was the fact that Client C had some involvement with a
criminal trial.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 5
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
2(xviii), 6(ii) and 13 [25][36]. The Tribunal
has also had regard the oral
evidence of Client C that she always signed the invoice form that was not
competed (T22, 23/8/10).
C gave the following evidence in chief (T12.40-13.40 & T19.40-20.35,
Q. Could I ask you to turn through please to the third page
behind that tab? Now this is a recipient created tax invoice claim for
for New South Wales approved counselling pursuant to the
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act
Q. Is this a document that you've seen before?
Q. Is that your signature--
Q. --under the heading signature of victim on completion of
Q. Could you please explain whether or not you signed this document on
completion of the session or before the session had been completed?
A. Before. It was - sometimes it was after that, it
wasn't - the dates and that weren't in there, it was only my signature
hadn't filled it out.
Q. I wonder if we could go through it column by column and I could just
ask you if we start on the right hand side so if you see
there's a heading VCT
only and a dollar sign just next to your signature and then there's a total
amount payable?
Q. When you signed that was anything completed under that
Q. The next line is where your signature appeared and can I ask you can
you remember did you sign this on three separate occasions
or all on one
A. No, all different.
Q. Then working backwards, two columns over there's a heading "Duration
hours and minute", you see that?
Q. When you signed this was that column completed or not?
A. No, they weren't completed.
Q. The previous column which says date of service, when you signed that
was that completed?
Q. Then when you look back and it says name of victim and the VCT
reference number can you remember whether that was completed when
A. I can't remember.
Q. Did you ever ask any questions of Mr Clarke-Saunders as to what
you were signing for?
A. No, I just knew it was for payment. I just signed it.
..............
Q. And then if you move down during the statement to paragraph 12
you referred to a time when you were going to see a Dr Kwan, who
understand is a general practitioner?
Q. And you've described that you had lunch at a pub instead of seeing
Q. And that you then went back to Mr Clarke-Saunders' office but
very little counselling was done, and you've said here that
Mr Clarke-Saunders
charged Victim Services for the counselling session.
How do you know that Mr Clarke-Saunders had charged Victims Services for
counselling session?
A. Because Elna(?), I think, had made me aware. We looked up the dates
and Elna had made me aware that it was coinciding with it.
Q. So at the time, were you aware of it at the time when you actually had
the lunch and then the treatment session?
A. Aware of what?
Q. Were you aware of whether or not he was charging Victims Services for
that session?
A. Well, I understood because he was with me going to the doctor, he took
me to that doctor.
Q. And I wonder whether you could give me an idea of just how long that
session or that interaction with Mr Clarke-Saunders would
A. Two hours.
Q. Two hours from start to finish?
Q. And how much of that time, if you can remember, was spent actually in
his office?
A. When I got there Peter was running late, and he'd fluffed around, like
he was just fluffing around and he was doing stuff, and
then when we got to the
appointment, the doctor - I'd missed my appointment, so I couldn't
even go in to see the doctor, so then
we went to the pub. So yeah, we weren't
really in the office much, yeah.
Q. So is it possible, do you think it was probably
10/15 minutes/half an hour?
A. Yeah, by the time I waited for him, yep.
Q. And during those 10 or 15 minutes did you have a counselling
session with him?
A. Not really. I think Peter's objective may have been to get me
on - get some help for me or get - yeah, get the doctor to
me some help, and yeah, and to get me out, teach me to go out because I was
really agoraphobic and hadn't been out much, so Peter
was encouraging me out, I
cross-examination Client C gave the following evidence (T22.30-35 &
T23.15-50, 23/03/10):
Q. There is an invoice as well which you were shown, do you
recall that on the last occasion, an invoice?
Q. You suggested that firstly you signed it when it was blank?
A. I always signed it when it was blank.
................
Q. Now that covers three different dates and 30 June 2005 it says
two hours. 4 July 2005 also says two hours and 13 July 2005 also
two hours. In the first two occasions there appears to be some writing over of
the hours but it appears that the signature,
and I don't have the original, but
it appears from what I've got on the photocopy that the signature is in the same
the date and the number of hours. Would you agree with
A. Not necessarily, I can't tell that from that.
Q. You think it doesn't appear to be the same type of pen?
Q. Or you are just prepared not to agree?
A. No, they are just different, you can tell by the way I've written it,
they are all different.
Q. I am not talking about the first one. The first one seems to be a
dark pen. The second one could be a bit different because
the hours have been
written over?
Q. Is anything important happening around those dates that you can
A. What do you mean? So much happened around those dates, yes, I was a
Q. Were you such a mess that you might have needed additional time with
A. Yes, I needed ongoing treatment.
Q. So it could well have been two hours, the time you took at those
appointments?
A. It could have been.
Q. But you signed the form before the amount of hours was written
A. Yes, I always just signed the form and Peter said he would fill it out
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 6
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found in Volume 2
of the HCCC documents.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T82.30-35,
Q. These are the only contemporaneous clinical records relating
to something in the region of 16 or 18 hours of counselling that
provided to Client C throughout the period from June till November or December
2005, aren't they?
A. It appears to be.
Q. You agree that they are inadequate to inform you or any other
psychologist of your assessment of Client C or of the treatment
that you were
providing on any particular session?
A. There's no - that's right.
Q. Do you agree also that they reflect what you've described earlier as a
period during which your professional standards slipped
somewhat as regards to
your treatment you were providing?
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client C with respect to this Particular and is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Five/Six – Particular 7
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
25(b) and 13 [37-8].
C gave the following evidence in Chief (T15.45 – 17.30, 22/03/10):
Q. I wonder if I could just ask you, what particularly prompted
you to approach Victims Services to make a complaint in relation
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Peter never gave me an explanation of why he wanted to drop me at the
end of it. I didn't know what was happening between him
and Client B, I didn't
know. There's things getting accused everywhere and I didn't know what
was - why that reason was and it made
me mad. Like, he'd just dropped
me like a hotcake, like, and I didn't even know. I'd been going to my
counselling sessions, like
I was meant to be given treatment and he let me down,
yeah. He just dropped me, he didn't give me an explanation or nothing.
Q. When you say when he dropped you, are you referring to him ceasing to
be your therapist?
Q. Could you explain how it was that you were told that he would stop
being your therapist?
A. If I remember correctly I rang him up to make an appointment or
something like that and then he goes "I'm not going to see you
anymore" and hung
up on me and I was just going whoa - I didn't even know what I'd done
or if I'd done something wrong or if - yeah,
what was going on. So
then I planned to stop seeing Peter and I rang Fosters Lawyers and I arranged
with them to organise another
counsellor and then I think not even a week later
Peter was "It's okay, you can come back again" and I got really, like,
you know, which way to go. Do I go with Peter or do I not, you know,
and then I ended up seeing him again.
Q. Did Mr Clarke-Saunders ever have any discussions with you about
arranging for your care or treatment to be transferred to another
psychologist?
A. He'd done that, yeah, in I think it was November or something. He'd
rung up out of the blue. That's what I said, he was all
didn't really know what he was doing because one minute he was telling me go and
he dropped me and go and see somebody
else and then he said it was all right to
come back again and I was going I didn't even know what I'd done.
Q. I wonder whether we could just try and be clear as to what came
Q. First of all you said that in November 2006 or sometime
A. I know it was a bit earlier, or it happened around November, because
it was before I finished with him. It was a couple of weeks
or something. I'm
confused about times.
Q. So is it the case that whilst you were still having ongoing regular
counselling sessions you had a discussion with Mr Clarke-Saunders
possibility that you would be referred to another counsellor?
Q. Could you explain the context in which that discussion arose? Was it
in the course of a treatment session?
A. No, no. I rang up to - I'm sure I rang up to get an
appointment or something like that and then he just cut me off and said it
hung up on me. I didn't even get in, like, "Peter, what have I done or why is
Q. So at that point where you rang up to make an appointment and
Mr Clarke-Saunders indicated to you that it might be necessary to
another counsellor, is that what happened during that telephone
conversation?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. Did he suggest any particular counsellor?
Q. After that did you resume treatment sessions with
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. I might've gone back a couple of times. Like, that's what I said, he
asked me to come back.
A. Yeah, I went back after that.
Q. So you think you may have gone back after that?
A. Yeah, I think I went back after that and then I stopped.
Q. Then it's your recollection that it was your decision to stop after
A. Yeah. Yeah. I'd made arrangements through hostels
transcribed)
to get somebody else.
Q. When you had the telephone conversation with Mr Clarke-Saunders
when he suggested that you should terminate your therapeutic relationship
him, could you explain how that made you feel?
A. Bewildered because I was really like needing to see somebody and I was
relying on him.
Q. Was it something that was expected or unexpected for you?
A. For me unexpected totally, yeah.
Q. Had there been any prior discussions at all between you and
Mr Clarke-Saunders?
A. Only that one time in November he said that to me and then he
continued to see me after he said it was all right and he calmed
down and, yeah,
we re-arranged another appointment.
Respondent gave the following evidence (T78.20-80.45, 31/03/10):
Q. And it's recording that on January 18 Ms Perry is
saying that she was advised of a fax received by you requesting a change of
counsellor for Client C to a female counsellor. Victim's Services attempted to
phone Client C but all correspondence had been directed
to you. Can you explain
why all the correspondence was directed to you?
A. No, I can't. That's very unusual. The Victim's Services liaise
directly with the - once you surrender a client to Victim's Services,
unless it's changed, the Victim's Services contacts the new counsellor and
directs all correspondence to the victim. So I don't
know, I don't understand
Q. In the second paragraph in this file note, a couple of lines down from
that it says:
"Peter was able to explain over the telephone why he had requested a
change of counsellor, and felt that due to some inappropriate
comments from
Client C to Peter that it would be important for the therapeutic relationship to
come to an end and all contact ceased."
Q. Now, it's right, isn't it, that the request to change Client C's
counsellor came from you and not from Client C?
Q. And it's right, isn't it, that then you just told Client C one day
that you had asked to change counsellors?
Q. And that you did that without any prior warning to her?
Q. And you did it because you were concerned about some comment that
she'd made?
A. Both Client B and Client C made sexual advances to me and I was
completely horrified and I was very, you know, upset, and I just
referred her on. I should have reported it. I actually should have reported
the incident to Victim's Services, and I
Q. And this all happened before 3 January 2006 when you sent that
fax to Victim Services--
A. I can't remember exactly when it happened but it was during that
Q. And you made no arrangements to prepare Client C for the change of
counsellor?
A. Yes I did, I contacted Victim Services. Once you contact Victim
Services, they take responsibility of allocating a new counsellor.
Q. Did you, in your sessions with Client C, take any steps to prepare her
for the fact that you were going to ask to have her hours
changed to another
counsellor?
A. I can't remember to be quite honest with you.
Q. Did you take any steps to ensure that she didn't see that as a form of
A. I can't recall sorry.
Q. You knew at this time that she was a fairly vulnerable person?
A. By this time I had learnt that she was also involved with the criminal
gang. Originally she was stating that she was a victim,
and probably she was,
but then subsequent information was revealed to me that she was involved with
the Lebanese gang, and that she
was part of the group.
Q. But in November 2005 you'd been of the view that she suffered from
profound anxiety attacks and major depression as a consequence
of her life being
A. Well you would.
Q. Do you accept that at least in November 2005 your professional opinion
was that she was vulnerable psychologically?
A. Sorry? Say that again. Have you got a date?
Q. Do you accept that as at November 2005 it was your professional
opinion that she was vulnerable from a psychological perspective?
Q. In fact, at page 25 of Client C's records, you wrote
"She was extremely vulnerable and will not accept referral to another
counsellor and/or government body. Client C is fragile and
requires further
psychological counselling."
A. Where does it say that?
Q. At page 25 of the records relating to Client C.
A. Which volume?
Q. It's volume 2. I think you're in the right tab. It should be
page 25, the numbering in the middle of the page at the bottom
pages. I think it's the one in your left-hand side, yes.
A. This one?
Q. Yes, and I think it's page 25.
A. Where it says, "A brief outline"?
Q. It does, and you said that, "She was terrified in November 2005. She
was extremely vulnerable and will not accept referral"?
Q. So do you accept that your decision to transfer her was likely to
cause her additional trauma?
A. Not necessarily.
Q. Certainly here you felt that she was certainly in the position where
she wouldn't accept referral to someone else and that she
was fragile. It's
likely, if that was your opinion, that transfer to another counsellor is
something that would require considerable
preparation to ensure that it didn't
compound her problem.
A. Well once they made sexual advances to me I just basically had nothing
to do with them.
Q. But that's not entirely true is it because if you say that the sexual
advances were the reason why you decided that you shouldn't
see Client C anymore
they must have happened before 3 January 2006 when you prepared your fax as
at that date to Victim Services?
Is that right?
A. I can't recall, sorry.
keeping of appropriate records is an essential part of the practice of all
health care practitioners. The Respondent acknowledged
the deficits in his
records. The Tribunal is reasonable satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Complaints Seven and Eight
HCCC submitted that the relevant documentary evidence is to be found at exhibits
19(iii) and R3 in addition to the evidence found
at T6.50-57 and T10.8-14
Particular requires the Tribunal to find that the Respondent knew or ought to
have known that his physical and/or mental capacity
to practise psychology was
impaired by reason of alcoholism. The Tribunal will set out in detail evidence
regarding the Respondent’s
impairment due to alcoholism not only to
satisfy this Particular but also as this will be a significant issue for the
to address prior to any application for re-registration.
finding that the Respondent did suffer from an impairment is based on the long
history of alcohol dependence (and poly-substance
abuse) reported by that
Respondent detailed in the documentation and record of interviews supplied to
the Tribunal. The Respondent
was first hospitalised and referred for
rehabilitation for substance abuse at the age of 14. In that year there were
apparently three
admissions. He seems to have sustained a severe alcohol problem
from then to his mid-20’s when on his self report to Dr Wright
he obtained
sobriety for the next 10 years, although there is some discrepancy between the
accounts of this period of sobriety between
the reports of Dr Wright and Dr
Prior. It was during this period of time that he completed his studies at
university.
his mid-thirties he relapsed, his alcohol use increasing throughout the first
half of 2000 and by the time of the Complaints he
had resumed heavy alcohol use
associated once again with experiencing blackouts, memory loss, confusion over
appointments, erratic
behaviour, and irresponsibility. It seems friends noted
the changes in his behaviour and he reported to his GP at the time, Dr Kwan,
2005) that he had alcohol problems. However, there appears to have been no
genuine insight gained by the Respondent into his
condition and no concerted
attempt to do anything about his condition for a further two years past the
closure of his business. The
fact that he continued to work in the general
welfare/counselling area during this time raises concerns about the ability of
Respondent to appreciate at that time how severely impaired he was or the
risk he was posing to his clients, and to his employers.
The Respondent’s
abuse of alcohol continued until 2008, when he made the decision to attend AA
and he became sober again. On
self-report there has been no relapse behaviour.
However, the Tribunal notes Dr Prior’s cautionary statement that CDT
(Carbohydrate Deficiency Transferin Test) should occur to assess for
relapse. The Tribunal notes that CDT testing will only pick
up an episode of
sustained (more than 60 grams of alcohol) consumption in a 24 hour period. It
will not detect if someone has the
occasional drink and thus is good test of
problematic drinking but not for any drinking. It is usual to have two tests, a
apart to provide for a one-month observation window.
is of concern that other than AA the Respondent has not sought specific drug and
alcohol treatment, and therefore his relapse potential
remains moderately high.
Factors usually associated with relapse potential include a pattern of poly
substance abuse, prior periods
of abstinence followed by relapse, co existing
mental health concerns (especially mood or psychotic disorders) and criminality.
than criminality, the Respondent has a pattern of risk factor suggesting
that professional treatment programs should be engaged.
Factors associated with
a good response to treatment include the presence of strong social supports, and
no lapse in alcohol use
following successful treatment. The Respondent reports
no lapses in alcohol use since obtaining abstinence but it is not clear how
support he has. It would therefore be important to monitor the relapse and
protective factors present in his life were he to
given the chronic relapsing pattern of substance abuse generally.
is a useful adjunctive support for alcohol dependence, but not a substitute for
evidence based programs specifically focussed on
managing substance use
impacts of alcohol and poly substance abuse on cognitive function and
personality organisation are well known. Substance use increases
disinhibition,
and in a person already affected by hypomanic behaviours from time to time, such
disinhibition can lead to severe
errors of judgment, irrational behaviour,
impulsive decision making, and reckless behaviour. Regrettably, there is ample
of such behaviours contained in the evidence.
is little doubt that the behaviours that have brought the Respondent into
disrepute as a psychologist are directly related to
his alcohol use, although
other factors, including poly substance use, his untreated Bipolar Disorder and
troublesome personality
traits have also contribute to his situation.
Respondent’s misuse of Valium while working at the Wayback Clinic in
either late 2009 or early 2010 (which initiated the
referral from Dr Dalton to
Dr Prior) raises concerns that his sobriety might be at a cost of use of
sedative medication such as strong
pain killers or benzodiazepines.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied this Particular is established.
Findings in relation to the Complaints
Complaint One/Two
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Complaint One is established.
It demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed by the Respondent and the care he
exercised in the practice of
psychology to be significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience,
and that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct in the course
of the practice of psychology. Having due regard to the training
and experience
of the Respondent, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the
Respondent is of such a serious nature that
it would warrant the suspension or
removal of the Respondent’s name from the Register. The Tribunal therefore
finds the conduct
constitutes professional misconduct and Complaint Two is
established.
Complaint Three/Four
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Complaint Three is established.
It demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed by the Respondent and the care he
exercised in the practice of
psychology to be significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience,
and that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct in the course
of the practice of psychology. Having due regard to the training
and experience
of the Respondent, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the
Respondent is of such a serious nature that
it would warrant the suspension or
removal of the Respondent’s name from the Register. The Tribunal therefore
finds the conduct
constitutes professional misconduct and Complaint Four is
established.
Complaints Five/Six
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Complaint Five is established.
It demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed by the Respondent and the care he
exercised in the practice of
psychology to be significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience,
and that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct in the course
of the practice of psychology. Having due regard to the training
and experience
of the Respondent, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the
Respondent is of such a serious nature that
it would warrant the suspension or
removal of the Respondent’s name from the Register. The Tribunal therefore
finds the conduct
constitutes professional misconduct and Complaint Six is
established.
Complaint Seven/Eight
Tribunal has set out in details the reasons why the Respondent knew or ought to
have known that his alcoholism was impairing his
capacity to practise
psychology. The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Complaint Seven is established. It
demonstrates a lack of skill and judgment possessed by the Respondent and the
care he exercised
in the practice of psychology to be significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
training or experience, and that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct
in the course of the practice of psychology. Having
due regard to the training
and experience of the Respondent, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
of the Respondent is of
such a serious nature that it would warrant the
suspension or removal of the Respondent’s name from the Register. The
therefore finds the conduct constitutes professional misconduct and
Complaint Eight is established.
Protective Orders
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s acceptance that his conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct. The Tribunal
also notes that the Respondent accepts a period of de-registration for a period
of 12 to 18 months followed
by a ‘properly monitored’ return to
registration with supervisory orders and that a Prohibition Order would be
in the mean time (see paragraphs 18, 20 and 21 of Respondent’s
submissions).
primary function of the Tribunal is to protect the public. Other matters to be
considered by the Tribunal as relevant considerations
are the maintaining of
discipline within the profession, a general deterrent effect and the maintaining
of public confidence in the
profession. The Tribunal therefore must consider
Orders that fulfil these requirements. Whilst it is an established principle of
law that the Tribunal should impose the least restrictive Orders possible in the
circumstances, the protection of the public is paramount
and outweighs
consideration of the onerous burdens that Orders may place upon a practitioner.
In this matter protection of the reputation
of the profession and the
maintenance of confidence that the public is entitled to expect in the
profession of psychology are prominent
considerations.
from the gravity of the misconduct, there are significant aggravating factors to
be considered with respect to appropriate Orders.
The Tribunal accepts the
submissions made by the HCCC at paragraphs 4 to 10 inclusive. With respect to
the content of paragraph 9
the Tribunal notes that the description of the
alleged threats provided to VSA-G and to the Tribunal differed. The Tribunal
that the Respondent did have the benefit of legal advice when he prepared
the statement which formed R3.
issue detailed by the HCCC in paragraph 11 of submissions was not the subject of
Particulars. Although there was sufficient evidence
for the Tribunal to be
satisfied that the conduct occurred it has not been taken into account for the
purpose of determining this
Tribunal had evidence that the breaches of confidentiality extended beyond the
matters set out in the Particulars. The Tribunal
notes the evidence of Ms Layton
(T30.40 & 331.29, 25/8/10):
Q. How did she come to be talking to you about her drug
A. I really don't remember, sorry.
Q. Had Peter told you already that she was a drug user?
A. Yes, he did.
Q. How did Peter come to tell you that one of his clients was a drug
A. Because I asked him.
Q. STERN Equally in your first letter that you wrote to the Health Care
Complaints Commission you said, "I am aware that Client B
has a criminal record
of drug offences, kidnapping and other offences."
Q. You said that because that's what Peter told you, didn't he?
A. Yes. Yes, exactly.
Q. He told you that?
A. Yes, he did.
Q. In another part of your statement you said that you read Client B's
file and in that file you saw information about her criminal
record, is that
Q. How did you come to be reading Client B's file?
A. Because Peter showed it to me.
Respondent noted that Dr Prior (the psychiatrist he has recently received
treatment from) does not consider that the Respondent
had improved sufficiently
to return to practice as a psychologist full time (paragraph 16, exhibit R3).
vulnerability of the clients entrusted to his care by VSA-G is a significant
aggravating factor. They were referred to his care
as a result of involvement in
serious crimes. They have had a specified number of treatment sessions approved.
There is evidence
that they were reliant upon the Respondent writing reports on
their behalf relating to legal proceedings.
made four findings of professional misconduct the Tribunal is of the view that
the only appropriate Order to make is one that
will leave the Respondent off the
Register for a period of time. The Tribunal would proceed to make identical
Orders even if Complaint
Four had not been established.
treatment that was actually provided by the Respondent was of extremely poor
quality. It lacked most of the characteristics of
the practice of psychology.
The breaches of boundaries were significant. The conduct is likely to bring the
profession into disrepute.
It was also an extreme abuse of the trust reposed in
him by his clients and authorities.
Respondent had not controlled his alcohol abuse or the symptoms of his mental
illness. Once again the Tribunal notes that the
bi-polar disorder was not
subject of a Particular of Complaint. There is of course a close relationship
between alcohol abuse and
bi-polar disorder. The Tribunal accepts that bi-polar
disorder is likely to have been a contributing factor to the Respondent’s
conduct with respect to alcohol use, but cannot be an excuse. Further, there
would not be sufficient evidence for the Tribunal to
be satisfied that the
Respondent suffered from bi-polar in 2002 when the conduct relating to Client A
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the HCCC at paragraph 13 regarding the
Respondent’s awareness of his conduct.
Tribunal notes the submissions made by the HCCC at paragraphs 16 to 21
inclusive. The Tribunal is of the view that the Code of
Conduct would have
provided sufficient guidance to the Respondent to avoid the misconduct he
engaged in.
the Complaint relating to Client A occurred much earlier in time than the
Complaints relating to Client B and C, the Respondent
did not appropriately
modify his practice. He did not demonstrate the development of any insight
during the intervening period of
time. The Respondent’s lack of insight
and propensity for boundary infractions has been chronic over an extended period
time. The Tribunal did not observe the Respondent to display signs of
insight, remorse or contrition with respect to the impact of
his conduct on the
Clients and the others involved (e.g. Miss D or the daughter of Client C).
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC as to the appropriate Orders and the
Tribunal is of the view it is appropriate for
the Respondent to remain off the
Register for a period of three years from the date hereof. Given the effluxion
of time since these
matters were drawn to his attention by VSA-G, the Tribunal
is of the view that the Respondent will require a minimum period of three
to address the deficits identified in this Reasons document. Given the long
standing nature of the Respondent’s mental
health issues and drug and
alcohol problems a period longer than submitted by the Respondent is
appropriate. The Tribunal has taken
into account the character evidence and
submissions of the Respondent in reaching this view.
the Respondent makes an application for re-registration, this Tribunal is of the
view that such an application should be determined
by a Tribunal, particularly
since the Tribunal had information before it regarding the fragile nature of the
Respondent’s own
mental health which was not dealt with by this Tribunal.
Respondent not only has personal vulnerabilities that would satisfy the Tribunal
that he poses a significant risk to public safety,
but his conduct towards
vulnerable patient’s over a significant period of time contributes to the
Tribunal’s view that
the Respondent cannot be allowed access to vulnerable
people until he has made significant progress with respect to remedying the
defects identified in this Reasons document. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
Respondent poses a significant risk to the public
safety, particularly having
regard to the nature of his conduct and his current level of insight and
functioning. The Tribunal therefore
proceeds to make a Prohibition Order.
provisions of the Act relating to the award of costs are what is commonly know
as ‘costs follow the event’. The Respondent
made submissions that
his mental state and financial position should be taken in to account. While the
first matter may partly account
for the Respondent’s behaviour and the
second is unfortunate, these are not matters that would constitute special
circumstances
warranting the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion. The
Tribunal however is concerned that the Respondent would be bearing
costs due to the actions of his initial legal representative. In the
circumstances the Tribunal orders costs in favour
of the HCCC in the usual terms
apart from the costs of 24 March 2010 for which each party will bear its own
Publication
copy of this document should be forwarded to the Respondent and his legal
adviser, the HCCC, the Psychology Board of Australia (NSW
Board), Psychology
Council of NSW, AHPRA, the Directors of VSA-G, Legal Aid and DoCS, and otherwise
as the Board and Council sees
The Tribunal considers that it is
appropriate that the name of the Respondent should not be on the Register of
Psychologists. Noting
that the Board has already removed the Respondent’s
name from the Register of Psychologists, the Tribunal orders:
(1) That the Respondent‘s name is to be cancelled from the Register (if
this has not already occurred).
(2) That the Respondent is not entitled to reapply for registration for a
minimum period of three years from the date hereof.
(3) That the Respondent is prohibited from providing the following health
services for a period of three years from today:
(i) therapy,
(ii) psychotherapy,
(iii) hypnotherapy,
(iv) mental
health service,
(v) welfare
services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
(vi) counselling,
(vii) any other
alternative/healing health care/therapies.
(4) After the expiry of the period of three years in Order 3 above, the
Respondent is permitted to provide these health services
on the condition that
he gains registration as a psychologist or other health professional, at which
time the registration authority
should consider the further continuation of the
prohibition order.
(5) The Respondent is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed apart
from the costs of 24 March 2010 for which each party
will bear its own costs. If
the parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted for an application to
apply to have the matter
re-listed before the Tribunal to determine costs.
Dated: 10 December 2010
___________________
___________________
___________________
Chris Lennings
___________________
Annexure A – Index of Exhibited Documents
– Submissions made by the HCCC
Annexure C – Submissions
made by the Respondent
Annexure D - Schedule of Names
INDEX OF EXHIBITED DOCUMENTS
HCCC v CLARKE-SAUNDERS
Volume One of Two
(a) Complaint
(b) Certificate of Registration
(c) Certificate of Registration from Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (AHPRA) and email from HCCC to AHPRA dated
30 August 2010 and reply from
AHPRA to HCCC dated 30 August 2010.
Letter from John Le Breton, Director, Victims Services, Attorney
General’s Department (“VS”) to the Commissioner
dated 27 March
2006 with attachments:
Note headed allegations made by Client B
Letter from VS to Peter Clarke-Saunders dated 20 February 2006
Email from Louise Flint VS to Clarke-Saunders dated 20 February 2006
Email from Louise Flint, VS to Clarke-Saunders dated 22 March 2006
Letter from Marian Curtis, VS to Clarke-Saunders dated 24 February
Facsimile from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 2 March 2006
Letter from VS to Clarke-Saunders dated 8 March 2006
Facsimile from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 16 March 2006
Letter from VS to Clarke-Saunders dated 22 March 2006
Photocopies of text messages on mobile phone of Client B (17 pages) with
some handwritten notes
Photocopy of text message on mobile phone of Miss D (1 page)
Email from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 13 February 2006
Email from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 16 February 2006
Email from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 24 February 2006
Note headed allegations made by Client C
Email from Elna Martin VS to John Le Breton VS dated 21 March 2006
Note headed Invoices
VS Invoices (x3) dated 18 October 2005; 10 June 2005 and 13 July 2005
Letter from Fosters Lawyers to VS dated 28 March 2006
(a) Letter from Leanne Evans, Commission to Clarke-Saunders dated 27 April
(b) Letter from Peter Clarke-Saunders to Leanne Evans received 11 May 2006 and
attachments (letters and CV of Clarke-Saunders (17
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Leanne Evans, Commission received 11 May
Letter from VS to Commissioner dated 22 May 2006 with attachments:
Facsimile from Peter Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 21 May 2006
File note of interview held on 24 February 2006 with Client C by Elna
File note of interview held on 17 February 2006 with Client B and Miss
Emails from Elna Martin of VS to John Le Breton dated 24 March 2006 and 23
February 2006
File note by Elna Martin of VS of telephone conversation with
Clarke-Saunders
Email from Clarke-Saunders to VS dated 3 April 2006
Letter from VS to Commission dated 16 June 2006 with attachments:
Memorandum of Understanding, Approved Counselling Scheme, 2005-2007
Handbook for Approved Counsellors
NSW Psychologists Registration Board, Code of Professional Conduct, 1
November 2004 and Psychologists and Sexual Behaviour in Professional
Relationships dated 6 February 2001
Letter from Registrar, Psychologists Registration Board
(“Board”) to Clarke-Saunders dated 11 May 2005 enclosing “With
Compliments Slip”; Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Board dated 19 May 2005;
two references from Dr Kwan;
Reference from Ms Erin Wheeler; and reference from anonymous client.
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Ian Thurgood, Commission dated 8 July
Letter from Board to Clarke-Saunders dated 10 August 2006
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Board dated 7 September 2007
Letter from Glenn Moat, Psychologist to the Board dated 9 November
Statement of Client B dated 24 January 2008 and attachments
(a) Statement of Client C dated 8 November 2007
(b) Statement of Client C dated 22 March 2010
(a) Statement of Client A dated 29 September 2008 with annexure
(b) File Note of visit to Client A by Julie Smith, Investigator dated 30
September 2008
Statement of Miss D dated 24 December 2007
(a) Statement of Janis Layton dated 29 November 2007
(b) Statement of Janis Layton dated 27 October 2007
Reference of Yvonne Lenders dated 18 December 2007
Statement of Elna Martin dated 14 November 2008
Correspondence from Peter Clarke-Saunders aka McCann to the
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Director of Proceedings received 2 November
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Director of Proceedings received 9 November
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Registrar Board dated 25 July 2009 (copied
to Director of Proceedings)
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Director of Proceedings dated 29 July 2007
and 2 references (Dingle and Emerson)
Letter from Clarke-Saunders aka McCann to Director of Proceedings dated 25
November 2008 and attached letter from Barbara Hillman
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to F. Westwood, Legal Officer received 3
February 2009 and article “
Caring approach helps cut drug
Reference of Caroline Gatty received 11 February 2009
Reference of Pam Freeland sent to Ian Thurgood, Commission received 24
October 2006
Letter from Marian Curtis VS to Dean Ardern, Investigator dated 31 July
2008 attaching invoice audit
(a) Expert Report of Sam Borenstein dated 26 February 2007 plus letter
requesting report and CV
(b) Expert Report of Sam Borenstein dated 10 March 2007 plus letter requesting
(c) Expert Report of Sam Borenstein dated 30 April 2009 plus letter requesting
report dated 8 April 2009
(d) Letter from Commission to Sam Borenstein dated 12 March 2010 requesting
further report
(e) Further report of Sam Borenstein dated 15 March 2010
Letter from Commissioner dated 1 May 2007
Response from Corbin Legal Services to the Commission dated 29 May
Letter from Clarke-Saunders to Board dated 7 July 2006
Letter dated 23 March 2010 from Mr Clarke-Saunders
Additional documents from Victims Services:
(a) Letter from Client B to Elna Martin faxed 15 February 2006
(b) Victims Services File Memo re Client C dated 3 June 2005
(c) Filenote of telephone call from Peter Clark-Saunders dated 27 March 2006
(d) Victims Services File Memo re Client Br dated 20 March
(a) Letter from Commission to Dr John Murray Wright dated 12 July 2010 with
attachment being:
Letter from Dr
Prior to Mr David Goss, NSW Psychologists Board dated 10 May 2010
(b) Report of Dr John Murray Wright dated 19 July 2010
(c) Curriculum Vitae of Dr John Murray Wright
(d) Email from Commission to Dr Wright dated 10 August 2010
(e) Email from Dr Wright to Commission dated 12 August 2010
Bundle of clinical records of Dr Prior with covering letter to HCCC dated
19 August 2010
Volume Two of Two
Clinical notes and counselling records of Client B (p1 – 251)
Clinical notes and counselling records of Client A (p1 – 107)
Clinical notes and counselling records of Client C (p1 – 67)
DOCUMENTS FILED BY THE RESPONDENT
R1 Statement of the Respondent tendered by Mr Corbin on behalf of the
Respondent on the first day of the Inquiry.
R2 Statement dated 6 August 2010 - Ms Caroline Gatty.
R3 Further statement of the Respondent dated 18 August 2010.
R4 Statement of Janis Layton dated 23 August 2010.
HCCC v CLARKE-SAUNDERS
SUBMISSIONS MADE BY THE HCCC
Introduction
Tribunal has before it a Complaint dated 4 August 2009 raising eight separate
particulars (the Complaint). Both unsatisfactory
professional conduct within
Psychologists’ Act 2001
(the Act) and professional
misconduct under
of the Act are alleged. The matters complained of raise
serious issues from the perspective of the protection of the public, the
maintenance of standards within the psychology profession and the maintenance of
public confidence in the psychology profession.
Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) submits that the Tribunal
should be comfortably satisfied that each particular
(save for particulars 2(h)
and (i) of complaints 5 and 6 which are not pressed), as alleged, is proved and
that the matters alleged
amount to professional misconduct. Indeed, the failure
to challenge the evidence of Mr Borenstein (tab 21A-D) strongly suggests that
McCann accepts that, if the matters alleged are proved, this amounts to
professional misconduct. It is difficult, indeed, to see
how there could be any
real dispute as to this.
Commission seeks orders:
(a) That Mr
McCann be deregistered for a minimum period of two years;
(b) That Mr
McCann be prohibited from providing therapy, psychotherapy, hypnotherapy, mental
health services, welfare services (as
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
, counselling and/or any alternative healing/health
care/ therapies unless and until he is re-registered as a psychologist; and
Particularly
serious issues arise in this case bearing in mind the vulnerability of the
complainants, and the fact that Mr McCann
was at the relevant time purporting to
provide services to the complainants as an approved counselor pursuant to the
Approved Counselling
Scheme established by the Attorney General of New South
Wales for the support of victims of violent crimes. Further, the nature of
scheme is such that any concerns as regards probity in claiming invoices and as
regards keeping appointments and ensuring that
the client is respected and gets
the benefit of the full program are of particular significance.
the context within which counselling services were purportedly being provided by
Mr McCann, the likelihood of his conduct causing
harm was particularly high.
These were individuals who had already been victims of violence. They were
likely to be vulnerable. They
were clearly likely to have issues as regards
boundaries, confidence and respect. Conduct such as that of Mr McCann was likely
cause considerable problems. It also potentially precluded these individuals
from receiving the counselling (funded by the state)
to which they should have
been entitled. His approach to the termination of counselling services for
client C is particularly problematic
bearing in mind his own opinions as set out
in reports to Victims Services of her vulnerability (particular 7 of complaints
context within which the question of protective orders must be considered
includes Mr McCann’s repeated attempts to discredit
the complainants by
reference to their own personal life histories, which information he was given
by virtue of his role as an Approved
Counselor (see tab 2(xiii) tab 2(xii) tab
18, tab 2(vi), tab 25(c), tab 4B, tab 6(vi), tab 10, tab 19(vi) and tx 31/08/10
– the criminal record was given to him by either Client B or a
barrister because the DoCS allegations were being challenged).
That shows a
persistent and remarkable lack of insight into his professional obligations, and
of the position of trust and confidence
in which he was placed. It exacerbates
the seriousness of his conduct, and accentuates the extent of his current
McCann was also clearly willing to communicate confidential information
disclosed to him by Client B in his professional capacity
to Ms Layton (Ms
Layton told the Tribunal that Mr McCann had told her that Client B was a drug
user (tx 25/08/10 at 30:44), that
Client B had a criminal record of drug
offences, kidnapping and other offences (tx 25/08/10 at 31:35) and that Mr
McCann showed her
Client B’s file (tx 25/08/10 at 31:45). That reflects a
serious failure on the part of Mr McCann to understand his professional
obligations.
Considerable
significance should also be given to the ongoing failure on the part of Mr
McCann to be fully frank as to his own alcohol
and drug usage. Significance
should also be placed upon his failure to inform his current employer of the
complaint (tx 31/08/10
at 107:45).
McCann’s various accounts to Victims Services, the HCCC and to the
Tribunal of threats he alleges were made by Client B also
do not reflect well on
him. It is not until the statement R3, in August 2010, that Mr McCann explained
that the threats that he alleges
were made by Client B occurred whilst she was
suffering from a drug related psychosis (at [20]). Ms Layton believed that
was having a drug related psychosis (tx 25/08/10 at 27:13). Ms
Layton’s account was that Mr McCann, at around that time, also
that Client B needed psychiatric help or support as her drugs were
“messing her memory up and mucking her line of
thought up” (tx
25/08/10 at 34:11-29). Mr McCann’s willingness to use these threats to
seek to justify his own professional
misconduct and to discredit Client B,
without any explanation that her conduct had been in the context of a psychosis,
again reflects
poorly upon him.
further matter by way of context is Mr McCann’s decision to send text
messages to Client B rather than make any formal notification
to DoCS (tx
31/08/10 at 45:39). If he had been genuinely concerned for the welfare of her
children he would have made that notification.
Given that he did not, his
willingness to cause her anguish and pain indicates a deep lack of insight into
Mr McCann’s evidence during cross-examination at tx 31/08/10 at 46:29
– 56:23, and the documents at volume 2,
Client B tab, pp. 19, 21, 23, 27.
29, 33, 36, 39, 40, 44, 49 60, in relation to the attempts by Mr McCann to
ensure payment fees
for treatment of Master E, strongly suggested that Mr McCann
was dishonest as regards his attempts to ensure that he was paid for
counselling
sessions which may or may not have involved Master E. This is again part of the
context relevant to protective orders.
Mr McCann’s bipolar
Tribunal has heard evidence as to Mr McCann’s ongoing psychological
difficulties. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
that this caused Mr
McCann to behave in the manner set out in the Complaint. The evidence goes no
higher than that his untreated
bipolar affective disorder and untreated alcohol
dependence may have contributed to the situations which gave rise to the
(Wright, Report dated 19 July 2010, tab 26, at p.3). In any event, Mr
McCann’s bipolar disorder does not in any way excuse
the conduct
complained of.
Mr McCann’s awareness
McCann has stated to the Tribunal that he was not aware of his problems as at
2004-2005. The Tribunal should reject this evidence.
Mr McCann was clearly aware
that as at 204-2005 he was having difficulty coping – his evidence is that
he asked Ms Layton to
come to Sydney for precisely that reason (statement at R3
at [12]). He was also being told by others that he was drinking too much
behaving strangely (statement at R3 at [9]). He told Ms Gatty that he had had
many, many, many blackouts (tx 25/08/10 at 10:46
& 11:47). He was depressed,
anxious, had memory blackouts and got the shakes (statement R3 at [18]). He was
clearly aware that
he was having blackouts. He told the Tribunal that from about
September 2005 to February 2006
“it was very bad”
and that he
told Dr Kwan around this time of his alcoholism (tx 31/08/10 at 7:3-20). If the
Tribunal accepts the accounts put forward
by the complainants, then these are
matters about which Mr McCann was clearly aware and for which he was fully
responsible.
Standard of Proof
standard of proof is the civil standard as stated in
Briginshaw v.
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
at 362-3. However by reason of the seriousness
of the allegations and the gravity of the consequences the Tribunal must be
comfortably
satisfied that the matters in the complaint have been
established.
Court of Criminal Appeal has cautioned against the use of “comfortably
satisfied” as implying that proof to a higher
standard than the balance of
probabilities is required:
Gianoutsos v Glykis
(2006) NSWLR 539 at 547-9
applied by the Medical Tribunal in
In re Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1
10. More recently, in
Polglaze v Veterinary Practitioners Board of NSW
[2009] NSWSC 347
, the court has confirmed that at common law there are
only two standards of proof, the ordinary civil standard of proof upon a balance
of probabilities and the criminal standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt. The
standard is not a third standard or proof. Rather it is
concerned with the quality or sufficiency of the evidence necessary to discharge
the civil standard.
The NSW Psychologists’ Board Code of
Professional Conduct
the Complaint is not framed in terms of any allegation of breach of the NSW
Psychologists’ Board Code of Professional
Conduct (the Code), this clearly
forms an important contextual document against which the Tribunal should
consider the Complaint.
is understood that the 2004 Code was notified to all psychologists in June 2005
(see decision of the Tribunal in
Cox-May no 1
). Thus, prior to that date
the relevant Code is the 1997 Code.
the present case the Commission relies in particular upon:
obligation to maximize benefit and do no harm in the practice of psychology
(General principle A2 of 2004 Code).
obligation to respect the dignity and welfare of individuals with whom
psychologists have professional contact (General principle
obligation to act ethically and properly and promote accuracy, fairness and
honesty in the practice of psychology (General
principle A4 of the 2004
obligation to safeguard the welfare of clients, especially during the
termination of a therapeutic relationship which can
be stressful (Minimum
standard A3(v) of the 2004 Code and Principle A5 of the 1997 Code).
obligation of confidentiality (Minimum standard 2 of the 2004 Code and
principles A2 and A3 of the 1997 Code).
obligation not to exploit the relationship of trust with clients in any way
(Minimum standard A3 of the 2004 Code and Principle
A4 of the 1997 Code). This
includes an obligation to avoid violating boundaries with clients and to give
specific consideration to
potential vulnerability of specific groups.
obligation to withdraw from practice when a physical or psychological condition,
for example as a result of alcohol or personal
stress, seriously impairs their
abilities or professional judgment (Minimum standard 4(iv) of the 2004 Code and
Principle D4 of the
1997 Code).
obligation to uphold the law (Minimum standard C of the 2004 Code and Principle
C1 of the 1997 Code).
Commission also relies by way of context upon the Psychologists and Sexual
Behaviour in Professional Relationships Guidelines
dated 6 February 2001
published by the NSW Psychologists’ Registration Board. This provides
“The community expectation of the professional psychologist is
that the psychologist will act with utmost integrity. The community
confident that personal boundaries will be maintained and that any person who
seeks the assistance of a psychologist will
not be at risk of conduct on the
part of the psychologist which transgresses the highest standards of conduct in
relation to those
boundaries.”
Borenstein in his reports also relies upon the Australian Psychological Society
Code of Ethics. Mr Clarke-Saunders states on his
CV that he is a member of the
APS (tab 4). The Commission relies upon this Code by way of background
relevant by way of context in this case are the specific obligations owed by
reason of the Victims Services Approved Counselling
Scheme pursuant to which Mr
Clarke-Saunders was providing treatment to Clients A, B and C. Pursuant to this
scheme, as set out behind
tabs 6(vii)(B)(i) and (ii):
in the Memorandum of Understanding
(a) Specific obligations of confidence are owed.
(b) Specific obligations are owed as regards changes in availability.
(c) There is a freestanding obligation to comply with codes of conduct and
professional standards.
(d) There is an obligation to keep proper records of charges, fees and billing,
and sufficient records regarding the structuring
of counselling sessions to
confirm that there was a need for the counselling hours requested.
(e) The services to be provided under the Scheme are short term, early
intervention counselling for victims of violent crime with
the aim of assisting
victims of violent crime to cope with the adverse symptoms and to reduce the
impact of the crime on their lives
as far as possible (p.14).
(f) There is a requirement to sign that the counsellor is fit to provide
counselling (schedule 5).
As set out in the Handbook
(g) The approach is client centred and the role of the counsellor is to foster
client empowerment and maximize recovery (p.6)
(h) The aim is to reduce the impact of the crime on victims’ lives
(i) There is an obligation to protect a client’s right to privacy and
confidentiality and to secure approved counselling files
(j) Approved Counsellors must terminate session appropriately explaining the
reasons to the client (p.31).
(k) Changes in availability must be notified to the Victims of Crime Bureau
(l) Approved counsellors are responsible for ensuring that the client has signed
the invoice at each session (p.36).
Credibility
of the complainants gave evidence before the Tribunal. None of them had anything
to gain by doing so. It was clearly a highly
stressful experience for each of
them, in particular clients B and C. As regards clients B and C, questions were
put to them that
manifestly touched raw nerves. Notwithstanding this, they
continued to make clear efforts to assist the Tribunal by giving the Tribunal
their best recollection of events. They clearly were not seeking to exaggerate
their experiences.
of the complainants had any incentive to make up the matters the subject of the
complaints. They did not seek any financial gain.
Whilst they did rely upon
their lack of effective counselling in support of their requests for further
hours of support from Victims’
Services, no adverse inference as to their
credit should be drawn from that fact.
complainants have given consistent accounts of the matters giving rise to the
complaints. Whilst they may, over the passage of
time, have become confused
had deteriorated over
time. By contrast to Mr McCann’s accounts, however,
there have been no shifts in the essentials of their accounts.
each of the complainants and Ms D gave evidence of a change in Mr McCann in mid
to late 2005. This is broadly consistent
with Mr McCann’s clinical notes
and the deteriorating quality thereof. It is also consistent with Mr
McCann’s evidence
“it was very bad”
from September
2005 (tx 31/08/10 at 7:4). This admission from Mr McCann as to the point at
which his drinking became a significant
problem, and his own knowledge of this
(reflected in him raising it with Dr Kwan at that time) and failure to take
steps to protect
the interests of his clients, is a feature of the evidence
which strongly supports the credibility of the accounts of the complainants
support for the credibility of their accounts comes from Mr McCann’s
recent acceptance that in 2004-2005 he was suffering
from blackouts and his
friends noticed he was behaving strangely (R3 at [9]), that he had trouble
coping (R3 at [12]), that he was
late for work on occasions and did not return
phone calls in a timely manner (R3 at [18]).
attempts have been made to suggest that Clients B and C may have colluded in
presenting their accounts to Victims’ Services
there is, in truth, no
basis for such a finding. Whilst they may well have discussed their experiences
with Mr McCann and it is clear
that on one occasion they attended Victims’
Services together (tab 6(ii)), there is no reason to believe that they were
to present a falsified account. They had no reason to do so.
Moreover, the consistency between their complaints and those of Client
had never had any contact with Clients B or C, strongly militates against the
suggestion of falsification or collusion. Moreover,
given their vulnerability at
the time and the effect of Mr McCann’s conduct upon them it is entirely
understandable that Clients
B and C may have wished to rely upon each other as
supports during this period and in contacting Victims Support. As Client C told
the Tribunal, she discussed the matter with Client B and then phoned Victims
Services because it was all so confusing (tx 23/08/10
at 24:34-40). This is the
rational, and likely, explanation for them speaking to each other about Mr
McCann and travelling to Victims’
Services together on one occasion.
is not surprising that individuals who are involved in the victims’
support programme may themselves have had a history involving
association with
criminality. However, those individuals are entitled to the same standards of
professional conduct and confidence
from psychologists. Their vulnerability and
history will, if anything, exacerbate those standards. It would be to undermine
principles if complaints by such individuals were to be regarded as
inherently tainted by allegations relating to their own histories.
there is no evidence before the Tribunal to indicate dishonesty by any of the
complainants (save possibly as regards whether
Client C had ever worked for a
particular hotel in a resume – which is hardly a matter which would
undermine her evidence to
any real extent).
report of Dr Prior dated 11 February 2010, addressed to Dr Dalton, and Dr
Prior’s handwritten notes, shows that in 2010
Mr McCann was noted to be
disinhibited at work, and talking about sex. This supports the accounts of the
complainants in this case
given that this is conduct of the nature of which they
allege occurred in 2004-2005.
final factor which lends support to the complainants’ accounts is that
their various recollections of Mr McCann’s home
are remarkably consistent,
and similar to Ms Layton’s description. Ms Layton said that his home
around 2005 was a one story
villa above a garage (tx 25/08/10 at 28:20-28). Ms
Layton’s statement suggests in paragraph 10 (tab 16) that Mr McCann did
fact have a swimming pool. Again, this is consistent with Client B and C’s
accounts (tab 12, statement at [5] and tab 13
statement at [7]). Client B
described it as like a villa unit with stairs going up to it (tx 23/08/10 at
McCann says in his statement (R3 at [12]) that he asked Ms Layton to come to
Sydney when he felt that he had trouble coping, and
this adds further
credibility to the complainants’ accounts. In oral evidence, when asked in
what way he had trouble coping
Mr McCann, referred to his drinking having then
really escalated and that he was overwhelmed and distraught (tx 31/0810 at
McCann candidly accepted in oral evidence before the Tribunal that his memory
was hazy from around halfway through 2004 (tx 31/08/10
at 29:26-29). He has also
talked of blackouts. It is highly unlikely that his recollection can be relied
upon as to details of the
particulars of the complaints. This makes much of his
denial unreliable.
contrast with the complainants, Mr McCann had everything to gain by presenting
himself in the most favourable light before the
Tribunal. The evidence plainly
establishes that he has lied about significant matters both in correspondence
before the Tribunal
and in his evidence to the Tribunal:
(a) Mr McCann
denied, by letter to the HCCC dated 11 May 2006, sending text messages to Client
B (tab 4B). He now accepts that he
sent those messages.
(b) Mr McCann
told Elna Martin on 24 February 2006 that no threat had been made to him (tab
18). He has subsequently repeatedly relied
upon such threats (see eg in his
statement at R3 at para 17). This suggests a dishonest attempt to discredit
Client B and to explain
his own conduct in sending the text messages.
(c) Mr McCann
repeatedly in correspondence with Victims Services sought to blame the
disintegration of his practice upon their conduct
(eg tab 18, 24 February 2006,
tab 2(vi) 2 March 2006, tab 25(c) 27 March 2006, tab 4B, 11 May 2006 and tab 5,
12 May 2006). However,
as in his statement at R3, Mr McCann later accepted that
his drinking was causing problems by 2004, that he was not coping, that
not functioning normally at work due to binge drinking, and that he was
paranoid. And in his statement exhibited as A to R3,
Mr McCann stated at p.13 of
the exhibit that in fact he closed down his business to ensure that he was not
causing harm to other
clients who were attending his practice. Further, in oral
evidence Mr McCann said that by 2005 his career was already falling apart,
legal aid had stopped giving him work.
apparent from Mr McCann’s evidence during cross-examination at tx 31/08/10
at 46:29 – 56:23 and volume 2, Client
B tab, pp. 19, 21, 23, 27. 29, 33,
36, 39, 40, 44, 49 60, Mr McCann clearly dissembled on occasions in order to
secure payment from
DoCS and/or Victims Services. Mr McCann admitted that the
stalking incident only occurred once, and yet he had on two occasions sought
rely upon it to justify a need for treatment for both Client B and Master E.
Further, Mr McCann’s denial that he had ever
sought payment for services
directly from Client B sits uncomfortably with the documents which refer to the
sum of a cheque for $1,160
coming from Client B. This whole passage strongly
supports Client B’s account as to being asked to lie about services being
provided to Master E.
(e) In tab A to
R3 Mr McCann said that the only interaction between Mark and Client B would have
been whilst he was sitting at the
café having a cup of coffee. That
contrasted with his evidence before the Tribunal that Client B and her daughter
Mark to get their hair cut (tx 31/08/10 at 102:27), and that he thought
that client B and Mark became friendly and
“formed some sort of –
I don’t know what, but they seemed friendly
” (tx 31/08/10 at
(f) Further Mr
McCann’s explanations for why he wrote in the text message to Client B
that he would send Mark over for the light
machine lacked credibility. Mr McCann
was unable to explain how Mark would have known Client B’s address (tx
31/08/10 at 111:10).
The only credible explanation for that text is that Mr
McCann knew that client B knew Mark beyond merely passing acquaintance, knew
that he knew where client B lived, and knew that she would be scared if he said
that Mark was coming to her home.
statement exhibited as A to R3 Mr McCann said, at p.12 of the exhibit, that
Client C did not have a daughter to his knowledge.
That was simply untrue given
that his notes relating to client C are littered with references to her
(h) Perhaps the
most significant dissembling by Mr McCann relates to his alcohol and drug usage.
As to alcohol, the first time that
this was mentioned in connection with the
subject matter of these complaints was in a letter dated 25 July 2008 at tab
the Psychologists’ Registration Board. Mr McCann’s
suggestion in that letter that he had not disclosed this earlier because
thought that he would be discriminated against lacks credibility. Mr McCann was
clearly aware of this earlier because he said
that he discussed it with Dr Kwan
in 2005-2006 (tx 31/08/10 at 7:19). Mr McCann states that he ceased drinking in
June 2007, but
in November 2007 (tab 19(i) and (ii)) he communicated with the
HCCC but provided no information about his alcohol use in 2004-2006.
dissembling can thus not be excused by ongoing alcohol usage. Further, given the
extent to which Mr McCann now relies upon his
alcohol usage as underlining his
conduct around this time, his failure to be fully frank about this from February
2006 when the complaints
were first made, whilst at the same time repeatedly
referring to alleged drug use by Client B, reflects badly on his
credibility.
drugs, at the commencement of Mr McCann’s oral evidence, Mr Jurd asked Mr
“In 2005 and 2006 were you taking any illicit
. Mr McCann replied
(tx 31/08/10 at
7:41-42). During cross-examination, Mr McCann, having been shown Dr
Prior’s report recording that he had told
him he had abused certain drugs
and last abused substances in June 2007, admitted that he had taken ecstasy,
speed, methamphetamine
and marijuana, but was reluctant to accept that he had
used the word “abused” to Dr Prior (tx 31/08/10 at 92:25-93:7).
few moments earlier he said that he only occasionally took these drugs (tx
31/08/10 at 92:20). At the end of the hearing, during
re-examination by Mr Jurd,
Mr McCann told the Tribunal that by the start of 2006 he got “
party scene in Oxford Street, so it’s just basically amphetamines –
those sorts of drugs
” (tx 31/8/10 at 112:48). It is thus clear that
even as at 31 August 2010 Mr McCann was prepared to lie to the Tribunal about
his drug use whilst relying upon Client B’s drug use to seek to discredit
(j) Mr McCann
had also earlier made a clear statement to the HCCC in May 2006 at B4 that he
had never used illegal drugs (tab 4B at
p.4) and in an email to Louise Flint at
Victims’ Services he stated that he had never used drugs or been involved
with people
using drugs (tab 6(vi)). Mr McCann clearly has shown that he was
willing to lie also to both Victims Services and to the HCCC if
he perceived
this as serving his own ends.
McCann’s explanation of discrepancies as based upon his lack of
recollection (tx 31/8/10 at 97:5-15) further damages
his credibility.
(l) Mr McCann
explained that he would demonstrate the sound and light therapy only after
getting a consent form from the client (tx
31/08/10 at 24:8). However, there is
no consent form for sound and light therapy in client C’s file. This
undermines the credibility
of this explanation proferred by Mr McCann. Client
C’s evidence that this was for 15-20 minutes without any explanation to
her for how it was done (tx 23/08/10 at 38:45-39:12) is in any event
inconsistent with this explanation.
McCann’s explanation to the Tribunal that he was not aware that he was
drinking to the extent that it was affecting his
professionalism is simply not
credible. Mr McCann told the Tribunal that his partner was telling him that he
had a drinking problem
(tx 31/08/10 at 24:48).
(n) Ms Layton
told the Tribunal that Mr McCann told her about Client B’s criminal
history and showed her Client B’s file
(tx 25/08/10 at 31:34-45). Mr
McCann denied that (tx 31/08/10 at 28:26) before, when pushed, accepting that
this was a possibility.
Again, this reflects poorly on his credibility.
(o) Mr McCann
described Ms Layton as being on a welfare placement (tab 4B at p.2) in order to
dissemble as to Ms Layton’s role
as regards clients B and Ms D. However,
Ms Layton explained to the Tribunal that she was not on a welfare placement and
had no psychological
training and her role was really just casual unpaid
assistance to Mr McCann (tx 25/08/10 at 32:25-35).
McCann’s account of his text messages to Client B and Ms D as being
responsive to threatening messages from Client B
lacks credibility in the light
of Ms Layton’s clear evidence that at the time when she sent text messages
to client B (at tab
16) from 12.15 pm on 12 February 2006 until 8.58 pm on 13
February 2006, she had not seen any threatening text messages from Client
Mr McCann (tx 25/08/10 at 37:23-28). Ms Layton had previously told the Tribunal
that she personally witnessed Mr McCann receiving
and deleting the threatening
text messages from Client B (tx 25/08/10 at 33:1-34:1). The text messages from
Mr McCann to Client B
and Ms D are all dated 12 February 2006 between 10.30 am
and 12.56 pm (tabs 2(x) and (xi)), i.e. before Ms Layton sent her messages.
Thus, if the threatening text messages occurred at all they could not have been
prior to Mr McCann sending his text messages to Client
B and Ms D.
McCann’s account that he discovered that client B was taking drugs and
this caused him to revise his view of her parenting
sits very uncomfortably with
his admitted failure to inform DoCS that his earlier opinions had been formed
because of a misapprehension
(tx 31/08/10 at 43:40 –
as Mr McCann stated in his statement at R3, and was noted by Ms Gatty to have
told her, Mr McCann’s recollection of
events from 2004-2005 is hazy, he
has had blackouts, and he was not coping at that time. This stands in sharp
contrast to his repeated
assertions in correspondence that the complaints were
unfounded and that the complainants had made up untruths about him. His failure
to accept the fallibility of his recollection in a timely manner, and to
recognize the potential for this and his alcohol and drug
usage in 2004-2007 to
have impaired his recollection, reflects unfavourably upon his credibility.
notable feature of Mr Clarke-Saunders’ approach to the complaints raised
by the clients has been to make allegations as regards
the credibility of the
clients given their own personal histories and/or to make allegations of
continuing criminal conduct. For
example, the Tribunal is referred to the
filenote dated 24 February 2006 at tab 6(v), the letter dated 2 March 2006 tab
2(vi), letter
dated 18 February 2006 tab 2(xii), email 3 April 2006 at tab
6(vi), letter received by HCCC on 11 May 2006 at tab 4. The indication
Channel 9 is keen on a story due to the criminality of the clients is stated in
the letter received by the HCCC on 11 May 2006
(tab 4 at p.1). This does not
reflect well on his credit, as it shows the steps which he is prepared to take
to have the complaints
either not proceeded with or dismissed.
is the Commission’s submission that the matters relied upon by Mr
Clarke-Saunders in these respects demonstrate a lack of
respect for the clients
and a lack of respect for their confidence rather than any lack of credibility
on their part.
Layton was also lacking in credibility. Her accounts appeared more designed to
support Mr McCann than to present her most accurate
recollection to the
Tribunal. By way of example:
evidence as to the dates of the allegedly threatening text messages was highly
inconsistent. In her statement dated 29 November
2007 she clearly stated that
these were sent in September or October 2006 (tab 16 at [6]). She later sought
to alter this evidence
but was highly inconsistent as regards the dates.
evidence that Mr McCann types his records (statement tab 16 at [13]) was
inconsistent with her oral evidence that she has
seen both written and typed
records (tx 25/08/10 at 39:1-6). It was also inconsistent with Mr McCann’s
evidence that his difficulty
in writing reports arose from his alcoholism but
that he did not have any other difficulties (tx 31/08/10 at 9:3-23).
evidence as to the final paragraph of her witness statement dated 29 November
2007, i.e that she was of the opinion that the
allegations made by Clients B and
C are untrue, was highly unconvincing (tx 25/08/10 at 38:3-23).
Layton’s account that she did not recall why she sent the messages to
Client B was not credible (tx 25/08/10 at 29:9-20).
It is not credible that she
would have sent such texts if her relationship was as limited as she described
(at tx 25/08/10 at 29:43
she said that she had only once had a personal
conversation with Client B). Rather, these text messages strongly support Client
and Client C’s accounts of Ms Layton participating in social contact
with them and Mr McCann.
Layton’s evidence to the Tribunal that she was not aware that Mr McCann
had used illicit drugs is not credible bearing
in mind that around 2005-2006
(when Mr McCann told the Tribunal he was using drugs and was into the party
scene in Oxford Street),
he was living with Ms Layton. Also, Client C’s
evidence was that Ms Layton had been present when Mr McCann took marijuana
Each of the particulars
evidence before the Tribunal strongly supports the accounts of the complainants
and Ms D, upon which the particulars of complaint
rely. Each particular was, as
set out below, clearly established on the written evidence before the Tribunal.
That evidence was in
no way undermined by the oral evidence of Mr McCann, or of
the complainants or Ms D. it was supported by the oral evidence of each
Clients A to C and Ms D (the detailed transcript references are not provided
below but can be provided on request). To the extent
that Mr McCann denies these
matters, his evidence should be rejected for the reasons set out above as not
written evidence as to the particulars of complaint is as
Complaints 1/2
Tab no/para or page
14A [12 - 13], 14AA [8]
14A [12-13],14AA [9]
14A [14-15] [17-18], 14AA [5][8]
14A [14-15], [17-18]
14A [15], 14B
14A [16], 14AA [7], 14B
Complaints 3/4
Tab no/para or page
12 [8], 6(iii)
12 [5-6], 6(iii)
12 [8], 6(iii)
25(a), 12 [11-12]
25(a), 12 [15]
25(a), 12 [4], 6(iii), tx 31/08/10 at 46:29 – 56:23 and volume 2,
Client B tab, pp. 19, 21, 23, 27. 29, 33, 36, 39, 40, 44,
25(a), 12 [15-16], 6(iii), 6(iv)
12 [8], 6(iii)
6(iii), 13 [7][9]
25(a), 6(iii)
25(a), 6(iii), 2(xi). Admitted by Mr McCann.
2(x), 12 [20-24], 18, 19(ii). Admitted by Mr McCann.
Complaints 5/6
Tab no/para or page
13 [25][31][32]
13 [14][17]
6(ii), 13 [11-13][33]
13 [7][17][33-4]
6(ii), 13[13]
6(ii), 13 [27]
6(ii), 13 [15]
6(ii), 13 [13]
6(ii), 13 [27]
13 [9][18-21]
Not pressed as covered by particular 2(d)
Not pressed.
6(ii), 13 [23-4]
6(ii), 13 [30], 13B [13]
2(xviii), 6(ii), 13 [25][36]
25(b), 13 [37-8]
Complaints 7-8
19(iii), R3. tx 31/08/10 at 6:50-7:12, tx 31/08/10 at 10:8-14.
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct, equivalent to that in s 25 of
the Act, was considered by the Medical Tribunal
In re a Medical
Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
(3 September 2007). The changes to
the previous definition were described in paragraph 10 as being twofold: first
in introducing
the concept of different levels of experience and skill requiring
different standards, and secondly, in introducing the idea that
the conduct had
to be “significantly below” the standard to be so expected. At
paragraph 12 “significantly”
was said to mean “not trivial, of
importance, or substantial”.
matters set out above, individually and cumulatively, clearly establish
unsatisfactory professional conduct. This is strongly
supported by the evidence
of Mr Borenstein, which was not contested (the contest being as to the factual
premise for his opinions).
Professional Misconduct
24 of the Act provides that professional misconduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or
cancellation of the psychologists registration. Whilst the statutory definition
of professional misconduct
makes it unnecessary to turn to the common law
definition, it was held in
Prothonotary of Supreme Court of NSW v. McCaffery
[2004] NSWCA 470
, that it gives context to a statutory definition of
professional misconduct that it was enacted in the context that
“professional
misconduct” at common law was said “to connote
“conduct which would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable”
by one’s peers: see
Allinson v General Council of
Medical Education and Registration
[1894] 1 QB 750
and other authorities
collected by Spigelman CJ (with whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed) in
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
is strongly supported by the evidence of Mr Borenstein, which was not contested
(the contest being as to the factual premise
Protective Orders
set out above, pursuant to section 53(2) of the Act, the Tribunal should
deregister Mr McCann for a minimum period of two years.
In addition, the
Tribunal should make a prohibition order pursuant to section 53(3A) of the Act
prohibiting Mr McCann from providing
therapy, psychotherapy, hypnotherapy,
mental health services, welfare services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
, counselling, and/or any alternative
healing/health care/ therapies unless and until he is re-registered as a
psychologist.
Commission relies upon the following:
(a) This is a
case in which deterrence and maintaining confidence in the profession are of
great significance. Mr McCann treated vulnerable
members of society with less
than the respect they deserved, then relied upon their very vulnerability to
attempt to conceal that
fact and discredit their accounts. It is of clear
significance to the profession that psychologists be sent a clear and
unequivocal
method about such conduct.
(b) Mr McCann
was clearly aware that his standards were slipping and that he was not coping.
He nonetheless continued to accept public
money to provide services, but did so
in a manner which was likely to cause far more harm than good. Again, this is a
matter which
requires a clear message to the profession and to the public.
(c) Mr McCann
has relatively recently, on his own admission, taken valium from a drugs
cupboard at his work (tx 31/8/10 at 87:40).
This is indicative of a continuing
failure to perform his professional duties in the manner which his profession
expects of him.
(d) Mr McCann
has also showed a continuing disrespect for the complainants and a continuing
failure to recognize or own up to his
own professional misconduct.
(e) Mr McCann
has also showed a lack of honesty in his provision of information to Victims
Services, the HCCC and to the Tribunal.
That again, shows a continuing failure
to recognize the standards required of his profession.
(f) The public
would not be adequately protected unless a prohibition order is made. Mr
McCann’s current failings and lack of
insight strongly support this course
as the proper means of protecting the public.
(g) Mr McCann
has clearly undertaken a lot of different counselling roles since the events the
subject of the complaints. As set out
in his oral evidence at tx 31/08/10 at
13:21-34 he has worked as a youth worker, with BetSafe as a Counsellor, at the
Don Russell
Challenge Foundation, and at the Way Back Committee as a drug and
alcohol psychologist. Given the matters set out above, Mr McCann
in undertaking
such roles is placing the public at risk.
Commission also seeks an order for costs pursuant to Schedule 5, clause 13 of
HCCC v CLARKE-SAUNDERS
SUBMISSIONS MADE BY THE RESPONDENT
this matter significant admissions and concessions were made by Mr McCann in the
opening and various admissions against his interest
were made in the course of
his evidence. In that latter regard in particular it is difficult to say that
the final evidence given
by Mr McCann was inaccurate or a fabrication with still
further concession being made in reexamination. Comments will be made at
conclusion of these submissions about the appropriateness of any orders which
the Tribunal might make against Mr McCann.
certain of these submissions may be repetitive this has been done simply in the
context of referral to the submissions made
by the Commission and while we wish
to avoid repetitiveness we are concerned lest certain comments should go
unremarked.
in paragraph 7 regarding certain of the matters are in fact relevant in Mr
McCann’s submission as he clearly feared
criminal connections and much of
his subsequent activity in at least the first half of 2006 can be explained in
that regard. It is
accepted that Mr McCann should not have shown Miss Layton the
contents of any files or allowed her to attend any session.
respect of paragraph 8 of the Commission submissions it is submitted that by the
conclusion of his evidence Mr McCann was frank
as to his own alcohol and drug
usage. At this point and subsequently reference will be made on his own
resignation from Bet Safe
which dated to shortly after the conclusion of the
hearing. It is submitted that Mr McCann was extremely candid in relation to drug
usage, and alcohol consumption both long ceased.
respect of the Commission’s submissions in paragraph 9 it appears that it
was not only Mr McCann who overlooked the psychotic
episode until the hearing.
There was also evidence that client B made threats by SMS but the content of any
such SMS has now been
lost forever. Opportunity to examine such content had been
lost by both Victims Services and by Mr McCann.
submission in paragraph 10 not only reveals a lack of insight into Mr
McCann’s role but a lack of insight into his condition
at that stage. The
content of the evidence in the Commission documents and in the evidence taken
from Mr McCann reveals, we submit,
a deep state of panic.
is submitted that there was no sound evidence provided to support the allegation
contained in paragraph 11 of the submissions by
the Commission and it is
submitted that even a strong suggestion does not satisfy the test to be used by
the Tribunal.
to the bipolar disorder exist in the reports of Dr Wright and Dr Prior and the
behavior demonstrated by Mr McCann in the
evidence given by the witnesses
including Ms Layton. The evidence is indicative of mood elevation present at the
time of the complaints.
While it is conceded that there is no retrospective
analysis of the relationship of the behavior complained of to the conditions
which existed at that time it is submitted that all available evidence points
strongly to the existence of the untreated bi-polar
references to Bi-Polar Affective Disorder and Alcoholism have been touched on
above in respect of the existence of any insight.
Certainly Mr McCann’s
correspondence at the time of the complaint is indicative of a lack of insight.
His evidence also indicates
in the substantial concessions made by him, that he
now has a better insight. His comments to Ms Gatty were made some years after
the incidents and it is probably a reasonable indication of the lack of insight
that Mr McCann believed he could cope with the assistance
that he was given by
Ms Layton. Now he concedes that he should have sought professional assistance
and that the assistance that he
sought was inadequate.
issues are taken in respect of the Commission’s submissions on the
standard of proof or the code of conduct. It is added
that there is no evidence
to suggest that the signatures were not provided at each session. Rather the
commission evidence is to
the effect that signatures were obtained before
sessions were concluded.
respect of the credibility issues raised by the Commission it is submitted that
client B broadened her area of complaint and raised
matters not previously
forming part of the evidence. In respect of the seeking of financial gain we are
not aware of the issue ever
having been raised.
references to collusion in reporting to Victim Services is placing any evidence
far higher that can reasonably be submitted. What
is submitted is that no
reasonable and responsible investigation can be conducted by interviewing
witnesses together that being a
practice which, despite the best of intentions
can result in shared “memories” rather than independent versions.
witnesses travelled together and a reasonable inference is that they had
discussed their complaints, which were made at about the
same time, both before
and during their trip to Victim Services. The witnesses were friends, attended
the same psychologist, mixed
socially, provided supportive references and
attended Victim Services together to complain about Mr McCann. Just what they
Mr McCann that made him complain before they did was never investigated
by Victim Services at the time when the opportunity presented
substantial matters are raised in paragraph 33 of the Commission’s
submissions. As has been remarked above, the initial
correspondence from Mr
McCann arose in part from panic and a fear (perhaps unreasonably) for his life.
That matter was admitted by
Mr McCann in the Tribunal. For similar reasons Mr
McCann also in early correspondence denied threats against him but there has
clear repetition of the threats being made and the one denial is we submit
an aberration. Mr McCann closed his practice once again
possibly as a result of
paranoia and in this respect we also cite the opinion of Dr Prior. The closure
of the practice displays some
level of responsibility and/or insight.
Mr McCann maintained his allegation that there was stalking. The
particular cheque referred to in 33(d) is unexplained yet it could
obtained from the bank with a timely application, perhaps even with an
application at or about the time of the hearing.
Other comments made in this paragraph are we submit speculation only with the
exception that with Master E, Mr McCann repeats his
submission made in respect
of paragraph 11 of the Commission’s submissions. (7. above)
References to “Mark” we do not submit go so far to indicate Mark
knew client B’s address. Certainly if Mr McCann
was going to send Mark to
client B’s address he would have supplied Mark with the address. Mark did
not attend the address.
Comments at 33(g) suggest error rather than an untruth.
References to 33(h) about the alcohol issue can also be explained by an
attempt to clear the air with the peak body as part of the
twelve steps of
Alcoholics Anonymous. Comments to earlier failure to do so are explained by the
absence of insight and the absence
of any Alcoholics Anonymous involvement until
The issue of drugs involved a substantial variation in evidence. Comments
in relation to the
period or whether the word selected was that of Dr Prior or of Mr McCann.
Nonetheless there were marked inconsistencies
in reference to drug abuse but
those inconsistencies were such as to constitute a serious comment against
interest, volunteered by
Mr McCann. Personal consumption of drugs, murky after
cross examination, was clarified in re-examination, again against interest.
would normally be said that there was an inconsistency in statements with
varying comments being made but it is submitted that
Mr McCann endeavored to do
his best in his sworn evidence to tell the truth, clearing the air of the
previous untruths he told about
his use of drugs both legal and illegal. Just
whether this was because of a lack of recollection, some internal confusion or a
perception of the truth is unexplained. The fact that it took him so long
to tell the truth stands to his credit though why it was
suddenly revealed
remains unexplained.
References in 33(l) to sound and light therapy raises confusion only, as the
clients did not have the treatment.
Reference to drinking in 33(m) does not take the matter as far as the
alcoholism for which Mr McCann has had treatment. The question
is not whether we
submit that people said he had a drinking problem but whether he appreciated
what they were saying.
In the case of Ms Layton her role and the work she performed remains unclear
and the fact that Mr McCann considered at the time that
Ms Layton could have
been in any way of any substantial assistance to him reveals not only his lack
of insight but his lack of judgment.
It is conceded that much of the initial
correspondence from Mr McCann lacks credibility. It is submitted that the
evidence taken
from him during the hearing was the evidence of a person who has
had substantial treatment for psychiatric illness and alcoholism
attempting to do his best when giving his evidence.
In respect of the matters submitted in 33(p) of the Commission’s
submissions the content of the messages is lost. No attempts
were made to
ascertain the content when the opportunity offered. Just what was said by client
B in messages to Mr McCann and Ms Layton
is a matter for the Tribunal.
comment in paragraph 34 is the comment made by a person who has had the
opportunity to undergo substantial treatment and rehabilitation.
His failure to
have insight into his difficulties would also explain his refusal to accept the
extent to which he may have erred.
Accordingly, with desperation and fear with
what would appear to be panic attacks described by Mr McCann mistake he made the
of which are blurred themselves by time, alcoholism and a psychiatric
disease. There was no lack of respect. If the psychiatric illness
identified and treated, if the alcoholism had been responded to appropriately,
mistakes Mr McCann made may well have been
clearer to him.
Layton gave evidence that did not assist Mr McCann or the Tribunal. In no
respect could it be said that her evidence on any matter
could be accepted or
form the basis of any credible submission. Nonetheless it was essential that she
gave evidence. Her assistance
to Mr McCann is itself evidence of his lack of
some point some credit must be given to Mr McCann for his ability to appreciate
the potential risk to the community of continuing
to practice as a psychologist.
Whether this resulted from the fear that he had at the time or insight. It was a
positive result we
submit. Mr McCann is now approaching five (5) years past the
time at which the complaints arose and in that time he has not practiced
psychologist, has undertaken substantial medical treatment and has displayed
personal commitment in his AA membership with the
attendance of five (5)
meetings weekly for in excess of three (3) years.
maintaining the submissions above we wish to add that in the case of Client A (p
12 24/8/10) there are various explanations
given regarding invitations to go out
with the replies and the previous statement as to a relationship with [Ms G] to
McCann does not dispute findings of both unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct.
respect of the Protective Orders, Mr McCann asked it be noted that he has ceased
his casual employment of seven (7) hours per week
with Betsafe from the first
week of September. In this matter Mr McCann concedes that he displayed a lack of
direction and a lack
of initiative in his practice as a psychologist. He
concedes that he displayed an inability to think through problems or to move
them through to a conclusion. It was these matters that led to his realization
that he could no longer continue to work as a psychologist.
An insight was
previously lacking perhaps because of alcohol, perhaps because of drugs and
perhaps because of a mental condition
at that stage undiagnosed.
Prohibition Order would be accepted and in that situation Mr McCann asks that
the opinions of Dr Wright and Dr Prior should be taken
into consideration with
substantial advances in his condition. Dr John Murray Wright took a history of a
diagnosis of Bi-polar Affective
Disorder in late 2009 or early 2010 (report
19/7/10 page 1). Mr McCann told him that “in retrospect he has experienced
of elevated mood regularly since his mid teens” and “felt
they had been around intermittently for most of his adult life”.
this history, Dr Wright concluded that:
“At the time of the complaint in 2006 Mr Clarke-Saunders had
an untreated alcohol dependence and an undiagnosed and untreated
affective disorder. It is quite likely that these conditions, either separately
or together, impacted adversely on his work
performance and may have contributed
to the situations which gave rise to complaints”.
There is much lay evidence regarding elevated mood in 2005 and 2006
(eg. p26 23/8/10, p48 23/8/10).
Dr Michael C. St J Prior is Mr McCann’s treating psychiatrist. He took
a history that Mr McCann “last abused substances
and alcohol in June
2007.” However, he was taking Tramal, “an oral narcotic and
analgesic agent”, which could be
addictive, lexapro which he had been
prescribed but which he consumed in excess of his prescription and seroquel the
dosage of which
he had also exceeded. The past use of ecstasy, speed and
amphetamines is not prescribed to any particular date. Subsequently there
mention of recent use of benzodiazepines. Dr Prior also took a history of a past
diagnosis, by a psychiatric registrar, of bi-polar
affective disorder and of
treatment for anxiety by Dr Stella Dalton in about 1997.
The hypomanic, possibly manic phase of bipolar affective disorder diagnosed
by Dr Prior “occurs in an individual with borderline
personality traits, a
past history of significant head injury and a past history of polysubstance
abuse in remission.” (Dr
Prior 11/2/10 at page 5).
Dr Prior does not express an opinion on the history of bipolar affective
disorder, but does suggest that the recent phase of the disorder
been induced by his self medicating with higher than prescribed doses of the
anti-depressant agent Lexapro.”
(Prior 11/2/10 p5).
As with Dr Wright, Dr Prior can see Mr McCann returning to the role of a
psychologist “When his Bi-polar Disorder is in remission.”
19810). Dr Wright saw a return to practice if permitted, under supervision
subject to several checks. (Wright 19/7/10 pp
McCann has participated actively in Alcoholics Anonymous since June 2007 and has
had active psychiatric treatment since January
2010. While understanding the
thrust of the Protective Submission he believes that his work since June 2006
when he surrendered his
resignation has been blameless. The evidence of Caroline
Gatty was clear in its references to Mr McCann’s determination to
alcohol addiction and his commitment to that cause. He has shown a similar
determination and commitment in his psychiatric
treatment. It is our submission
that any period of deregistration be of a period of between twelve (12) months
and eighteen (18)
months and any return be properly monitored with Mr McCann
prepared to accept any supervisory orders.
in our submission ordinarily following the event should in the case of Mr McCann
with clear and uncontested evidence of the
existence of a severe psychiatric
condition, be modified. Any order should also bear in mind that Mr McCann is
also unemployed and
has been unemployed for much of the period since June 2006.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.42 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter