URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Balafas v Medical Council of NSW [2013] NSWMT 4 (19 April 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Balafas v Medical Council of NSW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 4
Hearing Date(s):
18 and 19 March 2013
Decision Date:
19 April 2013
Levy SC DCJ
Dr B Westmore
Ms D Robinson
See paragraphs [107] - [111] for orders.
Catchwords:
MEDICAL TRIBUNAL - application for review of earlier deregistration orders
- whether case for reinstatement has been made out
Legislation Cited:
Medical Practice Act 1994
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW), s 125, s 126, s 127, s 163(2), s 163A and s 163B
Cases Cited:
Dinakar v Medical Council of NSW, unreported, 12 December 2012
Balafas, unreported, 18 June 2010
Re Mansour Haider Zaidi [2006] NSWMT
Principal judgment
Mr John Andrew Balafas (Applicant)
Medical Council (Respondent)
Representation
Mr E Pike (Applicant)
Ms K Richardson (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Browns (Applicant)
IV Knight, Crown Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
Application for reinstatement as a medical practitioner
Reasons for applicant's deregistration on 18 June 2010
Principles to be applied on an application for reinstatement
[11] - [12]
Applicant's medical training and work history
[13] - [17]
Summary of events leading to applicant's deregistration
[18] - [23]
Disciplinary history leading to 2010 Medical Tribunal hearing
[24] - [29]
Complaints arising after deregistration
Overview of applicant's pursuit of rehabilitation
[31] - [36]
Evidence in support of application
[37] - [88]
Mr John Balafas - applicant
[38] - [42]
Dr Keith Roberts - treating psychiatrist
[43] - [48]
Dr Alex Wodak - treating addiction specialist
[49] - [63]
Dr Michel Diamond - consultant psychiatrist
[64] - [82]
Associate Prof Stephen Jurd - psychiatrist
[83] - [85]
Applicant's wife
[86] - [88]
Consideration of the issues
[89] - [106]
[107] - [108]
Practice conditions
Health conditions
Review conditions
Application for reinstatement as a medical practitioner
Tribunal was convened to consider an application for review and reinstatement
pursuant to s 163(2), s 163A and s 163B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) ["the National Law"], by Mr John Andrew Balafas, a former
general medical practitioner,
who was deregistered on 18 June 2010 by order of a
differently constituted Medical Tribunal.
applicant's registration history, and the chronology of the conditions that were
imposed on his practice, before he was deregistered,
are fully set out in the
to these reasons in the form of an evidentiary certificate of
the applicant's registration history issued by the Medical Council
of NSW ["the
Council"] pursuant to s 244A of the National Law.
the present application, the Council took the position that it neither consented
to nor opposed reinstatement of the applicant,
but in the event of the present
Tribunal making an order recommending reinstatement, it sought that stringent
conditions be applied
to the applicant's future practice
arrangements.
Reasons for deregistration of applicant on 18 June 2010
the time the formerly constituted Tribunal ordered that the applicant be
deregistered, it also ordered that there be no application
by him for the review
of that order until a minimum period of 2 years had elapsed from the time when
that order was made. In making
those orders, the former Tribunal made a series
of adverse findings against the applicant. Those findings may be essentially
as follows.
former Tribunal did not accept the applicant as a reliable witness regarding the
explanations surrounding his illicit use of Pethidine
and Fentanyl whilst he was
addicted to those substances. The former Tribunal also concluded that the
applicant had given some differing
and irreconcilable accounts of his level of
his use of alcohol since 2007, and therefore did not accept his evidence in that
The former Tribunal also concluded that the applicant had given an
untruthful explanation concerning his use of the drug Stilnox.
Tribunal also noted that it considered the applicant to have given the Medical
Board non-genuine assurances concerning
the management of his addiction and his
addictive behaviour.
the reasons for its decision, the former Tribunal set out in some detail the
chronology of the circumstances of the applicant's
deceptive behaviours that led
to his deregistration. In these reasons it is not necessary to reiterate the
full detail of that chronology,
which is on the public record:
, unreported, 18 June 2010
[http://www.mcnsw.org.au/page/doctors--performance--conduct---health/professional-conduct-/hearings-and-decisions/decisions/medical-tribunal-decisions-index/medical-tribunal-decisions-2010/;
pages 3 -14].
ordering deregistration of the applicant, the former Tribunal determined that it
did not place much weight on the applicant's proffered
expressions of remorse
for his conduct that was then in question. It concluded he was an unreliable
witness. The former Tribunal
went on to record the finding that the applicant
had failed to provide a fully frank and honest account of relevant events. For
reasons, the former Tribunal concluded that at the time of its decision,
the applicant was not fit to practise the profession of
his present application before this Tribunal, the applicant has accepted the
correctness of the findings arrived at by the former
Tribunal. On behalf of the
applicant it was acknowledged that in view of the adverse credit findings made
against him by the former
Tribunal, the applicant faced a high barrier to
reinstatement.
essential question is whether the conduct the former Tribunal described as
acts of grave dishonesty
" perpetrated by the applicant, and which led to
his deregistration in 2010, have been overcome by a shift in his character
to justify the conclusion that those defects in character are no
longer suffered by the applicant.
Tribunal, as presently constituted, is required to determine whether, on the
evidence before it, the applicant has discharged
the heavy onus that an
applicant carries in such circumstances to demonstrate, accepting and
notwithstanding the findings of the
former Tribunal, that he now has sufficient
insight into his former addictions to drugs and alcohol and related behaviours,
sufficiently reformed his character to enable this Tribunal to
reasonably conclude, with the paramount consideration of the protection
public in mind, that he could be safely permitted to be reinstated as a medical
practitioner.
Principles to be applied on an application for reinstatement
principles to be applied in an application for reinstatement have been
identified in numerous decisions in the Medical Tribunal,
for example,
Mansour Haider Zaidi
[2006] NSWMT 6, and more recently in
Medical Council of NSW
, unreported, 12 December 2012
[http://www.mcnsw.org.au/resources/1309/Dinakar,%20Rajesh%20121212.pdf].
Essentially,
these principles provide that an applicant for reinstatement must demonstrate a
reformation of character such that patients
and colleagues can confidently
expect that if reinstated, the practitioner would resume the position of trust
expected of a medical
practitioner as a member of an honourable profession by
demonstration of the characteristics of a fit and proper person currently
entitled to membership of that profession:
Applicant's medical training and work history
applicant is presently aged 39 years. He graduated from the University of Sydney
in 2000 with the degrees MBBS BSc(Med). Significantly,
in the view of this
Tribunal, in his early post-graduate years of training, he did not pursue work
in the traditional pathways that
young medical graduates commonly undertook for
training in preparation for general practice.
2000 to 2001 the applicant fulfilled the formal requirements of his internship
and residency training years at Bankstown and
Royal Prince Alfred Hospitals.
Subsequently, through his employment with the company Oz Locums, he carried out
contract work in the
accident and emergency departments at Hornsby, Ryde and
Mona Vale Hospitals. In 2002 he worked for an after hours medical service,
making house calls in the eastern suburbs of Sydney.
2003 to 2004 the applicant worked for a clinic described as Total Health
Screening ["THS"] in Bondi Junction. That clinic
offered non-therapeutic
elective screening services and CT scanning services. Between 2004 to 2009 he
worked for a company known
as Advanced Medical Institute ["AMI"], in the field
of men's health, providing advice and treatment for erectile dysfunction.
of those employment situations involved general medical practice in the
traditional and commonly accepted sense.
2008, the applicant obtained his Fellowship of the Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners by passing an entrance examination
and on the basis of his
accumulated work experience with THS and AMI to that time.
2009 and 2010, until he was deregistered, the applicant worked as a general
practitioner at the Bondi Medical Centre, a practice
that he owned and currently
still owns. Since becoming deregistered, he has worked as the Practice Manager
in that practice, which
presently employs up to 5 general practitioners. There
is no suggestion that this practice is other than properly
Summary of events leading to applicant's deregistration
events that led to the applicant's deregistration are set out in detail in the
reasons for decision of the previously constituted
Medical Tribunal. The brief
summary that follows is sufficient for present purposes.
2004, the applicant started along the path of inappropriate personal use of
Pethidine and then alcohol, and he then proceeded to
conceal such activities.
That course initially involved impulse on his part, but later developed into a
compulsion to continue, and
involved some elaborate planning on his part.
applicant's hindsight explanations for those events traversed matters such as a
stressful upbringing where significant family
pressures were brought to bear on
him to achieve material success at an early stage. He found his residency
period, which involved
much night shift work, very difficult. For example, at
one time he had worked 20 nights in a row. He felt that his time as a resident
medical officer had left him without a clear sense of career direction. He was
initially unsuccessful in gaining a place in the training
scheme to become a
general practitioner. This led him to take on even more night shift work in
locum positions in public hospitals.
His long working hours led to him becoming
lonely and socially isolated.
moving to employment with THS and AMI, an opportunity arose for the applicant to
invest as a financial partner in a general
practice in Bondi. He took on large
debts in order to do so. At that time he concurrently worked 5 days per week at
AMI and he also
spent nights and weekends over a period of about 6 weeks working
with his father, a builder, in fitting out the premises for the
Bondi practice.
He found that in this period he had become physically and mentally
debilitated.
a misguided endeavour to cope with those stresses, the applicant showed poor
judgment by commencing the illicit use of Pethidine,
which he inappropriately
obtained from his doctor's bag. Surrounding those events, he also encountered
difficulties in his business
partnership. In order to try and resolve those
difficulties he incurred further financial liabilities when he found that it had
necessary for him to buy out the interests of his business partner. These
events proved to be very stressful for him. In that period
he immersed himself
in work to try and accumulate as much in the way of funds as he could in order
to try and manage his situation.
In these events he gave himself little or no
time to reflect upon how he should develop his professional career. These
circumstances
fuelled his drug abuse.
2004 and 2005 the applicant ill-advisedly commenced writing prescriptions for
Pethidine for his own use. He did so in a period
when he was continuing to
labour under heavy financial obligations in connection with his Bondi practice.
This involved him working
extra hours for AMI. His actions concerning the
inappropriate prescriptions for Pethidine, were inevitably discovered by the
Pharmaceutical
Services Branch of the Department of Health (as it was then
known), and this led to a chain of adverse disciplinary consequences
including from the evolving circumstances in which he sought to conceal his
illicit use of prescription drugs.
Disciplinary history leading to 2010 Medical Tribunal hearing
the applicant's illicit use of Pethidine was discovered, his licence to
prescribe Schedule 8 drugs was withdrawn and the Medical
Board then referred him
to the Impaired Registrant's Programme. Despite the considerable supports
afforded to him by that programme,
in May 2005, he resumed abusing Pethidine.
This resulted in a disciplinary hearing being convened under s 66 of the former
Medical Practice Act
. That hearing resulted in the applicant's
suspension from practice between 31 May and 1 August 2005. The applicant blames
the relapse
which led to that suspension on his pressured financial and working
circumstances that then prevailed.
his initial suspension was lifted, on resuming practice on 2 August 2005, the
applicant was subject to a number of stringently
imposed practice and health
conditions which are fully set out in the
reasons. Those conditions, which related to the applicant's prescribing
authority for Schedule 8 drugs, his need for supervision,
his working
conditions, his need for ongoing drug testing and treatment for recovery from
his addictions, were imposed to assist
him with his rehabilitation, but were
primarily aimed at protecting the public.
the context of difficulties with compliance with those conditions, and as a
result of various determinations made by the Board,
in the period 2 August 2006
to 20 March 2008, those conditions were from time to time
20 March 2008 the applicant was again suspended from practice, this time for one
month, due to problematic compliance with practice
conditions. On 8 April 2008
his registration was again reinstated subject to the second tranche of stringent
conditions set out in
which related to his
reinstatement at that time. Those conditions were also subsequently varied by
the Board from time to time up
until the previous Medical Tribunal hearing which
ultimately resulted in the applicant's deregistration from practice on 18 June
explaining his acknowledged past conduct lapses, the applicant stated that he
had fully intended to cease his use of Pethidine
but he had relapsed from his
partial recovery at that earlier time. He said he started using Pethidine again
because of his stressful
working circumstances and financial pressures, which
included the significant stress of financially subsidising a not yet financially
viable practice. He had worked without adequate breaks. At the same time he was
planning a major home renovation and had overloaded
himself with tasks and
responsibilities without giving proper attention to focussing and working upon
his recovery. His judgment
as to his welfare and responsibilities had become
seriously clouded by his addictive behaviours, which by then, related to the
use of both drugs and alcohol.
of these factors impacted on the applicant's judgment and upon the furtherance
of his misguided addictive behaviours which inevitably
deregistration.
Complaints arising after deregistration
accordance with the Council's obligations arising under s 163C(3) of the
National Law, the Council tendered a bundle of material
relating to a number of
other complaints against the applicant that had come to light relating to the
period 18 April 2007 and 18
January 2010: Exhibit "3". An examination of that
exhibit revealed that a number of those matters were either discontinued as
or were not proceeded with. On evaluating that material it was plain
that the requirements of procedural fairness and the timing
of those complaints,
which pre-dated the applicant's deregistration on 18 June 2010, indicate
diminished weight and little probative
value should be given to the bundle of
material comprising Exhibit "3".
Overview of applicant's pursuit of rehabilitation
Deregistration
has had a salutary effect on the applicant. The circumstances imposed on him by
his deregistration forced him to undertake
a reassessment of his life's
circumstances. He ceased drinking alcohol as he recognised this was the key to
his recovery from addiction.
ceasing to take alcohol he had been using it sporadically. This involved him
consuming up to one bottle of wine late at night,
which he acknowledged had
placed his patients at risk the day following such use.
attended regular consultations with Dr Wodak and Dr Roberts at approximately 6
week intervals. He has also attended weekly meetings
of a group called Doctors
in Recovery at the Northside Clinic. He also attended weekly meetings of
Alcoholics Anonymous. During 2011
and 2012, he also assisted in setting up a
group called Nurses in Recovery aimed at assisting health professionals other
than medical
practitioners, to deal with their addictions.
applicant has also sought out a sponsor who is a medical practitioner with a
background of training in mental health, and he has
maintained a close contact
with that doctor for several years. This has assisted his motivation to maintain
recovery from his addictions.
He consults this sponsor as a mentor to discuss
personal decisions of importance. He has also become a sponsor to another
participant
in the recovery group.
September 2010, the applicant has undertaken thrice weekly urine drug testing at
an accredited pathology laboratory which adheres
to Medical Council protocols
for such tests. He also attends the same pathology laboratory for monthly blood
tests for Carbohydrate
Deficient Transferrin ["CDT"] aimed at detecting
hazardous use of alcohol. These tests have also been carried out with strict
to Medical Council protocols. The results of those tests over an
extended period of over 2 years indicate that there have been no
detected lapses
in compliance with the testing protocols and no detected substance use or
applicant has also sought out appropriate advice and mentorship, and he has
utilised opportunities to attend conferences, academic
days and other occasions
aimed at assisting in dealing with drug and alcohol addiction.
Evidence in support of the application
support of his application for reinstatement, in addition to his own evidence,
the applicant relied upon evidence from Dr Keith
Roberts, his treating
psychiatrist, Dr Alex Wodak a specialist in drug and alcohol issues, and Dr
Michael Diamond, a consultant psychiatrist
who has examined him on a number of
occasions at the request of the Medical Council. In addition to the tender of
some testimonials,
the applicant also relied upon a letter from Associate
Professor Stephen Jurd, a consultant psychiatrist in the field of drug and
alcohol medicine. That evidence was augmented by the serial and extensive
results of objective pathology testing. A statement from
the applicant's wife,
Ms Kate Klunder, was also tendered. In the paragraphs that follow, we review
that opinion and factual evidence,
none of which was
challenged.
Evidence of Mr John Balafas - the applicant
these proceedings, the applicant expressed his shame at his former behaviours
whilst addicted to drugs and alcohol. He also acknowledged
the depths of
planning, lies and deceptions to which he had resorted in order to conceal his
pursuit of those former behaviours.
He also acknowledged that as a result of
those former addictions and the related perpetuating behaviours, he has lost
many things
valuable to him, both tangible and intangible, including his
credibility as a person, and as a member of a respected
profession.
applicant has had to endure the public humiliation of having his evidence tested
by embarrassing questions about his past conduct
that had led to his
deregistration. He acknowledged having abused his professional position in 2007
by obtaining Pethidine from a
wholesale source, and of having manipulated his
circumstances, also in 2007, to obtain access to Stilnox, and having taken steps
to evade detection of his use of Stilnox.
accepting and coming to terms with the previous findings made against him in
2010, the applicant has put himself forward as a much
changed and reformed
person from his former ways that brought him to adverse attention and
deregistration. He now claims his personal
values are very different, and he
wants not only to conduct himself in the right way, but to restore his
credibility and to resume
a position of professional usefulness in society. He
claims that he is no longer subject to the stresses and pressures, including
family pressures that led to his former addictive behaviours and
misconduct.
applicant also accepts that his recovery from his "
very, very severe
" nevertheless continues to carry with it the risk of relapse,
especially in the face of stressful circumstances. He points to a claimed
in his character and a change in how he now conducts himself, with humility,
openness, frankness and honesty. He argued that
the risk of a relapse into his
former addictions is remote in his new circumstances. In this regard, he points
to a different and
healthier relationship he has with his parents, the fact that
his wife will be running the business side of the practice which he
now stable circumstances, and the absence of other family involvement in his
practice, taken together with his pattern
of pathology testing showing he is
free from drug use. He also points to his pattern of attendance at appropriate
professional consultations
and supportive recovery groups as indications of the
unlikelihood of relapse on his part. He has stated that he intends never to
alcohol again.
applicant claims he now has appropriate insight into his former circumstances
and claims he has achieved a state of fitness to
practise. He recognises that if
he were to be reinstated, he would have to abide by a pattern of stringent
practice and health conditions.
He also indicated an acceptance of the guidance
offered by such conditions as he is dedicated to returning to the practise of
and to helping others. He feels his period of deregistration, and the
resultant events he has gone through in the ensuing period,
will make him a
better and more compassionate doctor.
Evidence of Dr Keith Roberts - treating psychiatrist
applicant tendered a report dated 26 March 2012 from his treating psychiatrist,
Dr Keith Roberts, whom he had been seeing at approximately
monthly intervals
since 2004. In his opinion, Dr Roberts concluded that since his deregistration,
the applicant appeared to have
been taking the requirements of the Medical Board
far more seriously and in greater detail than had been the case in previous
statement by Dr Roberts was something of a misnomer, because the Board, and its
successor, the Medical Council, had no formal
requirements of the applicant once
he was deregistered on 18 June 2010. Any such matters pursued by the applicant
since his deregistration
were therefore necessarily voluntarily self-imposed
requirements, albeit in compliance with Council protocols, and undoubtedly aimed
at obtaining evidence to secure a finding of fitness to
Roberts made reference to the applicant's prior dishonest conduct where, in
previous years, the applicant had succeeded in his
efforts at misleading Dr
Roberts and other doctors with regard to the nature and extent of his abuse of
drugs and alcohol.
contrast to that conduct, on his review of the applicant's circumstances, Dr
Roberts concluded that he was of the opinion the applicant
had undergone a
significant level of rehabilitation. At the time of writing his report, he
stated that the applicant was physically
and mentally well, without any
psychiatric condition being evident. Dr Roberts was of the view that the
applicant had also shown
a greater level of insight into the problems that had
led to his deregistration, and had shown remorse for his previous unacceptable
behaviour. Dr Roberts recorded that the applicant had acknowledged to him, that
he had previously exhibited poor professional judgment,
in that his prior
behaviours had transgressed the required medical and ethical
that background, with a significant qualification, Dr Roberts expressed the
opinion that the applicant had achieved a reformation
of his character to a
degree such that it would be appropriate that he be returned to the Medical
Register. The qualification expressed
by Dr Roberts was that the applicant and
his doctors should not be complacent about the future of the applicant's
situation, and
that the applicant would require continuing assessments for a
period of time, including by himself as the treating psychiatrist,
Dr Wodak or
his successor, and a Council nominated psychiatrist.
Roberts was not required for cross-examination on the content of his opinions.
His opinions remained unchallenged albeit that they
were expressed as at 26
February 2012. No adverse comment was made by the Medical Council concerning the
fact that there were no
further reports from Dr Roberts covering the 12 month
period between March 2012 and March 2013.
Evidence of Dr Alex Wodak - treating drug and alcohol addiction
applicant tendered and relied upon a report dated 6 August 2012 from Dr Alex
Wodak, an eminent consultant in Drug and Alcohol
Medicine. Dr Wodak also gave
oral evidence in which he explained aspects of his report.
applicant has been a patient of Dr Wodak from 2005 until the present time for
treatment of his drug and alcohol problems. His
appointments with Dr Wodak have
been at intervals of approximately 6 weeks. Dr Wodak has monitored the
applicant's progress over
that time and has given him encouragement and support
in overcoming the difficulties he has encountered with his
addictions.
Wodak recorded the applicant's expressions of shame and remorse at having in the
past been untruthful and deceitful concerning
his disclosures of the nature and
extent, and his lack of control, of his addictions. He also expressed the
opinion that since his
deregistration, the applicant has now achieved good
insight into his problems in that regard.
Wodak expressed the opinion that the applicant had overcome his problems with
addiction by changing his life and his values such
that he is now a much changed
person, including in his general outlook. Dr Wodak described the applicant as
now being more thoughtful,
serious and mature individual compared to his former
situation. Although Dr Wodak acknowledged that the applicant's problems with
addiction involved what is accepted and understood to be a relapsing-remitting
condition, he said he did not expect any further relapses
or problems in that
regard. He confidently considered that the risk of relapse by the applicant was
now very low.
Wodak considered that the personal, professional, community, and family
resources that had been engaged in order to effect a change
in the applicant's
former behaviours and outlook have resulted in the applicant, slowly but surely,
coming to grips with his former
addiction behaviour difficulties. He concluded
that the applicant had learned from the salutary experience of his
deregistration,
and now had a prognosis for being an excellent and safe
that the applicant had in the past succeeded in manipulating and deceiving his
doctors, including Dr Wodak, as to the true status
of his addictions, the
Tribunal initially viewed the optimism expressed in Dr Wodak's report with some
caution. However, on weighing
the relevant considerations, the Tribunal is of
the view those misgivings have been adequately addressed in the form of the
results of pathology tests which have confirmed that the applicant has
continued to abstain from the use of mood altering drugs and
alcohol, and
through the additional matters raised by Dr Wodak in his explanatory oral
evidence, which is reviewed as follows.
his oral evidence, Dr Wodak expanded upon some of the more cautiously expressed
remarks that he had set out in his report as summarised
above. The Tribunal
found Dr Wodak's oral evidence persuasive.
that evidence, Dr Wodak acknowledged that a fundamental question concerning the
fitness of the applicant to practise, after the
question of character, was
whether the applicant was likely to be a safe doctor.
that regard, he observed what he described as the occurrence of a complete and
astonishing change in the applicant's outlook. He
also observed that in his
view, the risk of the applicant having a relapse to his prior behaviours has
receded considerably with
the passage of time as the applicant's past illicit
attachment to the use of drugs and alcohol has continued to remain absent over
the years that have passed since his deregistration.
Wodak was asked to consider the character-related question of whether, given the
applicant's past dishonest conduct in misleading
and deceiving his treating and
assessing doctors, including Dr Wodak himself, that such deceptive behaviours
could possibly be a
continuing phenomenon, as an extension of the previously
misleading behaviours that had been exposed. In that regard, Dr Wodak was
opinion that the contrary proposition was compelling.
factors which Dr Wodak drew upon for the view that the applicant is a much
changed individual were
, the consistency of the pattern of negative
blood results and the results of the urinalysis of samples taken under
appropriate supervision
over two and-a-half years,
applicant's pursuit of further studies in the nature of professional
development,
, his diligence in other areas, which included
voluntary activity in the community amongst the disadvantaged,
the realisation of how damaging alcohol and drug problems can be,
, the setting up by the applicant of a clinic for drug and alcohol
dependent nurses,
, his active involvement in Alcoholics Anonymous
and Narcotics Anonymous groups, and
, the applicant's active
participation in a recovery group for impaired doctors. Dr Wodak also pointed to
the significant positive
impact of the applicant's marriage subsequent to his
deregistration, and the ongoing positive influence on him of his wife, as
important factors.
Wodak was of the view that when those matters were considered as a whole,
together with the applicant's realisation of the significant
monetary and other
losses that have flowed from his deregistration in 2010, this provided him with
compelling evidence that the applicant
was a much changed individual compared to
how he had formerly conducted himself, including the observation that
previously, the applicant
had been at near psychological breaking point.
expanded explanations within Dr Wodak's oral evidence have provided the Tribunal
with a helpful and objective guide to the assessment
of the applicant's evidence
as to his changed ways. We accept his evidence concerning the matters upon which
he has expressed opinions.
Wodak pointed to the truism that drug and alcohol dependent persons with severe
substance dependence were commonly untruthful about
relating the detail of such
matters. Significantly, he also pointed to the commonly accepted view that the
longer the duration of
the interval of time over which the individual was free
of such dependencies, the more truthful they were likely to be about their
behaviours. On the strength of Dr Wodak's evidence, when taken together with the
opinions of the other psychiatrists whose reports
were tendered, the Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that this is now the position with regard to the
applicant's present circumstances.
those matters accepted, Dr Wodak emphasised that if the applicant were to be
reinstated, there would be a need for appropriate
conditions to be imposed on
the applicant's future practice and conduct.
Evidence of Dr Michael Diamond - consultant psychiatrist
the period between 3 June 2005 and 18 June 2010, the applicant was assessed on a
number of occasions by Dr Michael Diamond, a
consultant psychiatrist appointed
by the Medical Board, and its successor the Medical Council. On those occasions
Dr Diamond saw
the applicant in his capacity as the Board-nominated
psychiatrist. Dr Diamond had periodically forwarded his reports to the Medical
Board following his assessments of the applicant in respect of those reviews. In
these proceedings, neither party sought to tender
any of Dr Diamond's sequential
historical reports that arose from that process. However, Dr Diamond obviously
drew upon that material
in preparing his opinion which was tendered in these
proceedings.
19 October 2012, for the purposes of obtaining Dr Diamond's evidence to be
placed before the Tribunal in respect of this application,
and as a prelude to
the preparation of his report dated 7 November 2012, the respondent arranged for
Dr Diamond to reassess the applicant.
behalf of the respondent, Dr Diamond was asked to review the material assembled
by and on behalf of the applicant in support of
his present application. In his
report, Dr Diamond summed up the applicant's pre-application status in the
following terms:
"After graduating MBBS from the University of NSW in 2000, he was granted
full registration in NSW on 14 February 2001. By March 2004
he was known to be
abusing pethidine and by May 2005 he was suspended from practising medicine
because of his ongoing, untreated
substance abuse disorder.
From that date until the Tribunal's decision of 18 June 2010 when he was
deregistered, he was either suspended from practising, or
practising with
conditions upon his registration. In a relatively brief medical career, Mr
Balafas has practised medicine with an
obvious need for supervision,
accountability and review by the registration body.
I refer to comments in my report to the New South Wales Medical Board of 26
February 2008 (which formed part of the body of evidence
at the Medical Tribunal
of 2010). On page 2 of the report, I commented as follows:
"We spoke about his medical career generally and how he had come to be
working in this particular way. It was apparent that he made
these decisions
without any advice or mentoring about his career. His experiences as an intern
at a major teaching hospital were
unsatisfactory overall. He discovered that he
could work better hours, in a more conducive environment, by doing shifts at
rooms rather than working fully within the hospital system. From there
he went into a medical practice doing general screening of
patients and
thereafter to AMI. He found that his work at AMI provided him with a pathway to
Fellowship of the RACGP and he persevered
in that environment."
These comments are relevant in that Mr Balafas has practised medicine in an
unusual manner during his relatively short medical career.
His concepts about
professional responsibility, professional standards and professional ethics were
undeveloped. What supervision
he has had was within the context of an unusually
narrow range of general practice activities (men's sexual health clinic) and
by individuals who have worked as employees in the medical centre that
More recently, Mr Balafas has completed his Fellowship of the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners. He has also in the
latter part of
his career to date, broadened the scope of his medical practice.
Overall, Mr Balafas is a medical practitioner who is not well integrated into
a peer cohort. His predicament is affected by a number
of important factors. The
first of these has to do with long term anxiety within a peer group. Over the
years he has spoken about
anxiety in social situations. He has described feeling
vulnerable when he compares himself to his medical peers and to his friends
socially. He has evidence of low self esteem that underpins a former need to
boost his social standing. The experience of deregistration
accompanied by deep
feelings of shame and humiliation have affected him adversely. He is
self-conscious amongst his colleagues generally.
He is very keen to feel
accepted and to be free of feelings of shame and guilt. This emerged in the
course of my interview with him,
as will be described later. My knowledge of
these psychological vulnerabilities existed before I saw him most recently."
Dr Diamond examined the applicant in October 2012 he reviewed the applicant's
general history, his work, his other activities,
and his professional and
personal relationships that had developed since he had been deregistered. In his
review, Dr Diamond observed
that the applicant had in the past failed to address
his problems in sufficient depth, which had led to issues of compliance with
conditions of practice, and which in turn had led to his deregistration. Dr
Diamond reviewed a number of factors that were influential
on the maintenance of
the applicant's former problematic circumstances.
former circumstances concerned the applicant involving himself deeply in social
activities, attending clubs and licensed premises,
drinking alcohol to excess,
and being hyper-focussed on financial and material success. He acknowledged this
was in part due to the
work ethic of his Greek family background, including his
need for parental approval by being seen to have been successful, and where
parents, and particularly his mother's intrusiveness and insistence, had
dominated his own opinions.
background forces had blindsided the applicant to the significance of his
participation in aspects of the AMI practice which
he now concedes to have been
not good medical practice, notwithstanding that hindsight has revealed, those
practices to have been
taken into account for the purposes of the applicant
obtaining RACGP accreditation.
Diamond was satisfied that the applicant now recognised the problematic nature
of those circumstances, and that he had now substantially
changed his attitudes
and now realised that success and wealth was not the central focus, and that his
own happiness and having happy
relationships was more important for him. These
realisations had made him focus less on his own insecurities and made him feel
socially uncomfortable, compared to his previous
circumstances.
his most recent examination of the applicant, Dr Diamond took him to the
following crucial matters:
"I asked him to comment about the role of alcohol in his life currently. He
said he no longer drank at all. He referred to his CDT
testing and the fact that
all of the results were below the cut-off level. I commented that this was a
test to identify hazardous
drinking rather than abstinence from alcohol. He
accepted that that was the case.
I asked him whether the alcohol was in any way tied into his patterns of
narcotic abuse. He said the abuse of alcohol was quite separate
narcotic abuse. The alcohol assisted him to feel more comfortable when he was
socialising. The role of alcohol was more
important for him within the
particular lifestyle. He commented that his life was now quite different. His
social relationships currently
were with people who accepted him as an addict in
recovery. He no longer had to keep up with a peer group who intimidated him.
I took him through the detail of the Medical Tribunal Judgment of June 2010.
He was distressed to have to face up to the extent of
his misconduct. The
judgment forced him to look at his misconduct in its totality. I questioned him
face of the Tribunal Judgment that systematically
outlined the extent of his deception and lies to treating practitioners, to the
Medical Board at the time and its representatives, which included me.
We spoke about the destruction of his credibility and the implications that
this had when forming a view about his character. His
response was notable. It
appeared to me that he had not addressed these issues in sufficient depth
previously. He appeared taken
aback by the line of questioning. It appeared that
he was not able to reflect on these matters in depth."
his oral evidence, at T112.30 to T113.5, Dr Diamond clarified the last cited
comments in the preceding extract and he explained
that comment as being
descriptive of past events, indicating that the applicant had been slow to
appreciate the damage that he had
been doing to his own
credibility.
Diamond's examination of the applicant's mental state revealed no matters of
concern. He remarked that there was no evidence of
disturbed perception or
disordered thought processes. He presented as an intelligent and competent
individual with a normal and appropriate
affect, ranging from a normal level of
anxiety about the process of the interview, to tearfulness at times, and to also
sense of humour. Importantly, in the view of Dr Diamond, the applicant
had demonstrated a basic understanding of his predicament.
Dr Diamond was
satisfied that the serial results of urinary drug screening tests demonstrated
that the applicant was not using prohibited
substances.
Diamond was asked to address the crucial question of whether the applicant has
gained genuine insight into the inappropriate nature
of his conduct which
resulted in his deregistration, including his past attempts to lie to and to
deceive others about his drug and
alcohol use. In response to this question, Dr
Diamond stated:
"This is a complex question consisting of a number of points that require
comment individually. As a general comment, the gaining
of insight occurs
progressively in its depth and in its meaning. For Mr Balafas, his insight
arises primarily because of the consequences
that have followed his misconduct.
In this way, he has had to face the full extent of his misconduct and has had to
confront the
full implication of deregistration that is different from his
previous experiences of suspension from practice and of having to practise
conditions on his registration. The time period of his deregistration has forced
him to confront practical realities impacting
directly upon his financial
responsibilities, his fears of losing his ability to maintain his home ownership
and to ensure that his
business remained viable.
On a personal level, he was confronted by the severe and unequivocal comments
the Judgment is on the
public record. He has experienced shame, humiliation and regret. This has
occurred at many levels such as
when patients had visited the medical centre and
asked him why he is unable to practise, it has occurred when he has attempted to
attend medical meetings and sees people who know him, and it has occurred more
generally in the course of his relationships with
family members and with others
in social settings. The insight gained as a result of facing up to consequences
of his misconduct
has evolved because it was inescapable.
Mr Balafas has further gained insight into his understanding of the extent of
his drug and alcohol use. Once again this has occurred
primarily as a result of
having to face the full extent of his addiction and substance abuse as it was
exposed in toto in the Medical
Tribunal proceedings. This insight is in contrast
with degrees of denial, rationalisation and compartmentalisation processes that,
precluded him from acknowledging and accepting the full implication of his
addiction and substance abuse in the past.
A further relevant aspect of insight concerns his increasing awareness of his
underlying psychological vulnerabilities that, in my
opinion, form a significant
part to the development of his addiction and substance abuse disorders. These
vulnerabilities concern
his longstanding low self-esteem and social anxiety. He
is gaining a deeper understanding of the overriding needs he had in the past
attempt to keep up with and impress a peer group, to try to live out the
expectations of his parents and to set himself difficult
or even impossible
goals with regard to personal and career achievements. He has developed insight
and clarity into these issues
over the years. It appears to me that he is
uncomfortable to acknowledge or to address these issues directly but he now has
of their relevance in driving him to conduct himself in dysfunctional
and aberrant ways that have been part of the evolution of his
addiction and
substance abuse in the past.
In my view, this process still has some way to go in terms of a need for
ongoing treatment and therapy. My reason for making this
point is that these
"vulnerabilities are the likely underpinnings to the unacceptable and
dysfunctional conduct that was evidenced
in his dishonest, deceptive and
destructive conduct that has resulted in destruction of his credibility before
the Medical Tribunal.
These elements of his values and conduct underpin the
significant impairment of character that was so clearly commented upon in the
Judgment of the Medical Tribunal.
When I saw him most recently, it was the superficiality of his understanding
and acknowledgment of these features that demonstrated
to me the need for
ongoing development of "genuine insight into the inappropriate nature of his
conduct which resulted in him being
deregistered". I have provided a detailed
answer to this complex question. It is my attempt to highlight the different
the development of insight and hopefully to assist the Tribunal in
coming to a view as to the extent of the insight shown by Mr Balafas
for him to be seen as a man whose character has changed sufficient for him to be
considered for registration as a medical
practitioner.
In my view, Mr Balafas has developed incomplete but sufficient insight for
him to be considered for registration as a medical practitioner."
Diamond was of the opinion that the applicant had, by the time of his most
recent reviews, developed strategies to overcome his
addiction that are
consistent with the recovery process. He was of the view that the applicant's
recovery has been achieved with
the assistance of the expert treatment he had
received. This was a reference to the applicant's treatment by Dr Wodak and Dr
Diamond also concluded that the many changes in the applicant's psychosocial
environment (including the positive effects on him
of marriage, and the more
settled relationship he has with his parents, the less competitive peer
environment, and the applicant's
former and related pursuit of material assets)
are likely to enhance the chances of the applicant maintaining his recovery from
addictions.
Diamond agreed with the view expressed by Dr Wodak to the effect that the
identified conditions of drug and alcohol abuse are essentially
conditions. He stated that notwithstanding the history of the applicant's stormy
and unduly prolonged introductory phase
of the recovery process, the consensus
amongst those who have treated the applicant was that the applicant has in fact
achieved the
point where the recovery process has been consolidated.
Diamond also referred to previous untrue statements made by the applicant
concerning his drug and alcohol abuse. In that context
he noted that the
currently expressed view was that the applicant had reached a state of recovery
and this was supported by credible
objective evidence comprising urinary drug
screening to exclude illicit drug use, and blood screening to exclude hazardous
patterns. On balance, Dr Diamond therefore accepted that there was
support for the views held by the treating practitioners that
the applicant has
achieved a state of recovery.
Diamond expressed his conclusions in the following terms:
"A return to practice for Mr Balafas would, in my opinion, be likely to
lessen the risk and stressors that operate on him at present.
vulnerabilities are those that arise because of his inability to practise and
assert himself as a medical practitioner. They
arise because of his financial
stress and his inability to use his skills to provide for himself and his family
adequately. He is
further stressed by the public shame and humiliation that
accompany his current predicament. By returning to medical practice, my
that Mr Balafas would be in a more settled and composed state.
I hold this view with some reservation, however. My reservation concerns the
requirement for Mr Balafas to practise medicine in a
properly supported
environment. This will require total compliance with practice conditions that
are described below. In essence,
Mr Balafas should not be exposed to
unconventional, inappropriate or narrow forms of medical practice that could
place him under
additional stress. He would benefit from a collegiate
environment. He requires supervision of the quality of his practice as a
inexperienced medical practitioner, albeit as a Fellow of the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners. In addition he would
benefit from
mentorship from a recognized established senior general practitioner who could
he has demonstrated to date with
regard to his understanding of medical responsibilities, medical ethics, scope
of medical practice
as a general practitioner and development of sound
work-lifestyle balance principles.
It is these features of his previous attempts at successful practice that may
well have underpinned the emotional stressors that contributed
development of addictive illness so early in his medical career."
his oral evidence, Dr Diamond addressed the question of whether the applicant's
expression of apology to him for his past deceptions
were considered by him to
have been sincere and indicative of the applicant having faced up to his prior
shortcomings. Dr Diamond
accepted that those apologies were
his oral evidence, Dr Diamond emphasised that the applicant had taken longer
than it should have taken for him to have reached
a point of recognition that he
should have previously complied with practice and personal conduct conditions
that the Medical Board
had imposed upon him. However, Dr Diamond was of the view
that the point has now been reached where the applicant had achieved and
requisite degree of insight into his past behaviours.
expressing the above views, Dr Diamond also addressed some practical matters as
to the appropriate conditions that he considered
should apply if the Tribunal
considered that the applicant should be permitted to return to practise. The
Tribunal has been strongly
influenced by Dr Diamond's persuasive views in that
Evidence of Associate Professor Stephen Jurd - psychiatrist
applicant tendered a letter dated 2 October 2012 from Clinical Associate
Professor Stephen Jurd, who is a specialist psychiatrist
with expertise in the
management and treatment of drug and alcohol addiction. In his letter, Prof Jurd
acknowledged his awareness
of the former Tribunal's findings concerning the
applicant's previous elaborate levels of deception in order to illicitly obtain
access to drugs and to deny his use of drugs, and the applicant's attempts to
avoid the consequences of that behaviour.
Jurd gave consideration to the applicant's increasing level of commitment to his
involvement with the group Doctors in Recovery.
He described the applicant as
having engaged in the process of commitment to membership of that group by
sharing his shame with others,
increasing his honesty, and receiving the benefit
of reinforcing feedback. In this regard he stated:
"I am aware that the Medical Tribunal found that Mr Balafas developed a "very
elaborate web of deception'' to obtain drugs, to deny
he used them and to avoid
consequences. Over the last five years Mr Balafas has, through his 12-Step
membership, been engaged in
a process of sharing his shame, increasing his
honesty, and receiving feedback.
Over the last several years I have noticed that Mr Balafas' attitude has
improved, recognizing his own faults and taking responsibility
for improving his
life. He has tearfully expressed his remorse to me and expressed his
understanding of the deep personal pain he
has caused to his family. He is more
aware of his ethical infringements in the time of his drug use.
On return to medical practice, Mr Balafas should have the support of the
impaired Registrants Program to monitor his health through
interviews, urine and
blood samples, and compulsory treatment of his addiction.
Mr Balafas is committed to the provision of high quality medical care, as
evidenced by his attaining the FRACGP and his continued
engagement as a manager
in a medical practice. I understand that Mr Balafas has engaged in charity work
as a demonstration of his
urge to assist the community."
above observations and comments of Prof Jurd were not challenged and the
Tribunal accepts them as evidence of the applicant's
commitment to the process
of recovery from his addictions.
Evidence of the applicant's wife
June 2011 the applicant met Ms Kate Klunder. They married in October 2012. Ms
Klunder provided a statement dated 15 October 2012
in which she described the
development of the relationship. She has operated a successful domestic aged
care agency business in Sydney
since 2001. That business is currently operated
from within the premises of the medical practice owned by the
her statement, Ms Klunder outlined her impressions of the applicant's
significant efforts at maintaining abstinence from the use
of drugs and alcohol.
In this regard, her descriptions included her observations of the applicant's
commitment to recovery by his
attendances at thrice weekly urine drug screening
tests, monthly CDT blood pathology testing, regular meetings with Alcoholics
and weekly meetings of Doctors in Recovery at the Northside
Klunder's statements concerning what she sees as being the applicant's total
commitment to recovery, and his continuing abstinence
from the use of drugs and
alcohol were not challenged. She was not required for cross-examination. The
Tribunal accepts her evidence
and is comfortably satisfied that the applicant
has had, and is likely to continue to have, the benefit of the active support
insightful encouragement of his wife in his ongoing efforts at maintaining
his recovery from his addictions regarding his former
use of drugs and
Consideration
view of the demonstrated and acknowledged instances of the applicant's past
deceptive conduct concerning his substance abuse, the
Tribunal has looked to
objective evidence of his abstinence from the use of illicit drugs and
abstinence from the hazardous drinking
of alcohol. The evidence in the form of
pathology test results, taken together with the observations of Dr Roberts, Dr
Diamond and Associate Prof Jurd has persuaded the Tribunal that the
evidence of the applicant concerning his abstinence from use
of mood altering
substances should be accepted.
considering the evidence we have reviewed in these reasons, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the applicant has demonstrated a shift
or change in his character
sufficient for the Tribunal to be persuaded he no longer suffers from the
formerly evident defects in
his character that led to his deregistration. For
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has made
out a case for a recommendation that he be reinstated as a medical
practitioner.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has acquired a deeper understanding and
insight into the personal weaknesses that formerly
impaired his judgment and
allowed him to use Pethidine and other psychoactive substances, and to then
deceive others as to the truth
concerning those activities, and to conceal his
involvement in those activities.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has demonstrated a change in his
awareness and immaturity of outlook concerning these
matters. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the applicant has acquired a realisation of his earlier
wrongdoings and that he has properly
acknowledged these matters. Those honest
and sincere acknowledgments, together with the objective results of testing for
abuse, provide evidence of the applicant's successful albeit
continuing journey along the rehabilitation pathway.
the applicant's involvement in the described rehabilitative activities he has
stated that he has had the opportunity to honestly
discuss and evaluate the
history of his use of drugs and alcohol, his past relapses from his attempts at
recovery, and the harm he
has done to himself and to his career. On reviewing
the evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that this evidence should be
appears that the applicant's efforts at rehabilitation have led him to set more
realistic expectations of himself. Following the
disastrous consequences for him
of his deregistration, his parents have ceased to apply pressure to him, as he
explained was previously
the case. Those circumstances had formerly led to him
pursuing unrealistic personal and financial objectives. His recent marriage
provided him with a strong and supportive relationship and with strong
motivation to maintain his recovery and sobriety. He has
appropriately
identified his goals as wishing to maintain good fitness and health, to maintain
good relationships, and to be honest
and forthright in his conduct and in
dealings with others.
applicant's time in the role as practice manager in the practice he owns has
allowed him time to reflect upon and to pursue professional
development
objectives and to keep his medical knowledge updated in the hope that if he were
permitted to be reinstated, he would
have maintained an appropriate skills
that regard the applicant has studied the RACGP standards for general practice,
the Medical Board of Australia code of conduct
Good Medical Practice and other
Medical Board Guidelines. The applicant's statement in that regard went on to
"26. As the result of all these steps I believe I am a totally different
person now. I made the conscious choice to completely immerse
myself in the
treatment and support programs that could enable me to return to professional
life. The program that I have undertaken
has become a part of my daily life, and
is the basis of a new way of life for me. A core part of this is the many AA and
in recovery meetings I have attended and the many specialist
appointments where I have been involved in psychotherapy, and the support
family and friends."
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has broadened his life experience by
performing volunteer work at the Wayside Chapel
and has drawn upon those
experiences as a confrontational reminder of the adverse outcomes of drug and
alcohol addiction. He now
sees his deregistration as a catalyst for having to
face his problems and get his life back on track by personal growth in recovery
from his former addictions.
applicant now conducts himself with more humility and with a respectful state of
mind, including with a greater awareness of the
people around him. He has
achieved greater insight into the importance of maintaining his sobriety and in
being a properly functioning
and honest member of society. He draws upon the
stepped approach embodied within Alcoholics Anonymous principles and methods in
to maintain that state of mind, aided by what he has learnt in
psychotherapy, with the assistance of the supportive network provided
the Doctors in Recovery network.
applicant has sought to reinforce those life changing activities by making time
to maintain physical fitness, by pursuing meditation
for relaxation and pursuing
hobbies and recreations to balance his life and to cope with stress. He has also
obtained satisfaction
from performing voluntary work for some of his wife's
elderly and needy clients such as taking them shopping and to doctors
appointments
or outings when a need has arisen for such assistance. He also
attends a general practitioner for his own health issues, which lessens
of relapse to his former addictive behaviours.
picture painted by the applicant's evidence and by the evidence called on his
behalf is one of a much changed and now honest individual,
compared to the one
adversely described in the reasons of the former Tribunal on 18 June 2010,
including him having in the past resorted
to engaging in lying and deceitful
conduct in order to mask his illicit drug use.
applicant has given assurances that if he were to be permitted to return to
medical practice, there would be no repetition of
his former professional
misconduct, which resulted in his deregistration. In this regard, he has stated
that he has fully committed
himself to maintain a comprehensive programme of
rehabilitation in order to achieve and maintain a change in his life and in his
moral compass. He understands and accepts that if he were to be permitted the
privilege of returning to practice, this would be at
the price of having to
assiduously adhere to stringent conditions for as long as the Council thought
appropriate.
conditions the Tribunal has in mind to set are not intended to be punitive of
the applicant. They are required to be put in place
as a necessary surveillance
and reinforcement measure in order to protect the public from the risk of harm
through possible future
misconduct if the applicant were to unfortunately
relapse into his former ways that led to his deregistration.
the applicant's limited practical training and experience in broad general
practice, the Tribunal considers his return to practice
should be subject to
structured mentoring, and supervision in a broad general practice, initially
other than his own, and not limited
by narrowly focussed areas of practice. Such
practice should preclude Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drugs. The Tribunal is also
view that the applicant's future mentors, supervisors and employers
should be given copies of the reasons for decision of the Tribunal
deregistered him, and the reasons for decision of the Tribunal as presently
constituted.
Tribunal considers that health conditions should be imposed on the applicant to
ensure he maintains a supportive environment
in which to continue his
rehabilitation. Those health conditions should be structured to provide for the
applicant's own health care
needs from time to time, and for him to be
appropriately reviewed on behalf of the Council. The Tribunal also considers
the Council may direct otherwise, there should be continued pathology
testing of the applicant's blood and urine in accordance with
the Council's
protocols, as has been the case until the present time.
Tribunal recognises the onerous nature of compliance with the conditions that
are proposed but is nevertheless of the view that
they are necessary in the
short to medium term until the Council, as the appropriate review body for those
conditions, is satisfied
in the public interest, that the applicant has made a
successful integration into practice. The applicant himself recognises that
reintegration would involve taking one step at a time and that each step may
involve a period of time. The Council is in the
best position, at least
initially, to assess the applicant's progress in that regard.
the applicant's name has never appeared on the register in place under the
National Law that commenced on 1 July 2012, if the National
Board accepts the
recommendation of this Tribunal, then the applicant's name will appear on the
National Register for the first time,
with the appropriate notations
commensurate with the orders this Tribunal makes.
Tribunal concludes that the applicant has reached a sufficient state of insight
and recovery from his prior addictions that would
permit the Tribunal to make a
reinstatement order under s 163B(1)(c) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) No
86a, but subject to the applicant's compliance with
stringent conditions on his future practice, including conditions concerning
monitoring of his health and provision for the review of those conditions, as
summarised above. The Tribunal therefore makes
the following
(a) The Tribunal makes a reinstatement order in respect of Mr John Balafas
pursuant to s 163B(1)(c) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
(NSW) No 86a;
(b) The Tribunal orders that pursuant to s 163B(4) of the above Act, Mr Balafas'
registration be subject to the practice and health
conditions set out in
paragraphs [109] to [111] below;
(c) The Tribunal orders that the applicant pay the costs of the Medical Council
conditions set out in paragraphs [109] to [111] are undoubtedly onerous for the
applicant, and may appear complex, and involve
inconvenience for him in adhering
to them. However, the Tribunal is nevertheless strongly of the view that in the
short to medium
term, the recommended conditions are a necessary mechanism for
the protection of the public, and should only be varied after the
applicant has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council as the appropriate review body,
a significant and sustained period
of compliance.
Practice Conditions
Practice Conditions referred to in paragraph [107] above are as
(1) The practitioner is to practise only in a group general practice or
practices, (but in no more than 2 practices), accredited
as teaching practices
by the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners and approved by the
Council. The group practices must
be comprised of a minimum of 4 doctors (full
time equivalent). Those group practices must offer a broad range of general
services not limited by emphasis on selected or narrowly focussed
health issues;
(2) The practitioner is not to prescribe, possess, supply, administer, handle or
dispense any drug of addiction (Schedule 8 drugs)
or any prescribed restricted
substance (Schedule 4D drugs);
(3) The practitioner is to treat no more than 100 patients in any one week
during the first 6 months of resuming practice. That number
may be increased at
the direction of the Council, at the request of the applicant, but should not
exceed 150, unless the Council
directs otherwise;
(4) The practitioner is to nominate a general practitioner in a senior position
as a supervisor 14 days prior to commencing employment
as a medical
practitioner. The supervisor is to be approved by the Council, and is to monitor
and review the practitioner's clinical
practice and compliance with Public
Conditions in accordance with Level 2 Supervision as contained in the Council's
Supervision Policy.
general practitioner in a senior position
is defined as a practitioner holding the Fellowship of the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioners or Fellowship of the
Australian College of
Rural and Remote Medicine and with 5 years or more continuous post Fellowship
experience in general practice.
The supervisor is to be provided with a copy of
the Council's Supervision Policy and a copy of this Decision and any reports the
Council deems to be appropriate to the practitioner's
circumstances;
(5) The practitioner is not to work in a practice he either owns or in which he
has a financial interest without the prior approval
of the Council. The
practitioner is not to seek such approval for a period of at least 2 years from
the date of this Decision;
(6) In the event that the Council gives approval for the practitioner to
commence working as a medical practitioner in a medical
practice in which he has
either a direct or indirect financial interest, 14 days prior to commencing such
employment, the practitioner
is to nominate for the approval of the Council, a
general practitioner in a senior position, as an additional supervisor. The
approved by the Council is to monitor and review the practitioner's
clinical practice and compliance with Public Conditions in accordance
3 Supervision as contained in the Council's Supervision Policy. That supervisor
is to be provided with a copy of the Council's
Supervision Policy and a copy of
this Decision and any reports the Council deems to be appropriate to the
practitioner's circumstances;
(7) All costs associated with the supervision arrangements specified in Practice
Conditions (4), (5) and (6) above are to be borne
by the practitioner. To
facilitate compliance with these conditions the practitioner is to ensure
(a) He and his approved supervisors meet on a weekly basis for at least one
hour, the first meeting to occur within one fortnight
of the practitioner being
advised by the Council that his nominated supervisors have been
(b) At each meeting between the practitioner and his supervisors, the
supervisors are to review the practitioner's work progress
and address any
relevant work-related, personal and professional matters;
(c) At each meeting between the practitioner and his supervisors, the
supervisors are to complete a record of matters discussed at
the meeting in a
format prescribed or approved by the Council;
(d) The practitioner's supervisors are to forward to the Council, initially on a
monthly basis and then subsequently at a frequency
determined by the Council,
a Supervision Report in a format prescribed or approved by the
(e) The practitioner's supervisors are to be authorised by him to inform the
Council immediately if there is any concern in relation
to the practitioner's
compliance with these supervision requirements, compliance with other conditions
of registration, clinical
performance,
the supervisory relationship ceases;
(f) In the event that an approved supervisor is no longer willing or able to
provide the practitioner with the supervision required
by these orders, details
of a proposed replacement supervisor are to be forwarded for approval by the
Council within 21 days of the
cessation of the original supervisory
relationship;
(8) The practitioner is to, within 14 days of commencing clinical practice,
provide for approval by the Council, the name and professional
address of a
registered general practitioner in a senior position who has agreed to act as
his professional mentor. The nature and
frequency of contact with the mentor is
to be determined by the mentor in accordance with the Council's Guidelines for
Mentors. The
mentor is to be provided with a copy of the Council's Guidelines
for Mentors, a copy of the Tribunal decision dated 18 June 2010
together with a
copy of this Decision, and copies of any reports the Council deems to be
appropriate to the practitioner's circumstances.
To facilitate compliance with
this condition, the practitioner is to:
(a) Authorise the mentor to report, in an approved format, to the Council every
three months, about the fact of mentor contact, and
to inform the Council if
there is any concern held by the mentor about the practitioner's professional
conduct, health or personal
(b) Meet with the mentor every 3 months for an initial period of 12 months from
the date of the first consultation, and thereafter
for such period as the
Council may determine;
(c) Authorise the mentor to notify the Council of any failure to attend,
termination of the mentoring relationship against the advice
of the mentor, or
any other matter the mentor considers appropriate;
(d) In the event that the approved mentor is no longer willing or able to
continue as mentor to the practitioner, he is to nominate
another mentor for
approval by the Council within 28 days of the cessation of the original mentor
relationship;
(e) Be responsible for any costs associated with the mentoring
(f) Ensure that the practitioner's initial meeting with the mentor should
include discussion of the issues highlighted in this Decision
and, as and when
they arise, any personal and/or medical practice issues, and his personal and
professional development as a registered
practitioner;
(9) The practitioner is to obtain the approval of the Council prior to changing
the nature or place of his practice;
(10) The practitioner is to authorise and consent to the exchange of information
between the Council, Medicare Australia and the
Pharmaceutical Services Unit of
the NSW Department of Health, for the purpose of monitoring compliance with
these conditions;
(11) Unless otherwise directed by the Council, the practitioner is to provide
copies of the Tribunal decision dated 18 June 2010
and a copy of this Decision
to all of his future employers, supervisors and mentors;
(12) The practitioner is to attend an appointed Review Interview at a place and
with a person to be nominated by the Council at a
time approximately three
months after commencing practice, or as otherwise directed by the Council;
(13) The practitioner is to authorise the Council to forward copies of this
Decision and any subsequent Council Review Interview
or other reports and
information relevant to his health and treatment, to the Council appointed
medical practitioners, and to his
treating medical
practitioners.
Health Conditions
Health Conditions referred to in paragraph [107] above are as
(1) Except for medications that may be purchased from a pharmacy without
prescription, the practitioner is not to prescribe for
self-medication;
(2) The practitioner is not to self-administer:
(a) Any substance detailed in Schedule 4, 4D or 8 of the NSW Poisons List or
Schedule 1 of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act;
(b) any narcotic derivative, non-prescription compound analgesic or cold
medication;
(3) The practitioner must not take any medications of the type referred to in
Health Condition (2) above unless such medications
are prescribed at the
direction of the practitioner's treating medical practitioner/s;
(4) The practitioner is to attend for review by a Council Appointed Psychiatrist
on a three monthly basis or as otherwise directed
by the Council, such reviews
to be at the Council's expense;
(5) Should the practitioner be prescribed or directed to
(a) any Schedule 4D or Schedule 8 drug;
(b) any narcotic derivative;
(c) any non-prescription compound analgesic or cold
medication;
the practitioner must notify the Council Appointed Psychiatrist and the
Council of any instance of illness requiring the administration
of any such
medications as described above. In addition, within 7 days of a prescription of
the above drugs, the practitioner must
provide the Council with written
confirmation for the recommendation of such treatment from the treating
practitioner/s;
(6) The practitioner is to take any medication that may be from time to time
prescribed by his treating medical practitioner/s;
(7) Unless otherwise directed by the Council, the practitioner is to attend for
thrice weekly Urine Drug Testing (including testing
for Zolpidem, Pethidine and
Tramadol) in strict accordance with the Council's protocol. Results of Urine
Drug Testing are to be forwarded
to the Council Appointed and treating medical
practitioners, and to the Council. Such Urine Drug Testing will be at the
the practitioner;
(8) The practitioner is to attend for treatment by a general practitioner of his
choice, at a frequency to be determined by the practitioner
and his treating
medical practitioner. The practitioner is to authorise his treating medical
practitioner to inform the Council of
any failure to attend for treatment,
termination of treatment or if there is a significant change in the
practitioner's health status
(including a significant temporary change). The
treating general practitioner should not be one who practises at the
practitioner's
work place or at a practice owned by the
practitioner;
(9) The practitioner is to attend treatment sessions with a psychiatrist of his
choice, at a frequency to be determined by the practitioner's
psychiatrist. The practitioner is to authorise his treating psychiatrist to
inform the Council of failure to attend for
treatment, termination of treatment,
or if there is a significant change in the practitioner's health status
(including a significant
temporary change);
practitioner is to
attend for treatment by a drug and
alcohol physician of his choice, at a frequency to be determined by that
treating physician. The
practitioner is to authorise the treating physician to
inform the Council of failure to attend for treatment, termination of treatment,
or if there is a significant change in the practitioner's health status
(including a significant temporary change);
(11) The extent of the practitioner's professional medical duties in practice is
to be guided by his health status and by the advice
of his treating medical
practitioners and any Council appointed medical
practitioners;
(12) The practitioner is to have samples of his blood taken for measurement of
Carbohydrate Deficient Transferrin (CDT) levels at
monthly intervals in strict
accordance with the Council's protocol for such tests. The results of all such
tests are to be forwarded
to the treating and Council appointed medical
practitioners, and to the Council. Such testing will be at the expense of the
practitioner;
(13) The practitioner is to attend Doctors in Recovery Group meetings at
Northside Clinic, at a minimum of weekly intervals, save
for any weeks where no
such meetings of that Group are scheduled to take place.
Review body for NSW and interstate review of conditions
Review Conditions referred to in paragraph [107] above are as
(1) These conditions may be altered, varied or removed by the Council at any
time, and the Council is the appropriate review body
for the purposes of
Division 8 of Part 8 of the National Law (NSW);
(2) Should the practitioner seek to change or remove any of the conditions
imposed by virtue of orders made in these proceedings
when his principal place
of practice is anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, sections 125
to 127 inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
to apply, so that a review of these conditions can be conducted as required by
the Medical Board of Australia.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter