URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/241.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lobato v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) [2025] NSWCA 241 (31 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Lobato v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 241
Hearing Date(s):
23 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Ward P at [1]
Adamson JA at [2]
Free JA at [132]
(1) Dismiss the application.
the applicant to pay the first respondent’s costs.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — judicial review — District Court —
whether primary judge’s decision affected by jurisdictional
legal unreasonableness — alleged denial of procedural fairness —
alleged errors in assessment of evidence
and credibility — whether such
errors capable of founding jurisdictional error —
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Act 2001
CRIMINAL LAW — intimidation
with intent to cause mental harm — residents of aged care facility with
dementia — circumstantial
case — use of photographic evidence as
corroborative of eyewitness account — tendency evidence —
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
District Court Act 1973
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Cases Cited:
Craig v The State of South Australia
(1995) 184 CLR 163
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Roder (a pseudonym)
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR
Dublin, Wicklow & Wexford Railway Co v Slattery
(1878) 3 App Cas
Eliezer v Sydney Water Corporation
[2021] NSWCA 300
Gazecki v McCabes
Lawyers Pty Ltd
(2020) 102 NSWLR 259
[2020] NSWCA 98
Ghaderi v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[2018] NSWCA 119
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission
of New South Wales (2010) 239 CLR 531;
[2010] HCA 1
Mack Fleet Pty Ltd v
Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWCA 149
(2020) 93 MVR 242
Shepherd v The Queen
(1990) 170 CLR 573
[1990] HCA 56
(2002) 212 CLR 124
[2002] HCA 46
Texts Cited:
Wigmore on Evidence, vol 9 (Chadbourn rev. 1981)
Principal judgment
Jorge Lobato (Applicant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(Respondent)
Representation:
M Robinson SC / D Hawkins (Applicant)
J S Caldwell (First
Respondent)
Submitting appearance (Second
Respondent)
Solicitors:
Simon Diab & Associates
(Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions (NSW) (First
Respondent)
Crown Solicitor’s Office (NSW) (Second Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/229362
Publication Restriction:
Publication of names and any information or material that may lead to the
identification of the residents is prohibited:
Court Suppression and
Non-Publication Orders Act 2010
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
21 March 2025
Blackmore SC ADCJ
File Number(s):
2021/354433
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, Jorge Lobato, was employed as a registered nurse at an aged
care facility in Eastern Sydney. He was charged with nine
offences involving
residents with dementia; one charge was later withdrawn. In the Local Court,
Gilligan LCM found him guilty of
sequences 1-4, each an offence of intimidation
with intent to cause mental harm under
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) and acquitted him of the remaining common
assault charges. An aggregate sentence of eight months imprisonment was
Sequences 2 and 3 concerned allegations that the applicant placed Ms W in
another resident’s (Mr O’s) room and dressed
her in Mr O’s
clothing, thereby intimidating Mr O (sequence 2) and Ms W (sequence 3).
The applicant appealed against his convictions and sentence to the District
Court under
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(NSW). On 21
March 2025, Blackmore ADCJ (the primary judge) allowed the appeal in respect of
sequences 1 and 4 but dismissed it in
respect of sequences 2 and 3, and imposed
fines totalling $10,000 in substitution for the original aggregate sentence.
By summons filed 16 June 2025, the applicant invoked this Court’s
setting aside
the District Court’s dismissal of his conviction appeal on sequences 2 and
3 and the fines imposed. The applicant
alleged errors concerning the primary
judge’s treatment of key prosecution evidence, his approach to character
and tendency
evidence, and asserted denial of procedural fairness.
The Court held
(Adamson JA, Ward P and Free JA agreeing)
the application:
Alleged error in accepting Ms Luitel’s evidence
(1) It was open to the primary judge to regard the
photographs found on the applicant’s phone as corroborative of Ms
evidence concerning sequences 2 and 3. There was no denial of
procedural fairness to the applicant in the photographs not being shown
as there was no dispute as to what they depicted and the applicant had been on
notice since the tendency notice was served
that they would be relied upon:
[100]-[105].
(2) Further, it was open to the primary judge to accept Ms
Luitel’s evidence on sequences 2 and 3. A tribunal of fact may
accept some
parts of a witness’s evidence and reject others: [106]-[107].
Shepherd v The Queen
(1990) 170 CLR 573
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
[1990] HCA 56
Dublin, Wicklow &
Wexford Railway Co v Slattery
(1878) 3 App Cas 1155
, considered.
Alleged error in accepting Mr Bhattari’s evidence
(3) It was open to the primary judge to infer that the
photograph shown by the applicant to Mr Bhattari was one of the photographs
comprising Exhibit P4. The prosecutor was not entitled to show the photos to the
witness in chief as the question would be leading,
and the inference was
supported by the fact that the only photos of Ms W on the applicant’s
phone were those in Exhibit P4:
[108]-[111].
(4) The primary judge did not treat the photographs as
images of the incident witnessed by Ms Luitel. The photographs were used
tendency evidence to show that the applicant had a tendency to harass elderly
residents for his own amusement. It was open to
the primary judge to rely on
them and Mr Bhattari’s evidence to reason towards the applicant’s
guilt: [112]-[113].
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
TKWJ v The Queen
(2002) 212 CLR
[2002] HCA 46
, considered.
Alleged error in rejecting the applicant’s explanation for taking
the photographs
(5) It was open to the primary judge to reject the
applicant’s explanation that the photographs were taken for reporting
having regard to the evidence as a whole, including the absence of any
explanation as to how Ms W entered Mr O’s room or came
to be dressed in
his clothing without the applicant’s intervention: [114]-[115].
Alleged error in dismissing the appeal against the applicant’s
conviction on sequences 2 and 3
(6) The findings of guilt were not legally unreasonable:
[116]-[118].
(7) Even if some defect in the fact finding of the primary
judge had been established, it would have been necessary for the applicant
demonstrate that legally unreasonable fact finding constitutes jurisdictional
error when the body under review is an inferior
court rather than an inferior
tribunal, as mere error of fact by an inferior court does not constitute
where the point has not been addressed in
detail in submissions, and where no erroneous fact finding has been
demonstrated, it is
preferable not to express a view about whether the
applicant’s arguments, even if accepted, would establish jurisdictional
error: [123]-[125].
(8) The applicant failed to establish any error which would
warrant this Court setting aside the primary judge's dismissal of the
against the magistrate's findings of guilt in respect of sequences 2 and 3:
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Craig v The
State of South Australia
(1995) 184 CLR 163
[1995] HCA 58
Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531;
[2010] HCA 1
Ghaderi v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] NSWCA 119
Eliezer v Sydney Water Corporation
[2021] NSWCA 300
Mack Fleet Pty
Ltd v Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWCA 149
(2020) 93 MVR 242
L v Minister
for Families, Communities and Disability Services
[2024] NSWCA 199
Gazecki v McCabes Lawyers Pty Ltd
(2020) 102 NSWLR 259
[2020] NSWCA 98
considered.
: I agree with Adamson JA.
: The issue raised by this application is whether the District Court made
a jurisdictional error or failed to exercise its jurisdiction,
when it dismissed
an appeal against the convictions of Jorge Lobato (the applicant) for two
offences (sequences 2 and 3) of intimidation
with intent to cause mental harm
contrary to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW) (the Act).
2 and 3 relate to the same acts. The prosecution alleged that the applicant
placed Ms W (a resident of the aged care facility)
in Mr O’s room and
dressed her in Mr O’s clothes. The prosecutor alleged that this conduct
amounted to intimidation of
Mr O (sequence 2) and of Ms W (sequence 3).
summons filed on 16 June 2025, the applicant seeks an order setting
(1) the dismissal by Blackmore ADCJ (the primary judge) of his appeal against
his convictions ordered by Gilligan LCM (the magistrate)
of sequences 2 and 3;
(2) the fine of $5,000 which was imposed by the primary judge with respect to
sequences 2 and 3 (in lieu of the aggregate sentence
imposed by the magistrate
in respect of sequences 1-4).
orders sought in the summons as filed were subsequently refined by draft orders
which were handed up at the commencement of the
hearing. The Court ordered that
the summons be treated as amended as if the proposed orders were substituted for
the original orders
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) (the respondent) is the first, and only
active, respondent. The District Court of New South
Wales, the second
respondent, has filed a submitting appearance.
applicant can only obtain the relief he seeks in this Court if he establishes
that the decisions involved jurisdictional error.
No relief is available for an
error of law on the face of the record
District Court Act 1973
(NSW)) unless it is jurisdictional. There is otherwise no right to
challenge, or appeal from, a decision of the District Court on
appeal from the
Local Court, as in the present case.
applicant was charged with 9 offences in the Local Court, one of which (sequence
8) was subsequently withdrawn. Each of the offences
was alleged to have been
committed at an aged care facility in Eastern Sydney, where the applicant was
employed as a registered nurse
(RN). It was alleged that the victims of each
offence was a resident of the nursing home who had dementia. Ms W suffered from
cognitive dementia, as a result of which her memory and speech were
severely compromised. Mr O suffered from Alzheimer’s disease
both articulate and mobile at the time of the alleged offending. By reason of
the mental state of the residents, none
was called to give evidence. Both have
since died.
applicant was found guilty by the magistrate of sequences 1-4 (all offences
contrary to
of the Act) and not guilty of sequences 5, 6, 7 and 9
(charges of common assault contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)). The magistrate imposed an aggregate sentence for sequences 1-4 of 8
months’ imprisonment.
applicant appealed as of right against his convictions and against the aggregate
sentence to the District Court pursuant to
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Act 2001
). Section 18(1) of the
provides that “[a]n appeal against conviction is to be by way of
rehearing on the basis of the evidence given in the original
Local Court
proceedings” subject to qualifications which are not presently relevant.
On 21 March 2025 the primary judge upheld
the applicant’s appeal in
respect of sequences 1 and 4 and dismissed the appeal in respect of sequences 2
and 3. His Honour
imposed a fine of $5,000 in respect of each of sequences 2 and
The offence provisions
13 of the Act
relevantly provides:
13 Stalking or intimidation with intent to cause fear of
physical or mental harm
(1) A person who stalks or intimidates another person
with the intention of causing the other person to fear physical or mental
is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty—Imprisonment for 5 years or 50 penalty units, or both.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person intends
to cause fear of physical or mental harm if he or she knows that the conduct
likely to cause fear in the other person.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the prosecution is
not required to prove that the person alleged to have been stalked or
intimidated actually feared physical or mental harm.
(5) A person who attempts to commit an offence against
subsection (1) is guilty of an offence against that subsection and is
as if the offence attempted had been committed.
7 of the Act relevantly defines “intimidation” as follows:
7 Meaning of “intimidation”
(1) For the purposes of this
intimidation
of a person means—
(a) conduct ... amounting to harassment or
molestation of the person, or
(b) an approach made to the person by any means ...
that causes the person to fear for his or her safety, or
(c) conduct that causes a reasonable apprehension
(ii) violence to any person, or
(iii) damage to property ...
is not necessary to canvass the evidence adduced at the hearing in the Local
Court except in so far as it is germane to sequences
2 and 3, since the
applicant was, either in that Court or in the District Court, found not guilty
of the remaining charges.
order to rely on evidence for a tendency purpose, as provided for in
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), the prosecution served a tendency notice dated
13 April 2023 pursuant to
s 97(1)(a).
The notice identified the alleged tendency
as follows:
The tendency sought to be proved is that the Defendant had or has a tendency to
act in a particular way or to have a particular state
of mind, namely;
a. To harass elderly residents (80 years and older) in his care.
b. To be violent towards elderly residents (80 years and older) in his care.
tendency notice included sequences 2 and 3 (described as event 2) and
7. Between July 2020 and 24th November 2021, the Defendant had
[Ms W] in his care at [the aged care facility]. [Ms W] is an 80-year-old
residential patient who suffers from severe dementia. [Ms W] is known to
“wander” and go through other resident belongings.
This is known to
be particularly irritating to [Mr O]. On multiple occasions throughout this
time, the Defendant would take [Ms W]
into [Mr O’s] room while he was not
present. The Defendant would dress [Ms W] in clothing belonging to [Mr O] and
in his room. This would often result in [Mr O] being aggressive
towards [Ms W], leading to fights between them.
8. The substance of the evidence to be relied on is contained
in the following:
i. Statement of Uma LAMA
ii. Statement of Manisha KC
iii. Statement of Gauri LUITEL
iv. Photographs and videos obtained via Cellebrite (See statement of Detective
Senior Constable Brendan EDMINSTONE)
v. Statement of Ashish BHATTARI
vi. Statement of Laxmi SHRESTHA
4 (which alleged that the applicant had done a similar thing to Ms G) was
described as “Event 3” in the tendency
notice. The tendency notice
also included the following, described compendiously as “Event
On multiple occasions between July 2020 and 24th November 2021, the Defendant
would make fun of the elderly patients at [the aged
care facility]. He has
recorded [Mr O] crawling on the ground and struggling to stand up on more than
one occasion while laughing.
... He took photographs of residents dressed in
other residents[’] clothing. The Defendant would share photographs of
with colleagues to “make fun” of them. On one occasion, he
was seen to take the toy of [Mr D], an elderly dementia sufferer,
and punch it
repeatedly in front of him.
tendency notice stated that the substance of the evidence to be relied on for
Event 9 was contained in the statements of Mr Bhattari
and Ms Luitel and
photographs and videos obtained from the applicant’s phone (as contained
in the statement of Senior Constable
Edminstone). The conduct described in the
last sentence of the extract was referred to in the evidence as the “toy
dog incident”.
there is no allegation of violence with respect to sequences 2 and 3 and as
sequence 1 alleged that the applicant added salt and
chilli to the food of one
of the residents, the only sequence that is particularly relevant to sequences 2
and 3 is sequence 4. Although
the applicant was ultimately acquitted by the
primary judge of sequence 4 (having been found guilty by the magistrate of that
it was still open to the primary judge to use that evidence for a
tendency purpose, notwithstanding that sequence 4 had not been
proved beyond
reasonable doubt:
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Roder (a
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR 644
The evidence of sequences 2 and 3: allegation that the
applicant took Ms W into Mr O’s room and dressed her in his
principal evidence before the magistrate of sequences 2 and 3 was as follows.
Manisha K C’s evidence
K C was employed as an assistant in nursing (AIN) at the aged care facility. On
every shift there was a RN and at least two
described Ms W, who had dementia, as having a tendency to “wander in[to]
other residents’ room[s]” and “collect
stuff”. Ms W was
in room 4 and Mr O was in room 17. Both rooms were on the lower ground floor.
K C observed Ms W in Mr O’s room “a few times a week” during
the period from July 2020 to March 2021. Every time
Ms K C observed Ms W in that
room, the applicant was also present. In order to get into Mr O’s room,
the entrant would need
to get through the door as well as negotiate the
“gate” which was also outside the door.
K C was in another location, such as the dining room or the nurses’
station, when she heard Ms W screaming. She went to see
what was happening and
observed the applicant dressing Ms W in Mr O’s clothes in Mr O’s
room. On at least one occasion,
Ms K C observed the applicant taking Mr
O’s clothes out of his cupboard and dressing Ms W in them. Ms K C observed
the applicant
“[m]ake her hands out and then wrap [the clothes] around
her”. On another occasion, she saw Ms W already wearing clothes
recognised as Mr O’s clothes. Ms K C said that the clothing which the
applicant put on Ms W was usually Mr O’s
other occasions, Ms K C observed the applicant shepherding Ms W into
Mr O’s room by “push[ing] her from the back or
tell[ing] her to
come with [him] [and] [s]ometimes[,] holding her hand as well.”. Ms K C
said that Ms W would “scream”
and yell loudly but not in discernible
asked what Ms W’s reaction was to being moved into Mr O’s room, Ms K
She was - she was sad. I mean, she wouldn’t give much reaction because she
had dementia. She could only yell at that time.
K C said that Mr O could not hear the screaming from the dining hall but, from
his position in the dining hall, he could see into
his room. When Mr O returned
to his room and found Ms W there, wearing his coat, he would yell at her,
“[y]ou bitch. Get out
of my room.”. By that time, the applicant was
no longer in Mr O’s room. Ms K C said that the applicant would dress Ms
in Mr O’s coat when everyone else was in the dining hall.
K C did not observe any other interaction between the applicant and Ms W other
than when he was leading her to Mr O’s room
and dressing her in Mr
K C did not report her observations at the time. She explained that the
applicant’s conduct had resulted in her decision
to stop accepting shifts
on the lower ground floor. She also decided not to create an issue by reporting
it. However, in about November
2021, she was talking with a colleague, Laxmi
Shrestha, about what was happening on the lower ground floor and they decided to
Cindy [the owner of the nursing home] and whisper about what was
going on”. They were directed to talk to the Director of Nursing,
K C was cross-examined about her failure to report the applicant’s alleged
conduct in accordance with the document headed,
“Compulsory Reporting in
Residential Aged Care Facilities” which she had signed on 28 February 2020
when she started
working at the aged care facility. It provided that staff
members were to report any abuse of residents “immediately”.
Ms K C accepted that she had neither reported nor recorded what had
happened until November 2021.
K C explained why she eventually reported it in the following
Q. So why did you leave it for such a long time?
A. As I said, I was in [a] lot [of] pressure. I had no feelings at that time,
like, it’s too much, but then later on, it was
just getting too much,
where I had to leave my regular shifts and then I had to leave the floor as
well. So it was getting too much
at that time.
K C also explained that she stopped speaking with the applicant from about
August 2021 because of his actions towards the residents.
Lama’s evidence
Lama started working as an AIN at the aged care facility in March 2019. When she
became a permanent employee she worked full time,
five days a week. She and the
applicant both worked on the Thursday afternoon shift between 12.45 and 9.15pm.
The morning shift started
at 6.30am and finished at 3pm.
Lama described Ms W as “a wanderer”. On two or three occasions, she
observed the applicant drag or pull Ms W into Mr
O’s room and leave her in
there and lock the door. Ms W would scream as he was doing this and Mr O would
scream when he returned
to his room and found Ms W inside. Ms Lama was outside
the room and therefore could not see what was happening inside the room.
she heard Ms W screaming from inside Mr O’s room, Ms Lama would go in and
get Ms W. By this time, the applicant would no
longer be inside the room. When
she saw the applicant outside the room on these occasions, she observed the
applicant laughing. When
asked to describe what state Ms Lama found Ms W in when
Ms Lama went in to help her, Ms Lama said, “just panic, like,
She observed Ms W trying to get out of the room.
Lama observed that, when Mr O returned to his room, he would hold his walking
stick and try to hit Ms W and say, “[j]ust
go out, go.”.
Lama agreed that Mr O had a swipe card which would enable him to leave the lower
ground floor. He also had a piano in his room
and would teach students. Ms Lama
agreed that, although Mr O could talk (unlike some other patients whose dementia
was worse than
his), he did not complain to her about finding Ms W in his
asked whether she said anything to the applicant on any of these occasions, Ms
I said, “Don’t do it,” but normally, he’s the RN,
he’s the boss of the floor, and he said, “I
know what I’m
doing,” so I just, like shut my mouth and just keep away.
Lama said subsequently that she was scared to report it because she was worried
that the applicant would complain about her and
that no one would support
Lama said that she spoke to Ms Thacker because she contacted her and wanted to
ask her about what had happened. She said that she
did not speak to her
colleagues about the applicant’s conduct.
cross-examination, Ms Lama agreed that she had signed the document regarding her
obligation to report any incident concerning a
immediately.
Evidence of Ms Luitel
Luitel worked as an AIN at the aged care facility in 2021 and continued to work
there at the time of the hearing (April 2023).
For a period of about three
months, she did the Friday afternoon shift with the applicant on the lower
ground floor. Ms Luitel would
start at 12.45pm and work until 9.15pm or start at
3pm and work until 9.30pm. Evidence of their rostered shifts indicated that they
worked a total of seven full shifts together (on 23 and 30 April 2021, 10 and 18
June 2021 and 2, 16 and 23 July 2021) and five shifts
where there was a one hour
overlap between their shifts (on 27 February 2021, 11 and 13 March 2021, 1 May
and 5 June 2021). There
was also a one hour overlap on 11 April 2021 but they
were working on different wards.
Luitel recalled that Ms W had dementia and “used to walk pretty
well”. She would “wander around the hallway ...
getting into
rooms”. She mumbled and could not say more than a few words, such as
“[g]et away from me”. Ms W picked
up items belonging to other
residents such as books or creams. She lacked the co-ordination to dress
herself. Nor was she capable
of opening a cupboard to remove clothing.
Luitel recalled an occasion in 2021 when the applicant grabbed Ms W’s arm
and took her into Mr O’s room and dressed
her in some of his clothes. Ms
Luitel also saw Mr O returning to the room “and yelling at [Ms W] to get
out of his room.”
Ms W would then run from Mr O’s room, which is
when Ms Luitel saw the applicant “laughing about it. Like smiling about
O’s room not only had a door but also had a “white barrier on the
door ...[j]ust to block anyone going inside”.
Ms Luitel said that
“it usually remains closed so that [Mr O] can open it and we can open
it”. She said that the applicant
had to open the barrier because Ms W was
unable to do so and none of the other residents could do so.
Luitel confirmed:
I didn’t know what happened inside, because I was in the TV room. So when
they came back she was in [Mr O]’s scarf, and
he used to have a hat. So
she had that hat on. And then a coat as well, his, [Mr O]’s coat.
Ms Luitel could not recall what Ms W was wearing when Ms W entered into Mr
O’s room, she said that she was not wearing
Mr O’s clothes because
she was no longer able to dress herself. Ms Luitel confirmed that it was the
responsibility of the AINs
to dress residents, such as Ms W, who were unable to
dress themselves. Ms Luitel saw Mr O entering the room and yelling at Ms W to
get out of his room.
Luitel recalled that the applicant was smiling when he came out of the room with
Ms W (who was dressed in Mr O’s clothes)
and took her to the dining
Luitel explained that Ms W “doesn’t know where she is going, so we
need to ... direct her to the dining room”.
Ms Luitel described Ms
W’s demeanour as “anxious” when Mr O “yelled at
her” and added that Ms W “tries
to run when she’s
anxious” but that the applicant restrained her by “holding her so
she couldn’t run”.
refreshing her memory by reference to her police statement dated 23 September
2021, Ms Luitel confirmed that she witnessed this
incident in
Evidence of Ms Shrestha
Shrestha started working as an AIN at the aged care facility in early 2021. She
mostly worked on the lower ground floor where the
applicant was the RN. They
tended to work together on Thursday and Friday.
one occasion she saw the applicant pinching Ms W on the back of her arms as he
was walking behind her. Following that incident,
she spoke with Ms K C and the
two of them went to report the applicant’s conduct. She explained that she
had not reported the
incident immediately because she was scared that the
applicant: “will just make up the things and complain in the management,
so they will not give you shift anymore. So I don’t want to lose the
Evidence of Mr Bhattari
Bhattari had worked with the applicant on the lower ground floor of the aged
care facility since 2019. He and the applicant’s
shifts overlapped on
Thursday, Friday and Saturdays.
Bhattari recalled the applicant either showing him or sending him photographs of
a resident “wearing some kind of ... clothing
... not in [the] correct
way”. Mr Bhattari identified the resident as Ms W and said:
That female resident usually wander around, like room and room, and randomly
grab stuff and put on her.
Bhattari said that when the applicant showed him the photo, the applicant said,
“if relatives, or family member, or management
saw it, it’s very bad
for us, to be careful about that”. Mr Bhattari also gave evidence that the
applicant said, “this
look funny” and “careful if we, like,
visitor or some, you know, family member saw this one, you guys in
This evidence was corroborated by the applicant’s own
evidence of the circumstances in which he showed a photograph to Mr Bhattari
(see below). However, when asked whether the applicant said anything further to
him when he was showing him a photograph of a resident
(Ms W) in different
clothes, Mr Bhattari said that the applicant did not say anything else.
led to the prosecutor making an application for leave under
Evidence Act
for leave to cross-examine Mr Bhattari on the basis of Mr
Bhattari’s prior statement that the applicant had taken the photos
“just to make fun” and had actually sent him the photographs (as
opposed to showing him the photographs on his phone,
which was Mr
Bhattari’s oral evidence). The prosecutor told the magistrate that he
wanted to explore which photographs Mr Bhattari
was shown. He also relied on the
description of the reason the photographs had been taken (“just to make
fun”) as supporting
the mental element for the offences charged. The
applicant objected to leave being granted and the magistrate refused the
application.
Bhattari described Ms W as “unpredictable” and said that sometimes
she would scream for no apparent reason or call
out, saying something like,
“my mother is coming, I have to go to [the] university ... I have to go to
[the] national library”.
He said that sometimes she would pick up an item
of clothing, a photo frame or flower vase and carry it from one place to
He also said that sometimes she would be settled but that at other
times she would be agitated.
Bhattari estimated the height of the gate at the door to Mr O’s room to be
approximately one metre. According to Mr Bhattari,
it had a little latch that
generally only Mr O or the hospital staff could operate. He said that,
generally, Mr O closed the curtains
of the window in his room when he went to
the dining room and that, in that event, Mr O would not have been able to see
room from the dining room. He confirmed that this occurred “most
of the time”.
Other evidence
prosecution tendered, for a tendency purpose:
(1) images (marked Exhibit P4) which had been deleted by the applicant from his
mobile device but which were recovered on forensic
analysis, including three
images which depicted Ms W dressed in Mr O’s coat and scarf and wearing
his hat, standing in his
room with Mr O depicted approaching her in the room;
(2) video footage, including video 2, which depicted Mr O lying on his back on
the carpet in a corridor in the facility, making attempts
to get up to a
standing position.
photo of the screen of the applicant’s phone taken by Senior Constable
Edminstone indicated that the three photographs taken
in Mr O’s room were
taken on 30 April 2021. The significance of this date (which would appear to
amount to a business record
within the meaning of
) and the fact that it corresponded with one of the full shifts which Ms
Luitel worked with the applicant was not explored in the
evidence. The
prosecutor did not submit that the photograph corresponded with the occasion
which was witnessed by Ms Luitel. Rather,
the prosecutor ultimately submitted
that the applicant’s taking of the photographs (together with his
admission and Mr Bhattari’s
evidence) showed that the applicant had a
tendency to harass residents with the intention of causing them to fear mental
harm (fear,
anxiety and distress) for his own amusement, in circumstances where
he appreciated that it was not consistent with his professional
duties and would
harm his career if either management or the families of residents learned of it.
This submission was accepted by
the primary judge.
The evidence
of sequence 4: allegation that the applicant took Ms G into Mr O’s room
and dressed her in his clothes
evidence is potentially relevant for a tendency purpose and, therefore, will be
addressed although the primary judge found the
applicant not guilty of sequence
Ms K C’s evidence
K C said that, on two occasions, she saw the applicant either holding Ms
G’s hand or pushing Ms G into Mr O’s room
when Mr O was in the
dining hall. Ms G was a resident on the lower ground floor. Ms K C observed that
while in the room, the applicant
would dress Ms G in Mr O’s coat. After he
had dressed Ms G in Mr O’s coat, Ms K C saw the applicant going into the
hall to help. Mr O’s reaction was the same as with Ms W: he would
leave the dining room and return to his room and would yell
K C was Ms G’s carer at the time and would go to the room to see what was
happening. She recalled telling Mr O that he should
and that she would handle Ms G and his coat.
The toy dog incident
Luitel gave evidence that Mr D, a resident, had a toy dog which he used to carry
around with him. On one occasion, she saw Mr D
in the dining room with his toy
dog. Ms Luitel said that Mr Bhattari was also present on this occasion. The
applicant “snatched”
the toy dog away from Mr D and told him
that he was going to punch the dog. According to Ms Luitel, the applicant then
punched the
toy dog a number of times with a closed fist. Mr D, who could not
communicate well said, “[g]ive me back, give me back”.
said that Mr D was “upset” and his face was “red”.
Luitel said that seeing the two incidents (relating to Ms W and to Mr D and his
toy dog) made her feel “uncomfortable”
which caused her to request
to be moved to another floor. She later reported both incidents when she went
with Ms K C to see Ms Thacker.
Bhattari gave evidence that he did not recall Mr D having a toy dog. Mr
D’s daughter gave evidence that Mr D carried “many
soft toys around
with him” and agreed that they would be a comfort and were “quite
dear to him”.
The applicant’s evidence
applicant also gave evidence, denying all sequences and called evidence of his
good character. The applicant’s evidence
is presently relevant only in so
far as it was referred by the magistrate or the primary judge as supporting the
prosecution case,
since the primary judge rejected his denials of sequences 2
and 3. In these circumstances, I do not propose to summarise it, although
references to it will be included, where necessary, in the consideration of the
respective judgments of the magistrate and the primary
photos taken in Mr O’s room of Ms W dressed in Mr O’s
applicant agreed that he had taken all the photos and videos that were on his
phone. His written explanation as to why he had
taken the photographs which were
tendered as Exhibit P4 (which depicted Mr O and Ms W dressed in Mr O’s
coat, hat and scarf
in Mr O’s room), was as follows:
These pictures were taken because [Mr O] pressed the emergency bell in his room.
When me and [Mr Bhattari] entered the room, we saw
[Ms W] wearing [Mr O’s]
clothes and holding some of his documents/newspapers. When I asked [Mr O] what
happened, he stated
that when he entered his room, he saw [Ms W] wearing his
jacket and hat but also carrying some of his belongings. On the first picture
from the left, ... it is possible to see [Mr Bhattari] hand holding a document.
I obtained these pictures as evidence of her behaviour
and to facilitate my
documentation. I remember documenting this situation under behaviour assessments
however, they are missing from
[care facility’s] documents and not part of
the subpoenaed documents. There is no malicious intent with these pictures but
rather direct evidence of her behaviour. An important point to notice is that
the dining area is located directly behind the closet
and the mini fridge with
the TV on the top, the window to the dining area would be further to the right
side of the fridge. I was
standing at the entrance of his room and as seen in
the pictures there is no direct view angle to the dining room.
applicant also gave oral evidence of why he had taken the photographs. He said
that Mr O’s blazer did not need to be buttoned
up and maintained that it
was not buttoned up in the photographs he had taken.
applicant agreed that he had showed one of the photographs on his mobile device
to Mr Bhattari and that he had “alert[ed]
him” by telling him,
“If relatives or family members
or management
saw it it’s
very bad for us, to be careful about that.” (Emphasis added.) This
evidence was accepted by the primary judge
as being corroborative of Mr
Bhattari’s evidence.
applicant then said, when asked how taking photographs of a resident in another
resident’s clothes was consistent with maintaining
It’s maintaining their dignity because I’m alerting him that the
resident needs to be dressed appropriately with her
clothes and not in anyone
else’s clothes.
applicant’s explanation was plainly not accepted by the primary
The toy dog incident
applicant denied the toy dog incident. He said:
Well it’s, it’s ridiculous. Because it’s, it’s out of
character. I love animals. Always did. Live or unalive
animals. I was brought up
in a farm with all kinds of animals. My dad is there and he can testify for that
if it’s necessary.
So I had a very close relationship with animals. I
understood how important it was for [Mr D] to have the dog with him. So I
not do anything disrespectful to upset him.
The magistrate’s reasons
magistrate’s reasons with respect to her findings of guilt in respect of
sequences 2-4 are as follows:
I turn now to sequences 2, 3 and 4. These sequences are interrelated. They
relate to alleged conduct by the accused in intimidating
and/or engaging in
conduct capable of amounting harassment to [Mr O], [Ms W] and [Ms G]. The
conduct alleged was both repetitive
and persistent. The Court is satisfied that
the conduct alleged would amount to an intimidation and/or harassment as earlier
I am satisfied that the conduct occurred as alleged based on the
evidence of witnesses [Ms K C, Ms Luitel and Mr Bhattari]. Further,
prosecution also sought to rely on the following evidence in support of the
alleged tendency:
1. Exhibit P4, the photographs on the phone of the defendant
which had been previously deleted. In particular, photographs 3,
4 and 5 which
show [Ms W] in male clothing belonging to [Mr O];
2. Exhibit P5, the video recordings on the phone of the
defendant except for video 8. I accept that material as admissible insofar
is relevant to sequences 2 to 4 as tendency evidence.
I FIND THE DEFENDANT ALSO GUILTY TO SEQUENCES 2, 3 AND 4.
magistrate did not accept that the toy dog incident was capable of amounting to
tendency evidence and therefore did not take it
into account in reasoning to the
applicant’s guilt of sequences 1-4.
The primary
judge’s decision
primary judge’s dismissal of the applicant’s appeal against his
convictions of sequences 2 and 3 is challenged in
the present application.
However, it is also necessary to address his Honour’s findings on the
other sequences because of his
Honour’s findings of credibility associated
with particular witnesses.
The primary judge’s assessment
of the evidence of particular witnesses
primary judge set aside the conviction for sequence 1, in part because his
Honour did not accept the evidence of Ms K C that the
applicant put chilli in
Mr O’s food, on the basis that it was uncorroborated. His Honour
noted her evidence that there was
no chilli kept at the aged care facility.
primary judge found Ms K C’s evidence that the applicant was in Mr
O’s room with Ms W “a few times a week”
“exaggerated” and unable to be accepted. His Honour also noted the
inconsistency between Ms K C’s evidence
that when she saw Ms W, she was
already wearing Mr O’s clothes and her evidence that she saw the applicant
take a coat out
of Mr O’s cupboard and put it on Ms W. The primary judge
observed that “those two statements cannot stand together”.
Honour noted the applicant’s admission that he was in Mr O’s room
when Ms W was wearing his clothing but denied that
he guided Ms W there with the
intention of dressing her in his clothes.
Honour noted Ms K C’s evidence that Ms W would become agitated and scream
as the applicant guided her into Mr O’s
primary judge also noted inconsistencies in Ms K C’s evidence with respect
to sequence 4. His Honour also regarded it as
significant that there had been a
lengthy delay between Ms K C’s observations of the applicant’s
conduct and her reporting
of it and noted that the charges of assault (sequences
5-7 and 9) relied heavily on Ms K C’s evidence and were dismissed by
magistrate, in the face of the applicant’s “firm
primary judge took into account, in his rejection of Ms K C’s evidence,
that she had failed to comply with the reporting
requirements at the aged care
facility. His Honour said:
This is not some minor indiscretion on her part. The document emphasises the
importance of such a report for the safety of the patients
at the nursing home.
She understood that the reporting was compulsory, but she delayed for around a
year and a half to report her
suspicions. To my mind, that significantly affects
the credibility of her evidence. Additionally, it affects the reliability of her
the magistrate (who found that Ms K C, as a young Nepalese immigrant, who was
junior to the applicant, may have been scared
to report allegations of
misconduct), the primary judge did not accept that there was a reasonable
explanation for Ms K C’s
delay in reporting. His Honour found that Ms K
C’s evidence “should not be accepted without
corroboration”.
primary judge rejected Ms Lama’s evidence that the applicant dragged
Ms W screaming into Mr O’s room on the ground
that it was
implausible. His Honour said:
Ms Lama’s account, to my mind, is so extraordinary that I find it
difficult to accept at face value. The wards of the nursing
family members. The idea that a staff member would physically drag a patient who
was screaming into someone else’s
room, whilst in public view, seems
beyond unlikely, in my view.
primary judge did not accept the evidence of Ms Lama as to other matters and
said that his Honour “put it aside”.
The primary judge noted that,
in finding the applicant guilty of sequences 2, 3 and 4, the magistrate did not
rely on the evidence
of Ms Lama. Rather, the magistrate relied on the evidence
of Ms K C, Ms Luitel, Mr Bhattari and the tendency evidence.
primary judge accepted Ms Luitel’s evidence, which his Honour described as
“coherent”, that:
(1) Ms W was unable to dress herself; and
(2) on one occasion she saw the applicant guide Ms W (who was wearing her usual
clothes) into Mr O’s room; Mr O subsequently
enter the room; and the
applicant escort Ms W (who was, by that time, wearing Mr O’s clothes) out
of the room as Mr O, who
was angry, was telling her to “[g]et out”.
the primary judge found that Ms Luitel, like Ms K C, had delayed in reporting
her observations, his Honour found that Ms
Luitel’s evidence and
Ms K C’s evidence corroborated the other and the differences
between their evidence “belie[d]
the allegation ... by the defence that
the evidence was jointly concocted by the witnesses”.
evidence that corroborated Ms Luitel’s account
primary judge accepted Ms Luitel’s evidence, which his Honour found was
corroborated by other evidence, as follows:
In addition to the oral evidence, there is also a photograph in Exhibit P4 of
Ms W dressed in Mr O’s clothes, apparently taken
inside Mr O’s
room. Mr O was in the photo, Ms W was depicted dressed in a buttoned up coat and
wearing a scarf and a hat. If
it’s accepted that Ms W could not dress
herself, then someone must have assisted her in dressing into Mr O’s coat.
do not accept that Mr O would have done that. The photo was one that was
recovered from the appellant’s phone when it was inspected
by the police.
Whilst there’s no date on the photo, I accept that it does support the
account given by Ms Luitel. Ms Luitel
was not challenged about her evidence that
Ms W could not dress herself. I note in cross-examination the appellant was
asked if Ms
W could do up buttons on her skirt, and he agreed that that
wasn’t possible; see page 118, 5th of July, line 25 to 40.
The appellant did provide an explanation for the existence of the photo on his
phone; see Exhibit D10. That explanation states that
the appellant took the
photo to document what he saw after Mr O pressed the emergency bell. He said
that both he and Mr [Bhattari]
entered the room and saw Ms W dressed as she was
in the photo. In fact, there were three photos taken that are seen in Exhibit
The appellant said that he used the photos to document Ms W’s
behaviour. The appellant claimed that he documented the behaviour
in a report,
but that report has not been located in the records of the nursing home.
What is not addressed in the explanation is how Ms W could have dressed herself
in a coat that was obviously buttoned up, if it was
not done with the assistance
of the appellant. Further, the appellant agreed that Ms W could not open the
gate into Mr O’s
room without assistance, but he also said that on
occasion she would barge into the room; see page 125, 5 July, line 25 to 26.
As previously noted, the appellant did firmly deny guiding Ms W into Mr
O’s room to cause him both upset and harm; see page
34, line 25 to 32. Ms
Luitel said that she moved from working with dementia patients because of the
things she observed carrying
on in that unit, which made her feel uncomfortable,
and because she was working with two guys; see page 256, line 19. She said she
later made a statement when she was asked to do so by Ms Thacker, her
supervisor.
With respect to the Magistrate, he made no real comment as to the reliability of
the evidence of this witness [Ms Luitel], other
than apparently relying on the
evidence to make a finding with respect to counts 2 and 3, that the appellant
was guilty beyond reasonable
doubt. Having considered all of Ms Luitel’s
evidence, including the cross-examination and taking into account evidence that,
to my mind, supports her account, I accept that this witness was telling the
The toy dog incident
the toy dog incident, the primary judge said:
There was also a suggestion that the appellant took a toy dog from a patient, Mr
D, and punched the toy, thereby causing Mr D distress.
I note that the
Magistrate found that the alleged punching of the toy dog, even if it occurred,
could not amount to tendency evidence.
I do not understand that finding to be
challenged.
Mr Bhattari
primary judge noted that the only relevant evidence given by Mr Bhattari related
to the applicant showing him a photograph of
Ms W wearing Mr O’s clothes.
His Honour continued:
... The obvious inference was that the witness was shown the photograph of Ms W
wearing Mr O’s clothes as depicted in Exhibit
Mr Bhattari gave evidence that when the appellant showed him the photo, he said,
quote, “This look funny, careful, careful
it, we like, visitor or some,
you know, family member saw this one, you guys in trouble”; see page 311,
line 1 on the 28th
of April 2023. This evidence was produced to support the
evidence of Ms Luitel, and inasmuch as that can be inferred that the photo
to the witness was the same photo of Ms W contained in Exhibit P4 as discussed
above, the evidence does support the allegation
that the appellant was amused by
the fact that Ms W was dressed in Mr O’s clothes. It’s another piece
of evidence that
corroborates the account given by Ms Luitel, and to an extent
by the evidence given by KC.
Character evidence
to the character evidence adduced by the applicant, the primary judge noted that
“there was significant evidence of good
character” and that his
Honour had taken that “unchallenged evidence of good character into
account in reaching [his]
conclusions ...”.
Dismissal of
appeal in respect of sequences 2 and 3
primary judge gave the following reasons for dismissing the applicant’s
appeal against the findings of the magistrate in
respect of sequences 2 and
[Sequences 2 and 3] required the Crown to establish beyond reasonable doubt the
appellant carried out an act of harassment with the
intention of causing mental
harm to Mr O [sequence 2] and Ms W [sequence 3].
The alleged act here was taking Ms W into Mr O’s room and dressing her
there in Mr O’s clothes. It’s alleged that
the appellant well knew
from prior dealings with Mr O and Ms W to undertake those actions would cause
both Mr O and Ms W considerable
angst. As already noted, I found Ms Luitel a
witness of truth. Moreover, her evidence is supported by the existence of the
contained in Exhibit P4, which is a photo of Ms [W] dressed in Mr
O’s clothes, taken from the appellant’s phone.
I’ve taken into account the appellant’s denials of having taken Ms W
into Mr O’s room for the purpose of dressing
her in Mr O’s
clothes, together with the evidence of his good character, but I am of the view
that the Crown has proved that
he did take Ms W into Mr O’s room and dress
her. Further, I accept that the appellant’s intention was to cause Mr O
Ms W some mental harm. His showing of the photo in P4 to the witness
Bhattari demonstrates that he had no justifiable purpose in
dressing Ms W with
Mr O’s clothes, and he knew that his actions were wrong, because he
realised to show that photo to a family
member would see them in trouble.
I’m satisfied that the elements of both these charges are made out beyond
reasonable doubt in the circumstances, so I confirm
the orders of the Magistrate
with respect to sequences 2 and 3 and dismiss the ... appeals in each case.
dismissing the appeal against sequences 2 and 3, the primary judge proceeded to
address sequence 4. His Honour again referred
to the deficiencies in Ms K
C’s evidence and the fact that his Honour would not accept it unless
corroborated. His Honour proceeded
to address the prosecutor’s submission
that Ms K C’s evidence was corroborated by the tendency evidence. The
judge said:
The corroboration asserted to exist in this case was the existence of tendency
evidence. Tendency evidence was led to establish that
the appellant had a state
of mind to harass elderly patients in his care. The evidence of that, to my
mind, supports that tendency
is now only evidence that supports the finding of
guilt made in respect of counts 2 and 3 as noted above. The photos and videos
in the trial did not support the contested tendency in my view. They
are all, except for the photo of Ms W dressed in Mr O’s
clothes, to which
I have referred with respect to counts 2 and 3, are capable of innocent
explanation.
there are some slight infelicities of expression in this passage in the reasons,
I consider that, fairly read, his Honour found
that the photographs of Ms W
dressed in Mr O’s clothes constituted tendency evidence which corroborated
the other evidence
adduced with respect to sequences 2 and 3, but did not
relevantly corroborate Ms K C’s evidence with respect to sequence 4
concerned a different resident, Ms G).
The grounds of
his summons, the applicant elaborated on his grounds of appeal in a discursive
way which combined their articulation with the submissions
in support. The
summons did not comply with r 59.4(c) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), which requires the grounds on which the relief is sought to be stated
“with specificity”. Nor was any attempt
made to indicate the basis
on which the errors alleged were jurisdictional errors.
substance, the applicant challenged various findings which he contended were
“legally unreasonable” or a “denial
of procedural
fairness”. In these circumstances, it is convenient to address the
findings challenged and, if any of the challenges
are made out, the further
question of whether the decision is affected by jurisdictional error can be
alleged errors are, in substance, as follows:
(1) the primary judge’s view that Ms Luitel’s evidence with respect
to sequences 2 and 3 was supported by the photographic
(2) the primary judge’s acceptance of Ms Luitel’s evidence with
respect to sequences 2 and 3;
(3) the primary judge’s acceptance of Mr Bhattari’s evidence that
the applicant showed him a photograph depicting Ms
W in Mr O’s clothes,
which the applicant appeared to find amusing;
(4) the primary judge’s approach to the evidence of the applicant’s
good character; and
(5) the primary judge’s approach to the tendency evidence.
Robinson SC, who appeared on behalf of the applicant in the Local Court, the
District Court, and, with Ms Hawkins, in this Court,
also sought to challenge
the finding that the applicant intended to cause mental harm to Ms W and Mr O
(being the mental element
of the offence under
of the Act). He also sought
to challenge the sentence (which will be addressed separately below). As no
ground was raised in the
summons relating to either of these matters, I do not
propose to address them.
Alleged error in accepting Ms
Luitel’s evidence
Robinson submitted that it was erroneous for the primary judge to regard the
photographic evidence as supporting Ms Luitel’s
evidence regarding
sequences 2 and 3.
submitted that, as the photos found on the applicant’s phone had not been
put to Ms Luitel, the finding was legally unreasonable
and amounted to a denial
of procedural fairness to the applicant since Ms Luitel was not shown the
photographs on which the primary
judge relied (which depicted Ms W in Mr
O’s room, dressed in his clothes).
understood Mr Robinson also to submit that it was not open to the primary judge
to accept Ms Luitel’s evidence of sequences
2 and 3 in circumstances where
her evidence of the toy dog incident had not been
Consideration
was no forensic need for the photographs from the applicant’s phone to be
shown to Ms Luitel, there being no dispute as
to what they depicted (Mr O in his
own room and Ms W, dressed in Mr O’s coat, scarf and hat). Further, it is
difficult to conceive
of any admissible evidence, beyond identifying the scene
or the persons depicted, which she could have given since it was a matter
the tribunal of fact to consider and determine what inferences ought be drawn
from her evidence of what she saw
Mr O’s room and the
evidence of photographs that were taken
there was no denial of procedural fairness to the applicant in the photographs
not having been shown to Ms Luitel. The applicant
had been on notice since at
least the time of the service of the tendency notice, which was dated 13 April
2023, that the prosecution
proposed to rely on the photographs in support of
sequences 2 and 3. Secondly, the applicant was on notice that it was not
that the photographs actually depicted the charged conduct observed by
Ms Luitel. Rather, the prosecutor made it clear that the photographs
relied on as tendency evidence of the applicant’s tendency “[t]o
harass elderly residents (80 years and older)
in his care”.
prosecution case in support of sequences 2 and 3 was based on the following
direct and circumstantial evidence:
(1) Ms Luitel’s direct evidence that she had seen the applicant guide Ms W
into Mr O’s room at a time when he was away
in the dining room;
(2) Ms Luitel’s direct evidence that she had subsequently seen Mr O enter
his room and had seen the applicant escort Ms W,
who was dressed in Mr O’s
clothes out of the room, while Mr O was shouting at her to “get
(3) the evidence that Mr O was fond of food and tended to be first in line to be
served in the dining room;
(4) the undisputed circumstantial evidence that Mr O’s room was secured by
a 1m high gate which could only be unlatched by
Mr O or a member of staff (and,
therefore, not by Ms W);
(5) the undisputed evidence that Ms W was not capable of dressing herself;
(6) the photographs on the applicant’s phone which showed Mr O and Ms W,
dressed in Mr O’s coat, scarf and hat, in Mr
(7) Mr Bhattari’s evidence that the applicant showed him a photograph of
Ms W in Mr O’s room, dressed in a strange way,
in circumstances where
the applicant appeared to be amused and evinced a consciousness that the
photograph would get him into trouble
if other staff members or residents’
families saw it (which was corroborated by the applicant);
(8) the videos on the applicant’s phone depicted a tendency to harass
residents; and
(9) Ms K C’s evidence of sequences 2 and 3, which corroborated Ms
Luitel’s evidence.
Luitel saw what happened before Ms W and the applicant entered Mr O’s room
and saw and heard what happened after Mr O returned
to his room. The inference
which the prosecution sought to have the tribunal of fact draw was that it was
the applicant who had dressed
Ms W in Mr O’s clothes and that he had done
so with the requisite criminal intention.
photographs (and Mr Bhattari’s evidence about the applicant’s
attitude to the photograph he had shown him) indicated
that the applicant had a
tendency to harass residents, which made it more likely that he was guilty of
sequences 2 and 3. Thus, they
corroborated Ms Luitel’s evidence in support
of those sequences. Ms Luitel’s evidence and the photographic evidence (to
be used for the tendency purpose) were “strands in the cable” of the
prosecution’s circumstantial case against
the applicant on those
sequences: see
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
J) referring to the metaphor used in
, vol 9 (Chadbourn rev 1981), par 2497, pp 412-414). Thus, Ms
Luitel’s evidence, the photographic evidence and other evidence
taken together to prove the Crown case beyond reasonable doubt.
the reasons given above, it was open to the primary judge to regard the
photographs found on the applicant’s phone which
depicted Ms W dressed in
Mr O’s clothing in his room, together with Mr Bhattari’s
evidence about the circumstances in
which one of those photographs was disclosed
to him by the applicant, as corroborative of Ms Luitel’s evidence of
2 and 3. I do not discern any basis in the primary judge’s
reasons to conclude that his Honour treated what is depicted in
photographs as being the particular incident described by Ms Luitel. Rather,
what was shown in the photograph was consistent
with the tendency alleged by the
prosecution and depicted substantially similar conduct to that which she
it was open to the primary judge to accept Ms Luitel’s evidence of
sequences 2 and 3, notwithstanding that the magistrate
had not accepted her
evidence as to the toy dog incident as admissible for a tendency purpose. As set
out above, the magistrate found
that, whether or not the toy dog incident had
occurred, it was not relevant for a tendency purpose. The primary judge noted
this finding was not challenged. Thus, neither the magistrate nor the
primary judge needed to decide whether to accept Ms Luitel’s
evidence of
the toy dog incident.
even had either the magistrate or the primary judge, or both,
accepted Ms Luitel’s evidence of the toy dog incident, it did not follow
that they were unable to accept her evidence of sequences
2 and 3. A tribunal of
fact is entitled to accept part of a witness’s evidence and not accept
another part:
Dublin, Wicklow & Wexford Railway Co v Slattery
3 App Cas 1155
at 1201 (Lord Blackburn).
Alleged error in
accepting Mr Bhattari’s evidence
Robinson submitted that it was not open to the trial judge to accept Mr
Bhattari’s evidence that the applicant showed him
a photograph of Ms W
“wearing some kind of ... clothing ... not in [the] correct way” and
that the photograph was one
of the photographs found on the applicant’s
phone. He submitted that, as Mr Bhattari had not been shown the photographs in
Exhibit P4, the inference was not available.
he submitted that there was no basis for the primary judge to infer that the
photograph which the applicant had shown Mr
Bhattari was the same photograph as
in Exhibit P4 and that, in so far as the primary judge found that it was, this
was erroneous.
prosecutor was not entitled to show Mr Bhattari the photographs that comprised
Exhibit P4 and ask him whether the photograph he
was shown by the applicant was
one of those photographs. Such a question when asked in examination in chief
would have been plainly
objectionable on the basis that it was leading. The
tribunal of fact was entitled to have regard to the photos and reason from them
that they made it more likely that Ms Luitel’s evidence as to what she saw
was true. In circumstances where the only photographs
(as opposed to a still
shot taken from a video) of Ms W on the applicant’s phone were the three
photographs which were Exhibit
P4, it was open to the primary judge to find that
the photograph which Mr Bhattari had been shown by the applicant was one of
photographs.
in any event, Mr Robinson’s submission in this Court that no inference
could be drawn that one of the photographs in
Exhibit P4 was shown to
Mr Bhattari is foreclosed by the way the applicant’s case was
conducted before the magistrate: see
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
(Gleeson CJ);
TKWJ v The Queen
(2002) 212 CLR 124
[2002] HCA 46.
out in the summary of Mr Bhattari’s evidence, the prosecutor applied for
leave to cross-examine him under
Evidence Act
to explore this
very point. Had leave been granted, the prosecutor would have been able to show
Mr Bhattari the photographs and ask
him whether he recognised one or more as
having been shown to him by the applicant. Mr Robinson objected to leave being
granted for
this purpose. In these circumstances, it is not open to him to
submit that no inference was available that the photograph which Mr
Bhattari was
shown was one of the three photographs in Exhibit P4.
Robinson also submitted that the primary judge was in error in finding that the
photographs taken by the applicant of Ms W in Mr
O’s room, wearing his
clothes were images of what Ms Luitel had witnessed.
reject this submission. It is neither what the primary judge found, nor the
basis on which the photographs were sought to be used
by the prosecution. As
referred to above, it was not suggested that the three photographs that
comprised Exhibit P4 were taken on
the occasion witnessed by Ms Luitel. Rather,
they were relied on expressly as tendency evidence (to show that the applicant
tendency to harass residents for, as Mr Bhattari’s evidence
established, his own amusement) and accepted as such with respect
to sequences 2
and 3. For the reasons given above, it was open to the primary judge to find
that Mr Bhattari had seen at least one
of the three photographs in Exhibit P4
and that the applicant, who derived amusement from dressing Ms W in Mr O’s
appreciated that the photographs must neither be seen by staff or
families because they were incriminating and would get him into
trouble (by
jeopardising his position as a registered nurse), as in fact
Alleged error in rejecting the applicant’s
explanation for taking the photographs
Robinson submitted that the applicant’s explanation for taking the
photographs (to document what occurred in order to make
a report) was not
rebutted and that, therefore, the primary judge was obliged to accept it.
ambit of the appeal required the primary judge to review all of the evidence
germane to counts 1-4. His Honour addressed the photographic
evidence; gave
extensive reasons for rejecting the applicant’s explanation; and noted
that the applicant did not address how
Ms W could have got into Mr O’s
room or dressed herself in the coat without the applicant’s intervention.
It was open
to his Honour to reject the applicant’s
explanation.
Alleged error in dismissing the appeal against the
applicant’s conviction on sequences 2 and 3
understood Mr Robinson also to submit that it was not open to the primary judge
to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the applicant’s
sequences 2 and 3 since the prosecution had not excluded the hypothesis
consistent with innocence that someone other than
the applicant had dressed Ms W
in Mr O’s clothes. He relied on the postulated presence of others in
Mr O’s room.
do not regard the finding of guilt as legally unreasonable. Each of the matters
listed above formed part of the prosecution’s
circumstantial case against
the applicant. Although the hypothesis that someone other than the applicant was
technically open, the
evidence, taken as a whole, was sufficient to exclude it.
The gate on the door to Mr O’s room was sufficient to exclude any
from being responsible. Further, Ms Luitel’s observations strongly
implicated the applicant. That she did not actually
see the applicant dress Ms W
in Mr O’s clothes is not fatal to the prosecution case because of the
strength of the other evidence
supporting that inference. The photographs the
applicant took also implicated him, as did his comments to Mr Bhattari as to the
in which the photos were taken, because they were capable of proving (as
the primary judge found with respect to sequences 2 and
3) that he had a
tendency to harass elderly residents in his care. I regard the hypotheses that
someone other than the applicant
dressed Ms W in Mr O’s clothes or that
she did so herself as nothing more than fanciful and excluded by the evidence,
as a whole.
applicant’s argument proceeded on an assumption, not properly developed,
that if the primary judge made a finding of fact
that was legally unreasonable
that would constitute jurisdictional error on the part of the District Court.
The argument fails on
the facts. Even on the generous assumption that it would
be sufficient for these purposes for the applicant to demonstrate that the
verdict was unreasonable applying the principles that govern criminal appeals
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
the applicant has failed to demonstrate any such unreasonableness.
if a conviction is to be challenged, a statutory right of appeal is required,
such as is conferred by s 11 of the
for conviction of summary
offences or s 5(1)(a) and (b) for convictions on indictment. The primary judge
had jurisdiction under s
to conduct an appeal against
conviction by way of rehearing from the orders of the magistrate: s 18 of the
. There is no such statutory right of appeal from the District
Court to this Court and judicial review for errors on the face of the
been excluded under
District Court Act
question of guilt in a criminal context is predominantly a question of fact,
which is the preserve of the tribunal of fact. The
tribunals of fact in this
case were, initially, the magistrate, and, ultimately, the primary judge, both
of whom were judicial officers
in inferior courts.
Craig v The State of South Australia
(1995) 184 CLR 163
[1995] HCA 58
) at 176-180 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ), the
High Court distinguished between administrative tribunals and inferior
It said, of present relevance, at 179-180:
In contrast [to an administrative tribunal], the ordinary jurisdiction of a
court of law encompasses authority to decide questions
of law, as well as
questions of fact, involved in matters which it has jurisdiction to determine.
The identification of relevant
issues, the formulation of relevant questions and
the determination of what is and what is not relevant evidence are all routine
steps in the discharge of that ordinary jurisdiction. Demonstrable mistake in
the identification of such issues or the formulation
of such questions will
commonly involve error of law which may, if an appeal is available and is
pursued, be corrected by an appellate
court and, depending on the circumstances,
found an order setting aside the order or decision of the inferior court. Such a
on the part of an inferior court entrusted with authority to identify,
formulate and determine such issues and questions will not,
however, ordinarily
constitute jurisdictional error. Similarly, a failure by an inferior court to
take into account some matter which
it was, as a matter of law, required to take
into account in determining a question within jurisdiction or reliance by such a
upon some irrelevant matter upon which it was, as a matter of law, not
entitled to rely in determining such a question will not ordinarily
passage highlights the importance of maintaining the boundaries of
in the District
Court, but not in this Court) exceed its permitted scope. It was a matter for
the primary judge to make an assessment
as to the strength and coherence of the
evidence of witnesses and to make an assessment of their credibility.
if some defect in the fact finding of the primary judge had been established, it
would have been necessary for the applicant
to demonstrate that legally
unreasonable fact finding constitutes jurisdictional error when the body under
review is an inferior
court rather than an inferior tribunal. The distinction
remains critical to the standard of review that is applied: see
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
239 CLR 531 at 570-571;
[2010] HCA 1.
Mere error of fact by an inferior court
does not constitute jurisdictional error:
Ghaderi v Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2018] NSWCA 119
Eliezer v Sydney Water
Corporation
[2021] NSWCA 300
Preston CJ of LEC (with whom Gleeson and
McCallum JJA agreed) held that an inferior court, such as the District Court,
“ordinarily
does not fall into jurisdictional error by making a legally
unreasonable decision on questions of fact or law that are within its
accepted categories of jurisdictional error of an inferior
court recognised in
.” Other statements in this Court have suggested that legal
unreasonableness, at least in the context of a discretionary determination,
suffice to constitute jurisdictional error by an inferior court: see
Fleet Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWCA 149
(2020) 93 MVR 242
L v Minister for Families, Communities and Disability Services
[2024] NSWCA 199
Gazecki v McCabes Lawyers Pty Ltd
(2020) 102 NSWLR 259
[2020] NSWCA 98
in the context of an allegation of legal unreasonableness, Basten JA at
[14] cautioned against assuming there can be jurisdictional
error of law on the
part of a court which “except to the extent that its jurisdiction was
constitutionally or statutorily limited
to particular kinds of matters, would
ordinarily have implied authority to determine questions of law”.
the present case, in circumstances where the point has not been addressed in
detail in submissions and where no erroneous fact
finding has been demonstrated
it is preferable not to express a view about whether the applicant’s
arguments, even if accepted,
would establish jurisdictional
applicant has failed to establish any error which would warrant this Court
setting aside the primary judge’s dismissal of
the appeal against the
magistrate’s findings of guilt in respect of sequences 2 and
The purported challenge to the sentence imposed
referred to above, Mr Robinson sought to challenge the sentence in oral
submissions in this Court. He relied on prayer 4 in the
summons filed on 16 June
2025, as follows:
An order that the Decision of his Honour, Acting Judge A Blackmore of the
District Court of NSW, made on 21 March 2025 to sentence
the Plaintiff to a
$5,000 fine for each sentence be quashed or set aside.
sentence was not otherwise referred to in the summons and no ground was
identified which was germane to any challenge to the summons.
In his written
submissions dated 22 August 2025 in this Court, the applicant referred to the
orders sought, including an order quashing
the sentence but did not make any
submissions as to why this relief ought be granted. In his written submissions
in reply dated 13
October 2025 in this Court, the applicant made passing
reference to the sentences imposed in the context of a submission that the
primary judge had convicted the applicant of sequences 2 and 3 (as opposed to
dismissing an appeal against convictions ordered by
the magistrate). He also
3. As to any sentencing submissions, if the summons is
successful, there will be no need for submissions. If it is not successful,
there will be brief oral submissions going to the matters being dealt with by
way of the matters being proven but without conviction
pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
this Court, Mr Robinson did not maintain the submission that the applicant ought
be dealt with by way of
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(NSW). However, he submitted, for the first time orally in this Court,
that the primary judge’s reasons for sentence were inadequate
to address the submissions put on behalf of the applicant.
accept the submission put on behalf of the respondent that this Court ought not,
in these circumstances, entertain a challenge to
the sentences imposed.
propose the following orders:
(1) Dismiss the application.
(2) Order the applicant to pay the first respondent’s costs.
: I agree with Adamson JA.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter