URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blacktown Pistol Club v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force [2013] NSWADTAP 55 (18 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Blacktown Pistol Club v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 55
Hearing Date(s):
12 December 2013
Decision Date:
18 December 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
P Molony, Judicial Member
Bolt, Non-Judicial Member
1. The Tribunal's decision is set aside.
2. The matter is remitted to
the Tribunal to be heard and decided again.
Catchwords:
MERITS REVIEW - decision of Commissioner of Police to add a condition to
the Blacktown Pistol Club's approval that there be "no live
firing until such
time as procedures are put in place to ensure no member of the public is within
the range danger area whilst shooting
is in progress"- whether Tribunal's
decision was 'unreasonable' - whether Tribunal asked itself the wrong question
Legislation Cited:
Firearms Act
Firearms Regulation
Principal judgment
Blacktown Pistol Club Ltd
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
Representation
Mr J Brown (Appellant)
- Solicitors:
Mainstone Lawyers (Appellant)
Crown Solicitors Office
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
11 October 2013
- Citation:
Blacktown Pistol Club Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2013] NSWADT 222
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Blacktown Pistol Club Ltd has operated a shooting range since 1963. On 31 August
2012 officers from the Firearms Registry inspected
the range and imposed a
condition on its approval. The condition was that there be "no live firing until
such time as procedures
are put in place to ensure no member of the public is
within the range danger area whilst shooting is in progress". According to
Police, the Range Danger Area is includes:
. . . those areas of land or water, together with specified air
space, within which danger to life, limb or property may occur arising
firing of specified ammunition. (Firearms' Range Users Guide, April 2013,
version 9 at p 8
Club applied to the Tribunal for a review of that decision. The Tribunal
affirmed the decision and the Club has appealed to the
Appeal Panel.
Grounds of appeal and conclusion
appeal can be made on any question of law and, with the leave of the Appeal
Panel, may extend to a review of the merits of the
appealable decision:
Administrative Tribunal Act
1997 (ADT Act), s 113(2). The Club appeals on
two questions of the law:
(1) that the
Tribunal applied the wrong provision when determining the matter.
(2) that the
addition of the condition was so unreasonable that no reasonable body would have
reached it.
Club also sought leave to extend the appeal to a review of the merits of the
appealable decision.
find that the Tribunal applied the wrong test when determining this matter. It
regarded non-compliance with Clause 86(3)(d) of
Firearms Regulation
as determinative of the issue as to whether the imposition of a condition
under Clause 87(3) was the correct and preferable decision.
Both parties agree
that the Tribunal made that mistake. In those circumstances it is not necessary
to address the Club's second ground
Tribunal's decision
Tribunal asked itself what the Club had to do in order to comply with Clause
86(3)(d) of the
Firearms Regulation
. That provision states that:
The Commissioner must not grant an approval unless:
(d) the applicant has control over the use of the shooting range
86(3)(d) applies to the approval process, not to the imposition of conditions
after the approval had been granted.
construing that provision, the Tribunal reasoned, at [54] to [63] that:
In order to determine the correct and preferable decision it is
necessary to consider the proper construction of Clause 86(d) of the
Regulation.
It is common ground that it is impossible for the Applicant to control the
Range Danger Area. The question arises as to whether the
legislation requires
that the Applicant is able to do so in order to comply with Clause 86(d).
The Respondent contends that in order to comply with Clause 86(d) the
Applicant must have control over the Range Danger Area. This
construction of the term 'shooting range' as including the whole of the area
that comprises the Range and Range Danger
Area. The Applicant does not
The definition of 'shooting range' in Clause 3 is not helpful. It states:
shooting range includes a moveable shooting range
The Respondent contends that the overwhelming intention of the legislature
was to ensure the public safety. A construction that furthers
the underlying
principles and objects of the Act is to be preferred.
I agree with that view.
Where public safety may be at stake the Respondent, and therefore the
Tribunal, must give precedence to that concern.
In my view, in order to comply with Clause 86(d) the Applicant must have
control over the Range and any area in which it could be
expected that some
danger might arise from ammunition fired from the Range.
In the present matter, the no live firing condition has the effect that the
Applicant must be able to ensure that no members of the
public are within that
area whilst shooting is in progress. In my view that condition is reasonable for
the protection of public
It is a matter for the Applicant how it achieves that outcome.
is not necessary for us to determine whether this analysis and conclusion is
correct because we have decided that the Tribunal
was addressing the wrong
the Firearms' Range Users Guide, April 2013, version 9 at page 17, the following
text appears under the heading Planning/Construction
The Range Inspectors of the FAR (Firearms Registry) should then be
consulted to carry out a preliminary investigation of the viability
of the Range
as far as siting and control of the area affected by the use of the Range. The
following should be provided to the FAR
to allow this to happen:
Copies of any lease agreements or documentary proof of ownership of the land
the Range will occupy. Bear in mind the Range Inspectors
will apply a Range
Danger Area Template to the map provided and will insist upon the Range User
having control or permissive shooting
rights over the land shadowed by that
template. The withdrawal of permissive shooting rights by a landowner at a later
see the Authority to operate the Range revoked. Organisations should
strive towards buying or leasing the entire area the Range Danger
Area Template
shadows. (Words in brackets added.)
the Range Users Guide, the Commissioner of Police purports to require either
that a club obtain "permissive shooting rights"
or that the club itself has
control of (that is, owns or leases) the entire Range Danger Area. The term
"permissive shooting rights"
does not appear in the legislation. It refers to a
letter from the owner of the land, not controlled by the Club, shadowed by the
Range Danger Area. The permissive shooting rights letter was described by Senior
Constable Jackson in a statement dated to May 2013
as providing permission to
use and enter the land and clear the land. The adjoining owner would also give a
declaration that they
understand the existence of the club's Range Danger Area
template overshadowing their land. According to Senior Constable Jackson,
club is required to have this for their approval to be formalised. He says that
it confirms that the club has control of the
land that they shoot over.
this case the Club could not obtain such a letter. The question the Tribunal
should have asked itself is not whether the Club was
required to have control of
the Range Danger Area but whether the Commissioner of Police made the correct
and preferable decision
when he added the live firing condition. The relevant
provision is Cl 87(3):
The Commissioner may vary or revoke any conditions subject to which
an approval has been granted or attach to any such approval additional
conditions.
discretion should be read with s 87(1) which gives the Commissioner power to
approve a shooting range either unconditionally
or subject to conditions:
The Commissioner may approve a shooting range either
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as the Commissioner thinks fit
(such as conditions relating to the control, administration, management, use and
inspection by a police officer, or such other person
as may be approved, of the
shooting range, and the preservation of public safety).
parties agreed that the Commissioner has a discretion to add a condition to an
approval if, for example, the purpose of that condition
is the preservation of
public safety.
to the submission by the Commissioner of Police, the Tribunal would not
necessarily have come to the same conclusion if it
had asked itself the right
question. Clause 87(3) gives the Commissioner a broad discretion to attach
approval conditions. Such conditions
may be directed to the preservation of
public safety. When determining whether the imposition of the live firing
condition is the
correct and preferable decision, whether the club controls the
land overshadowed by the Range Danger Area or has a "permissive shooting
letter are relevant considerations. But they are not determinative of the issue.
The requirements, as set out in the Range
Users Guide, are not the law. It is
not a statutory instrument and there is nothing in the legislation that requires
a club to obtain
either a permissive shooting rights letter or to own or lease
the land covered by the Range Danger Area.
relevant considerations when determining whether the Commissioner made the
correct decision when imposing the condition include:
the likelihood of
ammunition being misfired or incorrectly fired so that it lands outside the area
of land leased by the club, the
seriousness of any injury or damage likely to be
inflicted from such ammunition, the frequency of members of the public entering
the land either legally or illegally, the practicality and effectiveness of
measures to deter entry and the availability of other
measures to address safety
Tribunal has heard the evidence and is in the best position to reconsider it
when applying the correct test. The matter should
be remitted to the Tribunal as
originally constituted to determine whether the imposition of the "no live
firing" condition is the
correct and preferable decision. The admission of fresh
evidence is a matter for the Tribunal.
1. The Tribunal's decision is set aside.
2. The matter is remitted to the Tribunal to be heard and decided again.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (142 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter