URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/258.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARF v NRMA (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 258 (2 December 2020)
ARF v NRMA (Claims
Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 258
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the claimant
– motor cycle – Direction for Production –
CCTV footage
– factual investigation report – intoxicated pedestrian causing bus
to brake - claimant travelling at safe
distance behind the bus at the time of
the accident – legal costs
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Motor Accident Regulations (NSW) – Schedule 1 Part 1, Clause 3(2)(a)
Civil Liability Act 2002
Cases Cited
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
[1985] HCA 34
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd
[1953] UKHL 4
[1953] AC 663
Smith v McIntyre
[1958] TASStRp 11
[1958] Tas SR 36
Broadhurst v Millman
[1976] VicRp 15
[1976] VR 208
Hallowell v The Nominal Defendant
[1983] Qld R 266
Onassis and Calogeropoulos v Vergottis
[1968] 2 Lloyd’s Rep
AAI Limited trading as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
San v Rumble (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 259
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
Road Rules 2014
Regulation 126
ARF – Claimant
NRMA – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
in accordance with section 7.36(5) of the
Motor Accident Injuries
and clause 7.441 of the
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2, Clause
3 of the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
Insurance Australia Limited t/as
NRMA Insurance
Date of Accident
2 June 2019
DRS Reference
Date of Internal Review
2 December 2019
DRS Claims Assessor
Anthony Scarcella
Date of Decision
2 December 2020
Conference date and time
On the papers
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
the purposes of
section 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of
the Claimant.
For the purposes
section 3.28
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, the motor
accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the Claimant.
Legal Costs: The
amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Accident Injuries Regulation
is $3,652 inclusive of GST.
brief statement of my reasons for this determination is attached to this
certificate.
Anthony Scarcella
Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
This determination relates to a Miscellaneous
Claim, which is a reviewable decision under Schedule 2, Clause 3(d) and (e) of
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(the MAI Act), about
whether the Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault in causing the motor
is a dispute between the Claimant and the Insurer in respect of the cessation of
statutory benefits for weekly payments and
treatment and care expenses incurred
more than 26 weeks after the motor accident, based on the Insurer’s
decision that the
Claimant was wholly at fault under sections 3.11 and 3.28 of
the MAI Act.
2 June 2019, the Claimant was riding his motor cycle along Pittwater Road,
Collaroy behind a State Transit Authority bus (the bus),
when he braked heavily
and came off his motor cycle (the motor accident).
7 June 2019, the Claimant lodged an application for personal injury
19 September 2019, the Insurer notified the Claimant that it had decided that
the Claimant was wholly at fault in the subject motor
accident and declined his
claim for statutory benefits beyond 26 weeks after the motor accident. In the
alternative, the Insurer
relied on section 5.2(1) of the MAI Act to deem the
Claimant at fault.
27 November 2019, the Claimant made an application for an internal review of the
Insurer’s decision dated 19 September 2019.
2 December 2019, the Insurer conducted an internal review and issued a
Certificate of Determination confirming its original decision
that the Claimant
was wholly at fault in the subject motor accident and, in the alternative, that
the Claimant was deemed to be at
fault by section 5.2(1) of the MAI Act.
6 December 2019, the Claimant lodged the application and supporting documents,
which are now before me, with the Dispute Resolution
Service (DRS).
22 January 2020, the Insurer lodged its reply and supporting documents with the
the first teleconference in this matter on 9 April 2020, the Claimant was
unrepresented. I identified the issues in dispute as
(a) Whether the Claimant was wholly at fault in the motor
accident under sections 3.11 and 3.28 of the MAI Act.
(b) In the alternative, whether the Claimant was deemed to be at fault in the
motor accident under section 5.2(1) of the MAI Act.
the first teleconference, as a matter of procedural fairness, I offered the
Claimant the opportunity to seek independent legal
advice prior to setting a
timetable for further submissions and the admittance of any further documentary
evidence. Eventually, the
Claimant stated that he would take the opportunity to
seek independent legal advice and that a two week adjournment would provide
with the opportunity to do so.
the second teleconference in this matter on 9 April 2020, the Claimant was
represented by Mr Alex Foel of Law Advice Compensation
Lawyers, who advised that
Mr Geoff O’Hare of his office would be representing the Claimant. On the
basis that it would assist
me in assessing the claim, the parties agreed to me
issuing a Miscellaneous Claims Direction under section 7.43 of the MAI Act and
clause 7.479 of the
Motor Accident Guidelines
(the Guidelines) to the
State Transit Authority (STA) to obtain copies of the CCTV footage recorded from
the bus at the time of the
subject motor accident.
the third teleconference on 27 July 2020, the STA produced CCTV footage recorded
from the bus at the time of the motor accident
in response to the Miscellaneous
Claims Direction under section 7.43 of the MAI Act and clause 7.479 of the
Guidelines issued by
me. I allowed the parties access to the bus CCTV footage
produced by the STA. On 27 July 2020, I issued directions in relation to
lodgment of any further evidence and written submissions.
party disputed that the Insurer bears the onus of proof in respect of the issue
as to whether the Claimant was wholly at fault
in the motor accident.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the documents provided in the application dated 6 December 2019
and the reply dated 22 January 2020 and the following
further documentation
provided by the parties:
(a) CCTV footage recorded from the bus at the time of the motor accident
produced in response to the Miscellaneous Claims Direction
under section 7.43 of
the MAI Act and clause 7.479 of the Guidelines issued by me.
(b) The letter from Law Advice Compensation dated 22 June 2020 and attached
documents marked A1 to A15 inclusive referred to therein.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant provided written submissions dated 22 June 2020 and 10 August
Claimant’s principal submissions may be summarised as
(a) The motor accident was not caused by the fault of the
Claimant, and the accident was not a no-fault motor accident as defined
Section 5.1 of the MAI Act.
(b) Immediately prior to the accident, the Claimant was travelling at
approximately 50 km/h at a distance of approximately 40 metres
behind the bus.
50 km/h equates to 13.89 m/s, which equates to 41.67 metres per three seconds
(the time distance recommended by transport
New South Wales as a safe distance
in its brochure [A14]). Therefore, as the Claimant was approximately 40 metres
behind the bus
prior to the subject accident, the distance he was travelling
behind the bus was a safe distance in the circumstances.
(c) The subject motor accident occurred through no fault of the Claimant, nor
the fault of the driver of the bus or any other vehicle
in the vicinity of the
accident scene. None of the factual evidence relied on by the Claimant,
indicated that he took any action
which led to or caused the motor accident.
(d) The cause of the motor accident was the sudden and unexpected pedestrian
venturing onto the roadway in front of the bus, which
caused the bus to jam on
its brakes (as confirmed by independent witnesses) affording the Claimant no
opportunity to safely avoid
a collision with the bus except for braking and
losing control of his bike as occurred.
(e) The Claimant relied on the recent case of
AAI Limited v
judgement, analysis and findings in
can be directly extrapolated
and applied to the current dispute regarding the Claimant’s entitlement to
ongoing statutory benefits.
with respect to the party
who loaded the shipping container, in the subject motor accident, there was
clearly a third party at fault
for the motor accident, being the pedestrian who
ran onto the road in front of the bus. This fact has been confirmed by the
investigating
police, who in their transcript of interview, concluded that the
pedestrian was at fault in causing the accident, and in turn, the
retracted the Claimant’s Infringement Notice.
(f) The subject motor accident was caused entirely by the intoxicated
pedestrian running onto the road in front of the bus. The bus
and the Claimant
had no option but to take the action they did to prevent a much worse accident
taking place.
(g) However, if the Assessor is against the Claimant on the above submission,
the Claimant’s contention is that any contributory
negligence found on his
part (which is not conceded) would be minimal in the context. The Claimant was
an experienced motorbike rider,
who was riding his motor cycle at a safe speed,
under the speed limit and with a gap to the vehicle in front as recommended by
NSW. The Claimant acted by braking when the bus in front jammed on the
and in doing so, his motor cycle fell to the side and he sustained
injuries. If there is a finding of any element of contributory
negligence on the
part of the Claimant, in no way would it amount to anywhere near the definition
of mostly at fault in Section 3.28
(greater than 61%), allowing for the
continuation of the Claimant’s statutory benefits.
(h) In respect of the bus CCTV footage, if one views the speed in the bottom
left corner of the CCTV footage and assumes that is the
live current speed of
the bus at that point in time, then it may appear that the motor cycle the
Claimant is riding may have been
accelerating prior to the motor accident.
However, the speed shown on the CCTV footage is in fact incorrect, not
calibrated correctly
and also has a lag effect, all of which give the incorrect
impression that the motor cycle was accelerating prior to the impact.
the motor accident, the bus appears to be travelling at 56 km/h (17:08:42). It
is in this same frame that the bus first
appears to slow down and heavily brake
on viewing the pedestrian run onto the road. However, after very heavy braking,
by the persons on the bus being jerked forward, the bus is still
travelling (according to the CCTV footage) at 46 km/h at 17:08:46
even though
the bus appears to almost be stationary at that point in time. Further, the time
at which the Claimant falls off his
motor cycle is approximately 17:08:45, where
the bus is still travelling (according to CCTV footage) at 53 km/h even though
has almost come to a standstill with the pedestrian in front of it on
(i) Accordingly, the speed on the CCTV footage cannot be considered to be
completely accurate as to the specific point in time and
the perception of the
Claimant’s motor cycle increasing in speed is, in fact, a result of the
bus slowing down very rapidly.
Insurer provided written submissions dated 22 January 2020, 14 July 2020 and
24 August 2020.
Insurer’s principal submissions may be summarised as
(a) The Claimant was involved in a single vehicle accident
and lodged a claim against his own compulsory third party insurance policy.
(b) When the bus braked heavily, it managed to avoid colliding with the
intoxicated pedestrian. The Claimant had a 30 to 40 metre
distance in front of
him when he had to brake to avoid colliding with the bus. He lost control of his
motorcycle. 30 to 40 metres
was a considerable distance and would have given a
reasonable person enough opportunity to reduce their speed and come to a stop.
The Claimant’s own evidence recorded in the police notebook was that he
was aware that the bus was slowing to a stop.
(c) A reasonable person in the Claimant’s position had a primary
responsibility to ride in a safe and proper manner.
(d) The Claimant attended an STA office and viewed the bus CCTV footage.
After viewing the footage, he claimed that there was an oil
slick on the road.
However, he did not mention the oil slick on the road when he was interviewed by
police at the accident scene.
There was no other evidence to support the
presence of an oil slick on the roadway at the point at which the Claimant lost
of his motorcycle. The presence of an oil slick on the roadway would
have been significant enough for the Claimant to have identified
it when he was
interviewed by police at the accident scene.
(e) Following the motor accident, the Claimant was charged by police with
negligent driving. However, the negligent driving charge
was withdrawn by
police. The withdrawal of the charge was a discretionary decision, not a
judicial one. The withdrawal of the charge
was not relevant to the issue of
whether the Claimant was wholly at fault for the motor accident.
(f) Singh’s
case is not relevant. The motor accident was not a
no-fault accident. The motor accident was wholly the fault of the Claimant. The
Claimant’s submission that the speed shown on the CCTV footage was
incorrect; not calibrated correctly; had a lag effect; and
gave an incorrect
impression is merely an assertion unsupported by any expert evidence. After the
Claimant turned the corner and
came into view of the CCTV footage, he changed
lanes and then appeared to accelerate. The bus speed was about 56 km/h and, at
time, the Claimant was accelerating and catching up with the bus. The
Claimant’s motorcycle then slid and he lost control of
it. The bus applied
its brakes heavily. The bus was a very large vehicle and required time to
decelerate once its brakes were applied.
The bus appeared to brake heavily at
17:08:43 on the CCTV footage. As soon as the bus brakes were applied, its speed
declined and,
within the next four seconds, it had already decreased to 30 km/h.
In his evidentiary statement, the Claimant stated he completed
a head check to
his left when changing from lane 3 to lane 2. There was no evidence of a head
check on the CCTV footage.
(g) The CCTV footage demonstrated that there was a considerable distance
enabling a reasonable person enough opportunity to reduce
their speed and come
to a stop. The CCTV footage demonstrated that the Claimant lost control of his
motorcycle and supported the
submission that the motor accident was caused
wholly by the fault of the Claimant.
(h) The Claimant submitted that the motor accident was not a no-fault
accident and that the cause was the sudden and unexpected pedestrian
onto the roadway in front of the bus, causing the bus to jam on its brakes, and
thus affording the Claimant no opportunity
to avoid the collision. The Insurer
disputed that the pedestrian was the cause of the motor accident and maintained
that the Claimant
was wholly at fault.
(i) The Claimant is not entitled to statutory benefits beyond the first 26
weeks after the motor accident.
LEGISLATION
making my decision, I have considered the following legislation and
guidelines:
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (the MAI Act).
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
(the Regulation).
Motor Accident Guidelines 2017
(the Guidelines).
Civil Liability Act 2002
Road Rules 2014
made under the Road
Transport Act 2013
The relevant legislation and legal
this case, the Insurer submitted that the Claimant was wholly at fault in the
motor accident. The Claimant’s primary submission
was that the motor
accident was not caused by the fault of the Claimant.
relevantly provides that a driver must drive a sufficient
distance behind a vehicle travelling in front of the driver so that the
can, if necessary, stop safely to avoid a collision with the vehicle.
party directly referred to
regulation 126
. However, both
parties addressed the pamphlet lodged in the Claimant’s case entitled
“Road Safety – Top 10 misunderstood
road rules in
issued by Transport for
NSW and, in particular,
entitled “Safe following
distances”.
relevantly states:
“Drivers must
keep sufficient distance behind a vehicle travelling in front of them to safely
avoid a collision.
Safe following distances may vary depending on the conditions, the type of
vehicle and the speed at which the vehicle is travelling.
As a general rule,
when following a vehicle, the driver should travel three seconds behind the
vehicle in front to provide sufficient
time to avoid a crash.”
The pamphlet went on to explain how drivers could calculate the three seconds
space between vehicles referred to above.
pamphlet, on its second page, cautions that the document does not constitute
legal advice and that it is only provided as a guide
Road Rules 2008
Bearing in mind that the current
were made in 2014, prima facie, the
pamphlet is outdated and, based on the latter fact and the fact that it is only
a guide, I give
it little weight.
1.4(1) of the Act defines fault as negligence or any other tort.
3.11 and section 3.28 of the MAI Act relevantly provide that statutory benefits
by way of weekly payments (section 3.11) and
treatment and care expenses
(section 3.28) are not payable beyond 26 weeks from the date of the accident in
the event that the motor
accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of
the injured person.
3.11(2) and section 3.28(2) of the MAI Act provide that a motor accident was
caused mostly by the fault of a person if the
contributory negligence of the
person in relation to the motor accident was greater than 61%.
3.38(1) of the MAI Act provides that in assessing contributory negligence,
regard must be had to the common law and the enacted
there is any contributory negligence requires, pursuant to section 5R of the
CLA, a determination of whether a reasonable
person in the Claimant’s
position, would have done what he did, where and when he did it, knowing what he
did or what he ought
to have known.
assessing the degree of negligence, I am required to weigh up the respective
acts of negligence of the parties involved and determine
an appropriate
apportionment between them.
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty
Podrebersek
), the High Court of Australia confirmed that the
following considerations should be made when determining the apportionment of
culpability
between parties:
(a) The culpability of both parties;
that is, the degree of departure and standard of care of the reasonable man;
Pennington v Norris
(b) The relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage:
Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd
Broadhurst v Millman
(c) The whole conduct of each negligent party in relation to the
circumstances of the accident must be subjected to comparative examination.
significance of the various elements involved in such an examination will vary
from case to case.
Ultimately,
the apportionment becomes a matter of impression having regard to the
circumstances of the location, the amount of traffic,
the skill of the driver,
the condition of the vehicle and any loss of its control:
Hallowell v The
Nominal Defendant
the alternative, the Insurer submitted that the Claimant was deemed to be at
fault in the motor accident under section 5.2(1) of
the MAI Act. The Claimant
submitted that the motor accident was not a no-fault motor accident as defined
by section 5.1 of the MAI
5.1 of the MAI Act defines “no-fault motor accident” as a motor
accident in NSW not caused by the fault of the
owner or driver of any motor
vehicle involved in the accident in the use or operation of the vehicle and not
caused by the fault
of any other person.
5.2(1) of the MAI Act refers to liability in the case of a no-fault motor
accident and provides as follows:
“The death or injury to a
person that results from a no-fault motor accident involving a motor vehicle
that has motor accident
insurance cover for the accident (within the meaning of
section 1.10) is, for the purposes of and in connection with any claim for
damages or statutory benefits in respect of the death or injury, deemed to have
been caused by the fault of the owner or driver of
the motor vehicle in the use
or operation of the vehicle.”
Claimant relied on
because there was clearly a third party at fault
for the motor accident, being the pedestrian who ran onto the road in front of
bus. The Insurer later submitted that
was not relevant because
the motor accident was not a no-fault accident; but was wholly the fault of the
, Mr Singh was injured in a motor accident where he was the driver
of a truck that rolled whilst turning a corner, because the truck’s
contents had been insecurely stowed, allowing the contents to shift. Mr Singh
was not involved in stowing the load in the steel shipping
container loaded on
the trailer of the truck he was driving. The container was sealed when Mr Singh
took delivery of it. Mr Singh
was entitled to statutory benefits for a period of
26 weeks under the MAI Act.
relevant insurer cut off Mr Singh’s statutory benefits after 26 weeks,
arguing that by virtue of section 3.2(5) of the MAI
Act, Mr Singh was deemed at
fault and that, therefore, the termination provisions in sections 3.11 and 3.21
of the MAI Act were engaged.
Mr Singh applied for internal review, but the
insurer’s decision was not altered. Mr Singh then applied to the DRS,
was determined that for the purposes of sections 3.11 and 3.28 of the
MAI Act, the motor accident was not caused by the fault of
Mr Singh. The insurer
then commenced judicial review proceedings seeking review of the DRS
assessor’s decision.
, Fagan J found that “Section 3.2(5) is concerned with deeming
where financial liability lies, not with deeming that any person
is at fault, in
any situation”.
Mr Singh’s entitlement to statutory benefits were not terminated by
virtue of section 3.2 of the MAI Act.
Insurer in this case, did not rely on section 3.2(5) of the MAI Act. It follows
that, in this case, if the motor accident giving
rise to the Claimant’s
claim for statutory benefits was not brought about wholly or mostly by his own
fault, the statutory
deeming by force of section 3.2(5) of the MAI Act, does not
cut off his statutory benefits at the end of 26 weeks by force of sections
3.11(1)(a) and 3.28(1)(a) of the MAI Act.
, there was also an issue as to the effect, if any, that Part 5 of
the MAI Act, dealing with “no-fault accidents” had
entitlement to statutory benefits. The insurer relied on section 5.2(1) of the
MAI Act, which provides that in a no-fault
accident, fault is deemed on the part
of the owner or driver. Part 5 is further complicated by section 5.6, which
provides that the
owner or driver who is deemed at fault in a no-fault accident
can recover from the person actually at fault. In any event, Mr Singh
that the accident was not a “no-fault accident” because there was
fault on the part of the person who had negligently
loaded his truck.
, the insurer argued that the words “any other person”
in section 5.1 of the MAI Act should be read down so as to mean
something less
other person, “to leave open that a motor accident could
still be within the definition of “no fault” if it was
degree caused or contributed by a person who is outside the class of ‘any
other person’”.
Fagan J found that this was an impossible task and that the words “any
other person” in section 5.1 of the MAI Act mean
just what they say,
thereby rendering section 5.6, being the section relating to recovery of
contribution to damages or statutory
benefits from a person actually at fault,
Fagan J also found that, even if Mr Singh’s accident was a
“no-fault” accident within the definition in
section 5.1, section
5.2(1) would not have the effect of terminating Mr Singh’s statutory
benefits because Part 5 has no bearing
on the entitlement to statutory benefits.
Referring to section 5.2(1) of the MAI Act, Fagan J
“This is a statutory deeming of fault in the causation
of injury. In ss 3.11(1)(a) and 3.28(1)(a) the limitation to 26 weeks
statutory benefits turns upon fault in the causation of the motor accident.
Fault in the causation of injury and fault in the
causation of an accident are
two different things – not in the empirical world, or in practical terms,
but in the concepts
of this statute. It is the express and apparently deliberate
intention of ss 3.11(1)(a) and 3.28(1)(a) that the cut-off of statutory
at 26 weeks should turn upon the claimant’s fault in causing the motor
accident. The whole point of Pt 5 is to make
provision with respect to motor
accidents that are no one’s fault. Section 5.2(1) artificially
distinguishes between fault
in the causation of injury and fault in the
causation of the accident. It does so in order to deem fault in the causation of
(and hence to create a path of liability) in the case of “no-fault
motor accidents”, where there is by statutory definition
no fault in the
causation of the accident and where the legislature has apparently deliberately
chosen not to deem fault in the causation
Accordingly,
Fagan J dismissed the insurer’s summons and also recommended that Part 5
of the MAI Act should be re-drafted, having
regard to the obscurities and
inconsistencies in the provisions.
view of the decision in
, the Insurer’s reliance, in the
alternative, on section 5.2(1) of the MAI Act in this case in its liability and
internal review
decisions and submissions at teleconference, cannot be
supported. I note that in its further written submissions dated 24 August
the Insurer appeared to abandon its alternative position by submitting that the
motor accident was not a no-fault accident.
will now provide an analysis of the relevant evidence.
of the motor accident
uncontested evidence may be summarised as follows:
(a) The motor
accident occurred in Pittwater Road, Collaroy, near the intersection of Frazer
Street on Sunday, 2 June 2019 at about
(b) Pittwater Road is a sealed bitumen road with three lanes in each
direction running north/south with a speed limit of 60 km/h.
(c) The weather was cold but fine and the road was dry.
(d) At all material times, the bus was travelling in a northerly direction
along Pittwater Road in lane 2 (the middle lane).
(e) At all material times, the Claimant was riding his motor cycle in a
northerly direction along Pittwater Road behind the bus in
(f) At all material times, there were cars parked in lane 1 (the kerbside
lane) northbound in Pittwater Road.
(g) At about 5:09 pm, a child kicked a ball onto Pittwater Road, near the
intersection of Frazer Street. An adult male ran onto the
western side of
Pittwater Road in front of approaching traffic (including the bus) to retrieve
(h) The driver of the bus applied his brakes heavily to avoid colliding with
the adult male, who had run onto the western side of
Pittwater Road.
The Claimant’s evidence
Claimant provided a statement to Probationary Constable Benjamin Sneddon on
2 June 2019 at the accident scene, which was recorded
in the Probationary
Constable’s police notebook. Probationary Constable Sneddon recorded the
Claimant’s description of
the motor accident in his notebook as
“I pulled out of Jenkins St & turned left, a bus
was in lane 2 & was slowing to a stop. So I indicated right to go into
3. A car in lane 3 was turning right and had stopped. So I head checked &
indicated to go into lane 2. I went to move lanes
& realised the bus had
stopped. I had nowhere to go & jumped on the brakes, the bike fell to the
right side & I injured
evidence, is the Ambulance Electronic Medical Record dated 2 June
The document recorded a
history of the vehicle related trauma on 2 June 2019 from the Claimant and noted
the following:
“PT WAS RIDING MOTORBIKE WHEN TRAFFIC STOPPED
SUDDENLY DUE TO A BALL ON THE ROAD. PT HAD TO BRAKE AND LAID BIKE OVER AT APPROX
30-40KM/H. PT HAS PAIN TO BOTH ANKLES WITH LACERATION TO R ANKLE. PT ABLE TO
WEIGHT BARE [SIC] AND ABRASION TO RIGHT THIGH. PT DENIES
ANY NECK PAIN. PT IS
ALERT TO TIME AND PLACE.”
evidence, is the Northern Beaches Hospital Emergency Department Nursing
Assessment dated 2 June 2019.
The assessment report noted a history taken from the Claimant that he was riding
a motorbike at approximately 45 km/h when it slid
to the side to avoid a bus and
his application for personal injury benefits dated 7 June
, the Claimant described the
motor accident in the following terms:
“B1 double-decker bus
in lane 2, small hatchback car in lane 3 northbound on Pittwater Rd. I was
following the car in lane 3
with safe distance maintained behind the car. I
could clearly see in front of the car I was following there was no traffic and
ahead was clear. Suddenly both of the vehicles in both lanes bus and the
car started to brake heavily performing emergency braking.
I was forced to
replicate the same braking force. Unfortunately I just left my place one block
away, tires [sic] on my motorcycle
were cold, weather was cold, sun was coming
down so the road was cold and I had no grip in tires [sic]. That resulted in my
tire [sic] locking up prematurely and motorcycle coming down on the
right-hand side. Because safe distance was maintained I did not
hit the bus
neither the car from behind. From the presents [sic] of witnesses I have learned
that intoxicated young people kicked
a soccer ball onto the road then decided to
jump in front of the car and the bus to retrieve it. Fortunately they did not
by the bus neither the car and run ...”
The balance of the Claimant’s description was cut off in the online
template application form.
evidence, there is a statement by the Claimant dated 28 August 2019 taken by an
investigator from QuantumCorp engaged by the
I will now refer to the
relevant parts of that statement.
Claimant stated that he was 33 years of age; had been driving since the age of
18; had been riding motorbikes since he was a child;
and attained his Australian
motorcycle riding licence in 2010. He stated that he had been racing motorcycles
as an amateur for 5
to 10 years.
motorcycle the Claimant was riding at the time of the motor accident was a 2010
Honda CBR that he had owned for three years. He
described his motorcycle as
“immaculate” and in good mechanical condition at the time of the
motor accident.
Claimant described the conditions at the time of the motor accident as clear
weather; cold; “just starting to get dark”;
and a dry roadway. He
opined that the cold weather might have contributed to the motor accident as the
cold road impacts the ability
of the motorcycle tyres to grip the roadway. The
Claimant’s description of the accident scene was consistent with the
in [46(a) – (e)] above.
Claimant stated that Pittwater Road was straight and flat with a 60 km/h speed
limit. He was very familiar with the area because
he had lived there for 11
years. At the time of the motor accident, the traffic was light and there were
cars parked in lane one
northbound. He had just left his home to go to Narrabeen
to do some shopping.
Claimant stated that he was heading north in lane 2 on Pittwater Road following
a double-decker bus. As he could not see around
the bus, he merged into lane 3
behind a dark-coloured car. He was 30 metres or more from the back of the car
and travelling at about
50 km/h. He observed the car in front of him put on
their right indicator and slowdown. They were approaching the intersection of
Frazer Street and the Claimant assumed that the car was going to turn right into
Fraser Street or perform a U-turn. The Claimant
then relevantly
“44. I did not want to get stuck behind the car if it
was going to stop for safety reasons.
did a head check to my left and I started to change into lane 2.
the time the car and bus in lane 2 were near Frazer Street they were
approximately paralell [sic].
I did my head check to the left the bus was about 40 metres in front of me.
looked back in front of me and saw the bus and car had stopped in the middle of
was about 30 metres from the rear of the bus when I saw it had stopped in front
was in lane 2 behind the bus.
started to break with the front brake and slightly touched the rear brake.
knew my tyres were cold as I had only just left my home. I did not want to hit
the brakes too hard.
front tyre of the motorbike lost grip and I fell to the right-hand side.
slid on the road with the motorbike on top of me and my right leg was caught
under it. I can’t estimate how far I slid.
did not impact either the bus or the car.”
Claimant stated that, immediately after coming off his motorcycle, a woman ran
over to assist him from the eastern side of Pittwater
Road. The woman informed
the Claimant that there were some intoxicated young people on the corner of
Frazer Street acting irrationally.
A ball was kicked onto the western side of
Pittwater Road. They then ran onto the road directly in front of the bus to
retrieve the
ball. The bus slammed on its brakes to avoid a collision and
stopped within two metres of the person who ran onto the road.
Claimant stated that the police arrived within 30 seconds, as they just happened
to be passing. He observed the police take notes
from the woman who came to his
assistance. He stated that he provided police with his version of events. An
ambulance arrived and
he was examined by paramedics. The police wanted to leave
his motorcycle in the bus lane [lane 1]. However, the Claimant wanted to
his motorcycle back to his nearby home. The police and paramedics allowed him to
ride his motorcycle back home and they followed
him to his home. He recalled
signing something at the request of the police after being asked some questions.
He was then conveyed
by ambulance to Northern Beaches Hospital.
Claimant stated that he was fined by police for negligent driving. He requested
a copy of the police report and said that he disputed
much of what was in it and
referred to inaccuracies. He contacted the STA and arranged to view the bus CCTV
footage at their Leichardt
offices. He stated that the bus CCTV footage showed
him behind the bus coming down on what appeared to be oil on the roadway. He
recalled that there had been footpath construction on the western side of
Pittwater Road in the weeks prior to the motor accident
and that construction
vehicles had been parking in the bus lane. The Claimant asserted that the bus
CCTV footage suggested that his
motorcycle hit some sort of slick on the road
which he had not observed at the time of the motor accident.
Claimant stated that he wrote to the appropriate authority to defend the
negligent driving charge and requested a review. His
letters in this regard were
dismissed. On being informed by the STA that the police had not requested a copy
of the bus CCTV footage,
the Claimant wrote to Dee Why police requesting senior
officers to review the bus CCTV footage and the charge brought against him.
the letter, he drew to the attention of police the fact that there was no
mention of the information provided by the witness in
the police report. He was
due to appear in court to defend the negligent driving charge on 3 September
2019, when, just before that
date, the police withdrew the negligent driving
to the cause of the accident, the Claimant stated:
the people who ran onto the road in front of the bus, causing it to stop
suddenly, caused the collision. I was surprised
that with my driving experience,
the bike behaved the way it did. I was not aware of there being something on the
road until I saw
the footage which shows some sort of oil
to the Claimant’s statement dated 29 August 2019, was a Google satellite
image of the accident scene with the positions
of the bus, the car in lane 3 and
the motorcycle marked thereon by the Claimant.
evidence, there is an email from the Claimant to the Insurer dated 19 September
wherein he strongly
disagreed with the reference in the police report that he failed to exercise
caution in putting on his brakes.
He went on to state:
come onto [sic] oil slick and that resulted in loosing [sic] traction! That is
negligence on council or state government
to clear the road after the
construction of new footpath.
Also I had drunk pedestrians with soccer ball jumping onto the road directly
in front of me.”
Claimant’s oil slick submission came about after he had accessed the bus
CCTV footage at the offices of STA. The submission
was not pursued after the
Claimant became legally represented.
RS’s evidence
evidence, there is a statement by RS recorded in the police notebook dated 2
June 2019, which read as follows:
“About an 11 or 12 year old
kid kicked the ball into the road. 1 guys [sic] ran onto road to get kids [sic]
ball. Bus slammed
on brakes. Bike behind hit brakes. Ryder [sic] went over
handle bars or off the
is another entry in the police notebook at page 84 underneath the signature of
Senior Constable Doroszuk dated 2 June 2019 that
refers to a version by a
witness in the following terms:
“Kid kicked the ball onto
road. An intox guy walking past jumped into traffic to get ball. Bus jammed on
The name of the witness was not recorded in the notebook.
The police reports
were two NSW Police Force COPS reports in evidence bearing event reference
number E 72044141. The shorter report was dated 23
and the longer report was
dated 18 May 2020.
COPS report dated 23 September 2019 recorded the crash summary details as
“A motorcycle was travelling northbound on Pittwater
Road, Collaroy when it came into sudden traffic congestion, with nowhere
rider jammed the brakes on [sic] causing the wheels to slip out and the bike to
fall to the side, trapping the rider with
his leg under the right-hand side. No
other vehicles were involved in the collision. Rider conveyed to
report recorded the date and time of the motor accident as 2 June 2019 between
5:10 pm and 5:30 pm.
report described the incident location as being on Pittwater Road, Collaroy near
the intersection of Frazer Street on a straight,
level, sealed and dry roadway.
It confirmed that the weather was fine. It described the state of natural
lighting as “dusk”.
The report incorrectly recorded the speed limit
at the incident location as 70 km/h. However, the photographs attached to the
QuantumCorp
factual investigation report dated 30 September
clearly depicted the speed
limit painted on the roadway as 60 km/h. The report noted the Claimant as being
responsible for the motor
COPS report dated 18 May 2020 recorded the date, time and location of the motor
accident consistent with that which was recorded
in the report dated 23
September 2019. However, the report provided a more detailed narrative in
respect of the motor accident. The
narrative in the report recorded the Claimant
turning out of Jenkins Street, Collaroy and then commencing to travel northbound
Pittwater Road behind a bus in lane 2. The bus was in lane 2 and was coming
to an immediate stop. So, the Claimant changed lanes
from lane 2 to lane 3. As
the Claimant was in lane 3, he realised the car in front of him was stationary,
as it was turning right
at the break in the concrete section. The Claimant
turned his head to the left, did a head check, indicated, and went to change to
lane 2 from lane 3. The bus had stopped, the motorcycle had nowhere to go, and
jammed on its brakes. The wheels on the motorcycle
were cold as the Claimant had
just left home. The Claimant fell off his bike, as it had braked harshly. The
Claimant landed with
the bike on him, injuring both ankles.
narrative went on to state that the Claimant’s motorcycle was blocking
traffic in lane 3. So, police attempted to move the
motorcycle but the Claimant
offered to ride it home, where it would be secure and off the road. Ambulance
paramedics advised against
this, but apart from his ankle injury, the Claimant
seemed fine. Police allowed the Claimant to ride his motorcycle home and garage
it and then come back to be assessed by paramedics. Due to the severity of the
pain in the Claimant’s right ankle, he was conveyed
to Northern Beaches
Hospital by ambulance.
to the COPS report was a site diagram dated 3 June 2019.
of the documentation produced by NSW Police Force in response to the
Claimant’s GIPA request was a Blood Testing Certificate
for Alcohol in
relation to the Claimant dated 2 June 2019. The Certificate returned a negative
analysis in respect of alcohol in
the blood sample obtained from the
The QuantumCorp factual investigation reports
evidence, there is a factual investigation report by QuantumCorp dated
30 September 2019.
investigators took photographs of the accident
prepared scene
and canvassed the area for
potential witnesses and/or CCTV footage. An investigator took the
from the Claimant
dated 28 August 2019 referred to above. The same investigator recorded an
interview with Probationary Constable
Sneddon on 23 September 2019. The factual
investigation report provided a summary of the Claimant’s statement and
of interview with Probationary Constable Sneddon. I give no weight to
the investigator’s summaries. However, I have taken into
account the
Claimant’s statement, the transcript of the interview with Probationary
Constable Sneddon and the accident scene
photographs and plans.
evidence, there is a short supplementary factual investigation report by
QuantumCorp dated 14 November 2019 that focused on the
investigator’s
attempt to obtain a statement from the witness, RS. The investigator reported
that, despite making contact with
RS, she was uncooperative and the investigator
was unable to obtain a statement from her. The investigator closed his
The record of interview with Probationary Constable
Benjamin Sneddon
evidence, there is a transcript of a record of interview between the
Insurer’s investigator and Probationary Constable Benjamin
Sneddon on 23
September 2019 in relation to the motor accident. I will now refer to the
relevant parts of the transcript of the record
of interview, which may be
summarised as follows:
(a) Probationary Constable Sneddon stated
that he had seven months policing experience in general duties. During that
time, he had
attended at the scene of about 10 motor vehicle collisions.
(b) Probationary Constable Sneddon and Senior Constable Doroszuk were
“patrolling off” another job when their vehicle
was flagged down by
a person who informed them that there had been an accident on Pittwater Road,
Collaroy. They arrived at the scene
of the motor accident at about 5:10 pm.
(c) Probationary Constable Sneddon stated that the motor accident location
was in the northbound lane on Pittwater Road, Collaroy
just south of Frazer
(d) In response to a question about the investigations Probationary Constable
Sneddon conducted, he responded:
“So, we attended. There was an ambulance already called for [the
Claimant] from another motorist. I believe he was an off-duty
ambulance driver
that just quickly stopped to call the ambulance and then went to work. We spoke
to a witness there who said that
he was travelling behind a bus. There was a
ball kicked onto the road, because of the – because of the child. [sic]
the ball onto the road in front of the bus. And then, two guys that she
believed to be intoxicated ran in front of the bus. And,
[the Claimant]
attempted to brake and just laid the bike down. So, that’s what we were
told there. Then we got a form of demand
off [the Claimant] at his address about
ten minutes later. And, his version appeared to be the same as the
witness’. So, it
was pretty cut and dry. There was [sic] no other vehicles
involved. So, that was it.”
(e) Probationary Constable Sneddon stated that the Claimant was in lane 2
travelling northbound on Pittwater Road, Collaroy behind
a B-Line bus. The
Claimant stated to him that he “went to brake when the bus went to
brake”. The Claimant did a head
check. There was a car and he again braked
heavily and laid the motorcycle down to the right. There was no other impact.
Probationary Constable Sneddon, nor Senior Constable Doroszuk observed
any children in the area kicking a ball or any intoxicated
persons. He
volunteered that those persons may have walked off.
(f) Probationary Constable Sneddon read out to the investigator the statement
he had taken in his police notebook from the Claimant,
which has already been
quoted at [47] above.
(g) Probationary Constable Sneddon read out to the investigator the statement
he had taken in his police notebook from RS, which has
already been quoted at
[65] above.
(h) Probationary Constable Sneddon stated that the Claimant had been issued
with a ticket for negligent driving because “he
has braked back and
The Claimant
wrote back [presumably in response to receiving the ticket] and informed police
defended the charge and the ticket was
(i) Probationary Constable Sneddon provided a description of the accident
scene, which was consistent with the evidence, namely, three
lanes northbound
and southbound; a straight section of the road; sealed bitumen surface in good
condition; and streetlights were
(j) Probationary Constable Sneddon stated that he did not believe there were
any CCTV cameras in the area. However, when the Claimant
was “fighting the
, he obtained still
photos from the bus CCTV footage. Whilst the still photos were dark, they did
depict someone possibly running
across the road and the Claimant riding his
motorcycle behind the bus. He stated that the Claimant alleged that the photos
an oil slick on the road that came into play when he was braking.
Probationary Constable Sneddon believed that the traffic sergeant
went out to
the scene of the motor accident after the Claimant made the allegation in
respect of the oil slick and inspected the
roadway. It was his understanding
that the traffic sergeant was of the opinion that there was no oil slick. The
inspection took place
a couple of weeks after the motor accident. Probationary
Constable Sneddon stated that the police did not believe that there could
been an oil slick present on the roadway at the time of the accident.
(k) Probationary Constable Sneddon opined that the cause of the motor
accident was someone running across the road; the bus hitting
its brakes to
avoid a collision; the Claimant having nowhere to go, braking as heavily as he
could, forcing the motorcycle at the
front to dip down and lay to the side. In
response to the question as to who the police considered was at fault,
Probationary Constable
Sneddon responded:
“The person that’s [sic] ran onto the road that’s [sic]
caused the collision to – well, that’s [sic]
caused the bus to brake
heavily, that’s [sic] then had a – an effect moving
(l) In response to the question as to whether there was anything the Claimant
could have done to avoid the accident, Probationary
Constable Sneddon
“Without seeing it, being there, no, I don’t believe
The bus CCTV footage
bus CCTV footage demonstrated the following:
(a) At 17:08:38, the
Claimant is observed on his motor cycle making a left turn from Jenkins Street
into lane 2 of Pittwater Road
northbound.
(b) At 17:08:40, the Claimant’s motorcycle is observed moving from lane
2 to lane 3 in Pittwater Road.
(c) At 17:08:42, the Claimant’s motorcycle
appears to be accelerating. At this point, the bus is recorded to be travelling
56 km/h and the motor cycle appears to be catching up to it.
(d) At 17:08:43, the Claimant is observed moving from lane 3 to lane 2 in
Pittwater Road. Contrary to the Insurer’s submission,
I observed the
Claimant perform a head check at this time. It was difficult to see because of
the motorcycle’s headlight glaring
into the bus CCTV camera and it took
many reviews of the footage to spot. At about the same time, an adult male in a
black cap, black
long sleeve top and yellow trousers is observed running from
lane 1 in Pittwater Road following a ball, across lane 2 and partly
into lane 3,
where he is seen to control the ball with his right foot and kick the ball back
in the direction it came from and then
run back. At about the same time,
passengers in the bus are observed to be bracing themselves. At this point, the
bus is recorded
to be travelling at 53 km/h.
(e) At 17:08:44, the Claimant’s motor cycle
is observed to commence leaning to the Claimant’s right. The Claimant is
to lose control of his motorcycle.
(f) At 17:08:45, the Claimant and his motor cycle are observed to slide on
the roadway to the Claimant’s right and out of view
of the rear bus CCTV
(g) At 17:08:49, the Claimant is observed sitting in lane 3, nearer lane 2
than the median strip. The motorcycle is observed to be
completely within lane 3
lying on its right side, immediately behind a motor vehicle indicating to make a
right turn into Frazer
(h) Between 17:08:44 and 17:08:49, the speed of the bus had decreased to
30 km/h. Thereafter, the bus continued to reduce its speed
until it reached
10 km/h before continuing on with its journey. The bus did not appear to have
come to a complete stop.
still photographs taken from the bus CCTV
did not add anything to
the observations made above.
this case, the bus CCTV footage was of assistance and I have considered it
together with the other evidence available to me.
Consideration
and findings
respect of Probationary Constable Sneddon’s evidence, I do not place much
weight on his opinions as to the cause of the motor
accident or whether the
Claimant could have done anything else to avoid the accident.
Probationary
Constable Sneddon is an inexperienced police officer on general duties, who has
only attended about 10 motor accidents.
He is not an expert witness. He took a
statement in his notebook from the Claimant and RS at the accident scene. He
and/or Senior
Constable Doroszuk then charged the Claimant with negligent
driving presumably, based on the police notebook statements. After receiving
representations from the Claimant, the police withdrew the infringement notice.
Later, in his interview with the investigator, Probationary
Constable Sneddon
came to the view that the adult male running onto the road caused the bus to
brake heavily, in turn causing the
Claimant to brake heavily and fall off his
motorcycle. These matters, on their own, are not determinative. Probationary
Sneddon did not witness the accident. RS did. Unsurprisingly, the
adult male who ran onto the roadway disappeared before the police
arrived at the
scene. The off duty ambulance officer, who stopped to render assistance, left
the scene to go to work before the police
were able to take his statement. I
must assess the contributions of the respective parties based on the evidence
before me and by
applying the relevant legislation and legal principles referred
to above to that evidence.
short statement of RS in the police notebook is unchallenged. She observed a
child of about 11 or 12 years of age kick a ball
onto Pittwater Road and a
“guy” run onto the road to get the child’s ball. The bus
“slammed” on its
brakes. The motorcycle “hit” its brakes
and its rider went over the handlebar off to the side. Consistent with
evidence is the bus CCTV footage depicting an adult male running onto
the western side of Pittwater Road near the intersection of
Frazer Street.
Claimant’s accident description in his application for personal injury
benefits dated 7 June 2019 was inconsistent with
his police notebook statement
taken on 2 June 2019 and his statement to the investigator dated 28 August 2019.
In the application
for personal injury benefits, he did not refer to changing
back from lane 3 to lane 2 in Pittwater Road immediately prior to coming
motorcycle.
issue which muddied the waters occurred after the Claimant attended the
Leichardt offices of the STA to view the bus CCTV footage,
when he interpreted a
mark on the roadway, slightly off centre in lane 2, to be an oil slick. On my
viewing, the mark appeared exaggerated
in the motorcycle’s headlight. The
motorcycle appeared to drive straight over the mark on the roadway at the time
the Claimant
lost control. It was difficult to ascertain what the mark was, but
I am satisfied that it was not an oil slick. It is unlikely that
officers and the Claimant would failed to have noticed an oil slick in the
aftermath of the accident. In any event, the
Claimant did not seek to advance
that case in submissions.
the inconsistencies referred to above and the “oil slick”
distraction, I accept the Claimant as a witness of truth,
who did his best to
provide an account of the facts leading up to the motor accident.
value of contemporaneous evidence has been repeatedly endorsed by the courts. In
Onassis and Calogeropoulos v
Pearce said of documentary evidence:
“It is a truism, often
used in accident cases, that with every day that passes the memory becomes
fainter and the imagination
becomes more active. For that reason a witness,
however honest, rarely persuades a Judge that his present recollection is
to that which was taken down in writing immediately after the
accident occurred. Therefore, contemporary documents are always of
importance.”
Despite their brevity, I have placed considerable weight on the police
notebook statements of the Claimant and RS because of their
contemporaneous
nature. In addition to the contemporaneous evidence referred to above, the bus
CCTV footage was of assistance. The
Claimant had the opportunity to refresh his
memory by viewing the bus CCTV footage prior to providing his statement to the
investigator on 28 August 2019.
respect of the bus CCTV footage, I have summarised my observations of the
footage at [78] above. The Claimant submitted that the
speed shown on the CCTV
footage was incorrect; not calibrated correctly; had a lag effect; and gave an
incorrect impression. I agree
with the Insurer’s submission that the
Claimant’s submission in this regard is merely an assertion unsupported by
expert evidence. I agree with the Insurer’s submission that, after the
Claimant turned the corner from Jenkins Street into
Pittwater Road and came into
view of the CCTV footage, he changed lanes and then appeared to accelerate.
Except for the Claimant’s
submission that he was not accelerating, the bus
CCTV footage was consistent with his evidence.
is no evidence by an accident reconstruction expert in this case and I do not
intend to carry out mathematical calculations
as to speed and distance. That is
a matter for an expert. I must consider the evidence I have before me.
make the following findings in relation to the motor
(a) On Sunday, 2 June 2020, the Claimant was riding his
motor cycle and made a left turn from Jenkins Street, Collaroy into lane 2
middle lane) on Pittwater Road, Collaroy northbound.
(b) Soon after turning into Pittwater Road, the Claimant observed the bus
ahead of him in lane 2 and, not wanting to be behind the
bus, moved from lane 2
to lane 3 (the lane closest to the median strip) and began accelerating.
(c) Soon afterwards, the Claimant observed a vehicle in lane 3 ahead of him
with its right indicator operating on the approach to
the intersection with
Frazer Street. Not wanting to get stuck behind the vehicle in lane 3, that he
presumed was going to turn right,
the Claimant did a head check and moved from
lane 3 back into lane 2. The Claimant was about 40 metres behind the bus at this
At or about the same time, a child kicked a ball onto Pittwater Road,
near the intersection of Frazer Street. An adult male ran onto
the western side
of Pittwater Road in front of approaching traffic (including the bus) to
retrieve the ball. The driver of the bus
applied his brakes heavily to avoid
colliding with the adult male, who had run onto the western side of Pittwater
(d) When the Claimant looked back ahead of him, he
observed that the bus in lane 2 and the vehicle in lane 3 had decelerated
significantly.
The Claimant applied his front brake and slightly touched his
rear brake. The front tyre of his motorcycle lost grip causing the
Claimant to
lose control and the motor cycle fell to the right.
(e) The cause of the motor accident was contributed to by the sudden and
unexpected actions of the adult male running onto the roadway
in front of the
bus, which caused the bus to apply its brakes heavily, resulting in the Claimant
having to apply his brakes unexpectedly.
(f) The cause of the motor accident was also contributed to by the
Claimant’s failure to keep a proper lookout and a failure
to keep his
motor cycle under control.
(g) The Claimant was not wholly at fault in causing the motor accident.
have weighed up the respective acts of negligence of the parties involved. I
find on the evidence that the Claimant’s contribution
to the motor
accident is not greater than the 61% mostly at fault threshold in sections
3.11(2) and 3.28(2) of the MAI Act. Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the Insurer
has not discharged its onus to establish that the motor accident was caused
wholly or mostly by the
fault of the Claimant for the reasons stated
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
is a dispute between the Claimant and the Insurer in respect of the recovery of
legal costs under section 8.10 of the MAI Act.
8.10 of the MAI Act relevantly provides:
8.10 Recovery of
costs and expenses in relation to claims for statutory benefits
(1) A claimant for statutory benefits is (subject to this section) entitled
to recover from the insurer against whom the claim is
made the reasonable and
necessary legal costs, and other costs and expenses, incurred by the claimant in
connection with the claim.
Other costs and expenses include the cost of medical
and other tests and reports.
(2) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the
maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section
(including any matters for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and necessary
legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
regulations or the Dispute Resolution Service.
(4) The Dispute Resolution Service can permit payment of legal costs incurred
by a claimant but only if satisfied that –
(a) the claimant is under a legal disability, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant.
8.10 of the MAI Act confers a costs power on DRS assessors not previously held
by CARS assessors under the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
1 Part 1, Clause 3(2)(a) - (m) of the Regulation sets the maximum costs
recoverable for legal services in various miscellaneous
claims assessment
matters. Schedule 1 Part 1, Clause 3(1) of the Regulation provides that the
maximum costs for legal services provided
to a claimant or an insurer in
connection with an assessment under Division 7.6 of the Act involving a dispute
miscellaneous claims assessment matter are 16 monetary units
(to a maximum of 60 monetary units per claim).
Claimant sought, under section 8.10 (4)(b) of the MAI Act,
costs for legal services in excess of those provided
for in Schedule 1 Part 1, Clause 3 of the Regulation by relying on the
discretionary
power conferred on an assessor to order costs beyond the regulated
amount if “exceptional circumstances exist that justify
payment of legal
costs incurred by the claimant”. The Claimant referred to
AAI Limited
trading as GIO v Moon
) in support of his application.
Claimant submitted that the circumstances of this particular case are
exceptional because:
(a) The circumstances of the motor accident
gave rise to a complex set of factual and legal circumstances which were clearly
the normal.
(b) The liability documents obtained, considered and relied upon by the
Claimant were extensive, culminating in an application to
DRS consisting of 124
(c) The circumstances of the motor accident and its cause were the subject of
conjecture, which has been somewhat clarified by the
provision of the bus CCTV
footage of the incident. However, the Insurer continued to maintain that the
Claimant was wholly at fault,
even after reviewing the bus CCTV footage that
showed the pedestrian venturing onto the roadway in front of the bus.
(d) Whether the Claimant had any basis for the claim for statutory benefits
was a complex legal issue, noting the factual scenario
of the motor accident,
highlighted by the substantive submissions relied upon by the Claimant. The
submissions took considerable
time to prepare. The research and analysis which
precipitated the preparation of the submissions was extensive. Noting the
infancy of the current CTP scheme, a similar case with similar issues
had been agitated in
, which the Claimant had to thoroughly review
and consider.
(e) Further, submissions on legal costs and disbursements took considerable
review and preparation to determine whether the Claimant
was consigned to the
draconian regulated legal costs or whether he was able to raise an argument for
additional legal costs to be
awarded to him. This involved additional research
and particularly careful consideration of
(f) The work required and undertaken on the Claimant’s behalf in the
prosecution of the DRS application clearly exceeded the
maximum costs allowed
under the regulations by many multiples. There are clearly exceptional
circumstances which exist in relation
to the application entitling the Claimant
to seek costs for legal services under section 8.10 (4)(b) of the MAI Act.
Insurer disputed that the Claimant is entitled to costs for legal services in
excess of those provided for in Schedule 1 Part
1, Clause 3 of the Regulation.
Further, the Insurer submitted that the Claimant’s legal representative is
limited to the regulated
costs in connection with legal services provided for
the current miscellaneous assessment.
Insurer submitted that the present miscellaneous assessment did not warrant a
finding of exceptional circumstances, resulting
in the exercise of a discretion
to order reasonable and necessary costs beyond the regulated for the following
(a) The matter did not involve an unusual degree of factual
and/or legal complexity. It was a regular liability dispute.
(b) The matter did not require an audio visual assessment conference and was
limited to two teleconferences and written submissions.
(c) The Claimant’s lawyers had the benefit of the bus CCTV footage,
which was quite rare in liability disputes and clearly shows
leading case addressing section 153(1) of the MAC Act and the “exceptional
case” provision was
San v Rumble (No
). Campbell
JA, with whom Beazley JA and Ipp JA concurred, relevantly stated at
“A litigant who seeks to have a court displace, under
Section 153(1), the regime that Section 151 creates, bears the onus of
facts and presenting arguments that persuade the court that it is appropriate to
make such an order. In deciding whether
it is an “exceptional case”
within the meaning of Section 153(1), the court needs to find that the
circumstances of the
instant case are unusual or out of the ordinary, whether
that unusualness or being out of the ordinary arises from qualitative or
quantitative factors. But, to adopt
, the case need not be one that
is unique, unprecedented or very rare. The conclusion that the case is
exceptional can arise in any
of the ways identified by Rares J in
Beyond that, it seems to me, it is not possible for general guidance. As the New
Zealand courts have found concerning the discretion
that was the subject of
, it will be necessary to approach each application by a careful
consideration of the facts of the individual case.”
statement of principle relied on by Rares J
in Ho v Professional Services
Review Committee No 295
at [26] was that exceptional
circumstances:
“... can include a single exceptional matter, a
combination of exceptional factors or a combination of ordinary factors which,
although individually of no particular significance, when taken together, are
seen as exceptional.”
, Wright J envisaged at [99] that a matter may be exceptional because
it involves an unusual degree of factual or legal complexity
or for some other
reason, requires the Claimant to incur more substantial legal costs.
have carefully considered the facts of this case and the submissions the
Claimant made that sought to persuade me to exercise my
discretion to order
costs for legal services in excess of those provided for in Schedule 1 Part 1,
Clause 3 of the Regulation. I
am not satisfied that any of the factors
individually raised by the Claimant in his submissions or any combination of
them, or when
taken together can be seen as exceptional. Accordingly, I decline
to exercise the discretion conferred on me under section 8.10(4)(b)
referral from DRS referred to two miscellaneous claims assessment matters that
required my assessment, namely, whether for the
purposes of section 3.11 the
motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the injured person
and whether for the purposes
of section 3.28 the motor accident was caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the injured person.
my understanding of Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3 of the Regulation, the Claimant
is entitled to the costs in each of those disputes
subject to the cap of 60
monetary units.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the Claimant is entitled to the payment of legal costs at
the regulated maximum in each dispute.
In accordance with section 8.3(4) and
section 8.10(3) of the MAI Act, I permit the Claimant to recover from the
Insurer the reasonable
and necessary costs associated with the statutory
benefits claim as allowed under the Regulation on each of the disputes in this
matter as follows:
(a) Dispute under Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause
3(2)(d) of the Regulation: 16 monetary units or $1,660 plus GST; and,
(b) Dispute under Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3(2)(e) of the Regulation: 16
monetary units or $1,660 plus GST.
I allow costs in the total sum of $3,320 plus GST (being $3,652 inclusive of
My determination of the Miscellaneous Claim is as
the purposes of section 3.11 of the MAI Act, the motor accident was not caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the Claimant.
the purposes of section 3.28 of the MAI Act, the motor accident was not caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the Claimant.
The amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in accordance
with the Regulation is $3,652 inclusive of GST.
Anthony Scarcella
Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
Podrebersek v Australian
Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
[1985] HCA 34
Pennington v
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Stapley v Gypsum Mines
[1953] UKHL 4
[1953] AC 663
Smith v McIntyre
[1958] TASStRp 11
[1958] Tas SR 36
Broadhurst v
[1976] VicRp 15
[1976] VR 208
Hallowell v The Nominal
[1983] Qld R 266
, per Jones
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
A7 at pages 83 and 84
of the police notebook
A7 at pages 81 and 82 of
the police notebook
A8 at page 6 at
A8 at page 7 at
A8 at page 8 at
A* at page 9 at
Onassis and
Calogeropoulos v Vergottis
[1968] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 403 at
AAI Limited trading
as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC
San v Rumble (No
[2007] NSWCA 259
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.989 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter