URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2012/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v PHUNG (No. 3) [2012] NSWDT 4 (20 November 2012)
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CARE COMPLAiNTS COMMISSION
VAN THIEN PHUNG
An Inquiry pursuant to the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(“the National
Law”) as to Protective Orders consequent upon a finding by the Dental
Tribunal on 18 May 2012, that the
Respondent was guilty of Professional
Misconduct:
HCCC v Phung (No.1)
[2012] 1 NSWDT.
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
PURSUANT TO SCHEDULE 5D, CLAUSE 7, OF THE
NATIONAL LAW, THE TRIBUNAL HAS MADE A NON-PUBLICATION ORDER IN RESPECT OF THE
NAME OF ANY
PATIENT OR ANY MATERIAL WHICH MAY IDENTIFY ANY
Decision date
: 20 November 2012.
HCCC v Phung (No.3) [2012] NSWDT 4
Hearing dates
26, 27 September 2012
: NSW Health Care
Complaints Commission (Complainant);
Dr. Mark Van Thien Phung
(Respondent dentist)
: Mr. Peter Dwyer, Deputy
Chairperson
Dr. George Wing, AM (Dentist Member)
Lang (Dentist Member)
Dr. Catherine Berglund (Lay
Appearances
: Mr. P. Griffin of Counsel, instructed by Ms.
P. Hooke, Solicitor (HCCC) for the Complainant;
Mr. G. Gregg of
Counsel, instructed by Ms. F. Dransfield, Solicitor, for the
: Dentist—patient with work-related
injury—failure to obtain specialist
opinion—diagnosis—treatment plan—endodontic
treatment—crown and bridgework—unsatisfactory professional
misconduct—protective orders—conditions on
registration including
Legislation
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No.86a
Liability Act
Cases cited
HCCC v Phung (No.1)
[2012] 1 NSWDT;
Dean v Phung
Richter v Walton
, unreported, NSWCA 15 July
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
; (1938) 60
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
[2012] NSWCA 80
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Director-General
Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
Ex parte Tziniolis Re medical
Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
Kalil v Bray
1 NSWLR 256
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA
Law Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Dawson v Law
Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
a period of two (2) years commencing upon the expiration of the period of thirty
(30) days from the date of this decision, the
Respondent is to accept a Mentor
selected by him and approved by the Dental Council of New South
Wales (“the Council”); and such approved Mentor is to
report to the
Council in such manner and at such times as the Council shall determine but not
less than at monthly intervals; and
further, such mentor is to be provided with
and take into consideration, prior to commencing and during, such mentoring
Tribunal’s reasons for its decisions concerning its findings
with respect to the Complaints and to these consequential protective
Orders; and
the Respondent is to be responsible for the mentor’s costs necessarily
incurred by participation in the above mentoring
each of the three (3) dental registration years following this decision, the
Respondent must complete not less than thirty
(30) hours of Continuing
Professional Development (“CPD”) ten (10) hours of which are to be
by attendance at such CPD
programs; and twenty four (24) hours of the total 30
hours required, must address programs which are clinically or scientifically
based; evidence of completion of such CPD as required above, is to be provided
to the Council in such manner and form as determined
the period of twelve (12) months commencing upon the expiration of thirty (30)
days from the date of the Tribunal’s decision,
the Respondent is to
participate in three (3) counselling sessions with a person or persons, to be
nominated by the Council, to address
skills relevant to achieving effective
patient communication including responding to challenging communication
situations and managing
patient expectations; and the Respondent is to be
responsible for the costs of such counselling sessions;
such time and place to be determined by the Council, the Respondent is to
deliver a presentation to the Council or to such Members
thereof as nominated by
the Council, addressing the matters the subject of the Complaints as described
in the Tribunal’s Reasons
for Decision concerning its findings of
Unsatisfactory Conduct and Professional Misconduct relevant to such Complaints;
Respondent is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed; if agreement cannot
be reached, either party may have the matter
of costs re-listed for assessment
by the Tribunal;
REASONS FOR DECISION
Inquiry was conducted to consider the Tribunal’s Orders consequent upon
its findings in
HCCC v Phung
(No.1) [2012] 1 NSWDT, that the Respondent a
registered dental practitioner, was guilty of professional misconduct. The
current inquiry
commenced on 25 July 2012, but due to the illness of
Respondent’s Counsel, was adjourned; and resumed on 26 September
was foreshadowed by Complainant’s Counsel on the first day of the
ultimately adjourned inquiry, that an application may be
made to the Tribunal
pursuant to section 176C of the
Health Practitioner National Law (NSW)
(“the National Law”) to the effect that if the Tribunal forms an
opinion that its decision will impose an appreciable
burden on an identifiable
third party in connection with the Respondent’s practice, it must give
such party an opportunity
to make submissions to the Tribunal with respect to
such decision which the Tribunal must take into account before making any such
decision. It appeared from Counsel that no decided authority was available
concerning the interpretation or application of such provision.
In summary, the
Complainant’s reference to the above provision was in the context of its
having formulated some “...proposed
conditions...” after receiving
the Respondent’s written evidence for this second stage inquiry, to be
imposed on the
Respondent should contrary to its primary submission, the
Tribunal does not order cancellation of his registration; and relevant
extent any such conditions might impose a burden on the Council. Counsel
foreshadowed “...discussions between the...[Complainant
HCCC]...and the
Council which can resolve apparent difficulties at the moment.” [TS, page
154]. Ultimately, prior to the resumed
Inquiry, the Complainant advised the
Tribunal that this matter would not be further
The evidence
Complainant sought to tender a decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal
Dean v Phung
[2012] NSWCA 223
concerning the litigation conducted by
Patient “A” so identified in the earlier Tribunal hearing and
findings (“the
patient”) and including the Court of Appeal’s
determination relevant to the NSW
Civil Liability Act
, including the
interpretation of
(1) (a). The Respondent objected to the tender and
following argument and submissions, the Tribunal declined to admit the decision
into evidence.
Documentary
evidence comprising a binder of documents produced under Summons by the Dental
Council of New South Wales (“the
Council”) being a complaints
history relevant to the Respondent, was tendered by the Complainant and
following resolution of
Respondent’s objections to certain documents
therein, was admitted into evidence as Exhibit C-1.
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal; his Statement dated 10 July 2012
was without objection, admitted into evidence as
Exhibit R-1 together with four
character references in support of Respondent admitted as Exhibits R-2, R-3, R-4
and R-5; and a report
of a dentist, Dr. John Berne dated 24 July 2012, was
admitted without objection as Exhibit R-6. The Complainant sought to
cross-examine
the Respondent.
tendered by Respondent and admitted as Exhibit R-7, was a Memorandum by Dr.
Patrick J. Dalton, Inspector, NSW Dental Board (“the
Board”), to the
Registrar of the Board, dated 7 March 2009, recording his visit to the
Respondent’s dental practice on
6 March 2009 during which Dr. Dalton
selected at random, “six patient cards...All of which were being kept to
the standard
required and as advised at my last visit.” Dr. Dalton
recorded his informing the Respondent that his records were found to
satisfactory and that the Board would be informed accordingly.
the request of Respondent’s Counsel and he told the Tribunal, to avoid the
imposition of any costs not referable to the Inquiry,
a medical certificate in
respect of Counsel’s illness for the period 25 to 27 July 2012 inclusive
and his consequent inability
to appear at the Inquiry in such period, was
admitted as Exhibit R-8 relevant to any Order for Costs sought by the
Complainant to
be made in its favour. The Certificate was admitted without
objection, as Exhibit R-8.
article entitled “
Statistics in the Age of Medicare
to by a Tribunal Dental Member during its inquiry, a copy of which was provided
to the parties, was at the Complainant’s
request, admitted as a Tribunal
Exhibit T-1, to distinguish it from the parties’
Samson Chan a registered dental practitioner with surgeries in the city of
Sydney and at Campsie, a Sydney suburb, gave evidence
by telephone, concerning
his willingness to offer employment to the Respondent; and to act as a Mentor to
him and provide written
reports to the Council as may be required, should the
Tribunal make relevant orders and conditions to require
Respondent’s evidence
Respondent’s
statement included his background as a political refugee from Vietnam in 1981
followed by a two-year period in
a refugee camp in Hong Kong. With some of his
family members, he was assisted to resettlement in Sydney as a political refugee
June 1983; he then completed a two month intensive English course which
allowed him to enter High School and complete three months
study in Year 11, in
1983; he completed his Higher School Certificate in 1984 and gained entry to the
Faculty of Dentistry at the
University of Sydney from which after completing the
five year undergraduate course, he graduated as a Bachelor of Dental Surgery
1989 and was registered as a dentist, in December 1989.
the period 1989-1991 he served as an employed dentist in private practice with
Dr. Simon Chan (referred to above) in his then
practices at Sylvania and
Campsie; and by Dr. Richard Chen in his practice at Drummoyne. In 1991, he
commenced practice as a sole
practitioner at his surgery at Beverly Hills where
he continues to practice. He told the Tribunal how much effort his wife had
contributed
to his surgery and how he values this attachment, not wishing to
lose it. It was this practice that the patient attended during 2002
relevant to the complaints the subject of the Tribunal’s earlier findings.
Respondent was married in 1993 and subsequently they had five daughters
currently aged 10, 12, 14, 16 and 17 years. His father
died in 2009 following
which his mother a pensioner, then aged 85years, took up residence with the
Respondent. In 2010 his wife died
suddenly. Given his family and related,
responsibilities he has incurred considerable debt the particulars of which,
were outlined
during his evidence before the Tribunal.
Respondent told the Tribunal he did not challenge the evidence of the experts
called by the Complainant and he accepted their
criticisms; and that the
treatment provided to the patient was decided in part on the fact that the
patient had suffered an accident
and that he regrets having provided such
treatment; accepting that he should have referred the patient to a specialist
continuing the treatment; which he “...regrets every single
day.” The Respondent accepted that he failed to develop a
comprehensive
treatment plan for the patient, which he again, linked to his failure to refer
the patient for specialist opinion;
and he told the Tribunal he carried out the
treatment because the patient was in pain. He now prepares such a plan for all
even for a single ‘filling’. He told the Tribunal of his
various, continuing professional development (“CPD”)
including as a Member of the Australian Dental Association (“ADA”)
and journal reading.
his current dental practice, the Respondent said he attends it on average about
20 to 25 hours weekly, about four to five
hours daily on each of Monday to
Friday inclusive; and of which he sees one patient for about four hours with the
balance of such
time spent attending to sterilization and other,
practice-related responsibilities. He told the Tribunal of his current net
from his dental practice and his family-related, financial support
benefits; and that currently he has no patients attending his
practice. Prior to
his wife’s sudden death his practice was a busy one, seeing on average, 25
to 30 patients weekly during
2009 and the first part of 2010; and he worked
every day, 10 hours daily, Monday to Saturday. Since his wife’s death he
the Tribunal “...I really go down...really go downhill.” He
told the Tribunal he has improved his record keeping and
now writes more
thoroughly.
Respondent confirmed his willingness to accept any conditions the Tribunal might
impose on his registration as a dentist. When
questioned by the Dental Members
patient was in effect
thankful for the treatment he provided including for the
benefit that he could sleep. He expressed his intention to build-up his
practice; and that he found working for other dentists as he had done prior to
commencing in his own practice “...very restricted...”
He currently
has no receptionist or dental nurse; and that in the past he has employed two to
three dentists at his practice but
each of them had left to start on their own;
asked about his current dental practice, patient numbers and income, his
financial worries and his increased family obligations
following his
wife’s sudden death, the Respondent became distressed interrupting his
evidence. The Chairperson explained to
Counsel, the Tribunal’s concern by
addressing its questions to the Respondent, in considering possible, protective
might make; that given the current state of his dental practice,
including such clinical contact as he described, together with his
financial burdens, that any conditions on his registration the Tribunal might
decide, could fail to achieve their intended
response to the issues raised by the Tribunal, Complainant’s Counsel noted
the Respondent’s declared acceptance (as
recorded in his Statement in
evidence) of conditions on his practice; and submitted in effect, that some
conditions imposed by a
Tribunal carry with them a financial burden; and that
the Respondent’s financial and personal situation are not factors relevant
to the Tribunal’s primary task “...despite the sympathy we might
Tribunal adjourned early to allow Respondent’s Counsel and solicitor an
opportunity to discuss relevant issues including
those raised by the Tribunal
above, with the Respondent. Complainant’s Counsel did not object to such
an opportunity being
given provided that an outline of any evidence was made
available to the Complainant to allow it to make any inquiries that might
resumption, Respondent’s Counsel advised the Tribunal that having taken
instructions, a summary thereof had been provided
to the Complainant; and he
informed the Tribunal that a significant burden on the Respondent was likely to
be soon lessened in that
as the Respondent’s daughter had completed her
HSC examinations and was learning to drive, she was willing to take each of
other four children to and from their respective schools; this would allow the
Respondent further time and opportunity to practise.
Further, that the
Respondent was willing to bring to his current practice, another dentist to
occupy the second clinical room; and
the financial consideration derived, would
assist Respondent’s rental obligations as he would like to retain such
given its emotional attachment because of the assistance given by his
late wife in setting it up.
Respondent’s
Counsel informed the Tribunal that freed from some of his current family
responsibilities, the Respondent was confident
that he could obtain work
“...on a commission basis...” with Dr. Samson Chan, referred to
above, given his busy and extensive,
practice conducted at two locations; with
the Respondent estimating that his patient practice hours would increase by 15
to 20 hours
weekly but if more was available to him then he would accept it; and
the Respondent was confident in his capacity to comply with
any educational
courses the Tribunal might order as a condition on his registration; the
Respondent was confident he could obtain
a mentor acceptable to the Council and
willing to assist him, should the Tribunal order mentoring as a condition on his
registration.
Both Complainant and Respondent agreed that any such mentor would
need to be approved by the Council. Respondent’s Counsel
confirmed the
willingness of Dr. John Berne whose letter was in evidence, to act as a mentor
to the Respondent if the Tribunal made
such an order.
Complainant’s
Counsel expressed his concern to the Tribunal that the above developments had
been introduced late in the Inquiry
without the usual opportunity being made
available to the Complainant to make its own enquiries, relevantly; however,
following discussion
including the unavailability of Complainant’s Counsel
on the following day which had also been allocated if needed for the
hearing, the Tribunal made arrangements for evidence from Dr. Chan to be taken
by telephone forthwith. In response to
the Tribunal’s enquiry,
Respondent’s Counsel did not seek to adduce any further evidence from the
Respondent; and Counsel
for the Complainant confirmed that he did not wish to
put anything further to the Respondent.
Evidence of
evidence taken by telephone, Dr Chan confirmed to the Tribunal that he had
practised full-time as a dentist since his graduation
in 1986; that he currently
had two dental practices, one at Campsie and the other in the Sydney CBD,
currently conducted with about
20 dentists, some full-time and others,
part-time; he was satisfied with the standard of the Respondent’s dental
he employed him about 15 years ago; and he confirmed that has had no
opportunity to observe the Respondent’s work as a dentist
since that time;
he was a guest at the Respondent’s wedding, which was his last personal
Chan told the Tribunal he was willing to provide the Respondent with dental work
as an “associate dentist”; and if
the Respondent wished, he could
offer him up to 40 hours weekly in such capacity; he was also willing to act as
a mentor of the Respondent
if the Tribunal ordered mentoring and that he would
be pleased to report to the Council as required; he appreciated that such role
would include from time to time, meeting with the Respondent to provide an
opportunity to advise him and to answer any questions
Respondent.
was confirmed by Dr. Chan that he had not yet seen a copy of the Complaint nor
the Tribunal’s findings or its Reasons for
Decision; he had received from
the Respondent an outline only, of the matter and that the Tribunal had found
him guilty of professional
misconduct, as they had spoken only briefly earlier
that day and their conversation has also included the availability of any work
Dr. Chan might be able to offer him; and whether he was prepared to act as the
Respondent’s mentor should the Tribunal order
it; he was also aware that
the subject matter of the complaint occurred nine to ten years
completion of Dr. Chan’s evidence, the Tribunal raised the need for him to
read and consider the Complaint, the findings
and its Reasons for Decision given
their obvious and important, relevance as Complainant’s Counsel had
stressed, in addressing
questions to Dr. Chan during his
to the Tribunal’s expressed concern above, Respondent’s Counsel
confirmed that a copy of each of the documents
referred to above, had been sent
to Dr. Chan earlier this day, to give him the opportunity read and be fully
familiar with them;
further, that Counsel’s instructing solicitor Ms.
Dransfield, had subsequently received a telephone call from Dr. Chan to the
effect that having read the above documents he re-emphasised his wish to help
the Respondent in the way he had described to the Tribunal
during his evidence;
confirming also that he can provide the Respondent with work; and that he
willingly accepted the role of mentor
should the Tribunal make such an
Chairperson requested that a written acknowledgement be obtained from Dr. Chan
confirming the above matters as conveyed to Ms.
Dransfield, by way of a letter,
a copy of which was to be provided to the Complainant and to the Tribunal.
Respondent’s Counsel
confirmed that the Tribunal’s request would be
attended to as soon as possible. Complainant’s Counsel accepted what had
been conveyed to Ms. Dransfield, by Dr. Chan as described
Ultimately,
the letter requested by the Tribunal was not received at the Tribunal Registry
until 30 October 2012, having been sent
in the form of an E-mail message from
Dr. Chan sent to Ms. Dransfield on 29 October 2012; additional to the Tribunal,
the Complainant’s
solicitor Ms. Hooke was also a recipient of the message
received by the Tribunal. The message was as
Dransfield,
I apologise for the late reply. I acknowledge that I
have received and read the Complaint document and Findings, which were
to me on 27 September
would also like to confirm that I am prepared to offer employment and act as a
mentor to Dr. Phung, which would involve meeting
Dr. Phung and for me to
forward written reports to the Dental Council of NSW.
If there is anything else that you need, please do not hesitate to contact
Complainant’s submissions—an outline
Complainant helpfully provided an Outline of its submissions which were
carefully considered by the Tribunal, in which were highlighted
the principles
applicable to the making of protective orders including the Tribunal’s
principal functions to promote and maintain
the highest standards of
professional conduct and ethics in the dental profession; with its ultimate role
being the protection of
the community.
emphasised the need of the community to be protected from the risk of the
Respondent repeating the misconduct found proven;
together with a deterrent
effect on others tempted to fall short of the requisite level of high standards;
and by the Tribunal’s
decision also, the need to encourage the maintenance
of high professional standards and of the community’s confidence, in the
profession.
cited a number of well-known NSW Court of Appeal decisions from which the above
principles described by Counsel, are derived;
also emphasised, that commensurate
with the “...great privileges conferred on ...[dentists]...”
is the foundation underlying those privileges together with their
obligations to maintain “...very high standards...”especially
dentists are permitted to work alone; Counsel in addressing the issue of
cited relevantly, the
Richter v Walton
, unreported, NSWCA 15 July 1993, a case concerning a
medical practitioner.
Complainant
submitted that the Respondent did not admit to professional misconduct during
the Tribunal’s inquiry nor to his
conduct being improper; and Counsel
referred to the Tribunal’s description, an “...extremely serious
nature, extent and
range of the Respondent’s failures...”
emphasising also, the evidence of the experts called by the Complainant,
condemnatory
of the Respondent’s treatment of the patient. The patient was
described by Counsel as “...vulnerable...” with no
knowledge of
dentistry; and emphasised that as he was not personally responsible for the
payment of the relevant dental services,
he “...had no idea that the
Respondent was charging excessive fees.” Responding to the
Tribunal’s question, Counsel
confirmed that the patient gave evidence in
the Supreme Court litigation proceedings; and as noted by the Tribunal, the
Complainant
did not call him to give evidence in the Tribunal’s
Tribunal’s findings were summarised by the Complainant; and it was
emphasised that by his treatment of the patient, the
Respondent did not possess
the character and attitudes appropriate to the privileges and opportunities
afforded to dentists. Questioned
by the Tribunal as to the basis of the
Complainant’s submissions above, concerning character, Counsel responded
that it was
based on the Respondent’s conduct in 2002-2003 as the
Complainant has no other evidence”...that goes directly to his
situation...” and that the onus therefore, shifts to the
Respondent.
Complainant
referred to its onus in establishing whether there is no real risk or an
acceptable risk, of repetition of further misconduct;
Counsel relied upon the
Johns v Law Society of New South Wales
(1982) 2 NSWLR 1
at 9-10: “...
the substance of the question whether
a strike off order should be made when the matter comes for decision some years
later is not
dissimilar to the question arising upon an application for
re-admission, namely whether it appears there is material before the court
lead it to conclude that the last proved unfitness had been changed to
.” Counsel submitted that the evidence before the Tribunal was
insufficient to satisfy it that there was little or no, risk
of recurrence of
further professional misconduct by the Respondent; and further submitted, that
Respondent had not displayed “...sufficient
awareness of his underlying
motivations or fails to acknowledge them.”
questioned what weight the Tribunal should give to the Respondent’s
expressions of contrition for his misconduct; and
emphasised the need for the
Tribunal relevant to the protection of the community, to consider the nature and
extent of the harm suffered
by the patient whom he treated.
to subjective elements, Complainant referred to those matters included in the
Respondent’s Statement in evidence, including
his refugee status and his
family and financial situations which, it was submitted have little or no,
relevance to the Tribunal’s
statutory duty to make protective orders;
although there was evidence before the Tribunal of personal, testimonial support
Respondent, there were none from professional referees. It was also
submitted that the mere effluxion of time cannot be relied upon
to establish
current suitability to practise; and that the absence of similar misconduct in
“...the intervening years...”
is not conclusive of this issue; nor
is the absence of any current conditions on the Respondent’s registration
conclusive of
the issue; nor are the two reports by the Board Inspector Dr.
Dalton conclusive.
Counsel’s reference to the last opinion expressed by Dr. Dalton favourable
to the Respondent as being “...three
years down the track...” and
the consequent need for the Tribunal to address the situation as at September
2012, the Chairperson
asked Complainant’s Counsel about the availability
of legislative provisions between 2003 and 2012 whether prior to or under
current National law such as in section 150 of the latter, whereby the Council
(or its predecessor the Board, as relevant) if
satisfied that the health and
safety of a person of the public demanded it, could have suspended the
respondent from practice. Counsel
agreed with the availability of such measures
which Councils can exercise “... if they take the view that they have been
that there is some justification...[but]...that is a matter totally
outside the control of the Health Care Complaints Commission...[i.e.
Complainant]...”.
Complainant’s
Counsel noted the Respondent’s evidence about his current practice
including his stated net income for the
financial year 2010-2011 and the
Respondent’s expectation that his net income for the financial year
2011-2012 would be similar.
Counsel submitted that the Respondent had not
adduced “...any independent expert evidence...” of his current
or quality of treatment.”
noted the agreement of both Complainant and Respondent, that if ordered by the
Tribunal, any mentor would need the approval
of the Council.
was the Complainant’s ultimate submission that the only appropriate order
was cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration.
Respondent’s
submissions—an outline
Tribunal was assisted by a written Outline of the Respondent’s submissions
and included them in its consideration of protective
Counsel referred to the Respondent’s admissions with respect to the
particulars of the complaints early in the first stage
of the Tribunal’s
inquiry and submitted, such thereby demonstrated insight; and submitted also,
that from the way in which
the Respondent instructed his legal representatives
to conduct his case before the Tribunal, insight could also be inferred; and
thereby also, the avoidance of any wasting of the Tribunal’s time; it was
also emphasised that the Tribunal’s finding
relevantly, was of
“improper” conduct and that it did not find such conduct to be
“unethical”.
was the Respondent’s submission that the Complainant had ignored what
Counsel described as the “...important temporal
matter...” that the
relevant conduct occurred nine to ten years ago during the period 2002-2003; and
further, that the Complainant
had not demonstrated, nor had there been any
finding by the Tribunal of, current unfitness to practise.
addressing the 2008 finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct by the Board,
Counsel submitted that the subject matter thereof,
was essentially the same as
the deficiencies identified in his treatment of the patient the subject of the
Tribunal’s findings
relevant to the current inquiry as to protective
orders; and Counsel noted that the conditions imposed by the Board in effect,
the Respondent from carrying out Crown and Bridgework or Endodontic
treatment, until such time as the Board was satisfied the Respondent
completed necessary re-training; and further submitted that all of its imposed
conditions were satisfactorily completed in 2008-2009,
Counsel also referred to other complaints within the Board and Council, the
relevant file in evidence before
the Tribunal and noted that none of them
required any conditions on the Respondent’s registration and that each of
resolved; referring also to the reports of the Board’s Inspector
Dr. Dalton, in evidence, favorable to the Respondent consequent
“unannounced” visits to his dental practice in 2008 and 2009; and
noting that the Respondent has been practising
since 2009, without any
conditions on his registration.
submitted that the Respondent would submit to and cooperate with, any conditions
the Tribunal might impose on his registration;
and that he was willing to
undertake “...subject to his means...”any educational courses
relevant to his practice, that
the Tribunal considered necessary; likewise, he
would accept a mentor with obligations to report on the Respondent’s
accepting also that any such mentor would need the approval of the
referred to the testimonial evidence before the Tribunal, supportive of the
Respondent’s character with two of such
referees, Father Chu and Father
Tran, also knowing the Respondent as dental patients, the latter having had the
opportunity to know
the Respondent as his dentist, since he opened his practice
was submitted that the Respondent having conceded his serious lack of experience
and judgment, in failing to refer the patient
for another opinion on the
patient’s condition and by in effect, responding to the patient’s
requests for treatment,
such conduct would not recur; and Counsel submitted,
there has been no similar recurrence since his treatment of the
his submissions, Counsel took the Tribunal to the evidence of Dr. Peppitt, a
specialist prosthodontist, called at the earlier
hearing by the Complainant, who
confirmed that in 1989 there were no barriers to newly graduated dentists
performing prosthodontics,
endodontic treatment and crown and bridgework, if
they felt comfortable in undertaking any such procedures. Counsel also referred
to the discussion between Dr. Peppitt and the Tribunal, which included his
expressed view that it would be useful for new graduates
to undergo further
training before being permitted to practice fully in all treatment modes. By
referring to Dr. Peppitt’s
views, Counsel emphasised that the Respondent
did not seek to “...shift any blame or responsibility for what...[the
Respondent]...did...but
that...[the Respondent]...was not helped by the
prevailing system.”
was the Respondent’s submission that the Respondent having
“...learnt his lesson and some insight; and there has (sic)
significant matters since...” the Tribunal can accept “...there are
reasonable inferences to be drawn that he
has been since, practising
appropriately and at an appropriate level and standard.” With respect to
this submission, the Tribunal
notes that since about 2010, it appears from his
evidence, that the Respondent has not been treating the number of patients he
attending to prior to his wife’s sudden death in
referred to a decision of the NSW Medical Tribunal:
HCCC v Dr. Bao-Quy
Nguyen-Phuoc
[No. 40028 of 2009] 7 December 2010, involving complaints
against a medical practitioner including the prescribing and self-administration
of certain controlled medications; after noting the Medical Tribunal’s
observations (Decision at page 16) that although the
practitioner’s
conduct was sufficiently serious to justify suspension or removal
from the Register...
does not mean that his name must be
Respondent’s Counsel emphasised what was also said by
the Medical Tribunal (ibid.): “
Even in cases of serious misconduct
deregistration does not necessarily follow if at the time of the hearing present
unfitness has
been demonstrated..
Accordingly, present
fitness is a relevant consideration.
” (Emphasis added): The Tribunal
notes in having reproduced the above extract from the Medical Tribunal’s
decision, that
in the present inquiry, the transcript of evidence (taken on 27
September 2012, at page 293, Line 9) has omitted the word
...” where it should appear immediately preceding the
demonstrated
...” as highlighted in the
above quote.
was the Respondent’s submission that even though in the above decision of
the Medical Tribunal the practitioner’s conduct
was considered serious and
that he had also been the subject of an earlier finding of inappropriate
practice by the
Professional Services Review Committee
and was required
to repay a significant sum to
, the practitioner was allowed to
continue practice subject to a range of
conditions.
Discussion & findings—Protective
Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence before it at this second stage
inquiry addressing protective orders to be determined
following its finding of
professional misconduct; and the submissions of the Complainant and
Respondent.
making its factual findings and its finding of professional misconduct, the
Tribunal applied the test enunciated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
; (1938) 60 CLR and accordingly, had regard for the
The seriousness of the
allegation made, the inherent likelihood of an occurrence of a given
description, or the gravity
of the consequences flowing from a particular
finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether
the issue has been proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Tribunal.
submitted by the Complainant and as found by the Tribunal in reaching its
finding of professional misconduct, the proven complaints
are extremely serious
and extend across a significant range of practice aspects. However, the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective
of the community not punitive of the
practitioner. Accordingly, it must have regard for the maintenance of
professional standards
to protect the standing and reputation of the profession
further to its protection of the community. Its protective jurisdiction
intended to serve as a deterrent—on the particular practitioner and on the
profession generally.
Complainant seeks an order for the cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration. It made no alternative submissions in
the event that the Tribunal
does not order cancellation; it was given an opportunity to do so. The
Respondent seeks in effect, that
the Respondent be allowed to continue practice
and will accept “any conditions” on his practice together with an
for him to have a mentor and to undertake educational
observed by the Medical Tribunal in
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
, where the court (
JA) said, at 638C: “
The gravity of professional
misconduct is not to be measured by reference to the worst cases, but by the
extent to which it departs
from the proper standards. If this is not done there
is a risk that the conduc
of the delinquents in a profession will
indirectly establish the standards applied by the
[2012] NSWCA 80
, referring to the words of
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
, the Court of Appeal said, at [30]
per Barrett JA:
His Honour agreed that other cases might be of value as
examples in indicating a range of appropriate orders but could not be seen
precedents.
” And at [33] “
Just as the characterization of
conduct as professional misconduct entails the exercise of judgment by a
specialist tribunal, so too,
it seems to me, does a decision about the order
that should be made where such conduct is proved.
Complainant’s Counsel also cited
(Ibid. at [34]) during its
submissions concerning a number of factors relevant to the Court’s
approach that should be undertaken
in cases like that to which its reasons were
addressed; the Tribunal notes that factor described in
since the predominant consideration is the protection of the
public, a decision can only be made by reference to the facts of the
case and by considering what measures are needed to ensure that the future
behaviour of the particular practitioner is
shaped in a way that is consistent
with that protection:
addressing the need (on appeal) for the Court’s proper assessment of a
Tribunal’s discretionary judgment, the Court
, referred to an
explanation of relevant matters given by
Director-General
Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v
[2009] NSWCA 102:
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
which included the following,
The punitive effects may be directly
relevant to the need for protection so that, in a particular case, there may be
a factual finding
that the harrowing experience of disciplinary proceedings,
together with the real threat of loss of livelihood, may have opened the
the individual concerned to the seriousness of his or her conduct so as to
diminish significantly the likelihood of its repetition
and to produce a level
of insight into his or her own character or misconduct which did not previously
” His Honour had earlier noted (Ibid.) that an order made to
protect the community may be “...
punitive in effect
punitive effects may be relevant in formulating a protective
observed by
Ex parte Tziniolis Re medical Practitioners
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
Reformation of character and of
behaviour can doubtless occur but their occurrence is not the usual but the
exceptional thing. One
cannot assume that a change has occurred merely because
some years have gone by and it is not proved that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards
of conduct and his attitudes, it must require clear
proof to show that some
years later he has established himself a different man...In such cases it has
been frequently said that a
heavy onus lies on the applicant.
the above context, and relevant also to what Respondent’s Counsel
described during submissions, as “the temporal element”,
Tribunal is mindful of the Complainant’s submission to the effect, that
there is little before the Tribunal to satisfy
it that there is little or nor
risk of an recurrence of further misconduct by the Respondent. The Tribunal also
notes the Respondent’s
submissions to the contrary, especially concerning
the similarity (to that relevant to the Tribunal’s finding of professional
misconduct under present consideration as to orders) of the subject matter of
another complaint, in 2008, in respect of which the
conditions imposed by the
Board consequent upon its finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
February 2008 were successfully
completed in 2008-2009, about four years ago;
and the absence of any conditions on the Respondent’s registration since
time to the present.
considering the so-called “temporal element” and the absence of
anything further by way of complaint since 2008-2009,
the Tribunal is mindful of
the Respondent’s evidence concerning the state of his practice since his
wife’s sudden death
in 2010. The Tribunal is not unmindful of the various
and continuing, burdens on the Respondent consequent upon the sudden loss of
wife including his considerable family and financial responsibilities and the
effects thereof, on his practice. However, the
Tribunal must, in fulfilling its
statutory responsibilities look to its paramount protective function, in
determining what in all
the circumstances, such protective function demands by
way of orders.
in the Tribunal’s inquiry, following the Respondent’s evidence
interrupted by his distress when questioned about
the nature of his dental
practice following his wife’s death, enquiries were made of Dr. Samson
Chan referred to above as to
whether given the nature of his extensive dental
practices at two locations, he may be able provide work to the Respondent; and
act as a mentor to him subject to the approval of the Council; and to
whatever requirements it may determine for a mentor to report
to it. It was Dr.
Chan amongst others, by whom the Respondent was employed for a period following
graduation and prior to commencing
in his own practice. It was also noted that
Dr. Chan was a guest at the Respondent’s wedding about 16 years ago but
not been in personal contact since that time. Respondent’s
Counsel in effect, submitted that such absence of contact over a
considerable
period, would be better for the success of any mentoring by Dr.
evidence also included a letter from Dr. John Berne an experienced dental
practitioner, to the effect that he was willing to act
as a mentor if mentoring
was ordered by the Tribunal and noting that he would require reimbursement for
his evidence to the Tribunal confirms, Dr. Chan is willing to act as a mentor of
the Respondent and is able to offer him as an
“associate” dentist,
an estimated, up to 40 hours of work weekly and is willing to comply with the
Council’s reporting
requirements as may be determined by it, if a relevant
order for mentoring, is made by the Tribunal. Subsequent to the Tribunal’s
inquiry concluding, with its decision reserved, Dr. Chan provided confirmation
by E-mail message to his solicitor copied to the Complainant
Tribunal, that he had read and considered the Complaint, the Tribunal’s
findings and its Reasons for Decision and
confirmed his willingness to assist
the Respondent as outlined above. The Tribunal was informed by the
Respondent’s Counsel,
of the anticipated lessening of one of the burdens
on the Respondent by his eldest daughter’s acceptance of a major
responsibility
as noted above.
provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered dental
practitioners and as such, it is an ‘
expert professional
” as another professional disciplinary tribunal was so
described by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
JA in considering the purpose of protective orders
following a finding that a complaint has been proved, including the element of
to other practitioners to recognize the importance of
compliance with professional standards and the risk of failing to do so, His
Honour said “
The Powers of a Tribunal having two members of
the...profession should, at least in relation to professional standards be
a degree of flexibility which might not necessarily be accorded to a
Tribunal differently constituted.
Prakash v HCCC
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
, at pp 33-34,
referred with approval, to a passage from the judgment of
Law Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
practitioner’s expressed intention not to re-offend is relevant to
mitigation, it will have little weight unless accompanied
by an understanding of
the wrongfulness of the conduct...the subject of the disciplinary
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
In judging whether an applicant will, in the future, act
differently from the past, the Court
is not required to act on
psychological theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and the
decision in a particular case is, to a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it may draw inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being removed
from the roll. An
understanding of that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...
[of his]...
responsibility and, from this, what he
is apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what
has been done
in the past has been sufficient to indicate his ‘probably
permanent unfitness’
Ex parte Lenehan
at 422; the court
will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently
.” (Emphasis added)
subject treatment occurred nine to ten years ago, during 2002 to 2003. The
Tribunal notes that conditions imposed by the (then)
Dental Board during
2008-2009 were removed in 2009 apparently to the Board’s satisfaction; and
that nothing adverse was reported
by the Board’s Inspector Dr. Dalton
following his visits to and inspections undertaken at, the Respondent’s
Since that time the Respondent’s registration has not been nor
is it, subject to any further conditions.
the Respondent’s evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that he has
demonstrated and expressed, an intention not to repeat
the failures that have
resulted in the finding of professional misconduct against him. Additionally,
the Tribunal is satisfied that
the Respondent understands and accepts, the
wrongfulness of his failures in treating the patient and how they
Tribunal is not unmindful of the Respondent’s significant, family
obligations and financial burdens since his wife’s
sudden death in 2010,
as described above. However compelling these might be in attracting a
sympathetic approach, the Tribunal must
and does, have regard for its
, statutory responsibility and protective jurisdiction; and be
guided accordingly, in determining its orders, by consideration of
objectives.
also to its consideration of appropriate orders, the Tribunal is aware from the
evidence, of the apparent, significant decline
in Respondent’s patient
numbers and income from his dental practice, since the death of the
Respondent’s wife in 2010
and its consequences on him including increased
family obligations. This, as submitted by the Complainant, raises a concern for
current, clinical capacity as a dentist—again when considering the
Tribunal’s protective responsibility—as to his
present fitness to
Respondent told the Tribunal that he would like to retain his current practice
premises especially given his attachment to it
in light of his late wife’s
contribution to setting it up; he told the Tribunal he would like to offer for
rental, his second
clinical room to another dentist in which to practise in a
self-employed capacity, thereby alleviating the rental burden on the
Respondent.
John Berne, an experienced dental practitioner, has agreed to act as a mentor to
the Respondent if approved by the Council, should
the Tribunal make such an
order, on the understanding that the Respondent would be responsible for
reimbursing Dr. Berne for his
Tribunal has heard the evidence of Dr. Chan, another experienced dental
practitioner; and it has had the useful opportunity of
asking questions of him.
As described above, Dr. Chan if approved by the Council, has offered to act as a
mentor to the Respondent
and to offer him as an “associate dentist”,
a significant amount of clinical work. The Respondent anticipates that as
described above, one of his significant daily, family responsibilities will be
soon relieved with the assistance of his eldest daughter.
Apart from the obvious
benefits envisaged by Respondent’s role as an “associate
dentist” offered by Dr. Chan, it
is the Tribunal’s considered
opinion that this will give the Respondent guidance and increased
‘collegiality’,
not available to him as a sole practitioner. The
Tribunal is also mindful of the Complainant’s submission emphasising the
Respondent’s
evidence to the effect that he preferred working as a sole
practitioner, suggesting that this may possibly detract from practising
Respondent is no stranger to overcoming a variety of difficulties he has had to
deal with during his life thus far, especially
achieving as a refugee to this
country, his education and professional qualification as a dentist. The Tribunal
expects that he will
respond to and successfully comply with, its orders. He
will be well aware of the confidence in him by those who provided testimonial,
character support in their evidence before the
Tribunal is not reasonably satisfied that as submitted by the Complainant,
cancellation of the Respondent’s registration
is necessary in exercising
its protective jurisdiction. In all the circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied
and orders accordingly,
that the Respondent be subject to a two (2) year
mentoring program commencing upon the expiration of the period of thirty (30)
from the date of the Tribunal’s decision, by a mentor to be selected
by him and approved by the Council, who is to report to
it in such manner, and
at such times as it shall determine but not less than at monthly intervals.
Further, such appointed mentor
is to be provided with and take into
consideration prior to commencing and during, such mentoring role, the
Tribunal’s findings
and Reasons for Decision with respect to the
Complaints and to its consequential, protective orders. The Respondent is to be
responsible
for the mentor’s costs necessarily incurred by participation
in the mentoring regime.
Additionally,
during each of the three (3) dental registration years following this decision,
the Respondent must complete not less
than thirty (30) hours of Continuing
Professional development (“CPD”) ten (10) hours of which are to be
by attendance
at such programs; and twenty four (24) hours of the total 30
hours, must address programs which are clinically or scientifically
evidence of completion of such CPD as required above, is to be provided to the
Council in such manner and form as determined
the period of twelve (12) months commencing upon the expiration of thirty (30)
days from the date of the Tribunal’s decision,
the Respondent is to
participate in three (3) counseling sessions with a person or persons to be
nominated by the Council, to address
skills relevant to achieving effect patient
communication including responding to challenging communication situations and
patient expectations; and the Respondent is to be responsible for the
costs of such counseling sessions.
Tribunal also orders that at such time and place to be determined by the
Council, the Respondent is to deliver a presentation
to the Council or to such
members thereof as nominated by the Council, addressing the matters the subject
of the Complaints, as described
in the Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision
concerning its finding of professional misconduct relevant to such
Complaints.
Complainant seeks an Order for Costs. The Tribunal orders that the Respondent is
to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed;
if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may have the matter of costs re-listed for assessment by the
For the Tribunal,
.........................................................................
Peter Dwyer
Deputy Chairperson
20 November 2012
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter