URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v NG [2012] NSWPHT 1 (9 August 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
PETER WING KEUNG NG
MATTER NUMBER: PH02/2010
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
PH076817(NSW); PHA0001585235(National)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
____________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v NG
[2012] NSWPHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr P Ginters of Counsel, instructed by Ms S Connors,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Peter Wing Keung Ng
(Respondent) represented by Mr J
Simpkins of Senior Counsel, with him Mr L Livingston instructed by Ms W Blacker,
Gadens Lawyers (Mr R O’Connor, Solicitor, instructing at times).
FILE NUMBER: PH02/2010
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy
Chairperson)
Mr David Preswick (Pharmacist
Ms Virginia Bear (Pharmacist Member)
Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 9, 10, 11, 12 May, 27, 28 July, 22 August 2011 & 31
DATE OF DECISION: 9 August 2012
DATE OF ORDERS: 9 August 2012
FINDINGS: Professional misconduct (undisturbed from first Tribunal),
circumstances of offences render Respondent unfit in public
interest to be
registered.
ORDERS (in summary): The Respondent is reprimanded and his registration
cancelled. Respondent not entitled to reapply for registration
for a period of
18 months. Costs Order made.
CATCHWORDS: Pharmacy – convictions – unsatisfactory
professional conduct – professional misconduct – unfit
in the public
interest to be registered.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Regulation 2002
(repealed) – clause 60;
Pharmacy Practice Act
clause 39(2)(a);
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
No86a (National Law);
CASES CITED:
[2010] NSWPHT;
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Bannister v Walton
April 1992 – Court of Appeal – unreported);
Clyne v New South
Wales Bar Association
(1960) 104 CLR 18
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
Lucire V Health Care Complaints
Karalasingham
Wentworth v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR
([1998] NSWPB 8).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Complaint dated 4 March 2009 initially came before a differently constituted
Tribunal (the initial Tribunal). That Tribunal’s
decision (as set out in
was the subject of an appeal to the Supreme
Court of New South Wales (
NSWSC 1220).
was only partially successful and the matter was remitted on a limited basis to
a differently constituted tribunal. The
Short Minutes of Order formed volume 1,
Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the direction of the Supreme Court
to determine the question of protective orders
that should flow from the finding
of professional misconduct (Complaint Two) that was the undisturbed finding of
the initial Tribunal.
to the separate Complaint of convictions rendering the Respondent unfit in the
public interest within the meaning of section 39(2)(a)
Pharmacy Practice Act
(Complaint Three) there was little comment in the decision of the
Supreme Court. The parties initially both made submissions to the
effect that it
was open for this Tribunal to make findings with respect to this Complaint. The
HCCC later waivered on this position.
Complaint was amended with the consent of both parties. The amendments were of a
minor nature bringing the Complaint into line
with the evidence as it came
before the initial Tribunal. It is the Amended Complaint that is before this
the initial Tribunal commenced under the
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
Inquiry was conducted (by virtue of the transitional provisions) under the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
No86a (National Law).
After consideration of the transitional provisions it was the submission of both
parties that this matter should
proceed under the National Law.
a result of the implementation of the Orders made in the Supreme Court a number
of reports and documents came into evidence before
the Tribunal. The final
hearing day of the Inquiry became necessary in order for the Tribunal to
properly deal with the issue of
the weekly reports that the Tribunal continued
to receive from the Respondent’s supervisor (Mr Cohen). It was during the
Hearing held to hear the parties as to the appropriate course to be
taken with respect to these ongoing reports that the Tribunal
set a timetable
for the final service of documents and indicated no further weekly reports were
to be taken into evidence.
The Complaint
Complaint, as it was ultimately before the Tribunal after various amendments as
indicated, was as follows – that the pharmacist,
being a person registered
as a pharmacist under the
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of
(2)(b) of the Act in that the
pharmacist:
(a) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience, and/or
contravened a condition of the pharmacist’s registration, and/or
(b) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the pharmacist was the
proprietor of Ryde Pharmacy, 107 Blaxland Road, Ryde, New South Wales 2112
Pharmacy”).
6 September 2003 and 12 January 2005 at Ryde Pharmacy the pharmacist failed to
make six monthly inventories of drugs of addiction
stock for the following drugs
of addiction:
Contin 15 mg tablets
Fortral 50mg
Kapanol 20mg
Ritalin LA 20mg
Ritalin LA 30mg
Kapanol 50mg
Phosphate 30mg tablets
Dexamphetamine
5mg tablets
Concerta 36mg
Ritalin LA 40mg
Oxynorm 10mg
Morphine 30mg
Kapanol 10mg
MS Contin 5mg
MS Contin 10mg
MS Contin 30mg
Contin 100mg tablets
Ordine Mixture
Oxycontin 20mg
Morphine 10mg
contrary to clause 117 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
5 April 2004 and 6 December 2004 at Ryde Pharmacy, the pharmacist failed to
record in the Register receipt of supplies of
drugs of addiction as follows:
Kapanol 20mg
capsules (20 received on 22/11/04)
15mg ampoules (5 received on 5/7/04)
Morphine 30mg
ampoules (10 received on 3/12/04)
MS Contin 10mg
tablets (20 received on 5/4/04)
MS Contin 100mg
tablets (1,560 received on 11/10/04, 1,440 on 12/10/04 and 60 on 2/11/04)
Ordine Mixture
10mg/ml (200ml received on 11/10/04)
Pethidine 100mg
ampoules (30 received on 2/2/04 and 30 on 3/11/04)
Morphine 10mg
ampoules (5 ampoules received on 6/12/04);
contrary to
clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
16 September 2004 and 21 December 2004 at Ryde Pharmacy, the pharmacist failed
to record in the Register supply of drugs of
addiction as follows:
Hypnodorm 1mg
tablets dispensed
, 29/9/04,12/10/04, 13/10/04,
19/10/04, 21/10/04 (2 prescriptions),1/11/04, 9/11/04, 11/11/04, 23/11/04 (2
prescriptions), 8/12/04,
Morphine 15 mg
ampoules dispensed 2/11/04
MS Contin 100mg
tablets dispensed on 23/9/04, 11/10/04 and 2/11/04
Ordine Mixture
10mg/ml dispensed on
/ 20/12/04,
and 2/11/04
Oxycontin 20mg
tablets dispensed on 16/9/03 and 6/12/04
Pethidine 100mg
ampoules dispensed on 2/11/04
Physeptone 10mg
tablets dispensed on 3/11/04, 26/11/04, 4/12/04, 10/12/04, 15/12/04 and 17/12/04
tablets dispensed on 8/10/04, 25/10/04, 29/10/04, 3/12/04, 2/12/04, 6/12/04 (2
prescriptions) 15/12/04, 17/12/04, 22/12/04
and 21/12/04
Morphine 10mg
ampoules dispensed on 3/12/04
contrary to clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
31 May 2004 and/or on 5 July 2004 at Ryde Pharmacy, the pharmacist failed to
record in the Register receipt of a drug of addiction
namely Morphine 15 mg
ampoules on the day on which he received the drug of addiction, contrary to
clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
the dates and in the quantities shown in Schedule A to this complaint, the
pharmacist supplied drugs of addiction on prescriptions
which failed to comply
with the requirements of clause 77 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, contrary to clause 85 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
the dates and in the quantities shown of Schedule B to this complaint, the
pharmacist supplied quantities of a Schedule 4 Appendix
B drugs namely, anabolic
steroids on prescriptions which failed to specify the intervals at which the
drug may be supplied in accordance
with the requirement of clause 77 (1) (f) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, contrary to
clause 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
21 February 2004 and 21 February 2005 at Ryde Pharmacy on diverse occasions, the
pharmacist failed to properly record the
details of supply of pseudoephedrine in
accordance with clause 54 of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, contrary to clause 23 (2) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
the dates and quantities shown in Schedule C to this complaint at Ryde Pharmacy,
the pharmacist supplied drugs of addiction to
patients in quantities and/or for
a purpose that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what
is appropriate in
the circumstances, contrary to clause 109 of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
March 2004 and January 2005 at Ryde Pharmacy, the pharmacist, having supplied
quantities of an Appendix B substance, namely
Testosterone, on prescription for
Patients A, B,
(a) failed to
keep the prescriptions, contrary to clause 41 (1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(b) failed to
keep the prescriptions apart from other prescriptions, contrary to clause 41 (2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
or caused to be made false and/or misleading
entries in the pharmacy’s
computer dispensing records, namely approximately 2,000 entries for the
purported supply of Alphapharm
Brand products to two fictitious patients.
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within
the meaning of
(2)(b) of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(a) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience, and/or
contravened a condition of the pharmacist’s registration, and/or
(b) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
At all relevant times the pharmacist was the
proprietor of Ryde Pharmacy, 107 Blaxland Road, Ryde, New South Wales 2112
Pharmacy”).
Particulars 1 –
above are repeated.
COMPLAINT THREE
been convicted in New South Wales of offences the circumstances of which are
such as to render the pharmacist unfit in the public
interest to be registered
as a pharmacist within the meaning of
(2)(a) of the Act.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
2 February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde the pharmacist was convicted of five
(5) counts of failure to enter relevant prescribed
particulars in a drug
register in contravention of clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
2 February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde the pharmacist was convicted of one
count of making a false or misleading entry in a
record or register in
contravention of clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
2 February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde the pharmacist was convicted of one
count of supplying a drug of addiction more than
once on a prescription which
failed to specify the maximum number of times, or the intervals at which, the
drug may be supplied in
contravention of clause 85 (3) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
2 February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde the pharmacist was convicted of one
count of supplying a drug of addiction on a prescription
not in the required
form in contravention of clause 85 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
The Law – preliminary matters
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the Tribunal.
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
‘The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue
has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not
be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
is fixed intermediate between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction
a civil issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process by which
reasonable satisfaction is attained.’
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Tribunal not only has to protect the public but it is in the community interest
that the profession of pharmacy should retain
and be entitled to retain the
respect and high regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
trust placed in pharmacists is analogous to that placed in medical practitioners
because of the highly personal information that
the pharmacist comes to know by
virtue of the role a pharmacist plays in the provision of medication to the
patient. In a passage
cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
the primary role of the Tribunal is protective, it also has a role in
maintaining public confidence in the profession and
maintaining the reputation
of the profession. Orders of the Tribunal may operate to have a general
deterrent effect for other members
of the profession.
cases of assistance are referred to under the heading of Submissions below.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes throughout the Inquiry (Mr
Simpkins SC not appearing on the final day of hearing).
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the names of
all patients mentioned in the evidence before
the Tribunal in
accordance with Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law. The names are as
indicated in the
schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘D’ and any
information (other than information disclosed in this Reasons for Decision
document) that may identify them is not to be published. Annexure D will only
be attached to the original Reasons for Decision held
by the Registry and must
not be reproduced.
following witnesses were called to give evidence: Ms Kim Dolan, Acting Principal
Pharmaceutical Officer – Inspections and
Investigations, Mr Robert Dash,
Mr Patrick Mahony, Mr Christopher Piggott, Dr Peter Klug, Mr Stephen Cohen and
the Respondent.
Background information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent arrived in Australia in 1990. The Respondent has suffered from
panhypopituitarism since childhood. After working as
an employee in a community
pharmacy, he set up his own pharmacy in its current location in 1992. Apart from
the six months during
2010 when the Respondent did not hold registration as a
result of the initial Tribunal’s Order, the Respondent has practiced
continuously.
Respondent was first registered in New South Wales in 1987 (volume 2, exhibit
2). The Register held on behalf of the Pharmacy
Board of Australia records that
the Respondent received his BSc (Pharm) from ‘Brighton Tech’. The
Respondent gave evidence
that he was initially registered in Queensland.
Queensland did not require him to undertake a further examination at the time he
registered and his New South Wales registration was granted on the basis of
mutual recognition.
background of the Respondent’s criminal convictions is set out in the
Submissions of the Respondent commencing at paragraph
80. Details are also
recorded in the Chronology provided by the HCCC (volume 6, tab 1). The
Respondent was prosecuted under
section 9(1)(b)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
on 7 July 1995. He was again prosecuted on 9
December 1998. This related to 23 charges under the provisions of the
and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
On 2 February 2007 the Respondent was again
prosecuted under the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Confirmation of Registration Status dated 6 May 2011 (volume 6, exhibit 5)
records the Respondent was registered until 31 December
2011 and that from 5
November 2011 various conditions applied to his registration.
Background of the Complaint
current complaint arose out of the Respondent’s conduct, subject of his
most recent criminal convictions.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had a vast amount of evidence before it. Documentation included all
those exhibits before the initial Tribunal, the decision
of the Supreme Court as
well as material (substantially statements of the Respondent and various reports
regarding his practice)
generated since the time of the Appeal.
was a large amount of documentation before the Tribunal. The Tribunal does not
make any attempt to summarise the evidence in
its entirety. Rather the evidence
is highlighted below and then dealt with by reference to the submissions made by
the parties.
Short Minutes of Order
Short Minutes and the undertaking made by the Respondent form volume R1, exhibit
1. The Short Minutes read:
THE COURT ORDERS:
findings of misconduct made by the Second Defendant in its decision dated 29
April 2010 are not disturbed.
disciplinary orders made by the Second Defendant in its decision dated 29 April
2010 are quashed.
amended complaint is remitted to the Second Defendant for determination of the
appropriate disciplinary orders based upon its
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency is to re-instate the
registration of the Plaintiff by 5 November 2010, pending
determination of the
remitted amended complaint.
Plaintiff is to comply with the Form of Undertaking executed by him on 27
October 2010, which is annexed and marked A, pending
determination of the
remitted amended complaint.
Second Defendant to which the amended complaint is remitted is to be differently
constituted to that whose orders have been quashed.
First Defendant is to pay the Plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings in this
Plaintiff is to pay the First Defendant’s costs of the proceedings before
the Second Defendant that related to the determination
of the findings of
misconduct.
of the proceeding before the Second Defendant that related to the determination
of the disciplinary orders to be costs in the
Respondent’s Undertaking to the Supreme Court read as follows:
Upon re-instatement of his registration as a pharmacist, the plaintiff is to
implement and adhere to the following supervisory
7 days of registration, the plaintiff is to appoint Mr Patrick Mahony,
registered pharmacist, as a business mentor (mentor)
and provide a copy of the
contract to the Pharmacy Council of NSW (Council), such contract to include an
obligation by the mentor
to report to the Council any matter he regards as
demonstrating a significant failure of the plaintiff to comply with his
professional
obligations or the business plan referred to
2 months of registration, the plaintiff is to provide a business plan to the
Council that will establish to the satisfaction
of an independent auditor, who
is to be selected from a list of qualified persons provided by the Council, each
of the following:-
business structure that will focus on the protection of the public, compliance
with the legal obligations and professional standards
of a pharmacist, the
appropriate standards of the pharmacy and the workload of the plaintiff;
staffing proposal to ascertain the need for and engagement, if required, of
additional support staff necessary to provide a
standard of service consistent
with the professional obligations of the plaintiff; and
business plan enabling the plaintiff to sustain the commitment to and funding of
the proposed structure and mentoring.
Council is, within a reasonable time, to assess the business plan and, if it
agrees with it, indicate its agreement to the plaintiff.
communication of the Council’s approval, the plaintiff will only practice
as an employed pharmacist where his employment
is at all times under the direct
on-site supervision of a registered pharmacist approved by the Council and, in
doing so, he is not
to work as a pharmacist in charge.
plaintiff is not to commence work as a pharmacist in his own pharmacy until he
has employed such additional support staff, if
any, that are required in
accordance with paragraph 2(b).
commencement of his work as a pharmacist in his own pharmacy, the plaintiff is
to co-operate with the mentor to provide
independent audit reports related to
the implementation and progress of the business plan, firstly after 2 months and
at intervals of 3 months.
plaintiff is to undertake such additional training as is required by the
Approval of the Council
accordance with the Short Minutes of Order (of the Supreme Court) and the
subsequent undertaking of the Respondent the Council
considered and subsequently
approved two pharmacists to be employed by the Respondent as his direct on site
supervisor pending the
approval of a business plan (with Mr Mahony being the
business Mentor).
Council approved Mr Sidney Ho and Mr Stephen Cohen as supervising pharmacists
for the Respondent and advised the Respondent of
this decision on 13 December
2010. On the same day the Council also wrote to the Respondent’s
solicitors (volume 1- exhibit
5) to advise of the approval of three registered
pharmacists to act as an auditor of the business plan in accordance with
2 of the Respondent’s undertaking (Mr Piggott was included in
this group so approved).
10 February 2011 the Council informed the Respondent of the approval of the
Business Plan prepared by Mr Mahony. The letter also
notes that the Respondent
is to ensure that he had employed the support staff indicated in the business
he commences work unsupervised in his pharmacy (emphasis
added by Tribunal).
The 15 April Audit – Pharmaceutical Services
15 April 2011 two Pharmaceutical Officers from the Pharmaceutical Services Unit
(PSU)/Pharmaceutical Services Branch of NSW Health
(PSB) attended the
Respondent’s pharmacy for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Legislation. The report produced by the PSB was
dated 6 May 2011. A letter in evidence indicates that this report was forwarded
the HCCC on the same date.
summary of the findings of this inspection is found in paragraph 118 of the
Respondent’s Submissions (reproduced in Annexure
respect to the display of the wrong Pharmacist in Charge identification the
Tribunal notes that although there was conflicting
evidence regarding the last
date on which Mr Sidney Ho worked in the pharmacy, he had ceased his employment
by 29 March 2011 or 4
April 2011. The Tribunal also notes that the inspection
identified conduct of the Respondent that breached the Therapeutic Goods
legislation.
Tribunal also notes that in his oral evidence the Respondent identified the
white powder found in an unlabelled jar in the dispensary
to be salicylic acid.
PSU - Report dated 15 September 2011
Tribunal became aware of a report authored by Ms Dolan dated 15 September 2011
at the further Directions Hearing held to deal
with the continuing receipt of
weekly reports from Mr Cohen. Ms Dolan’s report was served in accordance
with the timetable
set during the further Directions Hearing.
report details reports and subsequent investigations made by Ms Dolan following
a report from an anaesthetist at a large Sydney
hospital (hospital). The
anaesthetist had telephoned Ms Dolan on 13 September 2011 stating that he had
observed a patient in a ward
‘off his face’
had been dispensed by the Respondent on the
prescription of a GP. The
anaesthetist further stated that he had contacted the Respondent who had
informed him that he had delivered
the medication to the patient in the waiting
room of the emergency department of the hospital as the patient was unable to
the pharmacy.
following day Ms Dolan attended the Respondent’s pharmacy and inspected
his drug register. Ms Dolan expressed her concern
to the Respondent that a
Schedule 8 medication had been delivered to an inpatient in a public hospital.
The Respondent stated that
the patient was an inpatient in the burns unit of the
hospital and that he did not see a problem with delivering the medication along
with other items such as shampoo and other toiletries.
Respondent informed Ms Dolan that the GP’s secretary had delivered the
script from the GP’s surgery to the pharmacy
on the day it was dispensed.
Dolan’s report then records Mr Cohen arrived at the pharmacy at this stage
of the conversation and Ms Dolan explained the
scenario to him. Ms Dolan records
the following interaction occurred:
Mr Cohen asked where in the legislation it says that you can’t deliver
medicines to an inpatient in a hospital. The conversation
heated up. Mr Cohen
said that Mr Ng had done nothing wrong, he had a legal prescription and he
delivered it. I explained although
it was not illegal, that professional
judgement and common sense sometimes need to be used, and I felt that Mr Ng had
used poor judgment
in this situation. I explained that when you are an inpatient
in a hospital, the hospital provides you with your medications and
it could be
detrimental if patients took medications without the hospital aware of this.
15 September 2011 Ms Dolan attended upon the prescribing GP. He stated that he
had had a conversation with the Respondent regarding
the prescription in
question but had not been advised that the medication was delivered to a public
hospital. He had asked his secretary
to walk the script up to the
Respondent’s pharmacy as the patient was in a wheelchair as he was a
paraplegic following injuries
sustained in a motorbike accident.
Dolan concludes her report as follows:
Mr Ng’s actions in providing Schedule 8 drugs of addiction to an
inpatient of a public hospital without the knowledge of his
treating medical
practitioner at RNSH has risked the health of the patient and undermined and
impeded their treatment plans for this
Oral Evidence of Ms Dolan
Dolan is a registered pharmacist currently working as the Acting Principal
Pharmaceutical Officer – Inspections and Investigations,
Pharmaceutical
Services Unit, Department of Health. Ms Dolan gave evidence regarding an
inspection of the Respondent’s pharmacy
she undertook with Ms Reyes, a
Pharmaceutical Officer on 15 April 2011.
consideration of this witness’ evidence is required in order to gain a
full appreciation of her evidence in chief as
it was so frequently interrupted
by objections.
Dolan described the manner in which the report was prepared.
Dolan gave evidence about the meaning of an AustR and AustL numbers and their
significance with respect to the practice of pharmacy.
Dolan described the location of the keys for the Drug Safe being in an unlocked
draw along with other keys.
Dolan then provided further details of the matters detailed in the report
including her view that the error in the recording of
OxyContin® was not in
the nature of a ‘human error’.
answer to questions regarding the time taken to identify the out of date stock,
Ms Dolan stated that it had taken a couple of hours
for the two of them to
locate those items listed in the report.
Dolan gave further evidence on 31 May 2012. Under cross-examination Ms Dolan was
asked a number of questions regarding the authority
prescription for
OxyContin® (40mg). The Tribunal notes at this point that earlier
prescriptions involving this particular patient
were also subject of some of the
Particulars of the Complaint in this matter.
Dolan gave evidence that she agreed that ‘on the face of it’ the
script appeared to be valid. She further agreed that
if the assumption was made
that the patient was taking the medication as prescribed that the patient must
have had other prescriptions
filled at a pharmacy other than the
Respondent’s. This view was reinforced by the fact that the particular
medication was addictive
in nature making it less likely that the patient would
be going for periods without the medication. Ms Dolan also expressed the view
that considering the dispensing history available to the Respondent she would
assume that this was not a ‘commencement’
dose of the medication for
this particular patient. Ms Dolan was unable to agree with the proposition put
during cross-examination
that the patient must have been obtaining prescriptions
from a doctor other than the one named on the scripts held by the Respondent.
T547 Ms Dolan gave the following evidence:
Q. Based on the material which is set out by Mr Mahony in
his report, it is likely, isn't it, that Mr Ng was the victim of a long
standing and dedicated campaign of deliberate manipulation and deception
perpetuated by
[the patient]
as a non compliant medication abuser, do you
A. I can't say anything, I can't say that, no. I don't know the
circumstances of - from what I understand from what Mr Ng said
he had moved away, so I have no idea what transpired between him and
[the patient].
Dolan was asked to assume that the Respondent believed that the prescribing GP
had contacted medical personnel at the hospital
and obtained permission for the
Respondent to deliver the Schedule 8 drugs to the patient in the hospital
grounds and asked to comment
as to whether this would lessen the error of
judgment made by the Respondent. Ms Dolan stated she did not know how such an
could be drawn as there would never be the circumstance that a second
doctor outside of the hospital system would be prescribing
medication for an
Dolan was asked to make the following five assumptions during
cross-examination:
"Mr Ng believed [the patient] was staying in the Burns
Rehabilitation Unit on the grounds of Royal North Shore Hospital and was not
in-patient of a hospital ward at Royal North Shore Hospital." Secondly,
"Mr Ng believed [the patient] was receiving treatment
from the Burns
Rehabilitation Unit solely for his burn injury and that analgesic and other
medication relevant to [the patient’s]
pre-existing conditions was not
able to be provided by the Burns Rehabilitation Unit and had to be prescribed by
[the patient’s]
general practitioner." Thirdly, "Mr Ng met [the
patient] outside the entrance to Accident/Emergency not inside the hospital."
"[the patient] was dressed in street clothes and not in a hospital
gown." Fifthly, "Together with the medication Mr Ng delivered
items to [the patient] including several personal care items, namely, shampoo,
hair gel, shaving cream, disposable razors,
and aftershave."
Dolan agreed if she was able to make these five assumptions then the Respondent
was only making a delivery but that this situation
was far from the actual
circumstances of the matter as per her investigation including the statements of
the anaesthetist and the
following exchange concluded Ms Dolan’s cross-examination (T551-552):
Q. Ms Dolan, I will ask you to make one further
assumption, and that is this, if Mr Ng had been aware that [the patient]
was an in-patient
of a hospital ward at Royal North Shore Hospital Mr Ng
would have consulted with the nurse in charge of the burns unit, or one of
medical practitioners responsible for [the patient’s] care at the hospital
to ascertain whether or not medications which
had been dispensed at the Ryde
Pharmacy could be delivered to the hospital and if so the name of the
appropriate person to whom they
could be delivered, now making that assumption,
you would agree, wouldn't you, that that would be a reasonable course for a
pharmacist to take in that situation, correct?
A. If a person, if Mr Ng was to assume that he was an
in-patient I don't know how you would not know as a pharmacist that there
be a need for an outside amount, an outside source for a narcotic
medication to be delivered to a public hospital.
Q. But if a registered pharmacist was in any doubt about that a
reasonable and appropriate thing for that pharmacist to do would
be to speak to
the nurse in charge or one of the medical practitioners at the relevant
hospital, correct?
A. Correct.
re-examination Ms Dolan gave the following evidence (T552-553):
Q. In circumstances where you are dealing with a community
pharmacist of 20 years' experience what do you say as to the validity
the five assumptions that Mr Livingston
(counsel for the Respondent)
has put to you as being without more a sufficient basis to dispense a
Schedule 8 drug?
A. It's a very long bow.
Q. Why do you say that?
A. Well first of all there is no consistency in the dispensing of the
prescriptions by Mr Ng so he would have to wonder why after
prescriptions dispensed there on a regular basis why out of the blue, because it
had been some time, that he was now dispensing
this prescription. The fact that
he's delivering it to an emergency room door isn't the - the exit of
an emergency room door isn't
where a person is normally discharged from a
hospital, and depending on what you are admitted to a hospital for, there is
where you can wear street clothes. So the assumptions that they've
asked me to draw I don't get the same conclusions.
Q. Do you accept that they would be valid assumptions to make?
Q. You were asked a question again on the basis of an assumption that you
were asked to make, that a reasonable thing in the circumstances
would have been
for Mr Ng to speak to either the medical practitioner or a nurse at the
hospital, do you recall giving that answer?
Q. In terms of Mr Ng's capacity to dispense the Schedule 8
medication, is there any other thing that you think would have been reasonably
open to him to do or not do?
A. As a pharmacist when you're presented with a prescription, even if
there's no question about the validity and legitimacy of the
prescription, you
have professional judgment that comes in to play that you dispense in a quantity
and for a purpose that accords
with therapeutic standards and I don't believe
that the purpose for which it was being dispensed for, given the circumstances,
a valid reason to dispense the prescription.
Q. Would it have been possible for Mr Ng to not dispense?
A. Of course
answer to questions from the Tribunal Ms Dolan agreed that a pharmacist needs to
exercise their professional discretion when dispensing
medications from Schedule
two upwards. She also provided details as to what potential outcomes could have
occurred due to the patient
having access to this Schedule 8 medication without
the knowledge of the hospital staff. Overall Ms Dolan saw this as another
of the Respondent’s continuing poor professional judgment.
Reports of Mr Mahony
Thomas Mahony is a registered pharmacist. He initially provided a peer review
report (February 2010 – volume 4, exhibit
4) and gave evidence before the
initial Tribunal. As a result of the undertaking made by the Respondent to the
Supreme Court, Mr
Mahony became the Respondent’s business mentor in
accordance with the undertaking made to the court on 27 October 2010.
February 2010 report included the following ‘Executive Summary’:
I have been requested by Nr Ng’s solicitor to provide a peer review of
his pharmacy. The report and recommendations below are
made in accordance with
the Expert Witness Code of Conduct.
I attended Mr Ng’s pharmacy at Ryde on Thursday 18 February and
interviewed Mr Ng and his staff. I also observed the operations
pharmacy. I have also read the various documents included in this
Despite every effort to avoid prejudicing the situation, when I read the
three volumes of documents, I subconsciously formed an opinion
that Mr Ng was
wilful in his attempts to achieve some personal gain in assisting various client
Continuing to
provide Controlled Drugs in a quantity and for a purpose that were not within
the therapeutic recommendations
record mandated transactions for the possible attempt to disguise some form of
illegal activity
large quantities of an item in a significant single transaction (30x Cialis @
approximately $70ea on 30 November 2004) which
were outside the norm for a
suburban pharmacy and
Attempting to
gain by fraudulently constructing transactions so as to overstate the
pharmacy’s performance vis generic sales.
As a result of my visit to the pharmacy I have formed the opinion that in the
case of the first three points, Mr Ng was misguided
in his attempts to assist
his clients. In some cases he may have deliberately flouted the regulations to
assist a client. Mr Ng’s
actions are not condoned in any way and do show
a lack of judgment and care.
I am unable to conclude the same with item #4, where this was a deliberate
attempt for personal gain. I can only assume this was
due to his paranoia
regarding the advantages gained by bigger pharmacy retailers in particular the
“discount pharmacies”.
I am unsure if such practices are widespread
and I condemn them as unethical.
My observations during my visit to the pharmacy and discussions with Mr Ng
and his staff are that Mr Ng is most anxious that he has
re-offended and is most
remorseful. Mr Ng also accepts that since the 14 February 2001 Pharmacy Board
decision and implementation
of its orders, he has not changed his business and
professional practices sufficiently to prevent a recurrence of the problems that
bring him before this Board of Inquiry.
My observations of the pharmacy are that it is not functioning professionally
and cannot continue in its present mode. I could not
therefore provide a
positive peer report. I do however make a number of recommendations to provide
a framework for Mr Ng to continue
to practice as a pharmacist without being a
risk to the public.
Mr Ng, I believe, failed to comply with the earlier orders of the Board due
to a lack of commitment to change, some difficult business
circumstances (due to
the reconstruction of the Top Ryde Centre), a lack of business acumen and
experience in the Australian ethic/professional
culture and/or insufficient
support to achieve the orders set out by the
Mr Ng has maintained his DD Register in an accurate manner since his
interview with Mr Battye and Mr Gavrilovic in February
However, I now further believe that Mr Ng has realised that he must change
and that he is committed to a plan that will enable him
to continue to practice
as a pharmacist, in a profession he loves and in the hope to be able to share
his profession with his daughter,
who starts Pharmacy at Sydney University in
Mr Mahony’s recommendations to Mr Ng
Ng engages a Business Mentor to oversee the implementation of a business plan.
This plan would address all of the issues that
have been contributory to Mr
Ng’s failures and will include certain quantifiable benchmarks and a
reasonable time table.
7 days of this Inquiry, he will provide a contract of employment of the said
mentor to the Board.
14 days of this Inquiry, he will have employed additional support staff for the
pharmacy and to change his work practices so
as to be able to commit the
resources necessary to meet this schedule.
Ng provides within 3 months a plan that will establish, to the satisfaction of
an independent auditor (list of qualified persons
to be supplied for nomination
by the Board), the following;
Business structure to focus on the protection of the public, the professional
standards of the pharmacy and the work load of Mr
staffing policy to engage additional support staff to provide a standard of
service consistent with a professional pharmacy
business plan that is sufficiently viable to sustain the commitment and to fund
delivery of this audit.
Ng continues to work with the mentor to provide independent audit reports to the
Pharmacy Board of the implementation of this plan
at 6 months, 9 months, 12
months, 18 months and 24 months.
Ng will undertake additional training (professional, managerial and
workplace)(self-paced and/or course based) as deemed necessary
by the mentor to
achieve his commitment to the Board.
Mahony wrote a ‘Foundational Report’ dated 27 November 2010 (volume
R1, exhibit 6). This report was followed by a Mentor
report and Business Plan on
17 January 2011.
Mahony wrote a report dated 14 March 2011 regarding his site visit to the
Respondent’s pharmacy. This document came into
evidence as volume R1,
exhibit 9. The report noted that the Respondent had had some confusion regarding
the requirements on his Registration
regarding additional staffing but that
these had now been resolved with the Council. Later in the report there is a
note, ‘process
begun’, next to the item ‘Employment of
additional support staff’. The report continues:
Therefore the employment of the FOS
[front of shop]
person will
immediately enable Peter to practice as pharmacist in charge, subject to the
documentation of a suitable roster with the
other pharmacists. It is anticipated
that this will come into effect on week commencing 28 March or 4 April.
concern Mr Mahony expresses regarding the Respondent is evident from the
following passage from his report dated 14 March 2011
(volume R1, exhibit
The shop renovations have taken a toll of Peter because he has been doing all
of it himself. He has planned to take a short break
over Easter. Peter has not
worked as a pharmacist except under supervision, however every aspect of his day
is interrupted by clients/customers
seeking him out to do projects for
This intimate involvement plus the disruption of the shop renovation and the
list of tasks that need to be completed on time is causing
this additional
stress. Peter has recognised this.
We have discussed a balance in Peter’s work life if there is to be the
necessary change in his professional life. Some of this
has related to his
registration and to the costs both direct and indirect of his earlier actions
that have brought him before the
report also recommended that of the three potential auditors approved by the
Council that Mr Piggott be retained.
April Mentor’s report from Mr Mahony formed volume R2, exhibit 2. Mr
Mahony noted that he had attended the Respondent’s
pharmacy on 11 April
2011. The Respondent was on leave and Mr Quincey Le was the Pharmacist in
Charge. Mr Mahony noted that the renovations
had been completed. Mr Mahony also
noted the appointment of a full time staff member with the anticipation that
they would commence
work by Easter.
Mahony prepared a report dated 21 April 2011 titled ‘Report and Comments
on Inspection of the Ryde Pharmacy by the Pharmaceutical
Services Section NSW
Department of Health 15 April 2011’ (volume R2, exhibit 4). This report
was based on the issues Mr Ng
reported as having been raised by the PSU during
the inspection. The report notes that Mr Mahony had been informed by an
of the Council, Mr Graeme Cox, that he had attended the premises in
‘performed the standard inspection of the premises to
identify if the renovations comply with the Regulations in the
Pharmacists
‘Mr Cox reported to me that
almost everything in order and recognised the considerable changes that have
been achieved’.
The Tribunal notes at this point that it did not
receive any report from Mr Cox.
21 April report identified that the additional staff member was due to commence
work by the end of April. Mr Mahony also considered
that the inspection by the
PSU was several weeks premature as they would have been attended to as planned
in that additional time.
The report included the following observation:
On the matter of the Controlled Drug register, it is most disappointing that
this essential record is not up to date. On Monday 11
April, I did as part of
my regular routine inspect this register. I discovered to my amazement that the
March audit had not been
completed. I did check several entries and discovered
that by this cursory glance that all items were recorded at the time of
and that the record was complete and consistent with the computer
record. I did not check the safe or all of the cancelled
prescription.
The responsibility of maintaining this record is with the Council appointed
supervising pharmacist/s as Mr Ng is not the pharmacist
in charge. I drew this
to the attention of Mr Quincy Li who was present during my visit. Mr Li and Mr
Sydney Ho must take responsibility
for any inconsistencies in the register at
Tribunal notes the evidence of Mr Ho that he ceased working at the pharmacy on
29 March 2011. There was no approved supervising
pharmacist working in the
pharmacy from 30 March 2011 until the time that the additional staff member
commenced work on or about
15 April 2011. The Respondent also worked on a number
of days (at least 2 and 3 April) during this period as the only pharmacist
duty. Mr Ho gave evidence (T148.35) that he considered the responsibility for
the Schedule 8 stock take was with the Respondent.
At T448.24 the Respondent
stated that he requested Mr Lee (not the Mr Lee who was an approved supervising
pharmacist – T450.27-28)
to undertake the stock take. Obviously this had
not been done as at 11 April 2011. Further, the tribunal notes the evidence of
Respondent that he accepts that the ultimate responsibility for ensuring the
stock take is undertaken is with the owner pharmacist
(T448.43-46).
from indicating his availability to provide further details to the Tribunal or
the Council Mr Mahony concludes his report with
the following:
It is important for the Council to put this inspection into perspective.
This was as I understand:
most detailed inspection (ie not a random audit) by two very experienced members
of the Pharmaceutical Services Section of the NSW
Department of Health.
Ng had a most non-compliant pharmacy prior to my appointment in November 2010,
which may have contributed to a number of complaints
being proved against him
Court approved time table had been set to allow Mr Ng twelve months to
demonstrate that he had addressed all of the issues identified
as contributing
to his former unsatisfactory practice.
I believe therefore that limited weight, except for the Controlled Drug
register’s short comings, should be placed on this report
at this stage.
The Controlled Drug register issue should be referred directly to the
supervising pharmacist(s).
Tribunal notes that the evidence from the PSU Inspectors was that the inspection
undertaken was not a comprehensive inspection.
The Tribunal also notes that one
of the Inspectors was relatively inexperienced. The Report noted that there may
have been some areas
not covered by the inspection. The Tribunal also notes that
the Short Minutes and Undertaking made by the Respondent to the Supreme
not fix a 12 month period to allow the Respondent to demonstrate he had
addressed all identified issues. The Tribunal also
notes that elsewhere the
Tribunal has made comments that the Business Plan as implemented does not
emphasise addressing ethical issues.
Mahony subsequently prepared a report dated 9 May 2011 (volume R2, exhibit 9)
which addressed the report of the PSB/PSU of the
NSW Department of Health
(inspection on 15 April 2011 – report dated 6 May 2011). In the
introduction to the report Mr Mahony
expressed the view that the PSB/PSU report
did not provide a
‘perfect report card’
‘demonstrate the considerable progress made in the preceding six months
mentoring program began’.
Mahony listed 11 matters identified in the PSB report that still required
attention and noted that they were scheduled to be completed
‘agreed timeline’.
These items included the removal of
non-complying medications and items, the Pharmacist in Charge details not being
displayed correctly,
the DD/Safe keys not being carried on the person of the
Pharmacist in Charge and the DD records not correctly kept.
Mahony then details timelines and concludes that all structural changes had been
made to the pharmacy and there were a number of
procedural and operational
standards that remain to be addressed.
Mahony reproduced an email sent to the Respondent on 24 November 2010 in which
he summarised issues he considered needed to be
addressed ‘asap’.
This included advice as follows:
excess, unsalable or out of date stock to be removed and packed up. As there is
very limited space in the shop, a short term secure
lockup could be considered.
However only stock that is going to be sold or equipment that is to be reused
should be stored.
else needs to be placed into a secured waste container that will be
professionally removed. Nothing should be left to
chance whereby an individual
may raid a bin a (sic) pick up stock or any item from the pharmacy.
email of 24 November 2010 ends with the following comment from Mr Mahony:
As I mentioned several times, because the Judge has overruled the
Board’s orders and sent them back, the standard that you must
exceed those of other pharmacists. You and I therefore have to deliver a plan
that will surprise them in its depth and
page 6 of the 9 May report Mr Mahony stated that due to the fact that only Mr Ng
or an experienced pharmacist had the ability to
check stock and decide which
items should be excluded that this process would wait until the renovations were
completed at which
time the stock could be organised into a
sequence and the employment of experienced staff would make this process
achievable’.
Mahony recounts that amongst the tasks recorded as being matters that the
Respondent should address in his March 2011 report was
the removal of all out of
date and shop soiled stock. The report then makes the observation that
‘one of the main areas addressed in the Business Plan and identified in
Appeal’s orders was Mr Ng’s workload.’
Mr Mahony listed
the tasks that the Respondent undertook himself and indicates that undertaking
change such as the delegation of some
tasks to others takes considerable time
and commitment. Mr Mahony then expressed the view that ‘procedural
change’ was
simpler and more achievable when associated with physical
change such as the shop fit. Mr Mahony observed that the PSB report confirmed
that the issues relating to pharmacy procedures, including dispensary
procedures, where not at a level to achieve QCPP accreditation.
Tribunal notes at page 9 of the May 2011 report Mr Mahony states:
Mr Wik H Lee (Mr Lee) and Mr Sydney Ho (Mr Ho) were appointed by the Pharmacy
Council as supervising pharmacists and therefore directly
responsible for the
activities of the pharmacy.
Tribunal does not have any evidence before it that the Council approved Mr Wik
Ho Lee as a supervising pharmacist at any time.
This accords with the evidence
given by the Respondent that he understood his role in the pharmacy was limited
when Mr Lee was the
Pharmacist in Charge (see around T222 & 223, 12/5/11).
Mahony expresses the view at page 9 of his report that the Pharmacist in Charge
sign and the Schedule 8 DD Register are the responsibility
of the Pharmacist in
Charge. The report continues:
The Pharmaceutical Society of Australia provides a number of packages for
locum pharmacists; these include a check list of everything
a pharmacist who
assumes the responsibility of the pharmacist in charge should complete, every
time they assume the role.
This would include as being appointed by the Pharmaceutical Council to the
position of supervising pharmacist that a full check of
everything in the DD
register and DD cupboard be audited and signed off. Unfortunately in this case
there was no guidance from the
Council, this was not
page 13 of the report Mr Mahony reiterates his view that the Pharmacy Council
should have ensured there were instructions for a
complete audit of the DD
Register to have occurred at the point when another pharmacist assumed
responsibility for that documentation.
Mr Mahony considers that this failure
makes the delineation of responsibility much more difficult.
report also notes that the QCPP standards were being reviewed which included the
use of cautionary advisory labels on medications
and that a procedure had been
implemented to ensure all stock would be date checked before dispensing.
Mahony gives an example of the difficulties faced by pharmacists when doctors do
not write prescriptions in the appropriate manner.
On page 14 Mr Mahony
Prescribers’ inadequate and illegally written
prescriptions are the bane of every pharmacist’s life.
Mahony points out in his report that the failure to record Norspan 5mg occurred
while the Respondent was not in charge of the pharmacy
and the mis-recording of
Norspan 20mg was a human error.
Mahony stated at page 15 of his report that the clearing of ‘out of date
stock’ was set to begin after the Tribunal
hearing was completed and that
a procedure of always checking stock prior to dispensing had been implemented.
following summary of his report was provided by Mr Mahony (at page 16):
The pharmacy inspection and report
demonstrate:
Mr Peter Ng has made considerable progress in changing his standards since the
March 2010 Tribunal Inquiry, the November 2010
appeal determination and the
implementation of the mentoring program.
Ryde pharmacy has undergone considerable structural renovation and
procedures within the pharmacy have been reviewed and an implementation strategy
is underway.
Of the issues raised in the report under Mr Ng’s direct
responsibility:
non-complying stock in the shop is now clearly identifiable and with additional
experienced staff can now be accurately removed.
The Fireproof
safe that does not comply with Clause 76(2) has been inspected by inspectors of
the Pharmaceutical Services Branch on
many occasions over many decades and has
until now not been considered inadequate.
The issue of
providing a staged “supply” of controlled medication
“dispensed” in the pharmacy as a community
service was
misrepresented in the report. The pharmacist in charge did however fail to
provide an adequate sub-register for the
“supply”. Mr Ng should
have established a suitable procedure and will be subject to the new QCPP
Mahony provided a Mentor Report dated 27 June 2011 (volume R3, exhibit 4). Part
of page 2 of this report reads:
The May Tribunal hearing invoked considerable soul searching on my role as
Mentor. After a time of reflection I came to the conclusion
that the plan
proposed by the writer and accepted by Judge Adams for a 2 year program to help
Mr Ng reform his practices was a correct
and justifiable
Unlike previous orders of the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales, this was a
comprehensive program that changed the fundamentals of
his practice. The Mentor
Program as outlined and accepted by the Judge involved a series of steps. The
first of this was to produce
a Business Plan to be audited by an independent
pharmacist on behalf of the Pharmacy Council.
The Mentor Program accepted by the Judge is significantly different to the
previous orders of the Pharmacy Board because this program
extends for a more
significant period and involves fundamental and significant structural change.
The objective of these changes
is to imbed the professional standards in such a
way that it causes long term reform.
The program was to take 2 years with various reviews at 3 months, 6 months
and 12 months.
Everything is on track with regard to this
The 14 April 2011 inspection by the Pharmaceutical Services Unit (PSU), less
than five months into this plan, did demonstrate some
significant short comings
in Mr Ng’s professional practices. These are not disputed and they are
not acceptable standards.
All of these standards were under review.
Furthermore at all times two other pharmacists, one appointed as Mr Ng’s
were working in the pharmacy. Neither of these pharmacists
identified these shortcomings.
A week after the Tribunal hearing, I met with Mr Peter Ng. Peter was
obviously very distressed, anxious and embarrassed at his short
identified at the hearing. It was important that he had his family make up
their minds as to how much effort (and money)
is applied to his defence.
Without this 100% commitment we could not achieve the details outlined in the
The various options were put forward and Peter was given 36 hours to consider
Peter chose to continue with the Mentorship and to allocate all resources and
all his time to demonstrate his commitment to be a good
pharmacist and meet all
of his professional obligations.
The result of this decision was to set a plan into
a suitably qualified and recognised trainer to address all aspects of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
from the position of pharmacist in charge (this included closing the pharmacy on
Sundays) so as to devote all of his time
to improve his professional skills,
focus on his own health issues, and to
on the implementation of the QCPP standards in his pharmacy.
with a similar sentiment are made in the Conclusion to the report (page 7).
report then sets out details of changes made in the Respondent’s pharmacy
with respect to who is acting in the role of Pharmacist
in Charge. The Report
records that this role was filled by Mr Quincey Le (name as per report) from 27
May to 6 June 2011 and thereafter
by Mr James Le (name as per report). The
report also provides details of the duties undertaken by the Respondent as the
owner. These duties include the implementation of the QCPP and personal
development such as working with Mr Dash on his understanding
and implementation
of the requirements of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
, a PSA course
on records and work on the Business Plan.
report also detailed progress towards involving the Respondent in appropriate
Continuing Professional Development and the QCPP
Mahony comments:
Mr Peter Ng, has taken these matters very seriously and is most anxious to be
able to demonstrate to the Tribunal his commitment to
the Professional Standards
of a pharmacist of equivalent experience and
responsibility.
The role of Mentor includes all aspect of the business. Its focus is a long
term change, addressing all issues of a professional
and commercial nature. It
is essential to be able to demonstrate integrity in the whole process and not a
single element. This
holistic process is outlined in the orders and in the
business plan.
The determination of the success or otherwise of the process must wait until
this project has been completed.
final report from Mr Mahony dated 7 December 2011 was received by the Tribunal
for the final hearing day on 31 May 2012. Mr Mahony
also provided a statement
dated 12 April 2012 (volume R4- exhibit 36). Mr Mahony also gave further
evidence on this occasion.
his statement dated 12 April 2012 Mr Mahony substantially dealt with the issues
arising from the Report of Ms Dolan dated 15 September
2011 regarding the
Respondent’s dispensing of medications, including OxyContin, to a patient
in the grounds of a hospital on
8 September 2011.
Mahony stated at paragraph 10 that he had reviewed the prescription for the
OxyContin® and was of the view that it was
‘capable of being
legally dispensed’
by the Respondent.
Mahony also considered that the prescriptions for Lioresal, Microlax® and
Valpam® (being the other medications dispensed
to the patient on 8
September 2011) were
‘capable of being legally dispensed’
paragraph 12 Mr Mahony stated that despite this he was of the view that the
Respondent should have exercised the discretion given
to him under clauses 85(1)
and 35(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulations 2008 (NSW)
declined to dispense the prescriptions and supply the medications outside the
entrance to the Accident/Emergency Department of
a hospital in which the patient
was domiciled. Mr Mahony expressed the view that the Respondent exercised poor
professional judgment
in so doing.
Mahony then sets out reasons why he expresses this view. At this point the
Tribunal notes in particular the matters referred to
in paragraphs 14, 15 and 16
of Mr Mahony’s report and accepts his clear analysis of the relevant
factors. These paragraphs
read as follows:
Mr Ng ought to have been aware that in a public
patient’s medication (including any regular prescription, pharmacist-only
or over-the-counter medication) is prescribed by
the medical practitioner(s)
responsible for the care of the patient while he/she is an inpatient at the
patient’s medication (including any regular prescription, pharmacist-only
or over-the-counter medication) is dispensed through
the hospital pharmacy and
the supply of that medication to the patient is strictly controlled by the
nurses and medical practitioners
responsible for the care of the patient while
he/she is an inpatient at the hospital;
patient is typically not permitted to self-medicate and would certainly not be
permitted to self-medicate Schedule 8 drugs such
as oxycodone hydrochloride
(OxyContin®); and
patient’s medication that he/she has brought with him/her to the hospital
will only be used by the hospital in treating the
patient if the hospital does
not currently have that medication or its generic equivalent on hand, in which
case the patient’s
medication will be withdrawn from use as soon as the
hospital has the relevant medication in stock.
Mr Ng ought to have been aware that in a public hospital the nurse in charge of
the relevant ward is responsible for the storage
of all medication on the ward,
and all Schedule 4 and Schedule 8 drugs on the ward are required by regulations
30(1) and 75(1) of
the Regulations to be stored in a separate locked room, safe,
cupboard or other receptacle that is securely attached to a part of
Further, even in circumstances where a patient is permitted to self-medicate and
store their medication in their lockable
bedside cabinet, that patient would not
be permitted to store Schedule 8 drugs in their lockable bedside cabinet due to
the security
and recording requirements of those drugs.
the dispensing pattern of controlled release tablets of OxyContin® to
[the patient]
at Ryde Pharmacy strongly suggests that this medication was
also being dispensed to
[the patient]
at other pharmacies and possibly on
prescriptions issued by a number of different medical practitioners.
Mahony also undertook an analysis of the pattern of dispensing of OxyContin®
to the patient from the Respondent’s pharmacy
and his conclusions
therefrom in paragraphs 17 to 24. Once again the Tribunal accepts Mr
Mahony’s clear analysis. These paragraphs
read as follows:
have reviewed the patient medication history report for [the patient] which
appears at pages 6 to 9 of the PSU Report (the
Medication History
). That report reveals the following pattern of dispensing of
controlled release tablets of OxyContin® to [the patient] at Ryde
January 2011, 20 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were
dispensed to [the patient] on a standard prescription
issued by a Dr Mohammad
Sadiq Asar on 20 January 2011.
7 February 2011, 20 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were
dispensed to [the patient] on a standard prescription
issued by a Dr Jalila
Haidary on 7 February 2011.
March 2011, 60 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were dispensed
to [the patient] on an authority prescription
issued by Dr Soh on 25 March
12 May 2011, 60 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were dispensed
to [the patient] on an authority prescription
issued by Dr Soh on 12 May
July 2011, 60 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were dispensed
to [the patient] on an authority prescription
issued by Dr Soh on 4 July
release tablets of OxyContin® have a 12-hour duration of action and are to
be taken at a frequency of one tablet twice
a day as needed for effective and
sustained pain relief over a 24 hour period. Accordingly, if [the patient] was
taking this medication
as directed, one would expect the prescriptions in
subparagraphs
17(d) above
to have been issued and
dispensed on or before the following dates: 4 January 2011; 6 March 2011, 5
April 2011 and 5 May 2011.
addition, OxyContin® 40mg is not a starting dose. A medical practitioner
would not start a patient on controlled release tablets
of OxyContin® 40mg
unless the patient was being transferred from a high dose of some other opioid
formulation to OxyContin®.
For patients who are not being transferred from
a high dose of some other opioid formulation to OxyContin®, the typical
dose is one controlled release tablet of OxyContin® 10mg twice a
day (i.e. every 12 hours).
fact that the first prescription of controlled release tablets of OxyContin®
dispensed to [the patient] at Ryde Pharmacy was
for OxyContin® 40mg suggests
that this is not the first occasion of supply of controlled release tablets of
OxyContin® to
[the patient], and that [the patient] has been taking this
medication for some time.
my opinion, it is highly unlikely that [the patient] has been taking this
medication less frequently than directed; that is either
one tablet per day and
only if needed, or one tablet twice a day but only on occasions when he
experienced extreme outbreaks of pain.
The reason for this is that
OxyContin® becomes addictive if it is prescribed for periods in excess of
three months, and a person
who is dependent on OxyContin® 40mg for chronic
pain management, for example a wheelchair-bound paraplegic such as [the
would not be able to stop taking that medication for any extended
period and then recommence taking controlled release tablets of
at this dose without experiencing some adverse effects.
my opinion, it is likely that:
(a) authority
prescriptions for 56 controlled release tablets of OxyContin® 40mg were
issued for [the patient] by Dr Soh at regular
21 to 28 day intervals, and
dispensed at Ryde Pharmacy and at least one other pharmacy; and
several occasions standard prescriptions for 20 controlled release tablets of
OxyContin® 40mg or another similar medication,
for example Endone®, may
have been issued for [the patient] by other general practitioners, and dispensed
at a pharmacy other
than Ryde Pharmacy.
Mr Ng ought to have been aware that pharmacy and doctor shopping is a real
concern and not uncommon with medication such as
OxyContin®.
Mr Ng ought to have been aware, or at least suspected, that [the patient] may
have been misusing and/or abusing OxyContin®
for the reasons set out in the
above paragraphs (or even possibly supplying his OxyContin® to others for
personal gain), and
that such misuse and/or abuse may extend to the other
regular prescription medication dispensed to [the patient].
Mahony also took an analysis of the pattern of dispensing of other medication to
the patient from the Respondent’s pharmacy
and the conclusions therefrom
in paragraphs 25 to 33. The Tribunal similarly accepts this analysis. These
paragraphs read as follows:
dispensing pattern of the other regular prescription medication dispensed to
[the patient] at Ryde Pharmacy also suggests that
that medication was being
dispensed to [the patient] at other pharmacies and on prescriptions issued by a
number of different medical
practitioners, and that that medication may have
been self-administered by [the patient] at doses that exceeded the recommended
Medication History Report for [the patient] reveals that [the patient] was
regularly prescribed the following medication consistent
with lower body
paralysis or paraplegia: Clofen® 10mg (or Lioresal® 10mg) and
Clofen® 25mg (or Lioresal® 25mg) to
suppress the involuntary muscle
spasms that lead to bladder dysfunction (incontinence); and Ditropan® 5mg
(or Oxybutynin Winthrop®
5mg) to increase bladder capacity and decrease the
frequency of incontinent episodes and voluntary urination.
A, B and C below detail the pattern of dispensing of Clofen® 10mg (or
Lioresal® 10mg), Clofen® 25mg (or Lioresal®
25mg), and Ditropan®
5mg (or Oxybutynin Winthrop® 5mg), respectively, to [the patient] at Ryde
Table A: Clofen® 10mg (or Lioresal®
Prescription
Supply Days
Days b/w Supplies
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Soh – 17.06.2011
Dr Soh – 17.06.2011
Table B: Clofen® 25mg (or Lioresal® 25mg)
Prescription
Supply Days
Days b/w Supplies
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Dr Asar – 11.05.2010
Dr Asar – 11.05.2010
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Asar – 11.05.2010
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Dr Soh – 08.09.2011
Table C: Ditropan® 5mg (or Oxybutynin Winthrop® 5mg)
Prescription
Supply Days
Days b/w Supplies
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr De Silva – 01.06.2010
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr Haidary – 07.02.2011
Oxybutynin Winthrop®
Dr Asar – 09.07.2010
Dr Asar – 20.01.2011
my opinion, 100 tablets Clofen® 10mg (or Lioresal® 10mg) were also
dispensed to [the patient] at another pharmacy on the
prescription issued by Dr
Asar on 20 January 2011 (being the first supply on the six supply prescription)
at some time between 20
January 2011 and 25 January 2011. I have formed this
opinion based upon the number of supplies on that prescription recorded in
Medication History Report and the pattern of dispensing of this medication at
Ryde Pharmacy.
of Clofen® 10mg (or Lioresal® 10mg) and Clofen® 25mg (or
Lioresal® 25mg) have a 6 to 8 hour duration of action
and are to be taken at
a frequency of one tablet three to four times a day for effective bladder
control. If [the patient] was taking
this medication as directed, that is a
total of 35mg of Clofen® (or Lioresal®) four times a day (one tablet of
each medication
four times a day), one would expect the prescriptions
(a) 100 tablets of Clofen® 10mg (or Lioresal® 10mg) to have been
issued and/or dispensed by the following dates, following
the dispensing at Ryde
Pharmacy on 16 September 2010: 11 October 2010, 5 November 2010, 30 November
2010, 25 December 2010, 19 January
2011, 13 February 2011, 10 March 2011, 4
April 2011, 29 April 2011, 24 May 2011, 18 June 2011, 13 July 2011, 7 August
2011, and 1
September 2011.
(b) 100 tablets of Clofen® 25mg (or Lioresal® 25mg) to have been
issued and/or dispensed by the following dates, following
the dispensing at Ryde
Pharmacy on 6 October 2010: 31 October 2010, 25 November 2010, 20 December 2010,
14 January 2011, 8 February
2011, 5 March 2011, 30 March 2011, 24 April 2011, 19
May 2011, 13 June 2011, 8 July 2011, 2 August 2011, and 27 August
my opinion it is highly unlikely that [the patient] would have been taking this
medication less frequently than directed or at
a lower dose than directed.
Further, the interval between consecutive dispensings of Clofen® 10mg in
September 2010 to December
2010, in particular, suggests that there may have
been months when [the patient] was taking this medication in doses that exceeded
the recommended dose. If that is the case, then it may provide an alternative
explanation for why [the patient] was observed by
Dr Olesnicky to be ‘off
overdose of Clofen® (or Lioresal®) can cause central nervous system
depression, signs of which include impairment of consciousness,
respiratory
depression, confusion, hallucinations, agitation and absent papillary
of Ditropan® 5mg (or Oxybutynin Winthrop® 5mg) have a 6 to 8 hour
duration of action and are to be taken at a frequency
of one tablet three to
four times a day for effective bladder control. If [the patient] was taking
this medication as directed,
that is one tablet three times a day, one would
expect the prescriptions of 100 tablets of Ditropan® 5mg (or Oxybutynin
5mg) to have been issued and/or dispensed by the following dates,
following the dispensing at Ryde Pharmacy on 31 October 2010: 3
December 2010, 5
January 2011, 8 February 2011, 13 March 2011, 15 April 2011, 18 May 2011, 20
June 2011, 23 July 2011 and 25 August
my opinion, it is also highly unlikely that [the patient] would have been taking
this medication less frequently than directed
or at a lower dose than directed.
This, together with the interval between consecutive dispensings of
Ditropan® 5mg (or Oxybutynin
Winthrop® 5mg) at Ryde Pharmacy, the number
of prescriptions issued to [the patient], and the number of repeat supplies on
prescription that were not dispensed at Ryde Pharmacy, strongly suggests
that this medication was also being dispensed to [the patient]
pharmacy (or other pharmacies).
paragraph 34 Mr Mahony adds to his view that the Respondent exercised poor
professional judgment on 8 September 2011 and that he
victim of a longstanding and dedicated campaign of deliberate manipulation and
deception perpetrated by
[the patient],
a non-compliant medication
Mr Mahony expresses the view that the Respondent’s
actions could be explained to some extent as a result of his misguided sense
care and compassion for the patient rather than self-interest or personal
Mahony records that he discussed the events that occurred on and subject to 8
September 2011 on 25 January 2012, 28 February 2012
and 27 March 2012 for a
period of two to three hours during which he shared with the Respondent his
views of the conduct. Mr Mahony
stated that he considered the Respondent
understood and accepted that he had exercised poor professional judgment and he
was confident
that he would not exercise such poor professional judgment in the
Oral Evidence of Mr Mahony
Mahony gave evidence on 12 May 2011, 11 August 2011 and 31 May 2012. His
evidence reveals he has spent a considerable amount of
time with the Respondent
working with him in compliance with the undertaking given to the Supreme Court.
The evidence of Mr Mahony
in its entirety has been reviewed and carefully
considered by the Tribunal. Given the length of this Reasons document the
will only summarise the evidence given on the last occasion by Mr
Mahony. There is no intention on the part of the Tribunal to give
his evidence
on 31 May 2012 any more or less weight and emphasises again that the entirety of
Mr Mahony’s evidence has been
carefully considered.
asked about the seriousness with which he viewed the Respondent’s conduct
on 8 September 2011 Mr Mahony stated that if
viewed in isolation it would
probably have a high degree of seriousness but there were some
circumstances/compensating facts for
that day that mitigated the seriousness
Mahony stated that apart from a reference in a report from Mr Cohen regarding
the events of 13 September 2011 he was awaiting further
information. The only
reference that the Tribunal can locate in the reports of Mr Cohen is a reference
to the fact that there had
been a visit from the PSU Inspector for the purpose
of destroying out of date Schedule 8 medications. The Tribunal notes that at
time the reports were written by Mr Cohen he was aware that these reports were
still being provided to the Tribunal and Council
despite the substantive Inquiry
being adjourned. Mr Mahony was cross-examined regarding where the reference to
the events of 13 September
2011 may have been and nothing significant was
identified apart from the report of Mr Cohen dated 21 September 2011 (see
was not until 23 January 2012 when a lawyer for the Respondent rang Mr Mahony
indicating that the matter would be put before the
Tribunal that arrangements
were made to speak to the Respondent. Mr Mahony gave the following account of
the discussion and what
occurred thereafter:
The discussion was about what his - what occurred on
that day and what occurred during Ms Dolan's visit. And Mr Cohen
happened to
be there on that day as well and we discussed that process. I said
to him that it was an error of judgment and that he should have
known certain
things about handling prescriptions and he should have known more about the
roles of medication for anybody who are
in hospital grounds. I then took all
the data from Mr Ng's computer about all the prescriptions he'd dispensed
for [the patient]
over the last three plus years and I took that home with me
and I analysed all of that data. And I got a slightly different picture
had happened on that particular day and what was happening with [the patient] in
that pharmacy. And I could see that there
was patterns that had occurred and I
was - I felt that [the patient] was - there were certain
things about his processes, about his
claim that he was only a general patient
not a concessional patient yet his funds were being managed by the
professional - the trustees,
all of those things sort of added up to
somebody who was not - was playing Peter off in this situation. I
then spoke to him again
and I said this is very serious and that the outcomes
probable deregistration
. And I said our business plan didn't include
that but what we are going to have to do now is to include that as a possibility
we needed to take steps to go down that track. However I said our strategy
is that we will assume that we can provide a reasonable
presentation to the
Tribunal and that we will work as hard as we can to address all the issues that
brought this process in to play.
And we looked at all the intervention reports
and sort of said okay these are how we should handle these things in the future.
that was the sort of sequence of events.
[Emphasis added by the
Mahony’s evidence continued as follows:
Q. In your answer there you described your discussions with
Mr Ng as being very frank, based on those discussions did you form a
experience?
A. I believe Peter has tried exceedingly hard to come to grips with all
of the changes that have been required for him and I would
certainly say that I
believe he has continued those attempts to improve his skills. And I think with
Mr Cohen's visits and monitoring
they have - we have worked on a
strategy to identify anything where are shortcomings and address those.
Q. Do the events of 8 September 2011 cause you to doubt whether
Mr Ng is fit to continue to practise as registered pharmacist?
A. I don't have the 100% confidence that I had 12 months ago. I do
have a lot of confidence in Peter, and particularly in his commitment
the process work. That's not to say that things won't go wrong but I know he is
committing himself 100% to make it work.
Mahony gave the following evidence under cross-examination:
Q. In the context where you consider it to be an error of
judgment was it of concern to you that Mr Ng hadn't raised the matter with
you in the immediate aftermath of the incident in September?
A. Again, that was one of the discussions that we did have in January
because it basically came out of the blue to me. I mean, if
you look at some of
the incident reports that Mr Cohen gives me they refer to there not being a
duplicate on a prescription, things
aren't signed correctly, or there are all
sorts of other issues which we would call incidents. And there was obviously a
that, and again that's part of what I did talk to Mr Cohen about,
Q. In your answer, and can I say your quite candid answer, to the
question put to you about Mr Ng's fitness, you said you don't have
confidence, or words to the effect that you didn't have the confidence you did
12 months ago, do you remember that answer?
A. I do, yes.
Q. Is it troubling to you that, notwithstanding the very considerable
efforts that you and others have gone to, your confidence is
at this point in
time less than it was 12 months ago?
A. I suppose the confidence is diminished because of the seriousness of
this error or judgment, right?
A. Now we all make errors of judgment and I know we've had to deal with
some in our pharmacies even as yesterday, so things happen
and they had to be
addressed. So we all do it but the thing that has concerned me in this instance
was the fact that we have such
supervision in this process that no matter what
happened the bells at the Pharmaceutical Services Branch rang louder because it
Ryde Pharmacy on that report. It was a serious report, I'm not arguing
that, but I know that Peter is being watched even closer
than anybody.
Justifiably, I'm not saying that it's unjustified.
Q. I understand that.
A. I'm saying that that's why my confidence level is slightly
diminished.
Q. Maybe just building on to that from that question, you gave some
instances when you were asked about the level of seriousness
of the incident,
you gave some factors both as to why it was serious and some mitigating factors,
do you recall that?
A. I do, yes.
Q. In making your assessment as to the seriousness of this incident would
you also take in to account the fact that Mr Ng has been
the subject of
past indiscretions?
A. I think the past indiscretions are irrelevant in this process. The
monitoring is relevant, but they are separate judgment errors,
right? The other
ones were more professional errors and things that shouldn't have happened
within the profession. They were lapses
in standards completely, whereas this
one he had he weighed things up and was influenced by certain decisions and he
made that judgment
call. And that's why I separate them out completely.
Q. I understand that.
A. The monitoring I don't separate that.
Q. Is it fair to say this, that if it was you that was in that situation
on the 8 September and having to make that balancing exercise
have fallen on the side of not dispensing the prescription?
A. I would have done more interventions.
Q. No, fair answer, but I've gone to the last question and I should have
asked the question beforehand, if you were confronted with
the situation that
Mr Ng was confronted with on the 8 September 2011 is it fair to say
you would have made more enquiries before
dispensing?
A. It's fair to say that I would have made more enquiries.
Q. If you hadn't gone to the step of making those further enquiries would
it be fair to suggest that you would have declined to dispense?
A. It obviously depends on the outcome because we actually do supply
medications to a hospital in one of our stores because there
are PBS funding for
prescriptions for long stay patients. And a lot of those people have private
medication, private pharmacies
and we deliver it to them, but it's not to them
per se, it goes through the system and everything is recorded. Even people who
in respite situations they would have their own medication, we would charge
them separately, we'd do all of those sorts of things.
So it's not uncommon to
actually provide medication to people in hospitals or health services, or
multipurpose services, but you
would have had much closer contact with the nurse
unit manager or with the prescriber to ensure that the - well, in the
case of respite,
the form that's been delivered, quantity, and all these other
sorts of things are all done, so, yes, I would have done those steps.
Q. Can I try to summarise this way, as I understand your evidence is, you
wouldn't have prescribed unless you had made further enquiries
A. I wouldn't have dispensed and delivered no.
Q. You would have only dispensed if having made those further enquiries
you were satisfied with the outcome of those enquiries?
A. That's true, yes.
answer to a question from the Tribunal Mr Mahony stated that he became concerned
when he saw that the fact
that the OxyContin® had been dispensed on 4 July 2011 then not again until 8
September 2011 and ‘nobody
would miss a month of oxycodone. This
information was sufficient for Mr Mahony to take a copy of the records of the
patient away
with him for further consideration (T596). Mr Mahony’s
evidence continued:
Q. So what did that make you think then?
A. I immediately thought that he was getting medication from elsewhere.
And so I then looked further and saw I think it was March
and February there was
two months together and then there was a script for Endone from another doctor
in the middle of all of that,
and I said, "Oops", so I just put it all into a
spreadsheet and sorted it out and you could see the sort of history and stuff
Q. So if you had seen that on your dispensing program would it be
apparent that that pattern was a bit funny without going to all
A. I could have spent the time at Peter's pharmacy doing it but I would
have - I saw something there which I felt I needed to analyse
dumped about and talked about other things and I took that home and I analysed
it separately.
Q. I suppose what I'm trying to say, would it have made you suspicious
just as the pharmacist on the day or being the owner at that
point that this
person did have an unusual pattern?
A. It's exactly the reason I took the history. I saw it and I went from
Q. So an immediate perusal made you suspicious?
A. Anybody that's on oxycodone 40s and 80 milligram and getting them
in 56s, in our store that's what we do. Nobody - Endone in
20s, that's common. Endone in lots of 120 we check the intervals, we do all
those sorts of things to make certain they're
right. And as I said, OxyContin
40s and 80s particularly, in our store nobody does it without doing that
in his evidence Mr Mahony also stated that the method of payment for medication
utilised by the patient (partly paid directly
and partly through the NSW Trustee
and Guardian) would also have aroused his suspicion and provided a detailed
explanation for this
view. Mr Mahony also expressed the view that extra
vigilance would be appropriate in such circumstances.
Tribunal clarified the comments made by Mr Mahony regarding his views of the
Respondent’s conduct on 8 September 2011 in
the following question:
Q. You gave us some examples earlier of what you thought were
mitigating factors for the conduct of Mr Ng on that day of the
8 September,
I'm just wanting to ask you have you looked at that incident
in the light of the fact that Mr Ng was before a current tribunal and
facing fairly serious complaints, so looking at his conduct, if you like, where
the spotlight was firmly focused on him and then
he goes and conducts himself in
the way he did, and I'm wondering if you can considered it from that
A. On the 25 January that was 100% of what I said to him, basically,
I said, "You more than anybody else should have not done that.
Your judgment
should have been impeccable, not questionable." And I said in the circumstances
of somebody else it probably wouldn't
have been as serious but because of the
situation he's in that's why I considered it was very serious and that's what I
in the report and that's what I said to him.
Tribunal attempted to further clarify when Mr Mahony became aware of the events
of 8 September 2011 (noting the evidence of the
Respondent set out elsewhere in
this document was that he did not talk to Mr Mahony about this incident until 25
January 2012). Mr
Mahony was asked the following questions:
Q. So are you able to say whether you had heard about it when
you wrote your report on the 7 December 2011?
A. It was not relevant in that report because there was no official
complaint or anything. There were lots of incidents that happened
which weren't
also recorded in that report. But it was what we were talking about in that
report, is the progress of that business
plan management process that needed to
get back to the council by that particular time. The first time we got the
official complaint
was in the next month, in January.
Q. But you had heard about the incident?
A. I had heard something and I had spoken to Steve Cohen about it because
of we had two conversations during the latter part of the
year and we were
talking about what his role was, particularly it was after the August tribunal
hearings, we were looking at how
his role continued and what we needed. And
Mr Cohen has some great interest in recording particularly DDs in
electronic form, that's
one of his passions that he wants to get through in his
role in the society. And we had lots of discussions about that. And part
discussion was that the fact that we are working with Pharmaceutical Services
Branch and if something goes wrong we don't criticise
them we work with them,
because I understood that his discussion with Ms Dolan was not a
professional discussion, it was more confrontation
and not professional.
Report of Mr Piggott
Respondent’s legal representatives wrote to Mr Piggott on 28 March 2011
asking that he provide an independent audit of business
plan prepared by Mr
Mahony. The covering letter (volume R1, exhibit 10) does not mention the
complaint of unfitness in the public
interest on the basis of convictions. The
letter request Mr Piggott to address the following matters in his
In that capacity, you will need to undertake the following
the Business Plan.
a written opinion as to whether you are satisfied that the Business Plan will
establish the following matters.
business structure that will focus on the protection of the public, compliance
with legal obligations and professional standards
of a pharmacist.
staffing proposal to ascertain the need for and engagement, if required, of
additional support staff necessary to provide a
standard of service consistent
with the professional obligations of our client.
business plan enabling the plaintiff to sustain the commitment to and funding of
the proposed structure and mentoring.
response to this request Mr Piggott prepared a report dated 3 April 2011 (volume
R1, exhibit 11). Mr Piggott expressed the view
‘Mr Mahony has done
an excellent job in developing a Business Plan (B.P.) that should satisfy the
Council’s desire’.
report concludes with the following comment:
My thoughts are that Mr Ng is having his eyes opened about Community Pharmacy
in an Australian business – sense. In some areas
he is acting slowly but
he is very acceptant of his Mentors teaching. I would hope that Mr Ng will
continue to mix with his peers,
both professionally and socially to continue his
growth of knowledge.
The B.P. prepared by Mr Patrick Mahony is sound, normal and achievable in my
estimation.
audit report prepared by Mr Piggott dated 3 April 2011, received by the Council
on 18 April 2011 was considered by the 11 May
2011 Council meeting (see volume
R2, exhibit 3).
Piggott provided an Audit report dated 22 July 2011 (volume R4, exhibit 4). Mr
Piggott states that he considers Mr Mahony had
‘done an excellent job
in developing a Business Plan (B.P.) that should satisfy the Council’s
Piggott made positive comments regarding the staffing levels in the pharmacy,
the appearance of the pharmacy, the recording of
the Schedule 8 drugs. With
respect to staffing, Mr Piggott made the following observations:
During my visit, I got the impression that Peter understands staffing levels
for customer satisfaction and training that maximises
the knowledge that staff
can impart to patients, which finally results in effective
profitability.
Peter told me that all his staff are Permanent Part Time. I have asked him
to send me an example of his ‘wages sheets’
for an average week. I
have also made him aware that Ms Nora Fenton at Guild, NSW Branch is a person
who he can turn to for advice
in all employment
report records that the Respondent had purchased an MYOB accounting package but
not installed it. Mr Piggott provided the following
advice in his report:
Business is fluid and requires constant assessing. Peter Ng should go back
over his B.P. and review all areas. The changing scene
‘discounting’ within our profession can potentially alter a business
rapidly, as I noticed when walking through his
adjoining shopping centre. He
can discuss strategies to conquer ‘threats’ with his Mentor.
However, I am of the opinion
that Peter is well prepared now to grow his
business through a traditional, personal
Piggott concludes that the BP prepared by Mr Mahony was
‘proceeding
with solid basic grounding and that it will bear the fruits of its strategy over
the coming years’.
Oral evidence of Mr Piggott
Piggott gave evidence on 28 July 2011. He confirmed that he had prepared two
reports (one dated 21 April 2011 – volume R2
– exhibit 4- and the
other 22 July 2011 – volume R4 – exhibit 4) and provided a copy of
Piggott confirmed he had received a letter from the Respondent’s
solicitors requesting that he inspect the Respondent’s
pharmacy for the
purpose of assessing what progress against the business plan developed by Mr
Mahony (volume R1 – exhibit 10).
Apart from the two occasions he attended
the Respondent’s pharmacy (being 29 March 2011 for about two hours and 21
for about one hour) Mr Piggott had no other contact with the
Respondent. Mr Piggott stated he did know Mr Mahony and held him in
Piggott spoke with the Respondent in order to determine the changes in protocols
and procedures that had occurred as a result of
the implementation of the
Business Plan developed by Mr Mahony.
Piggott reported that there were improvements he observed during the second
visit. The external signage had become clear and professional
rather than
‘tired’ looking. The renovation of the shop had progressed from
complete. The shop generally looked
more orderly in its presentation and he noticed improvements. The Respondent
informed Mr Piggott
that he had purchased an MYOB computer plan since his last
visit (although the Tribunal notes that it was not installed at the time).
Piggott stated that it had concerned him that when he attended the shop on 21
July 2011 the Respondent was the only person present
in the pharmacy. The
Respondent provided Mt Piggott with an explanation for this situation and
shortly thereafter the Respondent’s
wife returned from making a delivery.
Piggott commented that the Business Plan that had been developed by Mr Mahony
was thorough and expansive and fairly typical of
what he expects would be the
natural part of operating a traditional Australian pharmacy.
Piggott gave an account of the practice adopted in the pharmacies in which he
had an interest with respect to returned Schedule
8 drugs. It involved the clear
identification and recording of those drugs (T348-349). When pressed by senior
counsel for the Respondent
Mr Piggott stated that the actual regulations
regarding the return of Schedule 8 medications were ‘unclear’ with
to what the word ‘receipt’ meant. Mr Piggott’s
evidence was clear as how he considered returned Schedule 8 medications
be handled by a pharmacist. Later in his evidence, in answer to questions from
the Tribunal Mr Piggott stated that the ‘grey
area’ was whether to
place returned Schedule 8 medications into the unwanted medicines bin (RUM bin
– returned unwanted
medicines) or to put it in the safe and identify it
and have it destroyed at the next appropriate opportunity. Mr Piggott reiterated
that if the medication was placed into the safe then it should be identified in
at July 2011 Mr Piggott expressed the view that he considered the Respondent to
be a ‘work in progress’ as he thought
there still needed to be
improvements. Mr Piggott expressed the view that receiving one-on-one
supervision was of value and that
engaging in continuing education where the
Respondent was mixing with good Australian pharmacists was of importance as more
be learned from peers than from written materials.
Piggott concluded his evidence in chief with the following answer (T350):
Q. I realise at the end of the day it's obviously a matter for
the Tribunal, but having regard to your knowledge of Mr Ng, do you
view as to whether he's capable of being improved, to a level which would be
satisfactory?
A. I have a view that he is capable of being improved. I have a view
that he - he understands that some of the things that he previously
thought Australian pharmacy runs like, that that was unacceptable and that he,
even in broader areas, needs to improve his pharmacy
professional and commercial
cross-examination Mr Piggott initially gave evidence that he was not aware that
the Respondent had been convicted of breaches
Poisons and Therapeutic
as far back as the 1990’s and later stated that he could not
be sure as to what he knew in this regard, just that he knew there
complaints regarding the Respondent. Further, Mr Piggott was aware that the
business plan developed by Mr Mahony arose from
the most recent finding of
professional misconduct. Ultimately in answer to questions from the Tribunal Mr
Piggott agreed that he
had seen a copy of the Reasons for Decision of the
initial Tribunal and this had mentioned that the Respondent had convictions but
that he had put this out of his mind while he undertook the audit.
Piggott stated that he considered the Respondent to be fit to practice as a
pharmacist although there was a need for a review.
On further exploration this
entailed various conditions on practice such as supervision, exposure to
‘good Australian pharmacists’
and attendance at continuing education
conferences. Later in his cross-examination Mr Piggott accepted that the need to
have supervision
would indicate current unfitness to practice. He also confirmed
that he would not expect a pharmacist who had been working for 21
community pharmacist to require supervision.
Piggott confirmed during his cross-examination that merely placing an elastic
band around a returned or out of date Schedule 8
medication is not the system he
would use as he would always have a label or some identifier.
some confusion arose because of the wide ranging questioning of Mr Piggott, he
confirmed that it had been his understanding
that his role was to audit the
business plan Mr Mahony was implementing in the Respondent’s practice.
When he looked at the
Drug register he did not do so as a formal audit, rather
it was just a cursory look with a few checks.
he had difficulty answering the question because of the limited brief he had
with respect to this matter, in answer to a
question from the Tribunal as to
what he saw as the key areas in which the Respondent still needed to improve Mr
Piggott stated that
the Respondent had to embrace the culture of traditional
Australian community pharmacy meaning that the Respondent had to have a
‘very efficient and professional ability to control everything he does
in the pharmacy’
. Mr Piggott stated that the public was entitled to
expect a certain standard from community pharmacists. In his view the Respondent
had demonstrated that he did not have a
‘free flowing ability to carry
out all of the rules’
Piggott clarified that he had expected an external audit to have been conducted
between his April visit and his July visit but
it had been an internal audit
(for QCPP purposes).
Piggott expressed the view that the business plan was quite
‘expansive’, and his role was to check to see if the plan
‘good plan’. While speaking with the Respondent he did gain an
understanding as to areas where changes were being
made. Mr Piggott stated that
the Business Plan included compliance with legal obligations, professional
standards and pharmacy standards
but expressed the view that he did not see it
as being highly ranked in the Business Plan.
Piggott expressed the view that he considered supervision was of value for the
Respondent as a mechanism by which the Respondent
could have interaction with
his peers. He also considered that a period of 12 months would be
‘wise’. Mr Piggott was
unable to recall whether or not he knew the
details of the previous supervision that the Respondent had been subjected to
the Board Inquiry).
Reports of Mr Cohen
Respondent entered into a Supervision Agreement with Mr Stephen Cohen on 6 July
2011 (volume R4, exhibit 1). The Agreements provides
for Mr Cohen to work for
six hours on a Monday and six hours on a Tuesday at the Respondent’s
pharmacy and to provide weekly
reports regarding the supervision provided.
Cohen has thereafter provided regular reports which have been provided to the
Tribunal. The first report (for week ending 13 July
2011 – volume R4,
exhibit 2) records that the Respondent is working Monday to Friday ((am –
‘Sometimes, RDO on Wednesdays’
in addition to
Sundays from 10 am to 1pm.
next report of Mr Cohen for week ending 19 July 2011 noted that the Respondent
had taken Sunday off work and that he noted
‘a high quality is being
maintained within the pharmacy’
and that the Pharmacy Guild’s
Mirixa software had been activated.
Cohen provided a statement dated 25 July 2011 (volume R4, exhibit 6). The
statement records that Mr Cohen has been a registered
pharmacist for over 40
years. In paragraph 11 Mr Cohen records that he was elected to the Committee of
the NSW Branch of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia. He further stated
‘The Pharmaceutical Society oversees pharmaceutical practice
throughout Australia’.
Cohen confirmed in this statement that he has undertaken the role of supervisor
for the Respondent’s practice and will remain
in that role until Mr Mahony
instructs him to cease.
paragraph 27 Mr Cohen sets out the days and times he has provided supervision to
the Respondent.
Cohen states that the pharmacy is closed on Sundays and as of mid-August 2011 Mr
Quincey Lee will be available to work in the pharmacy.
The statement does not
mention the role of Mr James Lee, although an annexure to the statement
indicates he may be working on a Wedneday
and a Saturday and that the Respondent
works on a Sunday.
Cohen provides a detailed account of matters such as his regular inspection of
the DD book, the monitoring of the refrigerator,
the Respondent’s
dispensing practices, the manner in which short-dated stock is handled, his
general inspection of the pharmacy
and the incident reporting mechanism in place
within the pharmacy. Mr Cohen concludes that he believes the Respondent is fit
to practise
pharmacy, that he is not a risk to members of the public and that he
is more than happy to continue in the role of supervisor to
the Respondent.
Cohen provided a supervision report for the week ending 2 August 2011 (volume
R4, exhibit 7). This report detailed the Respondent’s
handling of a
prescription for a Schedule 8 drug. Mr Cohen described the prescription as
having approval from Medicare Australia.
Mr Cohen then described the issues with
the script and the subsequent actions:
In the first instance, Peter noted that there were no repeat intervals
endorsed by the doctor.
Secondly, there were no intervals for dosing the repeats, as required by
Peter contacted the doctor, who responded with a letter in response that
Dear Mr. Ng,
I have had a lengthy conversation with the authorities department at Medicare
who have told me that they have no requirements for
intervals for dosing of
repeats to be put on narcotic prescriptions. According to them all requirements
of this prescription have
been appropriately filled. “The patient”
is using “the narcotic” at a dose of 1 patch per week. His
prescription
should therefore be dispensed once a
In spite of these Medicare issues, Peter queried why would the doctor not
indicate repeat intervals of 28 days, not 1 month. This
was then reapproved by
the doctor.
is of note that the Regulations (Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulations 2008
- NSW) requiring intervals is not mentioned in
the report of Mr Cohen or in his
evidence regarding the interaction with the doctor. There is no distinction
drawn between state
legislative requirements and the requirements of Medicare
(Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme) – being the requirements under the
National Health Act 1953
(a Commonwealth Act).
report for the week ending 9 August 2011 formed volume R4, exhibit 8. This
report recorded that Mr Cohen had suggested a process
for the identification of
short dated stock within the pharmacy and that Mr James Lee had worked on
Thursday and Friday of that week.
is a reference to the visit of Ms Dolan to the pharmacy in Mr Cohen’s
report for the week ending 21 September 2011 (volume
R4 – exhibit 14). The
reference is in the form of an ‘Incident Report’. The report is
framed as an Inspector from
the NSW Department of Health attending the pharmacy
at the Respondent’s request for the purpose of destroying out of date
that had been identified during the inspection in April 2011. There is no
mention of the questions from Ms Dolan regarding the dispensing
and delivery of
medications to the hospital on 8 September 2011 or the telephone calls from the
hospital’s anaesthetist or
Tribunal notes at this point that Ms Dolan gave evidence that she had attended
the pharmacy on 13 September 2011 as a result of
receiving the complaints
relating to the Respondent’s inappropriate delivery of medications to a
patient in the grounds of
a hospital.
Tribunal also notes that the report dated 11 October 2011 from Mr Cohen details
the half day attendance of Mr Mahony at the pharmacy
but makes no mention of the
nature of the discussions that had taken place with the PSU Inspectors on 13
September 2011.
Oral Evidence from Cohen
Cohen gave evidence on 28 July 2011 (T374). From his evidence in chief it
appears that Mr Cohen had worked as a locum for the Respondent
from time to time
since 2009 and had then worked as his supervisor during 2011. The work as a
supervisor was six hours per day on
a Monday and a Tuesday. Later in his
evidence Mr Cohen clarified that he may have worked for the Respondent as a
locum for a period
of a few days and his role as a supervisor at the time he
gave his evidence had been limited to a period of approximately 48 working
Cohen confirmed that the views he expressed about the Respondent’s
practice were a result of his observation of the Respondent
during the times he
had worked as a locum and supervisor and not as a result of any of the
‘historical material’
cross-examination Mr Cohen gave evidence that he had only become aware that the
Respondent had been prosecuted in the Local
Court on a number of occasions for
breaches of regulatory legislation and had been subject of an adverse finding of
the Pharmacy
Board the day before he gave evidence to the Tribunal when he had
been provided with a folder of documentation.
Cohen was asked questions regarding whether he saw these matters to be of
concern. It is difficult to discern exactly what Mr Cohen’s
view on this
matter is from the answers he gave (see Transcript around 377-378).
Cohen stated that he was not sure how the term
‘Pharmacist in
was defined (T379.30) but accepted that there was a
requirement for the name of the Pharmacist in Charge to be displayed in a
Mr Cohen was unable to say who had been the Pharmacist in Charge
during the times that he had been working as a supervisor with the
(T379). Mr Cohen stated he was not sure of what the regulations were in this
regard and he had never needed to consider
this in his 40 years of practice
Cohen confirmed under cross-examination that he did not consider the Respondent
to be a risk to the public based upon his observations
of the Respondent during
supervision (which commenced on 6 July 2011) without regard to any past events
or indiscretions (T382).
The limited nature of the checking of items such as the
Drug Register was explored under cross-examination (see around T383).
the answers provided by Mr Cohen under cross-examination when the Tribunal took
Mr Cohen to section 139D(d) of the National
Law Mr Cohen gave evidence that he
had put up his name and his Pharmacist in Charge sign up whenever he was working
whether there
was another pharmacist there or not (T385). He expressed the view
that the legislation does not necessarily say there can’t
pharmacists in charge (T388 and 389). Later in his evidence Mr Cohen stated that
the term ‘Pharmacist in Charge’
meant to him a pharmacist who was
registered (in NSW) and working in the pharmacy (T388).
Cohen clarified that when he was working as a supervisor he was mostly observing
the Respondent doing the dispensing. He would
dispense himself if the pharmacy
became busy (T386).
respect to Mr Cohen’s comments regarding having observed drugs of
addiction being dispensed in an orderly and streamlined
fashion, Mr Cohen
confirmed that there had only been one or two such scripts dispensed during the
time he had been supervising the
Respondent (T388).
Cohen stated that he had not formed a view about what matters were of interest
to the Inspectors that attended pharmacies on behalf
of then Pharmacy Board of
NSW. It was his experience that they attended for the purpose of checking on
particular issues such as
the prescriptions dispensed from a particular doctor
in recent times, checking for stolen prescriptions and the like (T390). Mr Cohen
could not recall whether the inspector checked if his registration was current
or if he was the Pharmacist in Charge.
Cohen stated he had never read the Pharmacy Act (NSW) (being the legislation in
place prior to the introduction of the
National Law
re-examination Mr Cohen was taken to a document attached to his statement which
set out the terms of his engagement as a supervisor
which indicate his role was
to support the Respondent and correct any procedure that failed to meet
professional standards (T397).
Cohen stated that he had recently been elected to the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia (NSW Branch). Given that the Council
approved Mr Cohen as a supervisor
for the Respondent (given that he had been the subject of a finding of
professional misconduct)
it is of concern that Mr Cohen gave evidence that he
was unsure as to whether the Pharmacy Board of Australia still existed or
it had changed its name to the Pharmacy Council (T393).
Report of Mr Dash
Dash entered into a tutoring agreement (volume R3, exhibit 2) with the
Respondent on 15 June 2011 at the request of the Respondent’s
advisers. Mr Dash met with the Respondent on four occasions. A report dated 15
June 2001 includes the following account of
his contact with the Respondent:
I visited Mr Ng’s pharmacy on Friday 3 June 2011 to introduce myself to
Mr Ng, assess the conditions under which he practised,
find out what reference
material was available to him, and suggest some areas of study prior to our
first tutoring session. I found
out that some of Mr Ng’s reference
material was out of date, but that he had a copy of the current version of the
Guide to the NSW Medicines and Poisons Schedules
published by the NSW
Branch of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Mr Ng also assured me that he had
electronic access, through his
dispensing software, to current versions of
. Mr Ng was asked to study those parts of the
Guide to the NSW Medicines and Poisons Schedules
relating to the handling
of substances in Schedules 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the
A tutoring session lasting 2 hours was held in the Faculty of Pharmacy
building at the University of Sydney on Tuesday 7 June 2011.
The tutoring
process involved my asking questions to ascertain the extent of Mr Ng’s
knowledge of his professional obligations,
providing information to fill in gaps
that emerged, and answering Mr Ng’s
I visited Mr Ng’s pharmacy again on Saturday 11 June 2011 to provide
current versions of NSW legislation regulating the practice
of pharmacy and the
handling of poisons and therapeutic goods. The opportunity was also taken to
check other reference material
available to Mr Ng, and to confirm arrangements
for an examination of Mr Ng’s knowledge of his professional
obligations.
An examination session lasting 1¼ hours was held in the Faculty of
Pharmacy building at the University of Sydney on Tuesday 14
June 2011. I
provided Mr Ng with the enclosed examination paper and supervised him throughout
the completion of the enclosed written
response. After returning home I marked
the paper, my comments being recorded on the paper in red
Mr Ng’s written response to the examination paper and his answers to my
questions indicate that he now has a good working knowledge
of his professional
obligations in the handling of medicines and poisons. In addition, Mr Ng now
has all the publications required
for pharmacy premises, as listed in Schedule 3
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation
Forensic Pharmacy Examination prepared by Mr Dash and undertaken by the
Respondent asks fundamental questions regarding the supply
of a Schedule 3 drug
and the dispensing of one Schedule 4D and one Schedule 8 drug. The written
answers as marked by Mr Dash are
also included in volume R3, exhibit 2. The
marked paper indicates adequate but not complete answers.
Dash also provided a statement dated 22 July 2011 (volume R4, exhibit 5). The
statement and attached CV detail the lengthy and
distinguished career of Mr Dash
and covers the information in the report of 15 June 2011. Paragraph 19 of the
statement reads:
The respondent’s examination results indicated that he now has a good
working knowledge of his professional obligations as a
pharmacist in the
handling of medicines and poisons.
Oral Evidence of Mr Robert Dash
Dash gave evidence on 27 July 2011 (see T342-357).
Dash confirmed that he is a health services consultant and that he has produced
Guide to the New South Wales Medicines and Poisons Schedules
1956. Mr Dash also confirmed that he is not a registered pharmacist, having let
his registration lapse at the end of 2010.
Dash stated that on 7 June 2011 he asked the Respondent some questions and from
the answers he provided information ‘
to fill in the gaps
However, he could not recall what these gaps were.
Dash confirmed that he found the Respondent’s then knowledge to be quite
reasonable and comparable with what he would expect
of a practising
pharmacist.
asked if he had produced an examination to test the Respondent’s
knowledge, Mr Dash confirmed that he had done so. He
stated that in formulating
the examination it was his intention to test particular aspects of the
requirements a pharmacist ought
to know and that were related to his brief. Mr
Dash also stated that these requirements related to issues regarding the
of medicines in Schedules 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the Poisons List, and that
from the written answers to the questions he thought that the
Respondent’s
knowledge was comparable with that expected of a ‘reasonable’
practising pharmacist.
Dash stated that although the Respondent had been practising pharmacy for some
21 years he was not concerned that there were gaps
Respondent’s knowledge which Mr Dash had had to fill in. Mr Dash stated
‘Everyone will have an occasional gap in their knowledge, as
circumstances change, or legislation is updated.’
Dash stated that the fact the Respondent did not have the required legislation
(National Law New South Wales) was of concern to
him, but that the Respondent
did have a current copy of the
Guide to the New South Wales Medicines and
Poisons Schedules,
which summarised the legislative issues which are of
relevance to a practising community pharmacist. He stated that the Respondent
did not explain to him why he did not have a copy of the required legislation,
and that he accordingly provided the Respondent with
various pieces of
legislation which a pharmacist is required to have on hand.
Dash stated that from the Respondent's examination results he had a good working
knowledge of his professional obligations but
he could not offer a view as to
how much of that working knowledge could be attributed to the tutoring sessions
he had provided to
the Respondent, because he had not ascertained the
Respondent’s level of knowledge in detail prior to the examination.
Dash stated that the tutoring session on 7 June 2011 took the form of Mr Dash
asking the Respondent to explain to him his legislative
obligations in various
circumstances.
Dash stated that he was only aware in general terms of the Respondent’s
previous history and that he was only now aware of
the Respondent’s
convictions relating to non-compliance with legislative requirements. He
confirmed that he was aware that
the Respondent had been the subject of
disciplinary proceedings for failure to comply with legislative requirements.
He also confirmed
that it would be a matter of concern to him that the
Respondent had been the subject of previous adverse findings regarding his
with legislative requirements.
Dash stated that there were some notations on the Respondent’s examination
paper indicating important information that had
been omitted by the Respondent.
He stated, however, that under examination conditions people can fail to record
everything they
know as they are forgetful, and the Respondent’s
examination result may not necessarily be a reflection of his knowledge of
legislative requirements.
Dash stated that the examination was equivalent to that expected of a fourth
year pharmacy student. He stated that he would expect
the Respondent to have a
more practical knowledge base of legislative requirements (given the length of
time he has practised pharmacy)
than a fourth year pharmacy student, and that a
fourth year pharmacy student would probably be more specific regarding their
legislative
obligations.
Dash confirmed that the Respondent’s examination paper was not a copy of
one used for fourth year pharmacy students (as none
were available to Mr Dash at
the time) but one Mr Dash prepared that covered the issues that were of
importance.
Dash was unable to answer whether the Respondent’s examination results
would have been the same before Mr Dash’s tutoring.
He stated that in
tutorial Mr Dash went through each schedule and asked the Respondent what
the requirements were under various
circumstances. Mr Dash stated that his
overall impression of the Respondent’s tutorial responses was that the
Respondent ‘
had done his homework
Other evidence
Respondent also provided a copy of a letter dated 24 June 2011 from Meryl Kane
the QCPP State Manager (NSW) for the Pharmacy Guild
of Australia (volume R3,
exhibit 3). The letter records that there had been discussions between Ms Kane,
the Respondent and Mr Mahony
regarding the implementation of QCPP into the
Respondent’s pharmacy. The Tribunal notes that the timelines detailed in
letter do not appear from the evidence to have been met.
Professional References provided on behalf of the
reference dated 31 March 2011 written by Mr Sidney Ho was received by the
Tribunal (volume R2, exhibit 1). In oral evidence Mr Ho
confirmed the views
expressed in this document. Mr Ho was one of the pharmacists approved by the
Council as a supervisor for the
Respondent. The reference reads as follows:
I have been briefed by Mr. Peter Ng about his professional misconduct and the
Pharmacy Tribunal’s finding and Judge Adams’s
ruling and the purpose
of my presence as a supervising pharmacist.
Since September 2010, I have been working with Mr. Peter Ng in his pharmacy,
Ryde Pharmacy, which is located at [omitted]. Apart
from the pharmacist duty, I
was observing Peter’s everyday practice in his pharmacy. I found him to
be respected by most of
his customers and his practice is ethical and
professional and in line with current way of
In order to provide a safe and professional environment for the staff and
customers, Ryde Pharmacy had undergone a complete refit,
it involved improvement
in lighting, air-conditioning, changing from carpet to timber floor, and most of
all, the enlargement of
dispensing area. I found that after the renovation,
dispensing became more systematic and reduced the waiting time for customers,
also the new look of the pharmacy was so impressive to the customers. Peter has
put in a lot of effort in organising it, and has
done a good
Peter also employed a full time equivalent of pharmacy assistant to assist
the Pharmacist in running the shop; their position is very
a lot to the services of the pharmacy.
Aside from the improvement of the appearance of the pharmacy and increment of
staffing, Peter has been working hard to improve his
practice as a pharmacist,
to minimise the error in DD registrar, he stressed that DD items to be checked
in every transaction promptly,
so discrepancy can be verified and corrected
immediately. I found the DD register is up to date and the scripts are properly
and endorsed.
I finished my supervising role this month; however, I have confidence that
Peter can maintain his good standard of practice as a pharmacist
and wishing him
all his best.
Ho also gave oral evidence before the Tribunal on 11 May 2011. A copy of his CV
became Volume R1 – exhibit 4. He stated that
he had known the Respondent
for about 30 years, considered him a friend although he only saw him sometimes
for social purposes. Mr
Ho stated he had about 16 years of experience as a
community pharmacist. From time to time he and the Respondent had purchased
together in order to obtain a better price (T160).
oral evidence Mr Ho confirmed that he found the DD register to be up to date and
properly checked and endorsed and explained that
what he meant by this statement
was that every time he had to
‘do a DD dispensing’
that the register balanced. He confirmed he had not gone through the whole DD
Ho stated in cross-examination that he had been the Respondent’s
supervising pharmacist from November 2010 until the end
of March 2011 when he
was told by the Respondent that the supervision could be terminated (T147.2). He
had generally worked Sunday
to Tuesday and supervised the Respondent dispensing
medication (except for times when Mr Ho may have been
‘in the bathroom
or whatever’
Ho gave the following evidence at T148.1-19:
Q. So did you undertake the March - I am
sorry - did you have any role in undertaking an inventory in March
2011 of the dangerous
drug register?
A. As I said I don't - rather the whole registry is that the
item that are dispensed on that day that I will check.
Q. I'll ask the question again because I don't think you understood the
question and that's not a criticism. You understand that
there is an obligation
in March and September of every year for there to be an inventory taken of the
drugs in the - that are held
at a pharmacy. Correct?
Q. So there's an audit to make sure that the number of
dangerous - sorry that the number of drugs of addiction that are in
safe reconciles with what the records show in the DD register.
A. That's correct.
Q. And did you have any involvement in undertaking such an audit in March
2011 at Mr Ng's pharmacy?
this topic, in answer to questions from the Tribunal Mr Ho gave the following
evidence (T155.7-31):
Q. Yes. And when Mr Ginters said that you needed to do a
stock check every September and every March, there's also a requirement,
different pharmacist takes over as pharmacist in charge, that a stock take is
done there between the one leaving the post
of pharmacist in charge and taking
Q. Did that happen?
A. Usually the March and the September checking is at the end of the
A. Yeah. And when the new pharmacist take over, the - I mean,
the pharmacist in charge take over, they usually check the DD.
Q. So when you came in November, was a stock take done--
Q. --to ensure that what you - because suddenly you were taking
the responsibility from previous pharmacists so that, you know, you
the buck would land if there was some problem?
A. Yeah, but counting that I'm not there all the time - I'm not
the full-time pharmacist in charge in there. So what I can do is
whenever I do
the dispensing then I can check the item.
A. Just that particular items.
line of questioning continued at T148.33 – 135 as follows:
Q. Whose responsibility did you regard it as being to undertake
that inventory in March 2011?
A. I would say is Mr Ng, the pharmacist.
Ho was asked to elaborate on his statement (in volume R2 – exhibit 1) that
the Respondent had taken steps to improve his
practice and to minimise errors in
the DD Register and he gave the following evidence (T149.14 - 151.3):
Q. How do you say that that took place?
A. To enter the DD register promptly, that is one of the improvements
that I found because although he's very busy, then to enter
the DD register
whenever there is an in and out of the DD, yes.
Q. So was your experience that Mr Ng would enter entries in the DD
register when he'd done the computer dispensing or when he actually
supplied the
drug of addiction?
A. Supply drug of addiction - of the drug of addiction.
Q. So you understand that there might be occasions where the computer
dispensing is completed but that the supply doesn't take place
until another
Q. What was your experience with Mr Ng, was he making the entries in
the DD register when the dispensing record was completed or
when the drug was
actually supplied to the customer?
A. As I remember, all the time is supply.
Q. Thank you. And you indicate that Mr Ng stressed that the DD
items were to be checked in every transaction promptly, yes?
Q. What was the purposes of that checking process?
A. To minimise any discrepancy.
Q. What did the checking process involve?
A. Just balance.
Q. I see. So am I right in understanding this, balancing in the sense
that if a script asked for 20 tablets of drug X, there was
a check to make sure
that the amount of tablets handed over, married up with what the prescription
A. Not really. The usual practice is when we see the prescription, we
have a look at the stock and see that it is registered as
well and whether the
two things are the same before we do the dispensing. And after it was supply,
we check again because that time
we enter the DD register. So we check the
physical balance of the medication.
Q. Do I understand you to say then that you would check the physical
balance before there was the dispensing record completed?
Q. Are you aware of there being instances where Mr Ng would enter
the dispensing record but then discover that there weren't sufficient
the same to allow for the supply?
A. Doesn't come across to me.
Q. Do you not understand the question, or that wasn't--
A. No, it doesn't happen to me, yes.
Q. What would you say as to the appropriateness or otherwise of the
practice of entering a dispensing in the dispensing computer
before you'd
checked if there was enough drugs in the drug safe to actually supply to the
A. I don't want to do a delete on the prescription, so for me the usual
practice is I check the physical stock first, whether we
have enough and then if
we don't have enough we have to explain to the patient because sometimes
patient, they might have to - they
don't want to wait, they want to
have the full amount or whatever.
Q. And am I right in understanding that your practice would be if you
didn't have enough drugs in the drug safe to fill a prescription?
Q. You wouldn't enter the dispensing record in the computer?
A. Not yet.
Q. I see. You would wait until you had a sufficient supply in the safe
to allow you to dispense what was required in the prescription?
A. No, no, what my practice is, I'll explain to the patient first. If
they agree to take a portion of it then I would enter in the
computer and enter
in the DD registry whatever was given and then order it at the same
Q. I see. If for example a customer came in with a script requiring 60
tablets of drug X, and you only had 40 tablets in the safe,
and assume that the
patient was prepared to simply take 40 at that point in time, what would you
enter into the drug register?
A. The drug register is 40.
Q. I see. You wouldn't enter the 60 which was for the whole
prescription?
A. I don't have the 60 in stock.
Q. Is that the reason why you would only enter 40 in the--
A. Yes, I enter 40 and then later on when the stock comes in, I enter
another 20 after that.
answer to questions from the Tribunal Mr Ho stated that he had seldom seen the
Respondent dispensing a Schedule 8 drug. He further
stated that there were no
manuals, policies or procedures in the Respondent’s pharmacy to refer to.
Mr Ho confirmed that the
Respondent sought his advice on matters.
T 152 Mr Ho stated that he thought the last day he had worked in the
Respondent’s pharmacy was 29 March 2011.
Ho stated that he had advised the Respondent that while undertaking renovations
to the pharmacy that it would be a good time to
check for out of date stock. He
further stated that he would still come across out of date stock when dispensing
respect to how Mr Ho saw his role as a supervising pharmacist Mr Ho gave the
following evidence in answer to questions from the
Tribunal (T156.7-34):
Q. Mr Ho, after you were accredited by the Pharmacy
Council to be a supervising pharmacist for Mr Ng, what did you consider the
would be in that capacity, as opposed to a normal pharmacist in
charge if you were a locum; what was your expectation of the job
that you were
going to do?
A. To make such - or rather have some improvement on the
practice of Mr Ng.
Q. And how are you going to do that?
A. In a way that, in the renovation, then I can advise that the
dispensing area can be in such a way that we can have more room for
dispensing and more rooms, and also that - having a counselling area
for the patient, and also that I can remind Peter regarding
Q. You would have been aware of what Mr Ng was - you know,
he was before a board of inquiry and two tribunals, so you will be fully
of his history in terms of past breaches, et cetera?
A. Yes, I don't exactly fully aware on--
Q. So you never discussed that with Mr Ng?
Q. You weren't aware of that. So how were you directed by the Council to
supervise? Were you told to identify certain issues and
improve them, or was it
pretty much left to you to decide what to do and how you would manage
A. Actually, I don't have any information regarding the Pharmacy Council
that give me accreditation as a pharmacist supervisor.
Q. So you never received a letter saying that you could--
A. No. Or anything that I have to carry out during the
supervision.
Ho gave evidence that he was aware that the Respondent sometimes carried the
drug cupboard keys in his pocket and sometimes left
Tribunal notes that the Affidavit of Mr Rory O’Connor, solicitor, which
came into evidence before the Tribunal having been
tendered by the Respondent
(volume R2, exhibit 8) records Mr Ho’s last working day as 4 April 2011.
This affidavit also records
that the Respondent worked without supervision for
the first time on 5 April 2011. On 6 and 7 April 2011 the Respondent worked with
Mr Lee (the Tribunal notes Mr Lee was not a Council approved supervisor). The
Respondent was then on leave between 8 and 15 April
2011. The Affidavit records
that the new pharmacy assistant commenced work in the pharmacy on 19 April 2011,
working three days a
week and the other employees continued with
‘retail and administrative duties, as before’
Tribunal notes at this point that Mr Mahony’s evidence indicated he was of
the view that the undertaking made by the Respondent
was to the effect that he
was not to work unsupervised until he had sufficient staffing. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent worked
without an authorised supervisor or the
presence of another registered pharmacist on at least 2, 3 and 5 April 2011.
Character References provided on behalf of the
character references were provided on behalf of the Respondent. Mr Stuart L
Kerry OAM provided a reference which appears to be
dated 23 February 2010. Mr
Kerry OAM is a sociologist who has known the Respondent since 2002 and provides
reasons as to why he considers
his background demonstrates he is a fair judge of
character. Mr Kerry OAM and his wife are clients of the Respondent. Mr Kerry OAM
states that he had read a letter from the Respondent’s legal
representatives and also discussed the complaint with the Respondent.
reference continued as follows:
I have known Mr. Ng for nearly 8 years. I have always found him to be a
My wife and I
are in our 80s. He has readily delivered medications to our door, often
personally. His advice has been sound and
the information provided about our
medications, readily forthcoming and helpful. He is very friendly and obviously
concerned about
our health and general well being. I hold him in the highest
regard. I believe that he is of excellent
I have observed Mr. Ng with his wife and children and have no doubt that he
is a family man. This is further demonstrated by his
assistance to his aged
parents. He is a responsible, loving man.
Mr. Ng regrets most sincerely the shortcomings in his
administration/behaviour which have lead to the charges brought against him.
accepts full responsibility, he is remorseful and is determined that he will not
offend again. I have observed that at the time
of the said offences, he was
assisted i.e. given relief by casual pharmacists. He now employs a full time,
permanent pharmacist,
a man who is also reliable; a move which has helped Mr. Ng
with the running of his business.
I am honoured to be of service to Mr. Ng. Any further assistance I might be
to you during these proceedings is readily
second reference dated 24 February 2010 is from Dr M Wolfgarten. The reference
I have been a GP in Ryde since 1968. I have known Peter Ng professionally
since he started his pharmacy in 1992.
I do not attend Mr Ng medically nor do I know him
I have not had any issues with him nor have my patients. Furthermore, I have
been impressed by his personal after hours delivery
service to my patients who
are house bound.
Dr Peter Klug
Klug is a psychiatrist that examined the Respondent at the request of his legal
advisors on 31 March 2011. The letter of instruction
to Dr Klug does not mention
the issue of unfitness to practice on the basis of convictions. Dr Klug prepared
a report dated 27 April
2011 (volume 2, exhibit 6). The report records that the
Respondent is working as a pharmacist under the supervision of Mr Ho three
per week and when Mr Ho is not in the pharmacy the Respondent was not working as
the pharmacist and another pharmacist performed
Klug records that the Respondent informed him that the complaint relates to his
failure to keep up to date with DD Register paper
work due to being overworked.
The Respondent informed Dr Klug that he had not been having his testosterone
injections regularly around
the time the inspection found the DD Register was
not up to date.
Respondent reported to Dr Klug that amongst other changes he was now making
every effort to keep his business under control and
taking regular medication
including the testosterone injections. Dr Klug recorded that due to his
panhypopituitarism the Respondent
needed to take various hormones in order to
function normally. These hormones were thyroxine (orally), hydrocortisone
(orally) and
testosterone (intramuscularly every two to three weeks).
Respondent informed Dr Klug that as soon as staffing levels were appropriate he
anticipated being able to work as a pharmacist
on his own again.
Klug recorded that the Respondent’s GP was Dr Soh who provided the
hormonal supplements and monitored the Respondent’s
hormonal parameters.
At this point the Tribunal notes it did not receive any evidence from Dr Soh. Dr
Klug also recorded that the
Respondent’s endocrinologist was Professor
David Hendelsman but that he had not needed to see him for many years.
Klug recorded under the heading of personal history that the Respondent had no
record of criminal offences. While indicating that
he did not intend to pre-empt
the Tribunal’s decision Dr Klug expressed the view that the excessive
lethargy and fatigue suffered
by the Respondent as a result of failure to take
regular testosterone injections was a contributing factor, if not a mitigating
with respect to the complaint.
report then addresses specific questions posed by the Respondent’s legal
advisers as follows:
In response to your specific questions:
nature and extent of Mr Ng’s remorse relating to his past
It is my view that Mr Ng displays spontaneous remorse concerning his past
misconduct. He understands that his behaviour was a threat
to the safety of the
community and openly acknowledged the nature of his misconduct. I thought he
provided an open and spontaneous
account of events and expressed remorse and
contrition without my providing any leading
nature and extent of any emotional distress experienced by Mr Ng arising from
the disciplinary proceedings, appeal and supervision
The nature and extent of Mr Ng’s emotional distress arising from
disciplinary proceedings, appeal and supervision program has
been considerable.
He described feeling ashamed and humiliated about what had occurred. Although
he has continued to be distressed
and at times has understandably suffered from
depression of his mood, at no time has he suffered from any frank psychiatric
attitude of Mr Ng towards the implementation and progress of the supervision
program and business plan
Mr Ng’s attitude toward the implementation and progress of the
supervision program and business plan appears to be good. He
is happy to comply
with it until the program and plan has been completed. He understands that both
the program and plan have been,
and will be beneficial to him and his
opinion as to Mr Ng’s capacity to continue to comply with the supervision
program and business plan from a psychological
perspective
Mr Ng clearly plans to continue to comply with the supervision program and
business plan, and from a psychiatric perspective, has
the capacity to do
Dr Klug – oral evidence
Klug gave evidence by telephone on 11 May 2011 (T141-162).
his oral evidence Dr Klug confirmed that he is a clinical and forensic
psychiatrist and that he prepared a report relating
to the Respondent dated
27 April 2011.
Klug stated that he interviewed the Respondent on 30 March 2011, on
instructions from Gadens Lawyers. Dr Klug did not feel that
there was a need
for any follow-up consultation for the purposes of preparing the report.
Klug stated that the Respondent made it clear to him that he was working as a
supervised pharmacist.
Klug confirmed that his report did not reference the Tribunal's Decision from
April 2010 which made findings of professional misconduct
in relation to the
Respondent, and he also accepted that this had not been provided and or
received. He conceded that it may have
this document could have been of assistance to him in forming his views of the
Respondent.
Klug stated that, from his consultation with the Respondent, the Respondent now
understood the importance of ensuring that entries
in the DD register were
properly made and that the Respondent now appreciated the importance of
complying with auditing requirements
in terms of the DD drug register.
was Dr Klug’s impression from his consultation with the Respondent that
the Respondent’s difficulties with his DD register
occurred over a
relatively short period of time (weeks). Although not stated by the Respondent,
it was Dr Klug’s impression
that these difficulties occurred when the
Respondent was particularly unwell because of his pituitary disease.
Klug’s ‘impression’ as to the reason why the Respondent failed
on occasions to have his testosterone injections
as frequently as he should have
was that the Respondent was working hard and he didn't find the time to go to
Klug agreed that it was his opinion that one of the possible mitigating (and
contributing) factors in relation to the previous
complaints was the fact that
the Respondent was not having his testosterone injections at the required
frequency, which could have
contributed to the Respondent being tired and
lethargic, together with him working long hours. Dr Klug stated that there was
no validation
process (e.g. GP file notes) used, to his knowledge, to ascertain
whether the Respondent was currently
having his testosterone
injections with sufficient frequency.
Klug confirmed that he had been given an incomplete forensic history by the
Respondent (Tribunal appearance in 1995 when it was
in fact a Local Court
appearance, omission of Local Court appearance in 1998 and omission of Pharmacy
Board of Inquiry in 2000 into
allegations of professional misconduct).
Klug stated that it could possibly be of concern to him if the Respondent, on
previous occasions, had been found not to comply
with legislative requirements
which are imposed on pharmacists. In particular, whether ‘
the reasons
for any such non-compliance are related in any way to his history of pituitary
disease and the consequences of that, and
irregularly getting treatment, because
pituitary problems like that have a very high association with psychiatric
’. He stated that the Respondent made no excuses (including
his pituitary disease) to him regarding his breaches of legislative
obligations.
Klug stated that it was the Respondent who advised him that he was to appear
again before the Pharmacy Tribunal on 5 November 2011.
notes are unclear as to whether the date is 5 November 2011 or May 2011, as he
had noted ‘
’. Dr Klug thought he had made a mistake in
dictation from his notes and had concluded it was May 2011.
Klug stated that if he had been informed by the Respondent that he had a
criminal history relating to convictions with respect
to breaches of the
regulations dealing with the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
be of some significance. Dr Klug stated that breaches of regulations on multiple
occasions spread out over a period of time
would be relevant to him, as would be
being aware of any conditions that had been placed on the Respondent’s
practice by a
Board of Inquiry and if they were breached. He agreed that if any
of these matters had been known to him, they would possibly have
influenced the
opinions expressed in his report.
Klug confirmed that he had overlooked the criminal convictions noted in the
Supreme Court Decision (Adams J, 22 October 2010) and
listed in his
Klug stated that there had been issues within the Respondent’s marriage
around 2006 which related to his convictions. He
stated that he thought the
Respondent’s significant medical health issue was related to his
non-compliance.
Dr Klug stated that registered health practitioners have an obligation to take
care of their health to ensure that they practice
safely. He also stated that
the Respondent is now taking better care of his health by having regular health
checks (including regular
administration of testosterone injections and
influenza vaccinations).
Klug explained that pan-hypopituitarism has a high association with psychiatric
illness particularly if not well managed; most
commonly, depressive illnesses.
He stated this can be marked and people can be irritable, have reduced drive and
initiative, and
inertia, and that people can be abnormally indifferent to
things. He stated that physical problems include impotence, weight loss
changes, all of which can contribute to anxiety. Dr Klug stated that if a
person has inconsistent effective replacement
therapy then there is a high
likelihood of psychiatric problems (most likely depressive forms).
was Dr Klug’s opinion that it would be ‘
a good idea
for the Respondent to be cared for by someone in addition to a general
practitioner, such as an endocrinologist. He stated
that the Respondent had
said that he ‘
was technically under the care of an endocrinologist
(Professor David Hendelsman/RPA – name taken from Dr Klug’s report,
incorrectly transcribed as Higgins) but hadn't seen one for some time given that
his GP was treating him
Klug agreed that if reports were furnished from supervisors about the Respondent
indicating inertia, lack of drive, etc., this
would be of concern and may
indicate partial treatment of the Respondent’s pan-hypopituitarism.
Klug stated that the Respondent informed him that his wife had been a pharmacy
technician in Hong Kong.
The Respondent’s evidence
Respondent gave extensive evidence before the Tribunal.
Respondent gave evidence over a number of days of the Inquiry, commencing on 10
Respondent gave evidence in chief that packets of Endone® that were
returned by a member of the public were initially tied
in a rubber band and
placed in the Drug Safe and that (T73.33-35):
Inadvertently, after a few weeks the tablet between the two
(sic – pharmacists)
we have amalgamated the quantity of
our tablet with the return. So we ended up having just one bundle of Endone
Respondent’s evidence continued as follows (T73.37 – 74.4):
Q. When you say "inadvertently" can you explain how that
happened? Did you do it or do you know who did do it?
A. Well when it was returned we usually just rubber band it and put
inside the safe, but there are other pharmacies might not be
aware of the
situation and they saw they had the bundle, the stock that we usually keep, they
might put them altogether into one
big bundle.
Q. Did you know that that had been done?
A. After awhile I noticed they happening and I haven't separated or
informed the other pharmacies of the situation.
Q. Can you explain why you didn't inform them or correct the
A. I was waiting for the pharmacy council inspector to come to destroy
the tablet. I was hoping that they would be given to the
inspector and destroy
the quantity of the tablet.
in his evidence in answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent gave the
following evidence regarding the additional
endone tablets (T166.5-167.9):
Q. So you have a clear recollection that these drugs came back
to you about six weeks ago?
A. Roughly.
Q. So it was well and truly before you went on holidays, a number of
weeks before you went on holidays to visit your daughter?
Q. Is that at least a week or two weeks prior to the time - how
many weeks prior to the time you went on holidays do you think?A.
ago. A month before I went away.
Q. All right, and the person brought them into your pharmacy?
Q. And what did they say to you about those drugs?
A. They ask us if we can destroy the tablet for them.
Q. How did you package them or deal with them to put them in the safe?
A. I just put a rubber band around it and leave it in the safe.
Q. And do you recall if you were working with anybody else? Another
pharmacist on that particular day?
A. I can't remember.
Q. But is it your evidence now that you did not inform either Mr Ho
(as transcribed)
or any other pharmacist that might have
worked for you that they had been returned to you by a relative of a patient who
had deceased?
A. I didn't.
Q. And you didn't write it - anything? A note anywhere wrapped
around it or anything that would indicate that these drugs were not
A. I can't remember.
Q. Did you put them in a separate compartment? A separate place or was
it all - is there only one container for the Schedule 8 drugs
A. There's only one section in the safe that we keep the DD in.
Q. So when you put it in the safe it's in the same container as the other
tablets that could be dispensed?
Q. Were they a different brand?
Q. Were they the same sort of sized packet?
A. Same as the current ones.
Q. Is there anything that would distinguish them from the ones that were
the current stock?
A. I can't remember except I put a rubber band around them.
in his evidence the Respondent stated that the patient (who’s Schedule 8
medication was returned to the pharmacy) was
not known to him. The Respondent
also stated later in his evidence that he may have put a ‘little
note’ with the bundle
of packets (T170). The Respondent stated that it was
his intention to have the drug destroyed when the appropriate person (the
Council Inspector) attended the pharmacy. The Respondent also stated
that he was aware that the Inspector would be attending the
pharmacy at the
request of Mr Mahony but had not made any preparations to ensure the returned
drugs were destroyed as he thought
it was not a full inspection and was not in
the pharmacy when the inspection occurred.
cross-examination the Respondent stated that he was operating his pharmacy
without a pharmacist in charge, however, the Tribunal
takes this to mean, in the
context of this matter to be that the Respondent was working without a
supervising pharmacist and that
he was in fact the supervising pharmacist
(T74.32-33).
Respondent also gave evidence under cross-examination that he was aware of the
requirement for all products sold in the pharmacy
to have an AustR or and AustL
number. At this point the Tribunal notes that these numbers are not required for
all items sold (eg.
it is not required for combs).
Respondent stated that the Drug Safe key had been kept as part of a set of keys
which included his car key and the shop keys but
that since the 15 April 2011
inspection the key was kept separately as required by the legislation.
Respondent gave evidence as to his use of the terms dispensing and supply.
Dispensing involved putting the prescription through
the computer system and
supply involved providing the drugs to the patient. The Respondent accepted that
Clause 112 of the Poisons
and Therapeutic Goods Regulations required a record to
be made in the DD Book on the day on which the Schedule 8 drug was supplied
the patient. Later in his evidence the Respondent gave evidence that appeared to
contradict his evidence regarding his practice
regarding when the record was
made in the DD Book (i.e. at dispensing or supply – see T 89). The
Respondent also stated that
as at April 2011 he did not appreciate his
obligations under Clause 112 of the Regulations (T92).
Respondent confirmed that he considered Mr Lee was responsible for the failure
to audit Endone® and Hypnodorm® that should
have been undertaken in
March 2011 (there being a statutory obligation to conduct such an audit in March
and September of every year).
The Respondent then gave the following evidence
(T87.31-88.17):
Q. Well if I just come back to my question, do you take any
responsibility for the fact that there were not audits recorded in the
drug register in March 2011 for Endone and Hypnodorm?
A. I don't know.
Q. Okay. What do you see to be your role as the owner of the Ryde
Pharmacy in terms of ensuring that audits required by legislation
undertaken?
A. If it brought to my attention I would have investigated. I did not
know until I saw the report.
Q. Even though Mr Lee was the pharmacist in charge, do you not think
that as the proprietor of the pharmacy, you had an overriding
responsibility to
ensure that the March audit was undertaken?
A. I was very busy in March in doing the renovation. I requested
Mr Lee to carry out the audit for me, the stock check, which he
Q. Yes. The problem I have with that, Mr Ng, is in the previous
tribunal proceedings one of the explanations you provided for not
undertaking
the required audit of the drug register, was that you were very busy. Do you
recall that?
Q. So although the circumstances are slightly different, you say that
that responsibility was Mr Lee's because you were otherwise
undertaking the renovations, yes?
A. He was the pharmacist in charge at that time.
Q. Which comes back to my question, which is what role do you see you
play as the owner of the pharmacy to ensure that legislative
undertaken?
A. Complete role as a pharmacist and as the pharmacy owner.
Q. Thank you. SO you accept that even though that task had been
delegated to Mr Lee, you still had a responsibility to ensure that
task was undertaken?
Respondent gave the following evidence at T 94.7-47:
Q. It's fair enough to say isn't it that there were a number of
proven instances where you'd failed to record matters in the drug
register that
the legislation required you to record. Yes?
Q. And as a result of the orders of Adams J in the Supreme Court you've
been able to return to practice as a pharmacist. Correct?
Q. Albeit with restrictions in terms of supervision requirements.
Q. And also you've been required to put in place a business plan to bring
the pharmacy up to speed. Do you understand what I mean
Q. Can I ask you this question Mr Ng; given the findings in
relation to past legislative breaches that were made by the Tribunal
last year what period of time have you spent familiarising yourself with the
legislative obligations that apply to a community
pharmacist?
A. Can you repeat the question?
Q. Yes. Given the fact that you were found to have breached the
regulations in terms of recording of information in drug registers
what period
of time have you spent since then - since April of last year
familiarising yourself with the obligations that are imposed
upon community
pharmacists by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
and Regulations?
A. I was deregistered for six months.
A. From May to November. During this period my practice as a practicing
pharmacist was restricted even though I - to overlook the
pharmacist in getting the thing - getting all the recording done
Q. But maybe my question wasn't sharply put enough. Are you able to
identify what period of time you actually spent familiarising
yourself with the
legislative obligations that apply in relation to the running of a community
A. When I was over - under supervision of Mr Ho.
Q. And what steps were undertaken during that process?
A. I was able to perform the duty as a pharmacist.
line of questioning was repeated as it appeared to the Tribunal that unless the
Respondent was being evasive, he must not have
completely understood the
questions being asked. His evidence then continued (T96.3-98.12):
Q. Mr Ng, as far back as 1995 you were convicted and fined
in relation to non-compliance with legislative obligations, correct?
Q. Similarly, in about 1997 or 1998, you were convicted and fined in
relation to matters of legislative non-compliance, correct?
Q. In 2001 there was a finding of professional misconduct made against
you by a pharmacy board, correct?
Q. You may recall that when I asked you some questions about that matter
on the last occasion, you gave evidence there saying that
you were, words to
this effect, you now understood the legislation and you now complied with it.
Do you remember being asked some
questions about that?
Q. Then in 2003 to 2005 there were some further legislative breaches that
formed the subject matter of the most recent complaint,
Q. You'd been found to have engaged in professional misconduct in
relation to those matters, yes?
Q. As a result of Justice Adams quashing the deregistration order, you've
been permitted to continue to practice as a pharmacist
since November last year,
Q. At least in relation to the examples of the dexamphetamine and the
OxyContin, I want to suggest to you that your recording of
entries in the
dangerous drug register is not compliant with what is required by the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
. Do you accept that?
Q. The question I am asking you is, what you have done between being
put back on the register in November and now to ensure that
you are familiar
with the obligations that the Poisons and Therapeutic Goods regulation imposes
upon community pharmacists?
A. Their mentoring program by Mr Mahony, these are the things to be
addressed along the course of the program.
...........
Q. Do you think it would be a matter of concern for the Tribunal that
compliance with legislative obligations is a matter that still
needs to be
addressed in your circumstances?
A. I don't know.
Q. You've indicated that that issue of compliance with legislation is a
matter that is to be addressed with Mr Mahony, yes?
Q. Can I suggest this to you? Would you accept that you're reliant upon
Mr Mahony to be identifying matters of concern in relation
to your pharmacy
practice? Would you agree with that?
Q. Do you accept though that having Mr Mahony act as your mentor has
led to him identifying a significant number of matters that
needed to be
rectified in relation to your pharmacy practice?
Q. And that if we go back in terms of time, the matters that were the
subject of the complaint before the Tribunal covered a period
of about 2003 to
2005 or 2006, yes?
Q. In terms of the state of your pharmacy, this is the physical state of
it, Mr Mahony identified a significant number of issues
that needed to be
rectified, correct?
Q. It was only as a result of Mr Mahony identifying those issues
that steps had been taken to address the concerns regarding the
state of your
pharmacy, correct?
Q. It wasn't something that you identified yourself as being an issue
that needed to be addressed?
A. Some of them are.
Q. If some of them were, why hadn't you taken steps before Mr Mahony
became involved, to address those matters?
A. As I explained in my previous tribunal at time I was ill and I did not
have enough supporting staff to allow me to have the time
Q. It was at Mr Mahony's suggestion that you engage additional
staff, yes?
Q. What I'm getting to is I want to suggest to you that the way that you
run - the way that your pharmacy practice is conducted is
one which is
reactive to problems that are identified by other people and that its only when
they're identified by other people that
you put in place steps to address
matters of concern. Do you understand that question?
A. I do, but I don't agree with that.
respect to the failure to affix a particular warning label onto a medication (as
detailed in the 15 April Audit) the Respondent
gave the following information
(T105.33-107.16):
Q. The prescription dispensed to
[a patient]
not to have an ancillary label A10 affixed to it, do you see that?
Paragraph 77 of your statement?
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. You say that
[a patient’s]
been a patient
of - a customer of yours for a long period of
time - 19 years?
Q. Am I right in understanding your evidence is that when
started taking the particular medication, you warned him about
avoiding eating grapefruit, correct?
Q. The position is that you can't recall whether or not you fixed the
ancillary label to the 15 April prescription? Paragraph 79
Q. You were able to regenerate the dispensing label for the other
customer of yours and you've attached that to your statement, correct?
Q. Is there a reason why you weren't able to regenerate the dispensing
[a patient’s]
prescription?
A. I didn't get around doing it, but I did check. I did not have the
label 18 on the label - on the packet but my explanation is
did say to me once that he liked grapefruit so instead of putting
the label on, I explained to him that he can still have the grapefruit
morning and have the medication at night. So four hours before taking the
medicating, or four hours after the medication.
And the warning label 18
doesn't say that. It says to avoid grapefruit at all.
Q. I see. So you--
CHAIRPERSON: If I can just interrupt.
Q. Mr Ng I heard the second half of your answer, but the first half
of your answer I had real difficulty hearing you because your
voice was not
up. Sorry it - I know it's difficult to keep your voice up but I
just - I missed the first half and I think you said
something about
you didn't get around to it?
A. I didn't - didn't do the one for
[a patient]
I know that I explained to him - because once I remember he said he
liked the grapefruit so I said, you know, you can still
have it four hours
before taking simvastatin or four hours after the taking medication. So I do
not put the label on it because
the label says to avoid grapefruit
completely.
Q. So you're saying you didn't put the label on and you didn't get around
A. And I verbally warned him.
Q. I think the question was, you know, were you able to reconstruct and
print it out like this, and did you say that you had checked
A. I - I checked it, but I didn't print it because
I - I know the label wasn't put on.
Q. So when you say you checked it, does that mean you put it up on the
computer screen?
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I think I understand what your evidence is now.
Thank you very much, I'm sorry to interrupt.
Q. Would you agree that it would be best practice to put a warning, or a
notification on the dispensed medication?
Q. What would you propose to do in the future in relation to medicines
dispensed to, for example,
[a patient]
A. As of January a new warning label in the computer can be printed on it
to say it can be taken four hours before, or four hours
after, but there will be
a new warning; not the one already existing.
Q. The reason why you say that is that, as I understand it, label 18
simply says words to the effect of, "Do not take grapefruit",
Q. But from a pharmaceutical point of view, what needs to happen is there
needs to be a minimum of a four hour gap, is that right?
A. Generally four - if you like grapefruit. Yes take it four
hours before taking your medication, or four hours after taking your
medication.
T113.24-30 the Respondent gave the following evidence:
Q. Okay. Can I offer you this opportunity: can you explain to
the Tribunal why you say the position is now different than it was
on previous
instances where you've been found guilty of professional misconduct?
A. The previous misconducts were from ignorant, which I fully aware of my
wrongdoing. I haven't completed the same wrongdoing to
that magnitude as such
now. This hearing is for things in a different nature to the previous
Respondent gave evidence that after the PSU Audit on 15 April he checked some of
the other products that he had purchased from
the Chinese herbal shop and they
were marked with AustL and AustR numbers.
Respondent gave evidence that he held back some tablets of a prescription
Schedule 8 medication as a patient could not pay for
the script as well as other
purchases from the pharmacy. The Respondent acknowledged that the charge for a
PBS script of this nature
was $34.20 whether or not there were 20, 40 or 60
tablets prescribed.
Respondent gave evidence that he had been told by an experienced pharmacist that
it was acceptable when dispensing medication
that consisted of more than one
packet it was appropriate to affix a label to one packet and then sticky tape
the boxes together
provided they had the same batch number.
Respondent was questioned by the Tribunal regarding the trail of dispensing for
the drug dexamphetamine to one patient recorded
at T124 – 126.
Respondent stated that he had QCPP2 accreditation and was due for an internal
audit in February/March 2012 (T162). The Respondent
explained that all the
procedures, standards and protocols relating to QCPP were stored in two
‘big folders’ inside a
‘big box’ somewhere in the shop
and that was the reason why Mr Ho was not aware of their existence.
Respondent described the checking of the use by date when stock was taken off
the shelf and the checking of stock around items
that were being placed onto the
shelves (to restock the fast moving items). The Respondent was asked further
questions on this topic
at T 164.4-13 as follows:
Q. Do you have a system whereby the entire shop is audited from
time to time for out of stock items?
A. Usually when the representatives come to visit us we usually go round
the shelf and check for the items that belongs to the company
because we might
be able to get credits from those companies.
Q. In the policy and procedure manual that you say you've got in a box in
the shop, does that define a periodic audit of the entire
contents of the shop
or any other way of checking the entire contents of the shop for out of date
A. I cannot remember.
T167 the Respondent stated that he remembered that Mr Ho finished working in the
pharmacy on Tuesday 5 April 2011. At T170 the
Respondent stated that Mr Lee was
working in the pharmacy when Mr Cox (Pharmacy Council Inspector) made a visit to
the pharmacy.
At the commencement of his evidence of the following day of the
Inquiry (12/5/11) the Respondent provided a written apology to the
indicating that after checking his records he had discovered that Mr Ho had
ceased working at the pharmacy on 29 March 2011.
The Respondent stated that he
had worked by himself on 5 April 2011 and that his solicitors had informed him
at the end of March
2011 that his business plan had been approved and that he
was able to work
‘independently’
‘as soon as I had
sufficient supporting staff’.
The Respondent stated that he had worked
alone (i.e. without another pharmacist) on Sunday 3 April 2011 and Tuesday 5
April 2011.
When viewed in the context of other evidence, particularly that of
Mr Ho and Mr Mahony it appears that by working on these days without
supervisor or another pharmacist present the Respondent has breached the terms
of the undertakings/business plan that had been
put in place following his
appeal to the Supreme Court.
Respondent gave evidence that he had rosters and kept his payroll details by
hand in a notebook with superannuation and tax being
calculated using an excel
spread sheet at home. The Respondent stated that Mr Mahony had recommended that
he commence using the software
known as MYOB.
Respondent stated that he considered that he could commence working as the
Pharmacist in Charge from 15 April 2011 as by this
time he had satisfied the
Business Plan requirement to have sufficient staff. The additional staff member
commenced on 19 April 2011.
Despite this knowledge he still worked alone on 3
and 5 April 2011.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent confirmed that he had not
always complied with his testosterone injection
regimen, particularly when he
was stressed (T179 -180). On average he would have the injection about every
four to five weeks rather
than every three weeks. Having the injection does,
over a few days, make him feel gradually better. After a few weeks he finds his
energy level declines. The Respondent stated that he always had access to a
valid prescription for the testosterone and could always
fill the script through
his pharmacy by dispensing it to himself. The Respondent stated that as he was
‘scared’ of needles
he had tried the skin patches but these had
caused skin irritation and the oral medication Andriol® had caused liver
side effects.
The Respondent stated he had been to his GP about 12 months
earlier and the prescription would have given him enough doses for 36
only. The Respondent had not seen an endocrinologist for 10 years as
‘there was no call for that’
Respondent stated that he had read and understood the
Poisons and Therapeutic
and Regulations and saw its role was to protect the public (T186).
Respondent gave evidence of his understanding of the AustL and AustR numbers but
was not ‘100% sure of the difference between
Respondent was asked about the information he had provided to Dr Klug regarding
his criminal convictions. The Respondent recalled
having a conversation with Dr
Klug and stated that he did not go through every single ‘thing’ with
Dr Klug as he understood
a letter had been sent to Dr Klug from his solicitors
(T189-190).
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent confirmed that it was still
his position that he was fully aware of the significance
of relevant legislative
provisions. The Respondent stated that he considered that even in the past year
‘great improvement in reducing the number of error or
respect to the conditions placed on his registration by the 2000 Board of
Inquiry, the Respondent was taken to reports written
by the supervisors
appointed in accordance with these conditions. The Respondent stated he had not
read these reports for about ten
years. After reading the reports overnight the
Respondent indicated that the supervisors had prompted improvements in the
and that a lot of them coincided with Mr Mahony’s suggestions.
The re-design of the dispensary area suggested by the supervisors
in 2001 were
not undertaken until February 2011. He also stated that all of the signage
(which was commented upon by the 2001 supervisors)
had now been removed and
there was a plan to engage a professional window cleaner.
Respondent provided a final statement dated 5 April 2012 (in addition to the
statements dated 24 February 2010 and 10 May 2011)
for the final day of hearing.
He also gave further oral evidence on 31 May 2012.
the statement dated 5 April 2012 (exhibit volume R4 – 35) the Respondent
recounts the conversation he had with the patient
which resulted in the
Respondent delivering OxyContin® to the patient on 8 September 2011. The
Respondent records that the patient
‘I am in the burns unit at
[name of hospital] and am not able to come to the Pharmacy’
Respondent informed the patient that there were no scripts held in the pharmacy
for OxyContin® the patient stated
‘I will have [GP] write up some
new prescriptions’.
In cross-examination the Respondent stated that he
assumed that the patient must have suffered from a burn but had never enquired
of him directly (T558) and had made the assumption on the basis of the patient
mentioning the burn unit (T578).
paragraph 11 of exhibit volume R4 – 35 the Respondent states:
At that time, while I was aware that for the previous two or three months
[the patient] had been staying in a burns rehabilitation
unit on the grounds of
[a hospital], resting and recuperating from a burn injury. I was not aware that
[the patient] was an inpatient
of a hospital ward at [the hospital]. I
understood and believed that [the patient] was receiving treatment from the
burns rehabilitation
unit solely for his burn injury and that analgesic and
other medication relevant to [the patient’s] pre-existing conditions
(however caused) was not able to be provided by the burns rehabilitation unit,
and had to be prescribed by [the patient’s]
general practitioner.
Respondent’s statement records that he spoke to the patient on the
telephone later in the day and confirmed that the prescriptions
delivered from the GP and that he would not be able to deliver the scripts and
other products until after he closed he pharmacy
at 6pm. The Respondent records
that the patient stated:
‘I will soon be discharged from the burns unit; however I should still
be at [the hospital] at that time. I will wait for you
outside the entrance to
Accident/Emergency at [the hospital]. That way you can just hand me the items
without having to worry about
Respondent details the aspects of the prescription that satisfied him that it
complied with all legal requirements (which may
be seen as another example of
the Respondent missing the point of the scope of professional practice).
paragraph 19(d) the Respondent stated that he assumed from the fact that the
GP’s secretary hand delivered the prescriptions
to the pharmacy that the
patient had explained to the GP the reason why he had been unable to attend the
GP’s practice in person
and that prior to issuing the prescriptions the GP
had contacted the hospital and obtained authorisation or permission to issue the
prescriptions, for them to be dispensed at the Respondent’s pharmacy and
for them to be hand delivered to the patient at the
hospital. In
cross-examination the Respondent confirmed that during the period he had been
supervised by Mr Cohen he had rung doctors
to clarify aspects of prescriptions
and gave the following answer (T565):
Q. So there's no reason to suggest that you couldn't have
up and asked him for some further information before you
dispensed the medications for
[the patient]
, is there?
A. At that time I didn't suspect of any misappropriateness(as
Respondent stated at paragraph 19(f) that he had never previously delivered
medication to a patient either outside or in a public
hospital. He confirmed
this in his oral evidence on 31 May 2012.
paragraph 20 the Respondent set out the reasons why he did not suspect the
patient was abusing OxyContin. From this evidence the
Tribunal notes that the
Respondent was aware that the patient was receiving prescriptions for the
OxyContin® from more than one
doctor and that the intervals of dispensing
did not match the time that the supply would be close to being exhausted if they
been taken in accordance with the instructions. Generally the scripts were
not as frequently being filled as would be expected. The
Respondent put this
lower frequency down to the patient using less than the prescribed dose, only
using it when in extreme outbreak
pain and otherwise managing with
non-prescription medication or pain management techniques. However, in
cross-examination the Respondent
gave the following evidence:
Q. You would have been aware at the time that you had that
discretion to not dispense the medication, correct?
A. Yes, I do but the patient will be deprived of medication. That he
needs, that he needs genuinely. He's got spasm, he takes the
other medication
regularly, if I deprive him of this treatment he will be suffering.
paragraph 23 the Respondent recounts his observations upon meeting the patient
at the entrance of the Accident/Emergency Department
of the hospital:
I recall that [the patient] did not have any visible burn injuries. This,
together with the fact that [the patient] was in street
clothes and appeared to
be moving freely around the grounds of [the hospital] in his wheelchair,
reinforced my belief that [the patient]
was not an inpatient of a hospital ward
at [the hospital]; but rather was staying in a burns rehabilitation unit on the
[the hospital], and, consistent with what [the patient] had told me
on the telephone that afternoon, would soon be
discharged.
questioning of the Respondent to gain clarity, it is difficult for the Tribunal
to reconcile how the Respondent may consider
the patient to have been staying in
the burns rehabilitation unit but not be an inpatient and also not to be an
inpatient but soon
to be discharged. The Respondent’s further explanation
under cross-examination of his understanding that it was a rehabilitation
program did not assist to clarify this matter (T558).
in the statement the Respondent stated that he
‘understood and
that the patient would
‘hand-over’
medication to one of the nurses in the burns unit for storage and
administration. In cross-examination he said he had this understanding
telephone conversation with a nurse from the burns unit – a telephone call
that occurred after the patient had been
‘off his face’
in the ward i.e. a number of days after the Respondent delivered the
OxyContin® to the patient in 8 September 2011 (T567). On
questioning, when the Respondent was taken to paragraph 24 of his statement he
confirmed the statement that he did not recall
whether or not he had counselled
the patient to hand over the medication to a nurse in the burns unit, rather he
had assumed that
this is what the patient would have done had he not been able
to leave the hospital and return home that night (T568).
of the evidence of the Respondent are hard to reconcile with his view that the
patient was not an
‘inpatient’
at the time. The Respondent
stated that the first time he became aware that the patient was in fact an
inpatient of the hospital
was when the anaesthetist telephoned him (although he
later denied this in cross-examination T559.31). The anaesthetist was also
first person to inform the Respondent that the patient had a history of drug
misuse and overdose. This confusion was compounded
by the Respondent’s
answers to questions from the Tribunal wherein he stated that he was aware that
the patient had a number
of hospital admissions over time (T577) but did not
know the reasons for these admissions (T580) or his medical history (T584).
answer to a question from the Tribunal the Respondent gave the following
evidence (T585):
Q. So what basis was it that you say that the unit, the Burns
Rehabilitation Unit, was not attending to his analgesic and other medication
A. It came across my mind, you know, Lioresal® is not a drug of abuse
and he was requesting for that and I was wondering why
his medication was not
supplied to him.
paragraph 30 the Respondent states that after having had the opportunity to
discuss these events with his ‘business mentor’,
Mr Mahony, he
realised and accepted that he ‘displayed poor professional judgment in
dispensing and delivering medication to
the patient at the hospital in
circumstances where he ought to have been aware or suspected that the patient
was an inpatient. The
Respondent also realised that the circumstances were such
that he should have at least a reasonable basis for suspicion that the
was misusing or abusing OxyContin. As to the comments made by Mr Mahony in his
report (12 April 2012) the Respondent gave
the following evidence under
cross-examination (T566):
Q. Mr Mahony, having conducted some analysis of the
dispensing history of [the patient], in summary, raises concerns about whether
[the patient] was doctor or pharmacy shopping, or receiving additional supplies
of OxyContin, do you agree with that?
Q. Do you accept the validity, or do you accept the analysis that
Dr Mahony - I withdraw that. Do you accept that what
says is an accurate - I withdraw that question. Do you
agree with the conclusions that Mr Mahony reaches in that regard?
A. I do to a certain extent.
Q. Well what extent don't you agree with them?
A. If it is a Schedule 8 prescription without authorisation from the
Medicare, you see, because we don't have a record as to their
previous purchase
record, but if it is an authority prescription the doctors had to ring up in
this instance where the quantity was
exceeding the 28, the doctor might have
been alerted by Medicare about the patient's frequency in getting this
medication. And [the
GP] is a very responsible doctor, [the GP] in the past
he's refused to prescribe for other misuse people, patients who misuse drugs.
So in the future I will be more vigilant but in this case I just trusted [the
GP] to be - to have done all the necessary checks
Respondent was asked questions during cross-examination regarding how he came to
discuss this matter with Mr Mahony. The Respondent
gave the following evidence
(T571-573):
Q. You say in paragraph 30 of your statement that you've
had the opportunity to discuss the events of the 8 September and subsequent
with Mr Mahony, yes?
Q. Mr Mahony in his statement says that he had those discussions
with you firstly on the 25 January of this year and then on the
28 February and the 27 March, is that your recollection?
Q. Mr Mahony prepared a end of year report on the 7 December
2011, do you recall him preparing that report?
Q. Did you have discussions with him leading up to the preparation of
that report?
Q. He's identified that it was the final report for 2011 that he
prepared, yes?
Q. Presumably you would have had those discussions with Mr Mahony
some time after September 2011 and before he prepared the report
in December
Q. You didn't make mention of the 8 September incident with
Mr Mahony in those discussions you had in the latter part of 2011?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. Because the first time Mr Mahony discussed it with you was in
2012, correct?
Q. So you didn't think that the incident of the 8 September was
sufficiently serious enough for you to discuss it with Mr Mahony?
before you answer that question let me rephrase it. You didn't think that the
incident of the 8 September 2011 was sufficiently
serious enough to discuss
it with Mr Mahony prior to late January 2012?
Q. That's notwithstanding the fact that you had been contacted by an
anaesthetist and also had Ms Dolan come and visit you about
Q. You say that having had the opportunity to discuss the matter with
Mr Mahony you now realise and accept that you displayed poor
professional
judgment, do you see that at paragraph 30 of your statement?
Q. So is it your evidence to the Tribunal that it's only after having
discussed the matter with Mr Mahony from January 2012 that
you realised you
displayed poor professional judgment?
A. Given the chance I would be more suspicious, I would be more vigilant
in the patient's record and their prescription record and
dispensing record,
given the chance I would be more careful.
Q. Again, without going over history that's a similar answer to the
answer that you've given previous courts and tribunals, correct?
Q. I guess the nub of my question is this, after you had been contacted
by the anaesthetist from
[the hospital]
and after Ms Dolan had
visited the pharmacy didn't you at that point in time realise that you'd
exercised poor professional judgment?
A. I didn't know the whole situation, I contacted [the patient] and he
said that he wasn't overdosed.
Q. Notwithstanding that you spoke to Mr Mahony in the lead up to his
December report, you didn't think it was a matter you needed
to raise with him
A. I was waiting for the right timing to bring the matter up to discuss
Q. That timing arose in 2012, is that right?
Q. That was at a point in time after the Health Care Complaints
Commission had served on your solicitors a copy of Ms Dolan's
further questioned by the Tribunal on why he had not sought advice from Mr
Mahony on this issue immediately after he had been
and Ms Dolan the Respondent stated he could not comment any further than he was
awaiting the right time
to raise it with him (T585).
Respondent stated that he may have been misled by the patient regarding his
inpatient status in the burns unit and may have been
manipulated into delivering
the medication to the hospital but accepts that the patient’s conduct does
not excuse his poor
professional judgment.
Respondent stated that he had learned from his mistake (paragraph 32) in that
whenever he is handed a legal prescription for Schedule
8 drugs he will
carefully scrutinise the dispensing pattern to ensure it complies with the
recommended dosing frequency and will
not deliver medications to a public
hospital or other controlled health facility without the prior consent and
authorisation of the
medical practitioner responsible for the patient’s
care in the hospital/facility. During cross-examination the Respondent was
the following questions (T566):
Q. See you indicated, I think you said that in the future you
will be more vigilant, was that your answer?
Q. Without going over the history in great detail, that's an answer or an
answer like that you've given to a number courts and a
number of disciplinary
tribunals about your pharmacy practice, isn't it?
re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence (T586):
Q. As part of your answer you said words to the effect, "In the
future I will be more vigilant", in what ways will you be more vigilant
A. I will ascertain the usage, the history of usage. Find out from the
patient any changes in condition while they've been away
for a period of time.
And consult the doctor about any suspicions. And refer the matter to the
appropriate authority if the person
has been in another institution, whether
it's hospital or rehab.
Tribunal took the Respondent to one of the weekly reports written by Mr Cohen
regarding the Respondent’s practice and to
an entry made regarding an
enquiry that the Respondent had made with a prescribing doctor. The Respondent
had queried with the prescribing
doctor a Schedule 4D prescriptions that did not
have repeat intervals specified. The Tribunal then took the Respondent to the
he gave on the written examination he undertook with Mr Dash. Mr Dash
had specifically corrected an answer given by the Respondent
on this matter. Mr
Dash commented that while it was desirable for the doctor to so notate the
script it was not a matter that was
a requirement of the legislation (T579-580).
cross-examination to assist in contextualising his behaviour the Respondent gave
evidence that he understood that the patient
was moving suburbs (returning to a
suburb he had lived in previously – some distance from both the pharmacy
and the hospital)
upon discharge and due to his restriction to a wheelchair may
take some time to re-establish contact with his local GP and pharmacy.
delay may have left the patient in a position where he was without his
medications. The Respondent was of this view despite
accepting that upon
discharge a patient would generally be supplied with the medications that they
during cross-examination the Respondent stated that during a telephone call the
patient had indicated he was to be discharged
from the hospital and indicated he
would wait the four to five hours it would take for the Respondent to deliver
the medication.
The Respondent stated that this did not arouse his suspicion. In
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent stated he had
not enquired
of the patient as to what medications would be provided to him by the hospital
upon discharge (T575). He also did not
enquire of the patient whether his drug
regimen had been changed while he was receiving treatment at the hospital.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent stated that he understood
Mr Mahony was receiving copies of Mr Cohen’s
weekly reports as he was CCed
in on these emailed reports. The Respondent also confirmed that he was aware
that the NSW Trustee and
Guardian played a role in managing the patient’s
financial affairs.
Submissions and comments regarding the
Submissions
written outline of submission dated 10 August 2011 was provided by the HCCC. A
copy of these submissions is found at annexure A
hereto. The HCCC also made oral
submissions.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the HCCC written
submissions.
taken to paragraph 3 of the HCCC submissions the following oral submission was
made T425.38-43:
Ultimately we accept and embrace fully that the tribunal's
is the question of maintenance of public confidence in
circumstances where we've had findings of proven misconduct and repeated
over a number of years of either convictions for breaches of regulatory
requirements and findings of professional misconduct by professional
Tribunal accepts the submissions made in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the HCCC
written submissions.
Tribunal accepts the submission made in paragraph 7 of the HCCC written
submissions. The holding of registration is a privilege
not a right. The
comments made by the Pharmacy Board in the matter of
NSWPB 8) emphasise that there are many procedures, protocols and validations in
place in the practice of pharmacy to act
as reminders to practitioners of the
responsibility of pharmacy ownership. At this point the Tribunal also notes that
many authorities
have acknowledged that the orders resulting from misconduct in
a protective jurisdiction are sometimes more onerous than those that
result from a jurisdiction aimed at punishment for a breach of the relevant
legislation as the role of each jurisdiction is
quite different.
Tribunal accepts the submission made in paragraphs 8 of the HCCC written
submissions, noting that compliance with legal obligations
is an expectation
placed upon all registered health practitioners.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraphs 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the
HCCC submissions.
indicated during the Inquiry the Tribunal accepts the submission of both parties
that the applicable law is the National Law (paragraph
13 HCCC of the
Submissions) and that the powers of the Tribunal to make protective orders are
set out in sections 149A – 149C
of the National Law paragraph 14 HCCC of
the Submissions).
Tribunal has made observations above regarding the findings with respect to each
of the Particulars of Complaint made by the initial
Tribunal, carefully noting
that only the comments made in paragraphs 1 to 57 of
[2010] NSWPHT 2
are of relevance (paragraphs 15 and 16 of the HCCC Submissions).
Tribunal notes the previous criminal history of the Respondent, being 29 counts
for offences created by the
Poisons & Therapeutics Goods Act 1966
(and the relevant regulations) and its predecessor legislation being the
Poisons Act 1966
(as set out in paragraph 17 of the HCCC Submissions)
The Tribunal notes as a relevant factor that all the offences were committed
within the practice of pharmacy.
Tribunal notes the submissions made by the HCCC at paragraph 18 and is of the
view that this conduct cannot be seen as a
‘isolated’ conduct.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 19 of the HCCC submissions. The
Tribunal notes the comment made by the reviewer
at the Board Inquiry that the
Respondent had incomplete knowledge of the requirements of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
Regulations
and is of the view that the
Respondent still does not demonstrate appropriate level of understanding of
these requirements despite
the remedial assistance from Mr Dash and Mr Mahony
(as well as the supervisors put in place as a result of the orders of the Board
respect to the submission made at paragraph 20 of the HCCC Submissions, the
Tribunal notes the findings relating to Particulars
11 and 12 (before the
October 2000 Board of Inquiry) and to the Respondent’s acknowledgement
that the conduct was
‘inappropriate, illegal and improper’.
At this point the Tribunal notes that the nature of the conduct in
Particular 10 of the current Complaint (i.e. the conduct re the
products) may be placed into the same category. Once again the Tribunal cannot
therefore view this type of improper conduct
as ‘isolated’ or a
Tribunal notes the submission made by the HCCC in paragraph 21. The Tribunal is
of the view that the comments made by the 2000
Board Inquiry are equally
applicable with respect to the Findings made by the initial Tribunal with
respect to the current Complaint
and from the additional evidence before this
current Tribunal.
Tribunal notes the submission made by the HCCC in paragraph 22. The Tribunal is
also of the view that the Respondent has now had
a further opportunity to engage
in supervised practice. This was a result of the successful application made on
behalf of the Respondent
at the first Directions Hearing before this current
Tribunal to have the continuation of this Inquiry significantly delayed to
the Respondent the opportunity of having a number of progress reports
from witnesses such as Mr Mahony in evidence.
Tribunal notes and accepts the submissions made in paragraph 23 of the HCCC
Submissions. The Tribunal notes that issues such as
general clutter in the
pharmacy, staffing, ordering practices and compliance with legislative
requirements were all identified when
Mr Patrick Mahony initiated the
‘business plan’.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraph 24 of the HCCC submissions.
Tribunal also notes the content of paragraph 25 of the HCCC Submissions and
notes the clarification made in oral submissions regarding
Complaint 3.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraph 26 of the HCCC Submissions. In effect
the Respondent has already been suspended from the
Register for a period of six
months (5 May 2010 to 5 November 2010), a factor taken into consideration by the
Tribunal accepts the content of paragraph 27 of the HCCC Submissions.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraph 28 of the HCCC Submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 29 of the HCCC submissions.
The Tribunal adds at this point that the steps
taken by the Respondent were also
taken in compliance with undertakings made to the Supreme Court which
facilitated his return to
the Register and rescued him from a forced sale of his
interest in the pharmacy (in order that he comply with the legislative
requirements
regarding the length of time an interest can be held in a pharmacy
if the person is not a registered registered).
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 30 of the HCCC Submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 31 of the HCCC submissions.
In addition to the finding of professional misconduct
the initial Tribunal in
[2010] NSWPHT 2
made a finding that the Respondent had been convicted
of offences the circumstances of which are such as to render the pharmacist
unfit in the public interest for registration as a pharmacist.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraph 32 of the HCCC submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 33 of the HCCC submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 34 of the HCCC submissions.
The Tribunal shares Mr Mahony’s concern
regarding the manner that the
unaccounted 160 Endone® tablets were stored.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 35 of the HCCC
submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 36 of the HCCC submissions.
At this point the Tribunal notes the pattern of
past misdemeanours and
noncompliance with legislative requirements in the Respondent’s behaviour
over many years.
Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraph 37 of the HCCC
submissions.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraph 38 of the HCCC submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraphs 39 and 40 of the HCCC
submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraphs 42, 43, 44 and 45 of the
HCCC submissions. The HCCC made the following oral
submissions at T429.46
one will see that there have been steps put in place by
Mr Ng through Mr Mahony in an attempt to rectify areas of omission.
The question
and the very difficult question the tribunal needs to satisfy
itself of is, is that or has that been enough or is what steps have
been put in
place - well, firstly, they were required steps having regard to the
undertaking that was given to the Supreme Court
and secondly, the issue of it
being a reactive approach to the practice of pharmacy and one which would not
find favour with this
tribunal, where one is dealing with professionals and
professionals running their own pharmacy and the need for them to be proactive
and on top of issues such as their compliance with regulatory requirements,
paperwork, and ensuring that all statutory obligations
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent made both written and oral submissions. Two written submissions were
provided. The Outline of Submissions dated 11
August 2011 was supplemented with
a submission regarding the ‘15 April “Audit”’ dated 22
August 2011. Copies
of these documents are annexed hereto in B.
respect to the Submissions dated 11 August 2011 the Tribunal notes and accepts
the submission made in paragraphs 1 and 2.
respect to Particular 1, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 3 to 7 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions made
in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial Tribunal’s
comments and findings.
Tribunal notes that the initial Tribunal also noted that the Respondent only had
43 drugs of addition to deal with and in this
Particular he failed to stocktake
19 of them.
initial Tribunal found:
Mr Ng showed a lack of care and judgment in the practice of
pharmacy and was significantly below the minimum standard expected of
pharmacist with several years’ experience in a community pharmacy. His
failure in this regard would attract the serious
disapproval of pharmacists of
good repute and that Mr Ng's failure invited Mr Vincent's strong
criticism",
submissions were made regarding the role of the Respondent’s illness with
respect to the failures evident in this finding.
The Tribunal notes the
obligation on all health practitioners to ensure they are mentally and
physically able to practice safely
and appropriately and to work within their
limitations. Further comments on this matter are set out below.
submissions were also made regarding the time that had passed since the
Respondent’s conduct as detailed in this Particular.
The Tribunal is of
the view that the mere effluxion of time does not remedy defects of this type.
Further, in March 2011 the Respondent
was still failing to meet regulatory
requirements. The Tribunal also notes the evidence of the Respondent regarding
role in the deficits identified in the PSU Audit undertaken on 15
April 2011.
respect to Particular 2, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 8 to 14 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
Tribunal notes that the initial Tribunal considered the conduct set out in the
Particular to be of a more serious nature. The
Tribunal notes that some of the
failures to undertake a stock take would have occurred on two occasions –
the legislative requirements
being for a stock take to occur in both March and
September of each year.
Tribunal also notes that the failure to record in the DD register as detailed in
this Particular commenced on 2 February 2004.
The Respondent’s
‘explanation’ of these failures (as detailed in his letter to the
HCCC dated 21 May 2007 –
volume 4 – exhibit 48 – page 163) was
that he became ill in the winter of 2004 which created the backlog of entries
he would deal with when he felt better
‘the following
. The Tribunal is of the view that this may have been an
explanation as to why the DD register was not up to date for a short period
during the winter of 2004 but does not explain conduct that occurred over the
period 2 February 2004 to 6 December 2004. It certainly
does not excuse a
departure from legislative requirements.
respect to Particular 3, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 15 to 20 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
again the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s explanation of falling ill
during the winter. The Respondent also indicates a
lack of staff contributed to
his lack of time to make entries in the DD register. Staffing is a matter
properly considered to be
within the control of the owner of a pharmacy. While
matters such as illness and staffing levels may be explanations as to why the
register was not maintained it cannot be accepted as an excuse given the
statutory nature of the requirement to keep the record
contemporaneously. The Tribunal is of the view that this conduct is more than
mere carelessness on the part of the Respondent,
rather it is indicative of
neglect of his professional responsibilities.
respect to Particular 4, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 21 to 25 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings. However, the Tribunal notes evidence of
the Respondent’s
ongoing lack of compliance (accurate record keeping)
regarding scheduled drugs.
Tribunal also notes that the evidence of the Respondent as set out in his letter
dated 21 May 2007 that he always entered drugs
like ‘morphine 15’ on
the day of receipt. The Tribunal notes that the DD Book was not up to date as at
the end of December
2004 when the Respondent went on holidays. Although it is
not entirely clear what period of time the Respondent was referring to,
letter was written to address defects identified in his record keeping during
the 2004 year.
respect to Particular 5, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 26 to 30 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent may still have issues regarding the
identification of a conforming prescription. The content
of the weekly
supervision report of Mr Cohen dated 2/8/11 is of some relevance. This report
raises the question as to whether the
Respondent (and Mr Cohen) may still not
understand the requirements for a valid Schedule 8 prescription are set out in
NSW legislation
and is not within the jurisdiction of Medicare. The Tribunal
notes that the matter reported upon by Mr Cohen occurred after Mr Ng
provided with the tuition regarding the relevant legislation and had undertaken
an examination with Mr Dash on 14 June 2011.
The Tribunal also notes that the
2007 convictions related to supply of medication without the interval endorsed
on the prescription
under Clause 85
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Tribunal notes the shift in the Respondent’s position from 2007 (his
letter to the HCCC dated 27 May 2007) and his statement
to the Tribunal (Volume
5 – exhibit 5 paragraph 28) from stating that he would make every attempt
to make sure prescriptions
were written legally prior to dispensing to his
current position of refusing to dispense and contacting the prescriber if the
prescription
was not in the proper form.
respect to Particular 6 the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 31 to 35 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
Tribunal notes that this conduct involved the supply of many ampoules of
anabolic steroids over a period of 22 months. This is
not conduct that can be
viewed as careless.
respect to Particular 7, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 37 to 42 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
respect to Particular 8, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 43 to 49 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings and notes where Adams J indicated the
initial Tribunal
fell in to error in one regard.
assist lay readers of this document the Tribunal notes that the drug referred to
in this Particular is Hypnodorm® which is
also known by the name Rohypnol
(and commonly called the ‘date rape’ drug).
submissions in paragraphs 64 to 68 also relate to this Particular. As noted in
paragraph 68 of the Respondent’s Submissions,
this Tribunal must form its
own view of the conduct set out in Particular 8. The Tribunal accepts the
comments of Mr Vincent. The
Respondent failed to exercise appropriate
professional discretion on these occasions.
Tribunal notes that the prescriptions in question included some authorised by
doctors other than Dr Jackson. Even with the assurance
of Dr Jackson appropriate
practice would be to have concerns that the supply was not in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards
for a patient withdrawing from heroin. The
conduct fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
pharmacist of an
equivalent level of training and experience in that it
demonstrated a lack of care, knowledge and skill.
respect to Particular 9, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 50 to 56 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
respect to Particular 10, the Respondent made submissions as to the initial
Tribunal’s ‘conclusions’ and the
evidence upon which they were
based in paragraphs 57 to 63 inclusive. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made in these paragraphs
as an accurate reflection of the initial
Tribunal’s comments and findings.
appears that there is a typographical error in this Particular. The conduct
occurred in 2004 rather than 2005 (See volume 1 –
page 161). The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent used illness as a reason for not attending to matters
such as keeping the DD register
up to date during the winter of 2004, although
this must also be considered in light of the Respondent’s evidence that
making of the Alphapharm entries was a relatively quick and that staff also
made entries (volume 1- page 161). The large number of
entries (over 2000) must
also be considered in such an analysis.
respect to Complaint 3 the Respondent made submissions in paragraphs 70 to 73
inclusive regarding the initial Tribunal’s
74 to 79 of the Respondent’s submissions set out principles to be applied
in determining what orders ought to be
made by this Tribunal.
parties agree about the applicable law as set out in paragraph 74 and as to the
role of the Tribunal as set out in paragraph
75. The principle of the
out in the decision of
(see above). The Tribunal is also of the
view that there may be occasion for the Tribunal to make orders that have a
deterrent effect,
both to the individual practitioner and to the profession (and
like professions).
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the Respondent in paragraph 76 in so far
as this is one of the reasons why an order for
suspension or removal from the
register may be made by a Tribunal.
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the Respondent in paragraph 77 noting
that this principle is enunciated in many other
Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent in paragraph 78.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 79 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes that the contents of paragraphs 80 to 86 of the
Respondent’s submissions provide details the Respondent’s
of criminal convictions and professional disciplinary matters.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 87 of the Respondent’s
submissions and accepts that the conduct, subject of the
Particulars of
Complaint, covers the period September 2003 to February 2005.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 88 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 89 and 90 of the Respondent’s
submissions. This Tribunal has had an opportunity
of looking at the report of Mr
Mahony in the light of the comments of Adams J and with the benefit of
considerable additional evidence
from Mr Mahony. The Tribunal also has the
benefit of the 15 April Audit undertaken by the PSU.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 91, 92 and 93 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 94 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 95 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal balances the conclusion of the
report with the oral
evidence of Mr Mahony and the other evidence before the Tribunal.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 96, 97, 98 and 99 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 100 of the Respondent’s
submissions. This submission does not record who worked
in the pharmacy on
Saturdays, however the footnote reference to paragraphs 103 – 105 of
Respondent’s volume 2 exhibit
8 (being the statement of the
Respondent’s legal representative, Mr R O’Connor) records Mr Lee
working on Saturdays.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal also notes that the
evidence of Mr Mahony that the
situation was a ‘work in progress’ and that aspects ‘signed
off’ by Mr Mahony
were found lacking by the time of the 15 April 2011
Audit. At this point the Tribunal acknowledges that the evidence supports there
having been significant improvements made and maintained with respect to the
physical aspects of the pharmacy and its state of order.
While mindful of (nor
seeking to detract from) the comments of Adams J in the following regard, the
Tribunal is of the view that
it is essential that a high level of cleanliness is
maintained in premises used for the dispensing of medications. When cleanliness
is not maintained ultimately the public will be put at risk. Further, in the
context of the Respondent’s medical condition
any organised system that
could support the Respondent to comply with legislative requirements would be of
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 103 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes from the oral evidence
of Mr Piggott his purview
was limited to the review of the business plan without the context of the
previous criminal convictions
of the Respondent, of which he was unaware.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraphs 104 and 105 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 106 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes the evidence ultimately
before the Tribunal was
that the QCPP was not achieved within three months of the hiring of
experienced new staff member’
. There was evidence that the QCPP was
not achieved due to the distraction of the Tribunal proceedings. The Tribunal
notes that the
Respondent was aware of the Tribunal proceedings for quite some
time and was not unfamiliar with the nature of disciplinary proceedings
litigation in general terms. The Tribunal also notes that the
‘experienced new staff member’
did not commence until
mid-April 2011 (19 April) and has only been employed on a part time basis. The
Tribunal notes that as at 14
March 2011 Mr Mahony recorded that the staffing
issue was not resolved but that he anticipated it would be by 28 March or 4
2011 (volume R1 - exhibit 9). Subsequent to his report, Mr Mahony was
informed by the Respondent that the new staff member was to
commence work in the
week of 14 April 2011. Further, Mr Mahony had discussions with the Respondent to
the effect that the Respondent
could commence practising without a supervisor
and to work as the Pharmacist in Charge from the week commencing 17 April 2011.
T270, 12/5/11).
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal also notes the evidence
before it is that Mr Ho ceased
working in the pharmacy on 29 March 2011. It was Mr Mahony’s view that the
Respondent should
not work unsupervised until the additional staff member was in
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 109 of the Respondent’s
submissions. Once again the Tribunal notes the evidence
of Mr Ho that he did not
work during April 2011. Further, the Tribunal notes that the
‘experienced new staff member’
did not commence her
employment until 19 April 2011. The Tribunal has no documentation indicating
that either Mr Mahony or the Council
gave approval (through Mr Mahony or
otherwise) for the Respondent to commence working unsupervised from 2 or 3 April
2011 (or any
time prior to 19 April 2011).
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 110 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal is of the view that it would
be more accurate for
Paragraph 110(e) to read
‘practiced,
until the beginning of
April 2011...’.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 111 of the Respondent’s
submissions. While the risk of transgression may have been
reduced by the
Respondent’s focus since January 2005 on compliance with the requirements
he had transgressed, the evidence
before the Tribunal indicates the Respondent
is still transgressing as at 2011. While the Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent has
undertaken the considerable task of restructuring his pharmacy
practice, it is not in the view of the Tribunal sufficient for the
transgression in the future to be
The level of
transgression demonstrated by the Respondent in the past has been high as
indicated by the number of criminal convictions
recorded against his name. A
reduction from this level of transgression is of limited comfort to a Tribunal
exercising a protective
the evidence before the Tribunal regarding input made by the supervisors
Respondent’s practice in 2001 and by Mr Mahony, that much of the driving
force for the restructuring of the pharmacy
was not driven by the Respondent
himself, rather it was driven by the mentors/supervisors.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 112 of the Respondent’s
submissions. Since November 2010 the steps taken by the
Respondent as his
‘to having a properly functioning pharmacy’
included the entering into the undertaking to the Supreme Court. As a result
of the judgment of the Supreme Court the Respondent avoided
having to sell his
interest in his pharmacy, a position to the advantage of the Respondent. Other
steps have been as a result of
the implementation of the business plan developed
by Mr Mahony and audited by Mr Piggott. He has worked, not without failures to
meet legislative requirements, under the supervision of Mr Ho and more recently
with the assistance of Mr Cohen.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 113 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes Mr Piggott’s evidence
that he understood
his role was merely to audit the Business Plan and not to undertake an audit of
the pharmacy. The Tribunal notes
the view of Mr Piggott that the Respondent
‘is having his eyes opened about Community Pharmacy in an Australian
business-sense’
but views this in the context of the number of years
that the Respondent has practiced in his own business as a Community Pharmacist
in Australia. The Tribunal accepts Mr Piggott’s assessment of the Business
‘sound, normal and achievable’
. The Tribunal also
accepts that the Respondent has been very accepting of Mr Mahony’s
teaching as observed by Mr Piggott. The
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent
was accepting of the teachings of the supervisors of his practice in 2001 and of
tuition. What is absent is evidence that would satisfy the
Tribunal that the ‘teaching’ the Respondent has received has
remedied the defects in his practice identified in the findings in this matter.
Further, teaching is one thing; learning and applying
the knowledge and
translating that to skill and care are another.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 114 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes the discrepancy in the
evidence of Mr Ho and the
Respondent as to Mr Ho’s last day of work in the pharmacy. Mr Ho stated it
was 29 March 2011 and
the Respondent stated it was 5 April 2011. The evidence of
Mr Ho (set out in paragraph 14 of the Respondent’s submissions)
sit well with the findings of the 15 April Audit undertaken by the PSU.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 115 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal can make no substantial inference
on a comment made by
Mr Cox (to Mr Mahony) that his report of an inspection that took place on 4
April 2011 was
in the absence of any evidence
regarding the actual content of the report, knowledge of the nature of the
inspection or evidence
from Mr Cox. The Tribunal also notes at this point that
when Mr Dash attended the pharmacy in June 2011 he did not find a copy of
relevant legislation.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 116 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 117 and 118 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The defects identified by the 15
April Audit undertaken by the PSU
should be placed in the context of the Respondent being part way through an
Inquiry by the Tribunal,
his practice being subject to an undertaking made to
the Supreme Court that allowed him to return to practice and at a time that
Respondent was just being allowed to return to unsupervised practice.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 119 of the Respondent’s
submissions. With respect to Mr Mahony’s comment
recorded at paragraph
119(a) the Tribunal notes that his report of April 2011 Mr Mahony talks of the
‘considerable progress’
that the Respondent had made in the
preceding six months. The Tribunal notes that Mr Mahony attributed the progress
to the Respondent
rather than his supervisor. The Tribunal notes that sub
paragraphs 118 (e), (f) and (h) all relate to the DD register. The Tribunal
notes that sub paragraphs 118 (e), (f), (g) and (h) are all of a similar nature
to matters subject of past complaints regarding
the Respondent’s practice.
The issue recorded in sub paragraphs 118 (b) is so fundamental to the practice
of pharmacy that
it is included in the legislation as a ground for a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct (section 139D(d) National Law)
a requirement
of the legislation. The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct subject of
paragraph 118(c) of the Respondent’s
submissions is conduct that amounts
to an unacceptable practice and is known to any registered health practitioner
who holds a Schedule
8 authority (e.g. registered nurses).
respect to paragraph 119(b) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that having an indication that
many items had been discussed and
that they are
‘scheduled to be completed within the agreed
is of little assistance to this Tribunal given the matter
must be determined as at the present time. In any case there is scant evidence
that the Respondent has the ability to permanently remedy issues that are drawn
to his attention.
respect to paragraph 119(c) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that it is inappropriate for the
exclusion of
‘inappropriate stock items’
(being items that statutory
provisions exclude from sale in pharmacies in Australia) from the pharmacy to be
achieved after pending
renovation and the subsequent organisation of stock in a
‘logical sequence and the employment of experienced staff’.
The issue of such stock being on the shelves should not have arisen as checks
should have been made prior to the presentation of
the stock for sale. Once the
matter was brought to the Respondent’s attention the priority must be for
registered pharmacists
to comply with statutory provisions. The Respondent
should have been capable of this task, even in an un-renovated pharmacy.
respect to paragraph 119(d) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts that Mr Ho and Mr Lee should have been
the ‘Pharmacist in
Charge’ of the pharmacy at the relevant times. However, in the
circumstances of this matter a responsible
approach would have been for the
Respondent as the proprietor and as a supervised pharmacist working in the
pharmacy to have ensured
these matters were attended to in accordance with the
statutory requirements.
respect to paragraph 119(e) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that little can turn on the issue
of the safe given the evidence
regarding the bulk etc of the original safe.
respect to paragraph 119(f) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that it is relatively minor issue
standing alone. However, the
recording of the Respondent as the dispensing pharmacist when his evidence was
that he was not in fact
the dispensing pharmacist (as a result of an automatic
but reprogrammable computer function), in the context of this matter, takes
the dimension of being another area where the Respondent failed to take care to
put appropriate procedures in place to ensure
errors such as these did not place
him into an inappropriate position.
respect to paragraph 119(g) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
notes that on the evidence before it the Respondent
appears to have been the
only registered pharmacist working in the pharmacy on at least 2, 3 and 5 April
2011. The Tribunal notes
that the Respondent also remained the proprietor of the
pharmacy throughout the relevant time. Both Mr Piggott and Mr Mahony gave
evidence about their roles in running a number of pharmacies simultaneously.
When the evidence of Mr Mahony and Mr Piggott is considered
globally it is clear
that they both oversee the proper operation of their respective groups of
pharmacies (even though they each
had the benefit of family members and long
standing staff members working in the pharmacies). The Tribunal is of the view
conduct of Mr Mahony and Mr Piggott in this regard is an appropriate
standard to be employed whether a registered pharmacist is the
proprietor of one
pharmacy or several pharmacies.
respect to paragraph 119(h) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that it is certainly not best practice
‘inappropriate and excess stock’
on the shelves when that
stock includes out of date products and products not bearing an AustR or an
AustL number. Further, the Tribunal
is of the view that it is not appropriate
practice for such products to remain on display for any period of time. Such
stock should
have been identified and removed as a priority.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 120 of the Respondent’s
submissions. With respect to paragraph 120(a) of the Respondent’s
submissions the Tribunal has no doubt that the Respondent will be more
to not stock products not bearing an AustR or an
AustL number in view of this matter having been drawn to his attention. There is
an expectation that registered pharmacists will be aware of their statutory
obligations. AustR and AustL numbers are fundamental
parts of the regulation of
medicines and other products within Australia.
respect to paragraph 120(b) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
notes that there was no approved supervising pharmacist
working in the pharmacy
on 15 April 2011. Further, the Tribunal is of the view that while it is the
primary responsibility of the
actual Pharmacist in Charge to have their name
plate displayed correctly that it is also an obligation that falls to any
pharmacist that is working at the time.
respect to paragraph 120(c) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that if in fact the Respondent
did not know it was inappropriate
to keep the drug safe key anywhere other than on his person then his knowledge
of matters fundamental
to the practice of pharmacy is lacking to an alarming
respect to paragraph 120(d) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
refers to comments elsewhere re the safe and notes
that this matter has been
respect to paragraph 120(e)(i) of the Respondent’s submissions the
Tribunal notes that while the Respondent was on holidays
as at the date of
dispensing, the label for the medication records the Respondent as the dispenser
of the medication (see attachment
3 to the PSU report dated 6 may 2011- volume
6, exhibit 4).
respect to paragraph 120(e)(ii) of the Respondent’s submissions the
Tribunal notes that Mr Lee was not approved by the
Council as a supervisor for
the Respondent and therefore the Respondent should not have been working as a
pharmacist.
respect to paragraph 120(e)(iii) of the Respondent’s submissions the
Tribunal is of the view that if in fact the Respondent
did not know the correct
manner to ascertain the ‘supply date’ and the ‘dispensing
date’ this is another
indicator that his knowledge of matters fundamental
to the practice of pharmacy is lacking to an alarming level.
respect to paragraph 120(f)(i) and (ii) of the Respondent’s submissions
the Tribunal has elsewhere commented upon the inadequacy
of the use of a rubber
band to address the issue of returned stock, the lack of differentiation between
‘supply’ and
‘dispensing’ date.
respect to paragraph 120(g) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
notes the issue for consideration is who dispensed
the prescription rather than
who ‘issued’ the
‘non-conforming prescription’
respect to paragraph 120(h) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts that ‘human’ errors occur
from time to time in professional
practice. One of the roles of the training required for registration is to
reduce the occurrence
of such errors by identifying the likely areas for such
errors to occur. Fundamental to the counting of medication is the ascertaining
of the number of items in each package. This, of course, is fundamental to any
stock take exercise whether undertaken in accordance
with a statutory provision
or not. Where it is undertaken to fulfil a statutory obligation there is an
expectation that greater care
would be taken.
respect to paragraph 120(i) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
notes that the warnings provided to these patients
was verbal only. The
Respondent’s understanding of the significance of avoiding foods
containing cytochrome P450 enzyme inhibitors
(e.g. grapefruit and grapefruit
juice) when taking certain statins (a type of medication) is another matter that
adds to the Tribunal’s
concerns regarding the Respondent’s knowledge
of matters relevant to the practice of pharmacy (as detailed by the Tribunal
above) and the care that he takes in his practice. The inhibitors found in these
food stuffs can remain in the body for several days
and the interaction with the
statin medication can cause serious harm (such as muscle damage). This is not
merely a matter where
the medication is rendered ineffective or less effective
or may cause a transient side effect such a nausea.
respect to paragraph 120(j) of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
is of the view that a jar of unidentified white
powder should just not have been
in the pharmacy at all, regardless of whether it was for sale or not. The
presence of such a substance
in an area used for the dispensing of medication
for systemic and topical use by humans is inappropriate and contrary to
professional
practice. There clearly was no means by which the identification of
the substance, a batch number or expiry date could be identified.
The presence
of such a substance in a pharmacy is contrary to the fundamentals of the
practice of pharmacy and the potential for
harm to flow is high.
respect to paragraph 120(e)(i) of the Respondent’s submissions the
Tribunal accepts this is the practice the Respondent
says is in place in the
pharmacy. Evidence was heard from Mr Mahony to the effect that regular checks of
the expiry date of medications
in the dispensary were an integral part of
professional practice. The system described by Mr Mahony involved the
identification and
placement of stock with a short expiry date so that it will
be dispensed first. Further, as a part of this regular checking process
stock that may have gone out of date (or only having a short time to expiry)
without being dispensed could be identified and
disposed of appropriately.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 121, 122 and 123 of the
Respondent’s submissions. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent’s
evidence was that he has a poor history of complying with his medication
regimen, extending over a significant
period of time, not limited to the time he
was brought to the attention of the Health Department as recorded in the report
by Dr Klug. The symptoms of tiredness and lethargy the Respondent
reported to Dr Klug as being a result of his lack of compliance
medication regimen was consistent with the Respondent’s appearance
throughout the Inquiry. The Tribunal accepts Dr
Klug’s observation that
the rate at which the Respondent was receiving his testosterone injections could
be validated by way
of his treating GP’s notes. No such notes were
produced to the Tribunal. Further, the Tribunal notes the evidence of the
that while the testosterone injections were prescribed by the GP he
did not necessarily have to attend the GP on each occasion the
injections were
administered. Rather, he could administered them to himself or may seek
assistance, for instance by his wife, with
the injection without attending the
doctor’s surgery.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 124 and 125 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 126 and 127 of the Respondent’s
submissions. Without diminishing the obvious diligent
efforts made by Mr Mahony
to assist the Respondent, the Tribunal sees these steps in the context of
‘the whole flight of stairs’
that the Respondent has been taking
since his conduct first brought him to the attention of both the courts and the
regulatory authority.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 128 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 129 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 130, 131, 132, 133 and 134 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 135 and 136 of the Respondent’s
submissions and that Mr James Le was engaged as
Pharmacist in Charge from 7 June
2011, Mr Quincy Le having fulfilled this role from 27 May 2011 to 6 June
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 137 and 138 of the Respondent’s
submissions regarding the intention of the Respondent
to proceed with the QCPP
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 139 and 140 of the Respondent’s
submissions. Without doubting Mr Mahony’s
dedication to his role, the
Tribunal does have grave reservations regarding the Respondent’s ability
to respond appropriately
to the mentoring he is receiving and to maintain change
in any sustained manner as he has not demonstrated an ability to do so in
past despite significant levels of oversight, supervision and inspection.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 141, 142 and 143 of the
Respondent’s submissions and expresses difficulties as
detailed below,
with the views of Mr Cohen.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 144 and 145 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 146 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes that there is authority
to support this
submission. However, (while noting that the Respondent trained outside of
Australia) it cannot be that the investment
of public resources represented by
the Respondent’s education and experience is to outweigh the public
interest in allowing
the privilege of registration to fall to anyone (the
Tribunal notes in any case that the Respondent was educated overseas). The
Respondent’s
education and experience is not unique. His services are not
indispensible. Even if they were, the role of a protective jurisdiction
just that – protect the public safety, protect the reputation of the
profession, protect the trust that the public
may repose in members of the
profession and to protect against further conduct of this nature by acting as a
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 147 of the Respondent’s
submissions and has not relied upon the matters identified
by Adams J as being
not open for a Tribunal to rely upon in reaching a finding of probable permanent
unfitness. The Tribunal also
notes that Adams J did not disturb the initial
Tribunal’s finding of professional misconduct. In any case, the evidence
the current Tribunal is more extensive than that before the first
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 148 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 149, 150 and 151 of the
Respondent’s submissions. The Tribunal notes
however, that the Tribunal
has two questions to determine. One is whether or not the Respondent is
currently unfit to practice based
upon the circumstances of his criminal
convictions and the second is whether or not the Respondent is fit to practice,
with or without
conditions on registration, as a result of the finding of
professional misconduct.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 152 of the Respondent’s
submissions (and reads the reference to Mr Mahoney to be
Mr Mahony – the
former being a supervisor at an earlier period of time and the later giving the
most extensive evidence regarding
the Respondent’s recent practice).
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 153 of the Respondent’s
submissions. It is clear to the Tribunal that the Respondent’s
complete reformation is not complete; it has barely begun in substantive terms.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 154 of the Respondent’s
submissions and has made comments elsewhere about other
conduct it considers
cannot be characterised as careless. Indeed, with the knowledge of the adverse
impact of his medical condition
on his work performance, the conduct of the
Respondent over such a lengthy period is more accurately characterised in the
the Tribunal as reckless.
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 155 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 156 of the Respondent’s
submissions. As noted elsewhere the Tribunal cannot accept
the conduct relating
to the Alphapharm entries to be isolated given the circumstances, not the least
being the sheer number of the
entries. Further the Particular as established
finds that the conduct was false and/or misleading. Even if the submission that
was a ‘one off’ could be accepted the Tribunal still needs to
consider the false/misleading characteristic of the conduct
which is not
addressed in the Respondent’s submission.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 157 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes the contents of the balance of the Respondent’s submission
which essentially deal with the issue of appropriate
Respondent’s submissions regarding the 15 April
Respondent also provided a written submission regarding the Audit undertaken of
the Respondent’s pharmacy by the Pharmaceutical
Service Unit (PSU) on 15
April 2011. As recorded above a copy of these submissions is found in Annexure B
Tribunal accepts the submission made in paragraph 1 of these supplementary
submissions.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 2 of these supplementary
submissions. The Tribunal understands this submission
to mean that this Tribunal
should be focused on what lead to the initial Tribunal’s finding of
professional misconduct to establish
‘present unfitness’
Tribunal cannot accept this submission as it is clear from the legislation and
the decision of Adams J that this Tribunal must
proceed to determine the
question of current fitness which involves consideration of all of the
Respondent’s conduct, in particular
his conduct since the convictions.
Tribunal notes the submissions made in paragraphs 3 and 4 of these supplementary
submissions. The Tribunal notes that the initial
Tribunal made findings of
unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to Particulars 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9
and 10. The subject matters
covered by these Particulars included failure to
make six monthly inventories of drugs of addiction (for 19 out of 43 such drugs
that he held in his DD safe), failure to record in the DD Register receipt of
drugs of addiction on ten occasions, failure to record
in the DD Register supply
of drugs of addiction on 40 occasions, failure to record receipt of a drug of
addiction on one occasion,
supply of drugs of addiction on prescriptions which
failed to comply with Clause 77(1)(f) and 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 2002
on 58 occasions, supplying testosterone to three
patients and failing to keep the prescription contrary to Clause 41(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
and failing to keep the
(Schedule 8) prescriptions apart from other prescriptions contrary to Clause
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
and the making of
approximately 2000 false and/or misleading entries regarding Alphapharm Brand
Clearly the conduct considered by the initial Tribunal went
well beyond the scope of the issues set out in paragraph 4 of the
Respondent’s
submissions regarding the 15 April Audit.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 5 of these supplementary
submissions. While there is nothing in the 15 April Audit
that records any
fraudulent conduct on the part of the Respondent the Tribunal notes the entry
made in the DD Register for the drug
40mg for Patient A on 25 March 2011. The entry records that the Respondent
signed as dispensing 60 tablets of this drug on 25 March
2011 when only 53 would
have been in stock on that day. The Tribunal further notes that at this time the
Respondent was only able
to dispense Schedule 8 medication while working under
supervision from an approved supervisor and that Mr Lee (the other pharmacist
present) was not approved as a supervisor. While the Respondent provided an
explanation to the Tribunal as to his confusion regarding
date of supply and
date of dispensing, the fact remains that the entry in the DD Register is not
Tribunal also notes that looking for entries such as the Alphapharm entries
would not be within the scope of a PSU Audit.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 6 of these supplementary
submissions. The Tribunal notes the contents of Attachment
8 to the PSU Report
and the contents of paragraph 12 of the report which record that the Respondent
dispensed a Schedule 8 drug on
a non-conforming script. While the Schedule 8
drug is not an anabolic steroid, they both fall under the category of a
‘restricted
substance’ for the purpose of Clause 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 7 of these supplementary
submissions. While there was nothing in the April Audit
Report that indicates
the Respondent supplied drugs to any patients not in accordance with accepted
therapeutic standards, there
are examples of where the Respondent has dispensed
medications without regard to the principles of the Quality Use of Medicines
Namely, the Respondent dispensed Allegron
without the affixing of the warning label required by Appendix A of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
and the dispensing of
simvastatin without the appropriate ancillary label (the oral warning given by
the Respondent not being accurate
or sufficient - see T106.7-14). The Tribunal
also notes the submission made in paragraph 35 of the supplementary submissions.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 8 of these Supplementary
Submissions. For the reasons set out above the Tribunal
does not accept this
submission in as far as there is evidence from the April Audit Report that the
Respondent was found to have
engaged in conduct of a similar nature to that
established by the initial Tribunal.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 9 of these Supplementary
Submissions. It follows that the Tribunal does not accept
this submission as the
April Audit demonstrates that conduct of the same nature continues.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 10 of these Supplementary
Submissions. Not only is the Tribunal of the view that
conduct amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct should be considered in the overall picture,
the Tribunal has regard to
the comments of the initial Tribunal at paragraph 44
which clearly indicates that it was the totality of the conduct, rather than
matters considered seriously unethical that led the Tribunal to its finding of
professional misconduct.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 11 of these Supplementary
Submissions. As set out above the Tribunal does not
accept the submission made
by the Respondent that the April Audit demonstrates that the misconduct of the
Respondent does not continue.
Having made this finding the Tribunal cannot
therefore accept that the April Audit establishes that the conduct is unlikely
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 12 of these Supplementary
Submissions. The evidence suggests that the Audit was
thorough and that the
remit of the PSU was limited to statutory compliance issues relating to the
Poisons and Therapeutics Good Legislation.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 13 of these Supplementary
Submissions. The Tribunal notes the limited number of
patients reviewed in this
audit (although there is no clear statement that this was the number of patient
dispensing records reviewed
in the Audit Report, only reference to particular
aspects of the dispensing of medications to five named patients is actually made
in the report), the large number of expired medications on the dispensary
shelves and the anomalies in the DD Register.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 14 of these Supplementary
Submissions.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 15 of these Supplementary
Submissions. With respect to the submission regarding
Particular 1 the Tribunal
notes the submission is that the failure to complete the stock take of the
Schedule 8 drugs was a result
of the Pharmacist in Charge not completing the
task (as discrepancies were found) rather than as a result of the
Respondent’s
illness. This submission is elaborated at paragraphs 33 and
34 of the Respondent’s supplementary submissions. The Tribunal
view that the Respondent is not able to totally abrogate his responsibility as
the proprietor of the pharmacy. The Tribunal
notes that though the Respondent
accepted responsibility on the Respondent’s evidence a substantial burden
would fall to Mr
Lee for the failures to complete the stock take at the
appropriate time.
respect to Particular 2 the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s
submissions that there has not been any subsequent failure
to record the
receipt of drugs into the pharmacy. The Tribunal
is unable to accept the distinction sought to be made by the Respondent of
from a supplier (presumably as a result of an order) and the receipt
from a member of the public returning unwanted medications.
Both involve the
pharmacist coming into the possession of a Schedule 8 drug. This invokes the
application of Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods legislation to handle and account
for them appropriately. The Tribunal notes the evidence set out in paragraph 17
the submissions.
respect to Particular 3 the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s
submissions that there has only been a ‘mis-recording’
Register with respect to the supply of a Schedule 8 drug rather than a failure
to record. While the Respondent provided
an explanation as to his confusion
between the dispensing date and the supply date, the Tribunal is of the view
that the proper recording
of information in a DD Register is fundamental to the
practice of pharmacy.
respect to the Respondent’s submissions regarding Particular 4 the
Tribunal notes comments made regarding Particular 2
respect to Particular 5 the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submission and
refers to the comments made regarding the submission
made in paragraph 6 (see
respect to Particular 7 the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s
submissions.
respect to Particular 8 the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s
submissions and repeats the comments made above with respect
to the submission
made in paragraph 7.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 16 of these Supplementary
Submissions. The Tribunal accepts that the Respondent
is capable of learning and
change but notes it is Mr Mahony’s evidence that the Respondent has not
yet changed all of his
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 of the
Supplementary Submissions. The Tribunal notes that the evidence
Respondent is that he failed to record the supply of a Schedule 8 drug in
accordance with the statutory requirements, just
as he failed to do so on
previous occasions. In this instance there was a total failure to make an entry
in the DD Register (rather
than confusing between date of supply and date of
dispensing) until after the matter was drawn to his attention by the PSU Audit.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Supplementary
Submissions. The Tribunal prefers the evidence
of Ms Dolan as recorded in
paragraph 10 (a) of her report dated 6 May 2011.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 of the
Supplementary Submissions. The issue of concern is the Respondent’s
of knowledge regarding the keeping of the drug keys on the person of the
pharmacist. In the circumstances of this matter, the
Tribunal is not able to
accept that the Respondent did not appreciate such a fundamental matter. Whether
or not the keys were secured
is not relevant.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraphs 27, 28 and 29 of the
Respondent’s Supplementary Submissions. The Tribunal
notes that the
Respondent had made some effort to address the issue of expired stock and Mr
Cohen confirms a system is now in place.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraphs 30 and 31 of the
Respondent’s Supplementary Submissions. The Tribunal accepts
Respondent now takes care to ensure all appropriate items have an AustR or an
AustL number. While the Tribunal can accept
that checking for such markings
would not be usually undertaken with respect to stock arriving from a
pharmaceutical wholesaler,
this should not be applied to stock purchased from a
‘Chinese shop’
. People purchasing products from pharmacies
are relying upon the expertise of the registered pharmacist. They are entitled
so. By his lack of attention to these details he placed the public at
risk. Although the evidence of Mr Mahony regarding the fact
that there are
‘50 to 100 pharmacies’
in Sydney that would not comply with
the requirement to only stock retail therapeutic goods bearing AustR and AustL
numbers, this
Tribunal is only considering the conduct of the Respondent.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 32 of the Respondent’s
Supplementary Submissions.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s Supplementary Submissions do not
address the issue of the conduct detailed in Particular
6 of the Complaint.
Although there was no finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct made with
respect to this Particular there
was a finding that the conduct fell below the
acceptable standard. Conduct of this type was detected by the April Audit as the
dispensed on 17 January 2011 the drug dexamphetamine on the second
repeat of a non-conforming prescription dated 2 August 2010. While
the initial
dispensing was permissible under Clause 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 2002
any subsequent dispensing required an amended or new
prescription.
this point the Tribunal refers back to the evidence of the Respondent that as at
April 2011 he did not fully appreciate his obligations
under Clause 112 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulations noting that this position is despite
all of the interventions that
had taken place by that time attempting to address
deficits in his professional practice.
Tribunal notes the significant impact the Respondent’s medical condition
has had on the conduct subject of the Complaint.
The Respondent has not had
evidence of a medically supported treatment plan for his condition or any system
to ensure compliance
therewith. Had the Respondent chosen to appropriately treat
his condition he may not have suffered from the symptoms and illnesses
attributes to his failure to comply with treatment. The Tribunal may have
weighed this factor heavily had this been the first
occasion when the Respondent
fell ill, particularly if he was unaware of the causation of the symptoms and
repeated illness. However,
in the circumstances of this matter it cannot be
accorded significant weight in view of the Respondent’s knowledge of his
condition, the three sets of convictions and the previous disciplinary
proceedings.
Tribunal does not accept that the Respondent’s conduct was careless. He
failed to attend to a number of the statutory requirements
relating to Schedule
8 drugs over a significant period of time. It is not a case of just missing one
count of one drug inadvertently.
It is not carless conduct to put a rubber band
around the returned boxes rather than take the time to properly identify this
The Respondent could have spent time on statutory compliance rather than
making the Alphapharm entries. He could have employed additional
staff to take
some of the workload so he could attend to statutory compliance tasks. At this
point the Tribunal notes the oral evidence
of the Respondent around transcript
page 73 that he had noticed that the returned Endone® tablets had been
‘inadvertently’
amalgamated with the stock Endone® and that
despite this he had not taken steps to separate them or inform the other
pharmacists
of this occurrence. Rather the Respondent stated he was waiting for
the Pharmacy Council Inspector to attend to destroy the tablets.
The Tribunal is
of the view that this is an example of evidence that the Respondent has not
acted in a professionally appropriate
manner. The alternate view is that the
evidence of the Respondent is just not credible.
Tribunal is also troubled about the lack of clarity regarding the supervision of
the Respondent’s practice in the first
two weeks of April 2011. In the
circumstances of this matter, when operating under an undertaking made to the
Supreme Court, there
should be no lack of clarity as to when the Respondent was
permitted to work without supervision.
in some respects the use of the term ‘Business Plan’ may not have
been of great assistance to the Respondent, what
must have been clear to the
Respondent from the time the first Tribunal handed down its decision was that
there were serious concerns
regarding his professional practice and the criminal
offences he had committed while conducting that practice. While the Tribunal
accepts that Mr Mahony had set a timetable to work towards as part of the
Business Plan/mentoring arrangement, this cannot release
the Respondent from the
obligations placed upon him as a registered health practitioner. The nature of
the defects in the Respondent’s
practice identified by the PSB 15 April
audit are significant and in the context of this Respondent’s practice and
circumstances
must be, in the Tribunal’s view, carefully considered. When
regard is had to the circumstances of the Respondent at the time
of the 15 April
Audit the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent has not overcome the deficits
(from the misconduct finding) in his
practice to a satisfactory point, nor have
his actions allowed the Tribunal to repose confidence in his current fitness to
(after the finding of unfitness based on convictions).
Tribunal has considerable evidence before it that the Respondent had been
informed of the serious position his registration was
in. Mr Mahony’s
dedication to supporting the Respondent to overcome the deficits in his practice
is evidence not only in the
dedication that was obvious from his oral evidence
before the Tribunal but also evident from comments such as that at the end of
the email he sent to the Respondent on 24 November 2010 (as set out above in the
section dealing with the evidence of Mr Mahony).
While the Tribunal has
considered the conduct of the Respondent within the context of this matter, the
Tribunal has not held him
to some higher standard. The Respondent’s
conduct is properly adjudged having regard to his training and experience and to
the circumstances of the matters before the Tribunal.
Tribunal makes reference to Mr Mahony’s view that, in essence, the
Pharmacy Council did not make adequate provision for
the procedure when there
was a hand over from a supervising pharmacist to the Respondent (see detailed
above in the summary of Mr
Mahony’s evidence). While the Tribunal accepts
it would have been put beyond any doubt had such a matter been spelt out in
form of documentation, that this is a matter that is fundamental to the practice
of pharmacy. While it may be that the name
‘Business Plan’ may have
the unfortunate consequence of some professional practice issues being
overlooked, this is not
a matter that can be laid at the feet of the Council or
indeed the independent auditor, Mr Piggott. All registered pharmacists have
obligation to ensure that matters are in order when they take over
responsibility for a pharmacy. There are also responsibilities
that fall to the
owners of pharmacies that cannot be delegated.
Tribunal accepts the comments made by Mr Mahony in his report (see page 14 of
his report dated 9 May 2011) regarding the difficulties
faced by pharmacists
when presented with an inadequate or invalid script. The Tribunal notes Mr
Mahony’s view that the bona-fide
of the client and the prescribers’
intentions become the pharmacists’ responsibility. In the view of the
Tribunal it
is the pharmacists’ responsibility to dispense in accordance
with valid prescriptions and to be aware of the other professional
obligations
regarding appropriate dispensing which may involve the overriding of the
validity of the prescription.
Tribunal has set out the initial comments made by Mr Mahony in his Mentor Report
dated 27 June 2011 above. It is unfortunate that
there was a perception the
undertaking made by the Respondent to the Supreme Court was anything other than
an interim position, made
pending the redetermination of the matter by the
Tribunal as remitted by the Court. This misconception did not assist.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent did not provide evidence from the pharmacist
working in the pharmacy on 12 April 2011 that
they did not change the
‘default’ setting that recorded the Respondent as the dispensing
pharmacist or that they dispensed
the medication on 12 April 2011.
there is a natural sympathy for an aversion to injections, the consequences of
the Respondent’s avoidance of his medication
have been immense. There is
an obligation on all professional persons to work within their limitations. This
issue is discussed above.
The Respondent’s failure to comply with
treatment demonstrates a lack of judgment on his part as he has not taken
steps to keep himself well by managing his illness.
the Tribunal is of the view that the deficits in the Respondent’s
knowledge remain at a significant level, a level incompatible
with maintaining
registration, even with stringent conditions. The Tribunal also finds that the
Respondent has insurmountable issues
with the retention of knowledge and the
application of knowledge to his practice.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC (at paragraph 22) that conditions
have already been placed on the Respondent’s
registration in the past and
the change in the practises of the Respondent were not what would be expected of
a registered pharmacist.
Further, it falls well below what should be expected
even of a junior pharmacist let alone a senior practitioner with the
Respondent’s
experience. The Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent
does not demonstrate sufficient aptitude to take on board any significant
benefit from the assistance he has been given nor any initiative to instigate
change for himself. With so many examples in evidence
of situations where the
Respondent stated he would only take action if a matter was brought to his
attention and other examples of
where he still took no action even when he was
aware of a matter the Tribunal has formed the view that overall the
Respondent’s
conduct is strongly indicative of a very reactive nature
rather than a proactive nature. The re-design of the dispensary suggested
in 2001 by supervisors appointed by the Board were not in fact undertaken until
February 2011 (with the intervention of the
Undertaking to the Supreme Court and
the guidance of Mr Mahony) when, in effect, his hand was absolutely forced.
Further, the Respondent
had not even taken steps such as remedying the deficits
in his knowledge that were evident from the offending conduct such as what
difference between an AustL and an AustR number. The Tribunal accepts the
submission made by the HCCC (at paragraph 30) that
the Respondent is dependent
on others, shows little or no initiative or even where to start to address
defects in his practice.
Tribunal has taken into account steps the Respondent has taken to improve
matters, substantially with Mr Mahony admirably being
the driving force.
However, the Tribunal is substantially concerned about the ethical and proper
practising of the Respondent rather
than the appearance of the pharmacy.
Tribunal notes that consideration of whether a Respondent has been able to in
any adequate sense learn lessons from their earlier
misconduct was made by
Phegan J in the matter of
Theodorou v Dean
authority provided to the Tribunal by counsel for the HCCC. This was an appeal
from the decision of the Board –
Dean v Theodorou
[2002] NSWPB 5.
Tribunal also notes that an earlier decision made by the Board with respect to
the same respondent, being
Ian Dean v Theodoros Theodorou,
Pharmacy Board
of NSW (10 July 1996) was provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent’s
Counsel. The Tribunal is of the view
that the Respondent has demonstrated
extremely limited aptitude to learn lessons from his prior misconduct and
limited aptitude to
learn from other registered pharmacists. The Tribunal notes
that the Respondent has a number of convictions in addition to the disciplinary
processes detailed herein.
the context of the Respondent’s disciplinary history the Tribunal is
particularly concerned with the areas of non-compliance
identified by the
inspection undertaken by the Pharmaceutical Services Unit on 15 April 2011 (see
summary at paragraph 31(iii) of
the HCCC Submissions).
the Tribunal notes the opinion expressed by Mr Mahony that Mr Lee was
responsible for making the correct endorsement in the
Drug Register for the
dispensing of Patient E’s OxyContin® medication on 25 March 2011 when
the Respondent was not working
under the supervision of Mr Ho. The Tribunal
notes the dispensing label records the Respondent as the dispensing pharmacist.
presence of the Respondent’s name on the label places the legal
responsibility for the dispensing of the medication and the
notation in the
Schedule 8 Register with the Respondent. If the Respondent was in fact only
attending to the ‘retail side’
of the pharmacy at that time then he
should have ensured that the settings on the computer did not
‘automatically’ print
out his name onto the label.
Respondent’s evidence regarding the placement of an elastic band around
the boxes containing 160 Endone® tablets (that
had been returned and
therefore it would have been illegal to dispense) is indicative of the
ineffectual manner in which the Respondent
addresses matters of professional
significance. Although there were only a small number of pharmacists dispensing
in the pharmacy
it was the evidence of the Respondent that there was nothing
other than the elastic band to indicate these were returned stock and
should not be re-dispensed but rather were awaiting destruction.
the qualifications placed upon his evidence under cross-examination the Tribunal
has taken a cautious approach to the evidence
of Dr Klug. Dr Klug was placed in
the difficult position of not being fully appraised of the factual basis of the
matters under consideration.
One matter that was able to be distilled from Dr
Klug’s evidence was the potential difficulties (‘risk of psychiatric
illness’ and otherwise) that would be faced by a person suffering from
hypopituitarism if the condition was not appropriately
treated. He expressed a
view that care should be provided by an endocrinologist. In the circumstances
where the Respondent is a qualified
health practitioner and has suffered from
this condition for many years it is of grave concern that he does not have such
arrangements
in place. Rather, the Respondent’s evidence is that he avoids
the medication prescribed by his general practitioner as he has
an aversion to
needles. Further, it is his evidence that his general energy levels are improved
if he does comply with his medication
level of supervision he has received is more than that received by a new
registrant and is not compatible with the practice of
an experienced
professional.
Tribunal is left with a picture of recalcitrant behaviour on the part of the
Respondent. There have been steps towards remediation
in the last 12 months.
These must be viewed in the context of their degree and reactive (rather than
proactive) nature. The Tribunal
is left in the position where it cannot be
reasonably satisfied that there are any set of conditions that will ensure the
safety is maintained.
is also the view of the Tribunal that the protection of the reputation of the
profession is another factor that leads to the conclusion
that the appropriate
order is one of de-registration. Not only would members of the public have an
expectation that registered pharmacists
would comply with legislative
requirements relating to the handling of medications, other members of the
profession also, rightly
so, have the expectation that legislation will be
complied with.
would be no deterrent effective if a practitioner who had breached relevant
legislation on so many occasions over such a length
of time was allowed to
continue to practice.
only is it the view of the Tribunal that de-registration is required to fulfil
all of the well-defined elements of the role of
the Tribunal in a protective
circumstances of the convictions
would also result in an order for
de-registration.
the Tribunal has formed the view that the Respondent is unlikely to be fit to
that he may apply himself in a more
effective manner to the myriad of ways he has already intensively been subjected
to with the
significant support of others. The Tribunal is left with
reservations that the Respondent will be able to remedy the defects he currently
displays in the period of 18 months suggested by the HCCC in its written
Submissions as an appropriate minimum period to fix for
review of the
de-registration order. The Tribunal will make the order in the terms submitted
by the HCCC so as to leave open the
possibility that the Respondent
rehabilitates without having issues with respect to recency of practice
requirements under the
National Law.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Piggott. While the business plan was
approved by Mr Piggott on 3 April 2011, the Tribunal
has already noted that the
business plan is not seen by the Tribunal as the panacea for the deficits in the
Respondent’s practice
as identified by the findings made with respect to
the Particulars of Complaint. While the Business Plan developed by Mr Mahony may
‘bear fruits’ over the coming years in a business sense, this
Tribunal is responsible for the public safety, the maintenances
reputation of the profession and the confidence of the public in the profession
at the present time. The Tribunal does not
have a role in the profitability or
otherwise of a pharmacy per se. It does have a role in the regulation of the
members of the profession.
Tribunal accepts that having a properly functioning pharmacy would facilitate
the Respondent’s compliance with all relevant
legislative and regulatory
provisions rather than it ‘ensuring’ such compliance. The Tribunal
notes the submission that
the Respondent is committed to such a course (i.e.
having a properly functioning pharmacy). What is missing from this equation is
‘follow through’ on the commitment by way of self-initiated steps
and, more fundamentally, the remedying of the deficits
in his knowledge, skill
and judgment regarding the practice of pharmacy. The Respondent has had many
years to have a properly functioning
pharmacy. He has had significant assistance
from other experienced pharmacists to achieve this goal. The Respondent has now
had significant
assistance in trying to address the deficits in his practice.
The efforts of Mr Dash were admirable but in light of the Respondent’s
subsequent conduct the teaching appears to have failed to resonate with the
Respondent. It is unfortunate that the Respondent has
not had been able to
transpose the ‘learning of the rules’ he gained from Mr Dash into
clinical reasoning and decision
Tribunal notes that while relying upon occasional ill health (having the flu) as
part of his ‘defence’, the Respondent
made known to the Tribunal his
long term health issue substantially through the evidence of Dr Klug. It is of
concern that the Respondent
has not adopted an appropriate treatment regimen
despite his health issue having the potential to seriously impact upon his
to practise. While at one level an aversion to receiving injections is
understandable, if the results of failure to comply with medication
prescribed is seriously impacting on the performance of your professional role
it becomes inexcusable. The Tribunal does not have
evidence that the Respondent
is currently complying with an appropriate medication/treatment regimen. The
explanation of being ‘overworked’
provided by the Respondent to Dr
Klug is not an acceptable excuse for failure to comply with legislative
requirements thereby putting
public safety at risk. The Respondent’s
position was not helped by failing to provide Dr Klug with a complete forensic
the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s submissions (at paragraph 120(a))
that he will be more
pharmaceutical products not bearing an Aust R or an Aust L number the Tribunal
cannot be reasonably satisfied
that the Respondent will maintain this level of
care for any period of time. The past conduct of the Respondent is demonstrative
of repeated failure to maintain compliance with statutory requirements or good
practises. Despite the Respondent’s evidence
that he had not
‘completed the same wrongdoings’ (T113) the evidence contains
examples of numerous occasions on which
the Respondent has breached legislative
requirements placed around the dispensing and handling of medications.
view expressed by Dr Klug that the failure to take hormone replacement therapy
would give rise to a risk of psychiatric illness,
particularly depression (see
paragraph 123 of the Respondent’s submissions) is of particular concern to
the Tribunal given
the evidence of the Respondent that he has not consistently
complied with the regimen for quite some time. The Tribunal accepts the
Dr Klug that it would be preferable for the Respondent to come under the care of
en endocrinologist. This should have been
obvious to the Respondent for many
years given his illness commenced in childhood and given the stated impact it
has had on his health
and professional practice.
there is no doubt that the Respondent’s medical condition has impacted
upon his health significantly, it is not a matter
that arose by surprise and
without warning. While his health may be part of the explanation for the conduct
of the Respondent, it
certainly cannot, in the Tribunal’s view, be an
excuse. It is a ‘self-induced’ explanation in as much as it was
predictable result of the Respondent’s failure to comply with his
treatment regimen. The Respondent had a known and accepted
treatment option open
to him. He failed to comply with the treatment option. It is a factor within the
direct control of the Respondent.
There is an obligation placed on all health
practitioners to ensure that they are fit to work. Impairments (such as drug or
addiction/abuse or long term illness) that impact upon the
practitioner’s ability to work as a health practitioner should be
to the Council so that appropriate assessment can be made. Section 140 of the
National Law (as it applies in every jurisdiction
apart from Western Australia)
provides for the mandatory reporting of impairment that places the public at
substantial risk of harm.
100% commitment from the Respondent to be a good pharmacist and to meet all of
his professional obligations should have come after
his first criminal
conviction (paragraph 128 Respondent’s submissions). Rather, it has come
after three sets of criminal convictions
and two instances of disciplinary
findings of professional misconduct and a partially successful appeal to the
Supreme Court which
afforded him a last minute reprieve from a forced sale of
his pharmacy. In the circumstances of this matter (repeated undertakings
comply in the future, failure to address the underlying medical issue etc) the
Tribunal is not in a position to be reasonably
satisfied that the Respondent
will follow through with his verbal commitment to Mr Mahony. The driving force
of Mr Mahony can also
be seen from the contents of the Respondent’s
submissions at paragraphs 135 to 140. While it is admirable, it does not
in the Tribunal a sense that the Respondent is able to achieve an
appropriate level of practice without considerable outside input
of many kinds.
There is little to assure the Tribunal that there is any internally driven
desire and/or capacity for change on the
part of the Respondent. Although he has
been co-operative with those involved with the current process of supervision
the Respondent
shows no signs of taking ownership of his rehabilitation.
Tribunal acknowledges the changes made by the Respondent to his practice as a
result of the commitment made by the Respondent
to Mr Mahony in May 2011
(paragraph 129 – 134 of the Respondent’s submissions). The Tribunal
notes that Mr Dash met with
the Respondent on four occasions, including a two
hour tuition session, two visits to the pharmacy, and one meeting for the
of a one and a quarter hour examination. Mr Dash reported copies of the
relevant legislation were not located in the pharmacy on
the occasion of his
visit in June 2011 contrary to the requirements of the legislation. Mr Dash is
eminently qualified to provide
tuition on the topic of statutory compliance in
the practice of pharmacy. The Tribunal had the opportunity of perusing the
examination
paper of the Respondent and does not doubt his knowledge has
improved with respect to the specific matters subject of the two hours
tuition provided. However, given the range of deficits in the Respondent’s
knowledge it is not accepted that those deficits
have now been remedied to a
point where the Tribunal can be satisfied that the public safety will be
as undertaking additional training was an appropriate step for the Respondent,
the process of undertaking the QCPP process (referred
to in paragraphs 137 and
138 of the Respondent’s submissions) is viewed by the Tribunal as
appropriate, meritorious and valuable.
Once again Mr Mahony appears from the
evidence to be the driving force for this process.
indicated above the Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 141 of the
Respondent’s submissions that Mr Stephen Cohen
agreed in late June 2011 to
supervise the Respondent in the performance of his professional duties as a
pharmacist for six hours
per day for two days per week. It is unfortunate that
the oral evidence of Mr Cohen revealed that he did not know whether or not
Pharmacy Board of Australia existed and could not give an account of the
statutory obligations surrounding the term
‘Pharmacist in
. While the regular reports made by Mr Cohen are informal and
brief, one of the reports provided by Mr Cohen indicates that he may
appreciate the role of state legislation in determining the requirements for
endorsement of intervals of dispensing as contact
was made with Medicare to
clarify an issue of this nature (Medicare being a federal body not responsible
for determining the endorsement
of intervals of dispensing on prescriptions
which is covered by state legislation). The Tribunal notes that these matters
matters subject of the current Inquiry and has only made mention of them
due to the Respondent’s reliance on Mr Cohen as a
registered pharmacist
with 40 years’ experience and he proffers his opinion of the
Respondent’s current practices for
the Tribunal’s consideration.
While a lack of detailed knowledge of the regulatory scheme that came into place
for ten health
professions on 1 July 2010 may have been understandable at an
earlier time, as all practitioners of these ten professions have now
re-registration on at least one occasion since the introduction of the scheme,
knowledge of the existence of the relevant
Board is expected.
of the matters reported by Mr Cohen (see paragraph 142 of the Respondent’s
submissions) have been observed by other registered
pharmacists in the past.
Subsequently they have been found to be still lacking. While the Tribunal
accepts the observations of Mr
Cohen, there is nothing that assists the Tribunal
to accept that this situation will be maintained by the Respondent of his own
Ultimately,
the Tribunal takes the view that little can turn on the view expressed by Mr
Cohen that the Respondent is fit to practise
pharmacy and is not a risk for the
public, both for the reasons set out above and on the basis that this is a
question for the Tribunal
to determine based on the totality of the evidence.
Tribunal accepts the positive comments made by Mr Piggott in his report dated 22
July 2011 regarding the recent observation made
of the Respondent’s
pharmacy and his evidence that he would give the keys to his shop to the
Respondent (see paragraph 144
of the Respondent’s submissions). The
Tribunal notes that the matters reported upon by Mr Piggott are elementary and
fundamental
to a pharmacy practice. The Tribunal again has concerns regarding
the Respondent’s ability to maintain even these perfunctionary
With respect to the submission made in paragraph 145 of the Respondent’s
submissions the Tribunal notes that not only
did Mr Piggott state that he would
give the keys of his pharmacy to the Respondent to allow him to work there but
added that he would
keep a close eye on the Respondent as he did with all of his
employees. Once again it is the Tribunal’s view that it is a matter
determination by the Tribunal based upon all of the evidence.
respect to the submission made by the Respondent at paragraph 146 the Tribunal
notes that qualifications are only one element
of the requirements for
registration.
is of concern to the Tribunal regarding the history of convictions set out in
the Respondent’s submissions (see paragraph
149) is that the Respondent
has not demonstrated that he has made significant improvements in his
understanding of professional responsibilities
or an improved ability to act
upon the purported increase in his knowledge. When his practice is put under
close scrutiny departure
from statutory obligations are identified time and time
again. The Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submissions as to the effluxion
of time since these convictions. The mere effluxion of time does not, in itself,
remedy defects in professional conduct nor make
it more appropriate for a person
to remain in a profession with the weight of the circumstances of such
convictions.
Tribunal was assisted by the report of Dr Klug. While Dr Klug was not apprised
of all relevant facts and circumstances he provided
guidance as to the nature of
untreated panhypopituitarism. The Tribunal is not of the view that the lethargy
flowing from the Respondent’s
failure to appropriately treat this
condition is a mitigating factor in the circumstances. The Respondent was first
diagnosed with
this condition at age 14. On his own accounts he has always been
aware of the consequences of not treating this condition. The Respondent
also cognisant of the fact that the symptoms that flowed from a failure to
maintain his treatment regimen were detrimental to
his performance of his duties
as a pharmacist. No benefit can flow to the Respondent from his own failure to
care for his health.
Tribunal has had regard to the two character references provided. The Tribunal
is of the opinion that they are more in the nature
of a view of the
Respondent’s reputation rather than character. It does not appear that
either of the referees was provided
with a full account of the
Respondent’s criminal record. This is a matter that impacts upon the
weight that can be placed upon
the references. The Tribunal notes that both
referees appear to be people of good standing within the community. The Tribunal
no doubt that the Respondent is pleasant and convivial with his patients.
Although this is to be expected of all registered pharmacists
this is not the
issue being considered by the Tribunal and does not overcome the issues of a
fundamental nature identified by the
findings made against the Respondent.
to the professional reference in evidence from Mr Ho, the Tribunal notes that he
was only briefed by the Respondent regarding the
findings of professional
misconduct. He stated that he did not receive any information from the Council
as to how supervision should
be undertaken.
Tribunal has had the benefit of additional evidence. The Tribunal did not
receive a report from Mr Cox and only knows of his
views as reported by Mr
Mahony. Mr Piggott has a limited role in the matter and expressed an overall
view that the Respondent did
not have a free flowing ability to comply with
legislative requirements. Mr Dash also had a limited role in this matter, both
terms of time and purpose, although his finding that the relevant legislation
was missing from the pharmacy at a time that the Tribunal
was part heard is of
concern. In early 2011 Mr Mahony wrote a positive report regarding the
Respondent’s practice and then
the 15 April Audit undertaken by the PSU
identified significant defects. Mr Mahony then adjusted his view (appropriately)
he considered the Respondent to be a ‘work in progress’,
not able to be finally assessed until around the end of 2012
completion of the business plan).
respect to the submission that the 15 April Audit undertaken by the PSU proved
that the journey to complete reformation is not
complete (paragraph 153 of the
Respondent’s submissions), the Tribunal is mindful that what is being
determined is current
fitness, not how the Respondent might be presenting in 12
Mahony gave evidence that he had initiated the Respondent adopting the MYOB
computer system. The Respondent’s evidence was
that he had purchased it
but had not installed it. The Respondent was unable to produce staff rosters and
payroll excel spread sheets
could not be printed out. Once again the inertia
demonstrated by the Respondent is considerable.
noted above, the Tribunal does not view the conduct of the Respondent with
respect to the Alphapharm entries to be careless (as
submitted in paragraph 154)
or isolated (as submitted in paragraph 156). The sheer number of entries and the
purpose for which the
Respondent made the entries indicates the conduct is
deliberate and calculated in nature. The entries were made over a two day period
(one day in each of two consecutive months). This conduct was not undertaken for
a legitimate purpose. Other conduct of the Respondent
may be characterised as
reckless, as it was undertaken in ignorance of matters that are fundamental to
the practice of pharmacy.
The past conduct of the Respondent, such as requesting
prescriptions for doctors for medication dispensed, is another example of
conduct that is far from proper.
the Tribunal accepts that it is not inevitable that the mentoring program
‘must inevitably fail’ (see the submission
in paragraph 157), there
is insufficient evidence to allow the Tribunal to conclude that it will
inevitably succeed. There is little
the Tribunal can find to provide any degree
of comfort that the Respondent is making progress at a sufficient rate and that
any progress
made will be permanent. Indeed, it is unfortunate that the Tribunal
finds that the evidence is to the contrary. Advances made with
the significant
support of senior members of the profession are easily lost once the direct
supervision is not actively present.
Advances in knowledge are not applied in
his practice. His skill and care in practice, while moving in a positive
direction, have
still a long way to progress before meeting the appropriate
Tribunal has had regard to the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent
regarding the type of conditions that may be appropriate
in this matter (see
paragraphs 158, 159 and 160). The Tribunal accepts the view of Mr Piggott that
there was little else Mr Mahony
could do with respect to the development of the
business plan. However, given the repeated nature of the Respondent’s
in spite of the enormous amount of intervention in his practice the
Tribunal cannot be satisfied that complete remediation is possible
particularly
as the Respondent has not taken steps to increase his potential to meet all
professional obligations by ensuring his
health is optimal.
Respondent has stated that he is willing to change and comply with all
professional obligations. He has also stated that he is
remorseful for his
conduct (see paragraphs 162 to 164 of the Respondent’s submissions).
Remorse has not prevented him from
committing criminal offences on two occasions
after his first offence. His remorse and stated willingness to change has not
translated into tangible steps such as ensuring the pharmacy complies with
all requirements at all times, applying Mr Mahony’s
suggested improvements
promptly or complying with his own medication regimen to improve his chances of
not falling into the same
traps he has encountered in the past.
Tribunal is mindful of the observations made by Adams J that the initial
Tribunal’s finding of lack of remorse was misconceived.
This Tribunal has
the benefit of the additional evidence regarding the Respondent’s
continued failures to ensure his practice
complies with applicable statutory
provisions in addition to the evidence regarding his failure to comply with his
medication regimen.
While this Tribunal would not discount the importance of
running a pharmacy with appropriate levels of cleanliness and order given
function performed therein, this is not a matter that this Tribunal has had
regard to in forming the view that the remorse stated
by the Respondent has not
successfully translated across to changes in behaviour. Similarly the Tribunal
has not considered in any
way the rejection of the initial Tribunal of the
evidence of the Respondent regarding telephoning Dr Jackson.
Tribunal accepts that the Respondent is ashamed of his criminal convictions and
is remorseful for the predicament he is in where
his registration is in peril.
While the Tribunal accepts without reservation that this is what the Respondent
has said to Mr Mahony,
it is the actions of the Respondent that do not support
his statements of remorse as being able to provide comfort to the Tribunal
significant and sustained change is possible.
Tribunal accepts the submission made on behalf of the Respondent that he has
endeavoured over the last seven years to ‘rigorously’
observe his
obligations as a pharmacist, expressed to the Tribunal in March 2010 willingness
to participate in the supervision/mentoring
program and has been fully committed
to that program since November 2010 (see paragraph 170 of Respondent’s
submissions). The
Tribunal further accepts that the pharmacy has now been
transformed from the condition it was in when Mr Mahony undertook his initial
inspection and that further improvements are planned. The Tribunal notes that
earlier ‘transformations’ were achieved
with the assistance of the
supervisors put in place by the Orders made by the Board Inquiry.
rejecting the opinion proffered by Mr Mahony as to these improvements (see
paragraph 171 of the Respondent’s submissions),
as clearly they are
genuinely and sincerely held, the Tribunal is not able to be satisfied that the
progress has been sufficient
to address the deficits identified in the
Respondent’s practice to a position where conditions on registration would
the Tribunals obligation of ensuring public safety.
the Tribunal accepts that the Respondent has made a number of statements
regarding his commitment to rehabilitation since the
initial Tribunal’s
decision, in addition to participating in the mentoring program with Mr Mahony,
the Tribunal notes the difficulties
presented by the substantial findings as
well as subsequent events such as the 15 April audit conducted by the PSU
(paragraph 172
of the Respondent’s submissions).
Tribunal does not accept the submission made at paragraph 173 of the
Respondent’s submission. While it may be that the Respondent
‘his pharmacy practice to the required level’ the Tribunal cannot be
so satisfied on the evidence before it. This
is so despite acknowledging that
there has been significant support provided by Mr Mahony (a senior pharmacist of
good standing in
the profession) and that the Respondent has, on advice, taken
steps to initiate further improvements.
the views of witnesses such as Mr Mahony is considered in light of their
professional qualifications and experience, they are
not witnesses that should
be considered as ‘expert’ or ‘peer review’. In any case
this is a ‘peer’
tribunal and is well equipped to understand and
assess the evidence placed before it (refer to paragraph 175 of the
Respondent’s
submissions).
Tribunal is not persuaded by the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent in
paragraphs 176, 177 and 178 to the effect that
the Tribunal should consider a
further period of supervised practice to be potentially effective despite the
three month period of
supervision he undertook as a result of the Order of the
Board Inquiry (made on 14 February 2001). The basis for the Tribunal not
persuaded by the Respondent’s submission is that he has now had a period
of supervised practice since the undertaking
to the Supreme Court longer than
three months. The 2001 supervisor identified the issues either subject of the
Particulars of Complaint
or identified by Mr Mahony and took steps to address
them. There is evidence that there was a degree of planning and goal setting
undertaken by the supervisors and that there was communication between them. The
evidence before the Tribunal does not support a
finding that the supervision was
‘inconsistent, unfocussed and unsustained’. Rather, the evidence
supports there being
full time supervision by a registered pharmacist for the
three month period. There is no evidence of any ‘follow-up’
the three months of supervision initiated by any party – the Board, any of
the supervisors or the Respondent. While the
2001 supervision does not appear to
have had an ‘independent audit’ as part of the process, the nature
of the audit placed
before this Tribunal was of a limited nature as set out
above. The teasing out of the process of the handling of Schedule 8 drugs
matter not specifically listed as part of the supervision process is to ignore
the content of the reports made by the supervisors
and to artificially separate
this responsibility from the phrase ‘every aspect of the operations
of’ of the pharmacy.
The final matter submitted by the Respondent as
relevant to persuading the Tribunal to disregard the outcome of the 2001
supervision
was the attention of the supervisors to physical aspects of the
pharmacy such as layout, tidiness and staffing levels. The Tribunal
accepts that
these were issues of significant concern to the supervisors. The Tribunal also
notes that these were matters assessed
by Mr Mahony in 2010 as being of high
priority. From the descriptions provided in the documentation in evidence these
issues were
glaring and grave. It is clearly unsafe for medications to be
prepared in an unclean environment or to invite customers into a cluttered
or to expect employees to work in an unsafe workplace. This submission also
ignores the significant comments made by the supervisors
regarding more
substantial issues. Ultimately, there is evidence that deficits in his practice
are still patent despite the different
style of supervision undertaken by the
Respondent since the Supreme Court undertaking.
Tribunal has dealt with submissions such as those set out in paragraph 179 in
addressing earlier submissions to the same effect.
Tribunal is also unable to accept the submissions made at paragraphs 180 and 181
of the Respondent’s submissions. While
the Tribunal acknowledges that the
Respondent has made statements regarding his commitment to change and received
advice from Mr
Mahony, Mr Dash and others it does not follow that these matters
will make the outcome of supervision any more successful than it
was in 2001.
The comments of magistrates on the occasion of his criminal convictions, the
Reasons document of the Board Inquiry and
the comments of the five supervisors
should have caused significant ‘moment’ for the Respondent. While
those who have
provided more recent advice are senior members of the profession,
there is little that differentiates the advice they have given
to the Respondent
from the advice provided by the five supervisors.
Tribunal has carefully considered potential orders that would allow the Tribunal
to be satisfied it has fulfilled its statutory
function of protecting the public
safety, including those suggested by Mr Piggott in his evidence as set out in
paragraph 184 and
185 of the Respondent’s submissions (leaving aside the
finding of unfitness based on the circumstances of the convictions).
Tribunal is not of the view that there are any set of conditions that could be
imposed at the current time that could allow the
Tribunal to be reasonably
satisfied that public safety was ensured. Essentially, the Tribunal is of the
view that the Respondent
is likely to be permanently unfit to practise as a
registered pharmacist. The Tribunal is therefore of the view that the
appropriate
order to make is de-registration. This order also, in the view of
the Tribunal, satisfies the role of the Tribunal to maintain public
in the profession of pharmacy, to act as a deterrent to other pharmacists from
engaging in repeated breaches of legislative
requirements and maintain the
reputation of the profession.
Tribunal has had regard to the submissions as to the applicability of principles
HCCC v Wingate [2007
] NSWSC 326,
Lucire V Health Care Complaints
Commission (No 2)
With respect to the first decision the
Tribunal has not formed the view that the need to impose conditions demonstrates
to practice. Quite clearly the National Law contemplates findings such
as professional misconduct resulting in the imposition of
conditions on
registration being imposed. The decision in Lucire relates to conditions imposed
after a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Tribunal has also had regard to the submission made in paragraph 188 of the
Respondent’s submissions regarding the principle
Karalasingham
While parity is appropriate, each case must
turn on its own particular facts. The Respondent’s submissions provided a
analysis of a number of cases. The Tribunal has considered these
matters and cannot accept the submission made at paragraph 207 that
it would be
a matter of ‘principle, public interest and consistency’ to impose
conditions on the Respondent’s practice.
the Tribunal accepts the submission of the Respondent that the conduct subject
of the Particulars of Complaint covers the period
September 2003 to February
2005, it is the view of the Tribunal that the totality of the conduct of the
Respondent in the evidence
before the Tribunal must be considered in order that
appropriate orders are made.
Tribunal notes the positive comments made by Mr Mahony in his report dated 19
May 2010 (regarding his inspection of the Respondent’s
pharmacy on 17
February 2010). This evidence is compared and contrasted by the Tribunal with
the findings of the 15 April Audit undertaken
by the PSU. The Tribunal also
notes the oral evidence of Mr Mahony that he considers the situation to still be
‘work in progress’
with the outcome being ascertainable at
the end of the business plan.
Tribunal does not doubt the experience of Mr Mahony as noted by Adams J. It is
not the role of this Tribunal to comment upon the
adequacy of the business plan
subject of the undertaking to the Supreme Court. It does not appear to the
Tribunal that the business
plan was intended as a vehicle to rehabilitate the
Respondent. In many respects there was a lost opportunity for the Respondent to
prioritise professional standards (in particular legislative requirements
relating to the practice of pharmacy) and ethical matters.
J noted some of the matters Mr Mahony gave evidence about before the initial
Tribunal. This Tribunal had an opportunity to hear
additional evidence from Mr
Mahony, to undertake a more detailed questioning regarding his earlier evidence
and to consider Mr Mahony’s
evidence in the context of the additional
material. The Tribunal notes, as an example the evidence of Mr Mahony regarding
his encouragement
for the Respondent to adopt ‘good habits’. By this
Mr Mahony meant that there are certain matters that should just be
an integral
and fundamental part of the manner in which a registered pharmacist performs
their duties for which referral to textbooks,
policies and procedures and
legislation on each occasion is not required. It is the ‘good habit’
of the Respondent with
respect to compliance with legislative requirements of
the practice of pharmacy and overall professional conduct that is of concern
this Tribunal.
Ultimately,
the Tribunal has formed the view that although the Respondent has made some
steps towards improving his practice, much
of these can be characterised as
cosmetic in nature and not addressing the underlying issue of his lack of
knowledge, skill, judgment
and care in the practice of pharmacy, particularly
with respect to legislative requirements.
Respondent submitted that since the time of the judgment of Adams J he had taken
steps to comply with ‘relevant requirements
in respect to the matters the
subject of the complaint’ (paragraph 94). This Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent has taken
steps to comply with the specific subject matters of the
legislative breaches but the Respondent does not demonstrate compliance
legislative requirements as demonstrated by the 15 April Audit undertaken by the
PSU and other evidence such as the absence
of copies of relevant legislation in
the pharmacy noted by Mr Dash. The Tribunal also notes that many steps taken by
the Respondent
were a result of the assistance provided to him by Mr Mahony as a
result of the undertaking made to the Supreme Court.
Tribunal also notes the summary of discussions with the Respondent made by Mr
Mahony at page 9 of his February 2010 Peer Report.
At the particular point in
the comprehensive information gathering exercise Mr Mahony undertook in order to
write his report he records
having discussed the likely outcomes of ‘this
Board of Inquiry’ in light of his inability at that point to provide a
positive peer review. The observations of Mr Mahony are consistent with the
Tribunal’s observation that the Respondent has
not accorded his criminal
convictions or misconduct findings appropriate weight. The account of the
discussions provided by Mr Mahony
also illustrates the significant dedication
and detail of the counsel provided to the Respondent by Mr Mahony. The
alternatives set
out by Mr Mahony are in some respects prophetic and assure the
Tribunal that the Respondent was fully aware of the potential outcomes
making a ‘massive commitment to change his ways’. This section of Mr
Mahony’s report reads:
Having reached this point and convinced Mr Ng that I could not provide a
positive peer review in these circumstances, I discussed
with him the likely
outcomes of this Board of Inquiry.
Present his case without my review and with only the HCCC documentation. The
most likely outcome would be deregistration. Mr Ng
had failed to comprehend the
impact of this and the likelihood of its
occurrence.
Present a reasonable case and show remorse and he could be suspended for up
to 12 months. Unlike last time when this was a matter
“supervision”, he would not be able to even enter the pharmacy
whilst ever it was open. Mr Ng also failed to comprehend
the impact of this
Present a case including a plan as outlined below and make the massive
commitment to change his ways. The outcome may involve no
suspension but would
include considerable supervision and responsibility to the Board which would
enable him to remain as a pharmacist
and continue to serve the people of Ryde
and would enable him to see his daughter registered and practice alongside
Summary of findings re Particulars of Complaints One and Two
Tribunal notes that each of the Particulars of Complaint were established. It
appears the initial Tribunal found unsatisfactory
professional conduct with
respect to Particulars 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 and 10 and that the conduct constituted
professional misconduct.
This Tribunal made an additional finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to Particular 8. Complaint Two
is established.
Summary of finding re Complaint Three
Tribunal notes the submissions of the parties that this is a matter for the
current Tribunal to consider as the matter was not
directed by the decision of
the Supreme Court.
Tribunal notes the finding of the initial Tribunal with respect to Complaint
This Tribunal has made its own consideration of this Complaint. The Tribunal is
not of the view that this is a matter where it is
appropriate for a peer
reviewer to provide an opinion.
Tribunal is of the view that the circumstances of the offences are such that the
Respondent is rendered unfit in the public interest
to remain registered. The
Tribunal is of the view that the actions of the Respondent have not remedied
this unfitness.
The Respondent working without supervision
the evidence before the Tribunal it appears that the last day on which Mr Ho
worked in the Respondent’s pharmacy was 29
March 2011. It is noted that
the Respondent was required to work with supervision until such time as
appropriate additional sales
assistant staff were employed. The additional staff
member commenced employment at the Respondent’s pharmacy on 19 April 2011.
In the period between the time Mr Ho left employment at the pharmacy and the
time of the PSU audit on 15 April 2011 the following
Quincy Lee (Wik Ho Lee) worked as the Pharmacist in Charge on 30 and 31 March
and 1 April 2011. It is unclear as to who worked
in the pharmacy on 2 April
2011. On 3 April 2011 the Respondent worked without a supervising pharmacist for
a period of three hours.
On 4 April Mr Lee was the Pharmacist in Charge. On 5
April the Respondent worked without supervision.
Between 6 to 9
April 2011 inclusive Mr Lee was the Pharmacist in Charge.
The Respondent
was on holidays from 9 to 14 April inclusive.
On 15 April the
Respondent was working with Mr Lee. The name Sidney Ho was initially on display
as the Pharmacist in Charge and later
this was changed to Mr Lee as the
Pharmacist in Charge and the Respondent as the pharmacist on duty.
Tribunal also notes the evidence of the Respondent in his statement dated 10 May
2011 put before the Tribunal as volume R2, exhibit
10 at paragraph 23 that the
Respondent claimed Mr Ho worked at the pharmacy until 15 April 2011 as his
‘on-site supervisor,
in accordance with the supervision programme’.
Tribunal also notes the oral evidence of the Respondent regarding the matter of
when Mr Ho ceased working at the pharmacy. Initially
the Respondent stated that
Mr Ho had worked up until 5 April 2011 (T117.8, 11/5/11). The following day,
under cross-examination the
Respondent gave evidence that he had checked his
records and found that the last day Mr Ho had worked at the pharmacy was in fact
29 March 2011 (T207.12, 12/5/11). The Respondent apologised for
‘inaccurate information provided due to the poor recollection
misinterpretation’.
1 April 2011 the records indicate that the Respondent dispensed 100
dexamphetamine tablets (5mg) to a patient. A copy of the repeat
authorisation
form is annexure NG-1 of volume R2 – exhibit 10 which has a duplicate
dispensing label affixed to it which records
the Respondent’s initials.
This indicates that the Respondent dispensed the medication. When the PSU
inspection occurred on
15 April 2011 a discrepancy in the 5mg dexamphetamine
tablets was noted and an entry was made to adjust the record accordingly.
Respondent also gave evidence that he worked on 16, 17 and 18 April 2011 without
Mr Ho present and prior to the time that the
additional shop assistant commenced
Tribunal notes the evidence of Dr Klug that the Respondent stated that he was
making every effort to control the business. This
contrasted with the evidence
of Mr Mahony that various matters found to be at issue by the 15 April Audit
were not the responsibility
of the Respondent. The Respondent made several
statements to Dr Klug regarding the role of his mentor and supervisor. He saw
mentor as improving his business and helping him offload his workload. When
the Respondent consulted Dr Klug on 27 April 2011 he
talked about his
apprehension regarding his future, his feeling of shame over being de-registered
(by the first Tribunal), of his
remorse for having allowed this situation to
have occurred, he accepted that he had done the wrong thing. The Respondent told
Klug that he was doing all that he could to control his business and he was
fully prepared to implement the supervision program and
business plan that had
been ‘dictated by the court’.
Summary of Findings
Tribunal made a finding of professional misconduct and it is upon this finding
that the Tribunal intends making Orders. On the
balance of the evidence before
the Tribunal, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent is
currently permanently unfit
to practice pharmacy.
the Tribunal is of the view that the circumstances of the Respondent’s
convictions render him unfit in the public interest
to practice pharmacy and
that this unfitness remains current. Given the shift in position of the HCCC
with respect to whether a finding
of the Complaint of fitness on the basis of
the convictions is open to the Tribunal this finding will not form the basis for
Tribunal’s final Orders.
Additional evidence and Inquiry
reports were supplied to the Tribunal from Mr Cohen regarding his supervision of
the Respondent until the Tribunal ordered
that no further reports would be
received on 9 March 2012. It is difficult for the Tribunal to place significant
weight on the reports
of Mr Cohen given factors such as the limited time that he
had spent with the Respondent at the time he gave his oral evidence, his
familiarity with the relevant legislation and his limited role in the
Respondent’s pharmacy even without regard to
the glaring absence of any
mention in his Reports regarding the 8 September 2011 incident despite his
presence in the pharmacy at
the time of Ms Dolan’s attendance on 13
September 2011.
Respondent also sought to rely on a further report from Mr Mahony. The Tribunal
allowed the Respondent to rely on these additional
documents and for the HCCC to
provide a further report from Ms Dolan. The Tribunal re-convened for the purpose
of formally receiving
these documents and allowing cross-examination of these
witnesses. The Tribunal notes this accords with the Tribunal’s position
that all relevant material should be considered by the Tribunal (see T200).
noted above the Respondent gave further evidence when the Tribunal reconvened on
31 May 2012. The Tribunal accepts that the Respondent
believes his statements to
the effect that he has changed his ways. The Tribunal also accepts that the
Respondent believes he has
acted responsibly. However, the evidence before the
Tribunal does not allow the Tribunal to have confidence that when presented with
a new situation or even another example of a situation in which he has
previously acted erroneously that the Respondent will not
Tribunal also accepts the Respondent genuinely desires to remain in business as
a community pharmacist. However, the Tribunal
is of the view that the Respondent
lacks the skill, judgment, knowledge and care required to practice at the
standard required of
a registered pharmacist.
may well be that the Respondent will be better placed to remedy the defects in
his practice if he comprehensively addresses the
admitted deficits in the
treatment of his medical condition. The Tribunal hopes that the Respondent takes
heed of the evidence of
Dr Klug given the potentially serious ramifications of
not doing so.
would be difficult to fashion a more supportive framework than that which has
been put in place around the Respondent not just
over recent times but also in
the past as a result of the intervention of the Board Inquiry.
Respondent’s evidence to the effect that he had not considered the 8
September 2011 incident to be serious enough to discuss
it with Mr Mahony until
25 January 2012 (see paragraph 268 and T 571-573) is another example of the
Respondent’s lack of professional
judgment. By this point Mr Mahony had
provided the Respondent with an enormous amount of support and assistance. Mr
support of the Respondent is clearly evidence from the reports he
has provided and the evidence he has given before the Tribunal.
Respondent’s evidence that he was ‘
just waiting for the right
to inform Mr Mahony is not credible and the Tribunal notes
that by 25 January 2012 the Respondent would have been aware (on the assumption
that he would have needed to provide instructions re same) that the Tribunal was
holding a further Directions Hearing to discuss
the completion of the evidence
in this matter. Such conduct on the part of the Respondent does not bode well
for remediation occurring
within a short time frame or for there to be any
reliance on self-reporting by the Respondent. Another matter which adds to the
concern regarding the potential for remediation of the Respondent is
the lack of clarity around the issue of the motivation for the
Respondent’s repeated misconduct/breaches of professional conduct.
Tribunal cannot leave the issue of the 8 September 2011 incident without noting
the Respondent’s evidence that subsequent
to this incident being brought
to his attention that he had contacted the patient involved and been informed by
the patient that
he had not overdosed on the medication despite having received
information from an attending anaesthetist and registered nurse to
the contrary.
Other issues
Tribunal notes the evidence of the Respondent regarding his countermanding of
the advice provided on ‘Label 18’ which
relates to the interaction
between grapefruit and the particular medication. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent explained his
failure to affix this warning label on the basis that
he had provided verbal advice to the patient regarding the intake of grapefruit
four hours before or after taking the medication. The Tribunal notes that the
advice provided in MIMS is to limit intake of grapefruit.
The advice provided by
the Respondent placed the patient potentially at risk of muscle and liver damage
and is considered by the
Tribunal to be advice below the standard reasonably
expected of any registered pharmacist.
Appropriate Orders
care has been taken by the Tribunal to ensure only matters relevant to the
Orders that should flow from the Findings made
are considered in the
determination of the Orders. This is not a matter where a clean, tidy and/or
financially viable pharmacy can
be determinative of the outcome. This Tribunal
is dealing with the registration of one pharmacist, the Respondent. Putting
the Finding that the circumstances of the convictions render the
Respondent currently unfit to practice, the Tribunal must be able
trust in the Respondent that he will practice in a manner that protects the
public safety, that maintains the reputation
of the profession and ensures the
public may repose confidence in the profession.
noted elsewhere the Tribunal considers the circumstances under which the
Respondent has practiced over recent times with the assistance
of supervisors,
tutors and mentors to have been supportive in the extreme. There is no doubt
that Mr Dash is eminent in his field,
that Mr Mahony is a senior experienced
member of the profession or that Mr Piggott did not undertake the task allocated
diligently.
Rather, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent is working to his
current capacity. While conceding some improvements have occurred
Respondent’s practise, there have not been, in the Tribunal’s view,
significant improvements in the Respondent’s
knowledge, skill, judgment or
is unfortunate that the practise of the Respondent has not reformed sufficiently
to allow the Tribunal to repose confidence in
his ability to practise safely.
The Tribunal notes that observations regarding the Respondent’s work ethic
and ethos made by
Mr Vincent, the HCCC peer reviewer and noted in the decision
of Adams J at paragraph 38.
misconduct is of a particularly serious nature. It relates to matters going to
the heart of the practise of pharmacy. It is conduct
that may have had some
explanation if the Respondent was poorly trained or inexperienced. There is no
evidence that the Respondent’s
training was deficient and he now has over
20 years’ experience as a community pharmacist in Australia. As noted
above significant
efforts have been made by a number of other members of the
profession to provide further training on a one-on-one basis with the
Respondent.
Respondent has demonstrated a high degree of recidivism in his conduct. The
submission made on his behalf that each of the acts
was ‘different’
(and therefore should not be looked at in some cumulative way) is not accepted
by the Tribunal. The conduct
mostly amounts to breaches of the legislation under
which this profession operates and all fall into the category of inappropriate
professional conduct.
recidivism came after numerous declarations that he had, in essence, changed his
way. Statements of this nature were made to
courts, the Board Inquiry, Dr Klug,
the first Tribunal and Mr Mahony. The Respondent also stated that he was doing
all he could to
take control of his business. The evidence set out above records
that the Respondent continues to demonstrate a lack of professional
The Respondent also did not put before the Tribunal evidence that he had heeded
the advice of Dr Klug and was maintaining
an appropriate medication regimen. The
Respondent has to a significant extent abrogated his professional
responsibilities to others.
His simplistic statement to Dr Klug that he would be
working as the sole pharmacist once he had his staffing at an appropriate level
is an example of his simplistic view of the deficits in his practice.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC that the events of 8 September 2011
and the sequelae thereto demonstrate that the
Respondent lacks insight into his
whole situation. The evidence before the Tribunal as to the Respondent’s
conduct on that
day and subsequently has the inevitable result of reaffirming
that the Respondent does not have the knowledge, skill, judgment or
required to practise pharmacy in an appropriate manner. Putting aside the
uncertainty as to when this matter was drawn to Mr
Mahony’s attention by
either the Respondent or Mr Cohen, it appears to the Tribunal that it was only
when the Respondent’s
lawyers disclosed information to Mr Mahony in
January 2012 that Mr Mahony became fully appraised of the matter and then, in
the Tribunal’s
view, took totally appropriate action to investigate this
matter and to admonish the Respondent for his conduct in strong terms.
concern to the Tribunal that despite the detailed analysis provided by Mr Mahony
and his strong admonishment, the Respondent
stated that he did not fully accept
Mr Mahony’s comments. Mr Mahony’s comments should be viewed in the
context of the
comments of the anaesthetist and Ms Dolan on this matter.
is nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal that indicates steps of this
nature were taken by Mr Cohen after he became aware
of the situation when Ms
Dolan visited the pharmacy on 13 September 2011. This may well have been an
opportunity lost for the Respondent
to deal with this matter at an earlier time.
In any case, the actions of Mr Mahony certainly remedied any deficit there may
been in this regard.
Respondent submitted that the circumstances surrounding the 8 September 2011
incident render it a less serious error of judgment.
The Tribunal is unable to
view the incident in this light. The circumstances relied upon by the Respondent
are not ones that would
be accepted by a registered pharmacist of good standing.
It certainly is of particular concern when it is conduct of a practitioner
currently being scrutinised by a disciplinary body. Further, the evidence before
the Tribunal indicates that Mr Mahony became concerned
the medication from merely observing the date of the previous dispensing. If the
Respondent was so influenced
by the factors he sought to rely upon to lessen the
seriousness of the conduct then the Respondent is not a suitable person to
pharmacy as he is not able to see past what he stated was his
compassion for a person’s situation to consider his professional
obligations in an appropriate manner. If the assumptions were accepted then the
Respondent lacks the ability to detach himself from
emotional considerations to
the extent necessary to apply professional consideration to decision making in
his professional setting.
may also well be, as submitted by the Respondent, that the Respondent was
subject to a ‘long standing and dedicated campaign
of deliberate
manipulation and deception’ by the patient. It is well understood in the
profession of pharmacy, as detailed
on a number of occasions in the evidence of
Mr Mahony, that there is an element amongst pharmacists’
customers/patients that
are in some manner trying to manipulate and deceive for
their own purposes. It is imperative that pharmacists be alert to these
and be able to utilise strategies to address them. Painting the
Respondent as the victim of the patient does not assist in demonstrating
the Respondent has the qualities that would allow the Tribunal to repose trust
in the Respondent to practise safely.
Tribunal accepts that the weekly supervision reports provided by Mr Cohen do
indicate that the Respondent now has the ability
to identify some of the matters
he did not identify in the past. Even having no regard for the omission of a
report regarding the
8 September 2011 issue and sequelae these reports do not
demonstrate the type of progress that would be required to overcome the
the Tribunal has identified. Many of the issues are ones that the Respondent has
indicated in the past as having been addressed
but have later been found
wanting. Some of the issues are matters that are recorded as having been raised
with the Respondent by
the supervisors put in place after the Board Inquiry and
are now being reported as being addressed during Mr Cohen’s supervision
(e.g. a method of identification of out of date stock). The evidence does not
support sustained improvements in the manner the Respondent
practises, rather,
it indicates he falls back into the ‘bad habits’ identified by Mr
not determinative of the Orders, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s
actions on 8 September 2011 and its sequelae
is consistent with the HCCC
submission that the Respondent demonstrates a reactive approach to practise
rather than a proactive approach.
If a health professional is merely reactive
they will encounter difficulties in their practice. This has been illustrated in
many problems encountered by the Respondent in his practice. This incident
merely confirms that Tribunal’s view that the Respondent’s
demonstrates he has significant deficits in his understanding of professional
practice, that he has a tendency to abrogate
his responsibility inappropriately.
Once again the Respondent’s evidence regarding this incident is either not
credible or
demonstrates substantial gaps in the knowledge, judgment and care of
the Respondent.
Tribunal is unable to accept the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent
that he has shown insight, real effort, and a real
capacity for change based on
the evidence before it. The Tribunal cannot accept the submission that the
Respondent is able to learn
from his errors. The implemented changes are seen by
the Tribunal as directly attributable to the intervention of others in the
Respondent’s
pharmacy. As noted above the Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent has benefited from the relationship with Mr Mahony, Mr Dash and
Piggott. The Tribunal however is making protective orders with respect to the
Respondent. It is his inability to demonstrate insight;
it is his extremely
limited capacity for change and to learn from his errors even with the extensive
intervention of others over
more than a decade that is determinative. It is the
extent of the assistance provided to the Respondent compared to the improvements
in his practice that has substantially resulted in the Tribunal finding that he
is likely to be permanently unfit to practice pharmacy.
only appropriate order for the Tribunal to make in either of these circumstances
is one of de-registration. This would be so even
if the Tribunal had not reached
the view that the circumstances of the convictions currently render the
Respondent unfit to practice
in the public interest and only having regard to
the misconduct finding.
Tribunal notes at this point that if a person with the medical and criminal
history of the Respondent made an initial application
for registration in
Australia that it would not be automatically processed. Rather, the Board would
be undertaking considerable scrutiny
of both issues.
is appropriate that the Respondent is issued with a reprimand for conduct that
has brought the reputation of the profession into
the Respondent applies for review of the orders made herein it is appropriate
for such review to be considered by a Tribunal. Further,
the Tribunal is of the
view that the reprimand issued should never be removed from his Registration
(should he regain it at any time
in the future). The Tribunal is of the view
that this is not an appropriate matter for a Board to exercise its powers under
226(3) of the National Law.
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions regarding costs and will order that the
Respondent pay the HCCC costs of the Inquiry held
by the current Tribunal and
any other costs not covered by the Order of Adams J. The Tribunal notes the
Short Minutes of Order found
at volume 1, exhibit 1 set out His Honours orders.
The Tribunal makes the following Orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter
as the Practitioner):
Practitioner’s registration is cancelled fourteen days from the date of
the Reasons for Decision in HCCC v NG
[2012] NSWPHT 1.
Practitioner is not entitled to apply for review of the Order cancelling his
registration for a period of 18 months from the time
of such cancellation.
Practitioner is hereby formally and severely reprimanded in terms of Annexure C
to HCCC v NG
[2012] NSWPHT 1.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Pharmacy
Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales,
6) The Pharmaceutical Services Unit of the NSW
Ministry of Health, and
7) as the Council and Board see fit.
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
David Preswick
___________________
Virginia Bear
___________________
Frances Taylor
Annexure A – Written Outline of Submissions of HCCC
– Written Outline of Respondent’s Submissions
Annexure C –
Annexure D – Schedule of Names Suppressed
Written Outline of Submissions of HCCC
COMPLAINANT’S OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS
Introduction – the remitter from the
Supreme Court
proceedings are the subject of a limited remitter to the Tribunal from the
Supreme Court (C1, Ex U -
[2010] NSWSC 1220
findings of proved misconduct made by the Tribunal in
[2010] NSWPHT 2
were not disturbed by the Supreme Court (Supreme Court Orders, C1, Ex W, order
[2010] NSWSC 1220
; [63]; [74]).
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is (only) required to determine what (if any) protective orders are
appropriate based on the previous findings
of proven misconduct (Supreme Court
Orders, C1, Ex W, order 3; Ex U -
[2010] NSWSC 1220
and, having regard to the further evidence that has been led in this remitted
phase of the proceedings.
Obligation on pharmacists to comply
with legislative requirements
has long been accepted as being of fundamental importance that medical
practitioners comply with the rules regarding the prescribing
and supply of
Spicer v NSW Medical Board
(NSWCA, 19/2/1981)).
Hope JA speaking for the court said (at 3):
Tribunal expressed its opinion as to the seriousness of what was involved in
this conduct by saying that “strict adherence
to the statutory
requirements relating to the use of drugs of addiction is required of medical
practitioners” and that “the
breadth and depth of the illicit drug
problem in this community has reached alarming proportions and
any medical
practitioner who prescribes drugs of addiction other than in accordance with the
law is seriously misconducting himself
in a professional respect
my opinion that is an entirely correct approach to the matter. (emphasis
JA went on to state (at 5):
In my opinion
it is clear beyond
argument that the proper handling and prescribing of drugs by medical
practitioners are of the greatest importance
to the community. If a medical
practitioner handles or carries out that very great responsibility in a way
which is reckless and
which shows disregard to the law, it cannot be said that
he is fitted at such a time to be a medical practitioner
. (emphasis
Unsurprisingly,
a similar position applies in respect of pharmacists. In this respect see
[1998] NSWPB 8
The ownership of a pharmacy is a
privileged position. The legislation has accepted that this form of exclusive
right is granted so
as to provide maximum protection to the public. The
responsibility of ownership extends to ensure that at all relevant times,
procedures, relevant protocols and validation are in place to minimise
professional misconduct in the pharmacy.
Mr Dash succinctly stated, the past breaches by Mr Ng were a matter of concern
as he expected pharmacists to comply with their
legal obligations (XX’n of
Mr Dash, 27/7/11).
Decided cases
Pharmacy Board and on appeal, the District Court, have, on a number of
occasions, had to consider matters where allegations having
some similarities to
those presently before the Tribunal have been brought against pharmacists.
Commission accepts the Tribunal would adopt a cautious approach in attempting to
derive from previous cases any particular principle
or approach to be adopted in
the fashioning of protective orders in the present circumstances. This is
because each case must, by
definition, turns upon its own facts.
noting the above, the Commission draws the Tribunal’s attention to the
following decisions:
[1997] NSWPB 4
(esp. at 3.6, 4).
[1999] NSWPB 9.
is a case in which the respondent had (also) been before the courts on a
number of occasions in relation to breaches of regulatory
requirements.
(2) The Board
found Mr Destro had “a significant history in terms of disciplinary
matters dating back to 1991 when he was found
guilty of professional misconduct
by a Board of Inquiry for supplying more than 200 bottles of ephedrine without a
prescription.”
(at 3 of 6).
regard to the findings made in relation to Mr Destro the Board ordered that his
name be removed from the Register of Pharmacists.
Mr Destro has had three appearances before
the Local Court. This is the second appearance before the Board. The offences
are serious.
Mr Destro’s history is characterised by a lack of insight
and lack of understanding of his professional responsibilities.
He has failed
to learn from his mistakes and has failed to heed warnings that his position as
a pharmacist and his continued registration
was precarious. (at 6 of 6)
[2002] NSWPB 1
(esp. at 4).
[2002] NSWPB 2
[2002] NSWDC 1
(esp. at 7 –
are at least 6 principles of relevance that can be distilled from what is
otherwise a well known body of law in relation to
the protective functions to be
exercised by the Tribunal. These principles are:
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective. Proceedings such as these are
intended for the protection of the community, to maintain
proper and ethical
professional standards and to protect the good standing and reputation of the
profession of pharmacy (
[2009] NSWPHT 1
decision of the Tribunal will speak to the question of the maintenance of public
confidence in the profession (
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
public ought to be protected from the risk of a pharmacist repeating any
misconduct that may have been engaged in (
Verma v McGregor
[1989] NSWCA
at 2.40 - .47 per Clarke JA (with Samuels and McHugh JJA (at 1.18 - .21)
[1999] NSWPB 9
at 5.5 - .6 of
Pharmacists
occupy a privileged position in society. So that they may be able to perform
their duties properly, clients and the public
in general must be able to trust
them. If the reputation of the pharmacy profession falls into disrepute,
members of the community
will not use or trust it, and their health may suffer
In the matter of Dr David Charles Lindsay
, Medical Tribunal of New South
Wales, 20 August 2008, at [1] – [3] (and the cases cited therein)).
decision of the Tribunal ought to have the effect of encouraging the maintenance
of high standards within the profession of pharmacy
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
per Basten JA).
determination made by the Tribunal will have a deterrent effect on both the
respondent and others who may fall short of the high
standards required of
pharmacists in their profession (
[2010] NSWPHT 4
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
per Basten JA).
to a lesser degree than the previously identified principles, consideration may
need to be given to redemption and societal
Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
at 419A – E;
[2009] NSWPHT 1
– [141]). Insofar as the question of the
benefit to the community of having a pharmacist continue in practice this
consideration
has only limited application (
In the matter of John Herbert
(NSW Medical Tribunal, Matter No. 40020 of 1995, p
The applicable law
per the note handed up during the hearing (10/05/11, T 100.24 – 101.30),
and notwithstanding the earlier oral submissions
made on behalf of the
Commission (10/05/11, T 42.25 – 45.16), the Commission’s position is
that it would appear the applicable
National Health Practitioner
Regulation Law Act (NSW) 2009
("the National Law").
powers of the Tribunal to make protective orders are set out at sections 149A
– 149C of the National Law.
The decision in
[2010] NSWPHT 2
to the Tribunal's findings on the particulars of the Complaint are set out in
the Schedule of Findings
Particulars of Complaint and the Schedule of
Adverse Findings,
particularly up to paragraphs 56 – 57
3). These warrant revisiting. The particulars of the Complaint are also
conveniently summarised in the affidavit of
Rory O'Connor sworn 10 May 2011 (R2,
2010 Tribunal's findings with respect to the Complaint appear at paragraphs 1
– 57 of its written decision. The Tribunal's
consideration of the evidence
and legal principles with respect to protective orders and its orders appear at
paragraphs 58 –
As this latter part of the Tribunal’s
decision was affected by legal error and the protective orders made by the
Tribunal quashed,
this Tribunal must consider afresh the findings of proved
misconduct made by the previous Tribunal, the evidence tendered at the
inquiry and the further evidence tendered before the present inquiry in order to
decide what protective orders to impose, if
previous disciplinary and criminal history
evidence relating to Mr Ng's previous criminal convictions in 1995 (1 count),
1998 (23 counts) and 2007 (5 counts) are referenced
in the Commission's
chronology (C6, Ex 1). Of note, all the prosecutions were for offences created
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
its predecessor, the
Poisons Act 1966
Ng's conduct the subject of the 1995 and 1998 convictions and other misconduct
committed between 1 January 1994 and 24 October
1997 were the subject of a
Complaint dated 29 October 1999 (C4, Ex 52). The Complaint was heard by a
Pharmacy Board of Inquiry in
October 2000.
Particulars
1 – 6, 9 and 12 – 18 of the complaint of professional misconduct
(all proved) related to breaches of the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 1994
(C4, Ex 52). Mr Paul Mahoney, pharmacist, gave evidence at
the Board of Inquiry about visiting Mr Ng's pharmacy and stated "
that in his
view, one of the reasons for these offences occurring was an incomplete
knowledge on Mr Ng's behalf of the requirements
Poisons and Therapeutic
and Regulations
." (C4, Ex 53, p 1000).
Particulars
11 and 12, also proved, related to improper approaches by the pharmacist, in
person, and through a patient, to various
doctors to provide prescriptions to
cover previously dispensed Rohypnol. Mr Ng acknowledged this conduct was
inappropriate, illegal and improper
" (C4, Ex 53, p 999).
Board of Inquiry noted that "
Mr Ng's behaviour demonstrates not only a lack
of skill, care and judgment but also is indicative of little regard for the
of his patients and the public at large
It also commented on
Mr Ng's apparent inability to comprehend fully his obligations as a
pharmacist to keep himself abreast of the requirements of the
Regulations governing the practice of pharmacy
" (C4, Ex 53, p
Board of Inquiry imposed a series of conditions on Mr Ng's registration
including a period of supervised practice (C4, Ex 53,
p 1001 – 1002).
relating to Mr Ng's compliance with the conditions imposed was obtained for the
2010 inquiry and appears at C4, Ex 45, p
905 - 945. Perusal of that material
reveals that Mr Ng underwent a period of intensive supervision where a number of
matters/areas
of concern similar to those addressed in the most recent mentoring
relationship and new business plan implementation were being actively
with Mr Ng. Considerable efforts were made to improve Mr Ng's pharmacy and his
practices including: physical lay out,
clutter, staffing, ordering and
compliance with legislation. Significantly, problems with the Dangerous Drug
Register similar to
those identified by April 2011 PSU report were noted, see
C4, Ex 45, page 911 - mandatory twice yearly stock checks of Sch 8 drugs
Dangerous Drug Register not done. Mr Ng accepted that this was statement was
accurate (Questioning of Mr Ng by the Chairperson,
12/05/2011, T 209.42 - .47).
Mr Ng's pharmacy practice after the May 2010 Tribunal decision
Tribunal decision in
[2010] NSWPHT 2
resulted in an order being made
cancelling Mr Ng’s registration (
[2010] NSWPHT 2
, order 1). As
a consequence Mr Ng’s name was removed from the Register on 5 May 2010
(C1, Ex 5, p 343). Mr Ng was granted
permission by the Council to attend his
pharmacy to carry out administrative and retail functions pending the
Mr Ng’s appeal to the Supreme Court, insofar as it challenged the
protective orders made by the Tribunal, was successful.
The Supreme Court
quashed the Tribunal’s protective orders and ordered that Mr Ng’s
registration be reinstated (Supreme
Court Orders, C1, Ex W, orders 2 and 4).
This occurred with effect from 5 November 2010 (R1, Ex 2). The effect of the
Court's order
is that this Tribunal must consider afresh what protective orders
(if any) should be imposed.
the Tribunal’s de-registration order Mr Ng was prevented from working as a
pharmacist in the period 5 May 2010 –
5 November 2010. Since that time,
and pending the Tribunal’s determination of the question of what
protective orders are appropriate,
Mr Ng’s practice has been subject to
limitations imposed by his Undertaking (R1, Ex 1).
is apparent from material contained in the respondent’s hearing bundles
that Mr Ng, arising from the obligations imposed
by his Undertaking, has
endeavoured to put in place steps to bring the Ryde Pharmacy and his pharmacy
practice to a reasonably accepted
standard. This will no doubt be taken into
account by the Tribunal in determining what (if any) protective orders ought to
Theodorou v Dean
[2003] NSWDC 1
at 6 of 16).
being said, the above consideration falls well short of being a complete answer
to the question of whether the Tribunal ought
to make protective orders.
recent steps taken by Mr Ng, whilst commendable, were not done for altruistic
reasons. They were essential to his attempts to
demonstrate that he is fit to
remain registered as a pharmacist. To this extent they are
ex post facto
matters. They follow, and are reactive to, the professional misconduct
engaged in by Mr Ng.
his rejection of the proposition (XX’n of Mr Ng, 10/05/2011, T 98.7 - .12)
Mr Ng can be characterised as being a reactive
rather than a proactive
professional (
Theodorou v Dean
[2003] NSWDC 1
at 8 of 16). For example,
when questioned about the steps he had taken to ensure compliance with
legislative requirements Mr Ng
indicated that that would be a matter to be
addressed with Mr Mahony (XX’n of Mr Ng, 10/05/2011, T 96.40 –
similar effect, when Mr Ng was questioned about what rostering and
payroll arrangements he had in place at the Ryde Pharmacy he indicated
matters were to be addressed by/with Mr Mahony after the renovations to the Ryde
Pharmacy were completed (Questioning of
Mr Ng by Mr Preswick, 11/05/2011, T
169.25 – 170.4). It would appear that as at 21 July 2011 Mr Ng has
purchased MYOB software,
“but has not yet instigated it.” (Statement
of Piggott, 22 July 2011, R4, Ex 4, p 3). See also the evidence of Mr Dash
to the need to provide Mr Ng with copies of legislation that he was required to
have at the Ryde Pharmacy (Statement of Dash,
R4, Ex 5, [17]; annexure
“C”, p 10). Mr Dash gave evidence that it was a matter of concern
to him that the applicant
did not have copies of the necessary legislation
(XX’n of Mr Dash, 27/07/11).
Matters relevant to the exercise
of the Tribunal's discretion to impose protective orders
order of seriousness the Tribunal would be cognisant of, and concerned
finding of professional misconduct made by the Tribunal in
As to which see the Schedule of Findings, Particulars of Complaint
and Schedule of Adverse Findings documents.
history of Mr Ng’s (repeated) non compliance with legislative requirements
(see the Chronology and the references to the
relevant material). Compliance
with such matters is inherent to the performance of the privileged role of a
pharmacist. It is of
note that Mr Ng was first registered as a pharmacist in
NSW in 1987. In 1990 he purchased the Ryde Pharmacy (C4, Ex 53, p 996).
1995 a conviction was recorded against Mr Ng for contraventions of s 9(1)(b) of
Poisons Act 1996
. Thereafter, and with concerning frequency, Mr Ng
has found himself before the courts and professional disciplinary boards;
areas of non compliance identified in the PSU’s inspection of the Ryde
Pharmacy on 15 April 2011, such as:
anomalies in the recording in the Dangerous Drug Register of the supply of
medications by Mr Ng to Patient A and Patient C.
The Dangerous Drug Register
records the supply of drugs of addiction on days when those drugs could not have
been supplied as they
were not in the Ryde Pharmacy’s Dangerous Drug safe
on the recorded day (cl 112 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
). Mr Ng’s position was that the entries made in the Dangerous
Drug Register were reflective of the date of dispensing (even
if the supply did
not occur that day because, for example, there was insufficient stock in the
Dangerous Drug safe) (XX’n of
Mr Ng, 10/05/2011, T 82.4 – 84.11;
85.32 - .36; 89.13 - .25). In contrast to the position adopted by Mr Ng, the
Tribunal heard
evidence from Mr Ho of the approach he adopted. Namely, if there
was insufficient stock to dispense a prescription then, if the
customer agreed,
he would dispense what could be dispensed from the Dangerous Drug safe, and
enter that amount as being supplied
in the Dangerous Drug Register. Thereafter,
when further stock was on hand, he would dispense the balance of the
prescription and
record that further supply in the Dangerous Drug Register
(XX’n of Mr Ho, 11/05/2011, T 150.18 – 151.3).
(2) In the case
of Patient C, Mr Ng attempted to go back and correct the Dangerous Drug Register
(R2, Ex 10, annexure NG2) and recorded
that Patient C was supplied with 100
tablets on 1 April 2011 when to his knowledge, Patient C was actually supplied
the medication
on a date (not recorded) after 6 April 2011, when the new
supplies were received from Sigma. In the case of Patient A, Mr Ng asserted
his statement "
I had enough stock to fill the prescription (There were 113
tablets in the drug safe)
". Both statements were incorrect when one has
regard to the Dangerous Drug Register for Oxycontin (only 53 tablets in stock as
25 March 2011). Mr Ng gave evidence that this part of his statement was in
error (XX’n of Mr Ng, 10/05/11, T 84.13 –
presence in the Dangerous Drug Register entry for Oxycontin and Dexamphetamine
of entries that are out of date order.
(4) The absence
of a record of the required March 2011 inventory of Endone and Hypnodorm taking
place. Mr Mahony’
April 2011 statement (R2, Ex 4, p 13 – 14)
and 9 May 2011 statement (R2, Ex 9, p 9) indicate that the responsibility for
undertaking
the March 2011 inventory of the Dangerous Drug Register lay with the
pharmacist in charge. See also Mr Mahony’s oral evidence
Mr Mahony, 12/05/11, T 252.21 –
As to the legislated responsibilities
see cl 110, 111 and 118 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Mr Ng appeared to ultimately accept, as the owner of the Ryde Pharmacy,
(some) responsibility for ensuring that the March 2011 inventory
Dangerous Drug Register took place (XX’n of Mr Ng, 10/05/2011, T 87.27
– 88.7; esp. 88.15 - .17). Mr Ho’s
reference (R2, Ex 1) indicates
that Mr Ng otherwise played a proactive role in relation to ensuring that the
Dangerous Drug Register
was promptly checked.
(5) The inaccurate balances in the Dangerous Drug Register records for Endone,
Dexamphetamine and Hypnodorm (PSU inspection report,
attachments 5, 6 and
(6) The presence in the Ryde Pharmacy of goods for sale that did not bear an
Aust L or Aust R number. Mr Ng’s evidence was
that he was aware of the
need for therapeutic goods that were sold at the Ryde Pharmacy to be registered
(Aust R) or listed (Aust
L) goods (s 36A of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
). However he was not aware that the goods identified by the PSU
officers during their inspection (see paragraph 6 of the PSU report)
have an Aust R or an Aust L number (XX’n of Mr Ng, 10/05/2011, T 77.17 -
(7) The lack of appropriate and required procedures being in place in relation
to the securing of the key to the Dangerous Drug safe.
Mr Ng gave evidence that
he now keeps the Dangerous Drug safe key with him and that the practice of
placing the key in the dispensary
drawer was a recent occurrence, as previously
he had kept it on his person (Questioning of Mr Ng by Chairperson, 11/05/2011, T
– 120.39; esp. 119.41 - .42, 120.33 - .39). Perhaps also to a
lesser extent, the affixing of the Dangerous Drug safe. The
matter of affixing
the Dangerous Drug safe had not been attended to as at 10 May 2011 (XX’n
of Mr Ng, 10/05/20011, T 80.22
- .31) but has since been attended
also evidence of Mr Ng dispensing Oxycontin to Patient A on 25 March 2011 in
circumstances where has not working under the supervision
of Mr Ho (XX’n
of Mr Ng, 12/05/2011, T 221.45 – 227.46). A possible counterbalance to
this was Mr Mahony’s evidence
that it was Mr Lee’s responsibility to
ensure the Dangerous Drug Register was properly endorsed (XX’n of Mr
Mahony, 12/05/11,
T 237.37 – 238.3).
Ng in his evidence demonstrated a lack of knowledge or inadequate understanding
of the legislative requirements with respect to
keeping of and the recording of
the supply of drugs of addiction. (See for example, XX’n of Mr Ng,
10/05/11, T 92.19 - .22;
96.34 - .38. See also the evidence of Mr Mahony in
this regard, XX’n of Mr Mahony, 12/05/11, T 245.8 - .26). It is
acknowledged
that Mr Ng has made efforts to rectify this situation (R5, Ex
This is however symptomatic of the reactive approach of Mr Ng.
terms of the issue of the recording of the supply of such drugs see the above
references concerning Patient C and Patient A. In
terms of the issue of
storage, Mr Ng’s storage of 160 Endone tablets returned by a member of the
public in the Dangerous Drug
safe without any notations or marking to indicate
to the other pharmacists that it was returned stock was a dangerous practice
created a risk that medication not suitable for sale could have been
(illegally) supplied to a member of the public. Mr Mahony agreed
proposition that the presence of 160 unaccounted for tablets of Endone was a
matter of concern (XX’n of Mr Mahony,
12/05/11, T 259.4 - .6).
needs also to be made to Mr Mahony’s statement dated 27 June 2011 (page 2)
where he noted that the PSU inspection:
... did demonstrate some
significant short comings in Mr Ng’s professional practice. These are not
and they are not acceptable standards
. (emphasis added)
professional misconduct engaged in by Mr Ng, combined with the evidence of past
misdemeanours and non compliance with legislative
requirements, speaks to the
need for the Tribunal to made protective orders in this matter.
Ng’s professional misconduct also raises for consideration issues
concerning the maintenance of public confidence and the
need for there to be
specific and general deterrence in accordance with the principles identified in
paragraph 12 above.
Dr Klug’s evidence
Tribunal heard evidence from Dr Klug on 11 May 2011 (11/05/2011, T 129.1 –
143.22). Dr Klug’s report was also in
evidence (R2, Ex 6).
Klug indicated there were matters that could have been important to his
assessment of Mr Ng that his attention may not have been
drawn to. These
(i) Previous
findings of professional misconduct (XX’n of Dr Klug, 11/05/2011, T 135.12
(ii) That Mr
Ng had been convicted of offences (Questioning of Dr Klug by the Chairperson,
11/05/2011, T 137.34 - .42; 139.25 - .27).
(iii) That Mr
Ng had, on multiple occasion over a period of time, breached regulatory
requirements (Questioning of Dr Klug by the
Chairperson, 11/05/2011, T 139.29 -
(iv) That Mr
Ng had had conditions placed on his registration (Questioning of Dr Klug by the
Chairperson, 11/05/2011, T 137.35 -
being said, Dr Klug expressed the view that such additional information
“may change my opinion and it’s possible
it may not”
(Re-examination of Dr Klug, 11/05/2011, T 141.11 - .21, esp. 141.17). In short,
Dr Klug would have needed more
information.
Dr Klug’s evidence, the Tribunal will ultimately determine what, if any,
protective orders ought to be imposed based
on its assessment of Mr Ng and the
evidence otherwise placed before the Tribunal. The evidence of Dr Klug, whilst
not to be entirely
discounted, will be of limited assistance to the Tribunal in
its consideration of the matter.
Mr Ng's dilatory history; the repeated, formal reminders by the Courts, the
Board of Inquiry and the previous Tribunal of his
important professional
responsibilities, the assistance he has been given by his supervisors and
mentors to improve his practice,
the further training and accreditation
processes he has engaged in and significantly, the repeated occasions and the
long period
over which his departures from professional standards have occurred
and the most recent findings of professional misconduct, the
Tribunal could not
be satisfied that he is now fit to practice.
the above respect, Mr Mahony’s conclusion to his 27 June 2011 report (R3,
Ex 4 at p 7) that “The determination of the
success or otherwise of the
[mentoring] process must wait until this project has been completed” is
noted. Further there is
the evidence of Mr Piggott (XX’n, 28/7/11). Mr
Piggott’s evidence was to the effect that he considered that, amongst
other things, Mr Ng required oversight by a pharmacist for 1 to 2 days per week
(Mr Piggott also spoke of the need for Mr Ng to attend
conferences and
continuing education and to interact with other pharmacists). Mr Piggott
described Mr Ng as a “work in progress”,
and a person who needed to
improve his professional and commercial skills; he [Mr Ng] was not a person who
had a “free flowing”
ability to comply with the laws regulating the
profession of pharmacy (as disclosed by his previous misdemeanors).
the question of fitness to practice on the basis of the need for a pharmacist to
be overseen 1 to 2 days per week, Mr Piggott
acknowledged that the need for such
a requirement to be imposed spoke against such a person being fit to practice.
This is all the
more the case when it is appreciated that Mr Ng has been
practicing as a community pharmacist at Ryde Pharmacy for approximately
years. The need to impose a 1 to 2 day per week oversight regime on such a
person was accepted by Mr Piggott as revealing the
existence of knowledge, skill
or judgment possessed, or care exercised, below the standard reasonably expected
of a pharmacist of
Mr Ng’s level of experience.
in addition to the above, the Tribunal would not be satisfied that further
admonitions to comply with the legal and ethical
standards of his profession nor
conditions or restrictions on his practice can provide the necessary safeguards
to protect the public.
Appropriate Orders
Deregistration
with an order that Mr Ng may not apply for a review of the deregistration order
for a period of 1 year.
Ng to pay the Commission's costs of this inquiry and those of the previous
inquiry, not already covered by Justice Adams' order.
Written Outline of Respondent’s Submissions
present hearing proceeds on the basis that the complaints have been proved in
accordance with the (differently constituted) Tribunal’s
. The hearing
is for the purposes of determining the appropriate protective orders based upon
those findings.
assessing the significance of the findings, however, regard will need to be had
to the evidence upon which those findings were
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
: Failure to make 6 monthly stock checks, contrary to clause 117 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted most of the complaint (making no finding that the complaint was
established beyond the
admission)[11]
Vincent’s opinion that the failure to comply showed a significant lack of
care and judgment ([11]) was accepted [12].
period of the complaint was 6 September 2003 to 12 January 2005.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
was aware of the need to do six monthly
would have balanced in September 2004 if he was well
tried to catch up with the recording when he was
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
Mr Ng said that
he put back his 6 monthly stockcheck because of the accumulation of entries to
be made in the register (referred
to under particular 2).
Ng’s reason for not carrying out the stockcheck was ‘not
failure to carry it out showed a significant lack of care and
Ng had significantly failed to meet the minimum standard;
conduct would attract serious disapproval.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 2
: Failure to record receipt of drugs of addiction, contrary
to clause 112(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
The Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
complaint overstated the position in respect of the 100mg MS Contin tablets
(only 180 were unaccounted for, not 3000)[14];
, subject to
this qualification, was admitted by Mr Ng
Ng was dealing with only 43 drugs of addiction [16];
had no procedure in place for checking them [16].
period of the complaint was 5 April 2004 to 6 December 2004.
Ng gave statement evidence that in this period he “placed certain tax
invoices inside the drug register for recording at
a subsequent
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
were invoices left with the register that had not been entered into the
explanation for the failure to enter was illness leading to the work being put
off and never come back
always tried ...when (he) got better to catch up with the
was “trying to organise to balance the book, just organise the ins and
outs, trying to balance it but each time (he) did
that (he) got distracted and
(he) didn’t have time to finish
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May 2007 Mr Ng
I always keep my
records up to dates except during the winter
of 2004, I felt sick one week and I had to go home earlier as a result I did not
the daily check of
entries. When I felt better the following week,
there is already a backlog of entries to be made because we serve a lot of
patients who require more
drugs than other suburbs of younger
generation. I did not want to enter new ones before I caught up with the old
ones hence the missing
entries mounted up. However, all the relevant invoices
and prescriptions were kept in the register for me as soon as I have caught
with the other daily duties.
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to record
the required information in the register on the
not cross-examined to suggest
failure to make the entries would be deemed gross incompetence by any
respectable pharmacist;
would draw the strongest of criticism.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 3
: Failure to record supply of drugs of addiction, contrary to
clause 112(1)of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the complaint [18];
failure amounted to a very serious lack of care and judgment [19].
period of the complaint was 16 September 2004 to 21 December 2004.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
tried to record the sales
was behind in his recording and intended to record them when he felt better and
was less behind in his other
noted above, Mr Ng’s report to the HCCC dated 21 May 2007 provided the
explanation that a combination of illness, then deferral
and accumulation had
lead to the situation the subject of the complaint. In his oral evidence he
elaborated as
Well, in the winter of 2003 I got sick. I suffered a condition
where I have low immunity and when I get sick at that time I was by
myself with
a shop assistant, so at that time I had a fair bit of Schedule 8 prescriptions
and a lot of them I couldn’t enter
on the day and was keeping for the
following day to enter the new ones, but things mounted up and I didn’t
want to enter the
new ones except for the instance of like morphine 15, where
they are not common so I make the entry. All the common items I was trying
save up until I have time to enter them in the order of occurrence, but since
2005 I have employed another staff to share my workload.
Ng’s statement evidence was that current practice has been to record the
supply in the register on the day of
. He was not
cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
failure to make the entries would be deemed gross incompetence by any
respectable pharmacist;
would draw the strongest of criticism.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 4
: Failure to record receipt of a drug of addiction on the day
of receipt, contrary to clause 112(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
The Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the complaint
complaint was not as serious as others [21].
period of the complaint was 31 May 2004 to 5 July 2004.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said he had not made a record on
the actual date of receipt a few
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to record
the receipt in the register on the day of
. He was not
cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
the surface the incident appeared to be ‘isolated’;
pharmacists have probably entered the day after receipt;
Ng showed a lack of skill, care and judgment;
conduct was significantly below the accepted standard.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 5
: Supply of drugs of addiction on non-conforming
prescriptions, contrary to clause 85 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
The Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the complaint [23];
Vincent’s opinion that the conduct was significantly below the accepted
standard for a community pharmacist and would draw
severe criticism from
pharmacists of good repute and competence was accepted [24].
period of the complaint was 28 January 2004 to 4 January 2005.
his letter of report to the HCCC of 27 May 2007, Mr Ng said:-
Those supplies...were prescribed by local doctors or doctors
whom I am familiar with to regular patients...for the treatment of
insomnia...and
for the long term management of severe pain....I frequently
if repeats were ordered, as the latter is regularly omitted by the
doctors...Having ascertained the authenticity of the
scripts, I admit that I had
dispensed those scripts without getting the prescribers to amend them...since
then I have made every
attempt to make sure the scripts are written legally
prior to giving out the medication.
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to
“review carefully every prescription that is submitted
for dispensing to
ensure that the prescription is in the proper form” and “if a
prescription is not in the proper form...refuse
to dispense the prescription and
prescriber”
He was not cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
Cook and Jackson appeared to have a very tenuous grasp regarding the regulations
would have been ‘tiresome’ for Mr Ng to deal with the
doctors write prescriptions contrary to the regulations;
Ng’s conduct was significantly below the accepted standard.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 6
: Supply of Androgenic anabolic steroids on non-conforming
prescriptions, contrary to clause 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the complaint [26];
Ng’s conduct showed:-
of knowledge of the applicable legislation;
of judgment in applying the legislation;
of care to those who were supplied: [27].
period of the complaint was 30 January 2003 to 28 October 2004.
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
On commencement of the treatment if the prescriber omitted the
interval I always ring to confirm, but some of these doctors would
the same mistake again. My practice now is persistent with the doctors until the
prescriptions are properly written up.
Of those patients who obtained those
anabolic scripts where intervals were not stated, they were obtained at
therapeutic intervals
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to
“review carefully every prescription that is submitted
for dispensing to
ensure that the prescription is in the proper form” and “if a
prescription is not in the proper form...refuse
to dispense the prescription and
prescriber”
He was not cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
pharmacists would have returned the prescriptions for correction;
are capable of abuse and this is known by pharmacists;
Ng was either ignorant of the potential for abuse or chose to ignore
conduct fell below the accepted standard “to a degree that is
moderate” inviting “mild criticism”.
1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 7
: Failure properly
to record the supply of pseudoephedrine, contrary to clause 23(2) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Tribunal’s conclusions were only that Mr Ng admitted the complaint
period of the complaint was 21 February 2004 to 21 February 2005.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
was aware that psuedoephridine tablets could be used for the illicit manufacture
amphetamines
understood that there was a need to record the name and address of the patient,
the date of purchase and the
had been complying with the requirement to record to the best of his
made a record either in the computer or in a
agreed that the booklet he was shown was the booklet he had referred
booklet was used when the pharmacy was
booklet did not record the year, the pharmacists ID or the prescription
thought the record was
thought that his form of record was
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
Supplies of pseudoephedrine tablets are usually recorded in the
computer as a dispensed script with all the customer’s name
and address
recorded and labelled with instruction, with the exception when I was not in the
dispensary and when I was serving at
the counter, so the sales were recorded in
a book behind the counter...There were moments when the shop was busy and it
been hard to leave the counter to go into the dispensary to dispense
the sale, hence the use of the book. I admit that only the date,
address of customer and the name of product were recorded and a serial number
was omitted from the entry inadvertently.
As now sales of all pseudoephedrine
containing over the counter products required to be recorded, we have adopted
the use of just
sales record book with different columns for all the
required information including a serial number, and only when they are
are then recorded in the computer.
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to record
the supply of pseudophedrine in the pharmacy
not cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
usual recording is by way of computer;
use of a ‘docket book’ is not acceptable as no unique identification
of labelling of the product can occur;
volume of products associated with the complaint was “relatively small
compared to the several thousands that some pharmacies
(are) involved
Ng’s conduct fell below the accepted standard and invited strong criticism
for lack of knowledge, care and judgment.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 8
: Supply of drugs of addiction other than in accordance with
the recognised therapeutic standard, contrary to clause 109 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
The Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
did not admit the complaint
Mr Ng stated he had contacted Dr Jackson about the prescriptions [33], this was
not accepted
any event, Mr Ng had a discretion that he should have exercised if he thought
the supply inappropriate [36];
supply of Hypnodorm was in dosages and at levels that were well outside the
therapeutic range [37].
period of the complaint was 11 February 2004 to 15 October 2004.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng gave an account of this
conversation with Dr
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
Dr Jackson of Top Ryde Medical Centre was the doctor responsible
for prescribing flunitrazepam 1mg to those patients in those quantities.
first started doing so, I contacted him with that concern; however, he confirmed
with me that they are to alleviate the withdrawal
symptoms of heroin, so I
assumed that would be treatment being used for that purposes, as I was aware
that dosage would not be for
the treatment of insomnia.
Ng’s statement evidence was that he had confirmed the dosages with Dr
not cross-examined to suggest to the contrary.
Ng’s statement evidence was that his current practice has been to contact
the prescribing medical officer in every instance
when he receives a
prescription that does not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard and,
if not satisfied, refuse to
. He was no
cross-examined to suggest to the contrary.
ought to have calculated that the dosages and timeframes were in excess of the
therapeutic standard;
conduct fell significantly below the accepted standard and showed a total lack
of care, knowledge and skill, inviting strong criticism.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 9
: Failure properly to keep Testosterone prescriptions,
contrary to clause 41 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
of the prescriptions were subsequently found: by Mr Ng [39]-[40], although he
admitted to not keeping them properly
conduct showed significant lack of judgment and lack of knowledge of how to meet
the legislative requirements [41].
period of the complaint was March 2004 to January 2005.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
was aware of the need to keep the prescriptions separate;
must have made a
always kept the duplicate in the box where he kept the duplicates for the
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
I do have a separate folder where I keep the
repeats and
Appendix substance, such as testosterone. It is situated behind the folders
where other ordinary scripts are kept. I file away the
scripts most of the time
when the assistant help me to file away the scripts and she filed away the ones
that she was not supposed
to do so. I do understand the importance of having
these types of scripts kept separately, and I always try to do it
accordingly.
Ng gave statement evidence that his current practice has been to keep the
prescriptions
. He was not
cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
his oral evidence Mr Ng said that he had located some of the relevant
prescriptions and that they had been kept
pharmacist dispensing on an irregular basis “often forgets to follow the
important to be able to locate prescriptions in a timely manner because of the
possibility of misuse and abuse;
Ng’s conduct is significantly below the accepted standard because of his
cavalier attitude;
has shown significant lack of judgment and his actions would incur serious
disapproval.
Complaint 1 (unsatisfactory professional conduct):
Particular 10
: Making false or misleading entries in the pharmacy’s
computer dispensing records
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the complaint
Tribunal accepted Mr Vincent’s opinion that the conduct would be strongly
criticized by reputable pharmacists and showed
a lack of care skill and judgment
that was at least morally indefensible [44].
period of the complaint was October 2004 to November 2004.
his record of interview on 11 May 2006 Mr Ng said:-
records were an exercise to get a statistic for Alphapharm sales for the purpose
of getting a
wanted to increase the script
thought the entries were
entries were only used for the discount
his letter of report to the HCCC dated 21 May
Two dummy patients were created to be dispensed with private
Aphapharm products ...Those entries were private items where no PBS
reimbursements
were required and the entries were to be deleted after the
figures were established. No intention of defrauding
Medicare was ever considered.
Ng statement evidence was that his current practice has been only to make
entries for a proper
not cross-examined to suggest otherwise.
his oral evidence he candidly conceded dishonesty and expressed
practice was exceptionally rare and significantly below the accepted
Ng’s conduct would be strongly criticised and showed total lack of care,
skill, knowledge and judgement.
Complaint 2 (professional misconduct)
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
conduct demonstrated Mr Ng’s knowledge, skill and judgment were
significantly below the standard reasonable expected of
pharmacists of
equivalent experience [44].
Ng’s conduct in respect of:-
(Particular 10);
(Particular 6); and
(Particular 8).
was seriously unethical
conduct was, in combination, unsatisfactory professional conduct [44].
The finding that Mr Ng’s conduct in respect of Hypnodorm was seriously
unethical requires qualification or reconsideration,
to the extent that it
relied upon the Tribunal’s rejection of Mr Ng’s evidence about
that regard, the Tribunal concluded that:-
claimed that he had spoken to Dr
Tribunal rejected that
In his judgment Adams, J said:-
It is convenient to first deal
with the last-mentioned ground. The closing submissions of counsel for the HCCC
pointed to the requirement
that a pharmacist, faced with a prescription for
quantities in excess of the recognised therapeutic standards, should contact the
prescribing doctor to ascertain the justification for the proposed supply,
referred to Mr Ng’s evidence that, at least in respect
Dr Jackson’s prescription, he did speak to him about it, but
submitted that such an inquiry was insufficient in the circumstances
to meet his
independent professional obligation not to dispense a prescription in excess of
recognised therapeutic standards where
there was no good reason for doing so, a
matter as to which the pharmacist is bound to come to a positive conclusion that
necessary or reasonable, though no doubt he or she should take into
account the doctor’s opinion on the matter. At this point,
the Chairman of
the Tribunal made the following observation—
Chairman: Whilst you’re on that point ... isn’t it the
established position in relation to making notes and Mr Ng says
he rang the
doctor, made a note about it and then must have destroyed that note by following
a practice of destroying certain material
— isn’t it the case, if
there is no evidence of it, you treat it as not having occurred?
Mr Ginters: That would be my submission, yes.
Chairman: This is an established position, because of the essential
requirement of health practitioners, if they don’t note
things and the
note is not extant that it really didn’t happen.
Mr Ginters: One would have thought that if it was viewed as important
to make an annotation on a prescription or a dispensing, if
one considered that
important enough to do, the notion that then one would subsequently destroy that
prescription and destroy the
record of behaviour that was other than the norm,
in the sense of an aberration from what a script might have said, it’s a
nonsense, quite frankly.
If one wanted to come before this Tribunal and said, “Look, I had a
practice of making notations that I had contacted the doctor
things”, you would want to see that note produced before the Tribunal to
satisfy the Tribunal as to the fact that
it occurred.
Counsel then continued with his submissions to the effect that
Mr Ng’s conduct fell markedly short of that which was required
as a community pharmacist.
Counsel for Mr Ng submitted in due
course that his client did take some steps to satisfy himself as to the
propriety of the excessive
prescriptions. The following exchange then
Chairman: ... Isn’t the problem for you here that there is no
evidence of the steps taken by your client other than his statement,
are well established ways of recording these issues and there is no evidence of
the recording of these contacts, when
it is the practice to record such matters?
This has been something that has been exercising our minds, that’s why I
to give you the opportunity to make submissions about it.
Mr Griscti: I understand. It has not been put to Mr Ng that he
did not have the conversation. Mr Ng was asked by a Tribunal member
made any notation and he responded that he did, but that he no longer had it ...
[his] evidence that he telephoned the doctor
is unchallenged and there is no
basis upon which, in my submission, the Tribunal ought not to accept that
Chairman: If that is what you want your submission to be, it’s up to
us to make up our minds. It remains that it is well established
profession, as I understand it and certainly in other professions, that you make
notes of issues of this and a similar kind,
and without proof of those, the
usual approach is: well, it didn’t happen.
You say you got the evidence of your client saying he did do this, but he
thinks the material was destroyed that would have proved
it. It is worrying in
itself and it also goes against the normal practice too, to record activities
undertaken in relation to prescriptions.
It raises an issue about sloppiness in
relation to dealing with prescriptions too, doesn’t it?
Mr Griscti: It does potentially raise an issue, but as I say, it is
an issue that has arisen as a result of a question during the
hearing ... I rely
on his evidence that he telephoned the doctor ... the making of the telephone
call has not been challenged in
any way, and indeed he goes further to say that
in the same circumstances today he would take further steps. I can’t
take it any further than that.
Chairman: Thank you.
The Tribunal stated explicitly, as I have mentioned above, that it did not
accept Mr Ng’s evidence that he rang and queried
doctors about the
dosages and I have also set out the Tribunal’s summary of its reasoning in
respect of this conclusion.
It seems to me to be evident from the
way in which the Tribunal dealt with the seriousness of Mr Ng’s
misconduct and the genuineness
of his expressions of remorse that it was not
only influenced by the history of repeated failures to meet the proper standards
of pharmacists as well as his legal obligations and the situation
described by Mr Mahony on his inspection, but also by its conclusion
Mr Ng’s evidence on an important matter could not be believed. It is
self-evident that a conclusion that a pharmacist’s
evidence on a key
matter of professional conduct was not truthful was not only significant of
itself but must also reflect seriously
on other controversial claims as to
remorse, an issue of vital importance to considering whether continuing
unfitness and the need
for continuing protection of the public. In my view,
Mr Griscti’s submission that it was not appropriate for the Tribunal
act on the basis that Mr Ng’s evidence about this matter should be
disbelieved when there was no challenge in cross examination
to its truthfulness
was correct, certainly unless there were some unusual circumstances that enabled
such a conclusion fairly to
be drawn in the absence of such a challenge. But
there were no such circumstances and the Tribunal did not suggest their
If I may respectfully say so, the
suggestion by the Chairman arguendo that there were documents which ought to
have been in existence
which were not produced meant that it followed as a
matter of necessary inference that they did not exist — as distinct from
simply being a circumstance from which an inference of their non-existence might
be drawn — is neither a rule of fact nor law,
especially where, as here,
the witness whose evidence is impugned gave an explanation as to why the
documents could no longer be
produced, an explanation which — considering
the regrettable disorganisation of Mr Ng’s records — was not
unlikely to be true. Although it may be that the rule in Browne v
Dunn is by no means absolute, it encapsulates an important principle
fairness. Had Mr Ng’s counsel been aware that it would be submitted
on behalf of the complainant that Mr Ng’s evidence
could not be
accepted, having been alerted by cross examination to that effect, it may be
that he would have been in a position to
prove by other means that the impugned
inquiry had in fact been made. In the result, the issue was not raised until
final submissions
and, even then, the matter was raised in the form of a query
and it was not suggested to him by the Chairman that his submission
inferences which could or could not properly be drawn from the failure to
produce the written notes was not accepted...
It follows that the Tribunal’s
rejection of the truth of Mr Ng’s evidence of contacting the doctors
in respect of the
over-prescriptions was affected by a denial of procedural
fairness, amounting to an error of law.
Accordingly,
the finding that the supply of Hypnodorm was seriously unethical is not a
finding that stands. It is for this Tribunal
to determine what significance it
gives to the established complaint.
Even if this (or any other finding of unethical conduct) stands, the finding is
an ultimate conclusion and the imposition of an appropriate
order by this
Tribunal requires it to form its own judgment of the conduct, as part of its
evaluation of current fitness.
Complaint 3 [the convictions of 2 February 2007]
Tribunal’s conclusions were as follows:
admitted the convictions but not that he was unfit in the public interest to be
registered as a pharmacist [47].
offences covered a period of approximately six weeks, between 11 November and 20
December 2004 [52].
offences covered acts and omissions that were contrary to required processes
essential to protect the public interest and included
some dishonest and
unethical activity [52].
Ng’s apparent failure to change his practices, despite his claim he has
as evidenced by Mr Mahony’s
the pharmacy was not on 18 February 2010 functioning professionally and that the
business had not changed sufficiently “to
prevent a recurrence of past
problems” “led the Tribunal to the view that any expressions of
remorse by Mr Ng were mere
words not backed up by action”.
Mahony’s report
Ng’s recent actions and his
satisfied the Tribunal that Mr Ng’s lack of fitness to be registered as a
pharmacist, as demonstrated by his convictions in
2007, continued right up to
the hearing.
Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the circumstances of these offences of
which Mr Ng has been convicted were such that he
and continues to
, unfit in the public interest to practice pharmacy.
finding of present unfitness appears to have been based upon two matters: Mr
Mahony’s report and the rejection of Mr Ng’s
evidence about
upon both matters: [70], [71]
portion of Mr Mahony’s report relied on by the Tribunal was limited to
organisational and business practices, a matter acknowledged
by Adams J in his
judgment on the appeal:
The concerns of Mr Mahony were not that what he saw showed a
repetition of the wrongful conduct that had led to the two proceedings
Mr Ng. Rather, he thought the disorganisation of the premises of his pharmacy
and his business practices had not sufficiently
changed to prevent the
recurrence of the problems (or, at least some of them) that had given rise to
the earlier complaints and,
as well, those presently being considered.
(Obviously, this is a general statement since, strictly speaking, the
particulars of the
complaints differed, although their generic character was
somewhat similar). This reflected no more than a common sense view that,
pharmacist is disorganized, the likelihood of failings in respect of records
– both making them and keeping them –
his report, Mr Vincent looked at each of the charges and opined, to varying
degrees, that each demonstrated skill and judgment
below acceptable
evidence, Mr Vincent said that his views were expressed without regard to the
particular circumstances underlying the
Principles to be applied in determining what orders ought to be
proceedings were brought by HCCC pursuant to the
Pharmacy Practice Act
”), which commenced operation in February 2008. The
Act was repealed by the
Health Practitioner Regulation Amendment Act
with effect from 1 Jul 2010. The latter applies for the purpose of these
proceedings: Schedule 5A, clause 4(3).
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
176 CLR 239
at 250-251). Professional disciplinary proceedings are intended
for the protection of the community, to maintain proper and ethical
professional
standards and to protect the good standing and reputation of the profession of
an order for suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
public point of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and
from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not
lead to loss of privilege”
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
104 CLR 186
at 201-202.
relevant time for determining the fitness of the respondent to practise is the
time of the Tribunal’s determination: see
A Solicitor v The Law Society
of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
, Kirby P said at 409 [10]:
... Improvement – The final consideration concerns an
aspect of the public interest to which, as I believe, insufficient attention
been paid in these cases. I expressed my views in this regard in Kotowicz v Law
Society of New South Wales (Court of Appeal,
7 August 1987, unreported). I was
there in dissent as to the result of the application. But, I hold to my opinion,
as applicable
to this case. It is an opinion which has enjoyed some favour in
other Australian jurisdictions:
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’
[51] of its decision the Tribunal, in the earlier determination, set out a
number of relevant matters to be considered with regard
to determining the
appropriate protective orders. These were:
onus of proving these matters is on the HCCC;
order cancelling the registration of a pharmacist should only be made when the
probability is that the pharmacist is permanently
fact that the pharmacist has a conviction for a serious offence is not
necessarily sufficient reason for an order deregistering
fact of conviction (and imprisonment) is, however, far from irrelevant and may
be regarded as carrying a degree of disgrace itself;
Tribunal needs to consider the conduct involved in the conviction and see
whether it is of such personally disgraceful character
that the pharmacist
should not remain a member of an honourable profession;
fact that the pharmacist pleaded guilty to the charge will usually be counted in
their favour. However, it is appreciated that
not all pleas of guilty
necessarily show remorse;
not occurring in the course of professional practice may demonstrate unfitness
if it amounts to incompatibility with the personal
qualities essential for the
conduct of practice. There may not even have been any criminal conviction with
respect to that conduct.
This is particularly so where the conduct over a long
period shows systematic non-compliance with legal and civic obligations (not
relevant in this case);
attitude of the professional association (or a peer reviewer) is of considerable
significance; and
question is present fitness, not fitness as at the time of the crime.
Mr Ng was prosecuted under section 9(1)(b) of the
Poisons Act 1966
convicted and fined
Mr Ng was prosecuted under:-
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(two charges) and
fined $500 on each charge;
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(three charges) and
fined $300 on each charge;
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(18 charges) and fined
$500 on each
1999 a complaint was made by the HCCC in respect of,
convictions
dealing with the complaint insofar as it pertained to the convictions (relating
to the period April 1995 to October 1997), the
Board referred to and implicitly
accepted the following:-
respect of the 1995 conviction, Mr Ng was busy and carelessly failed to contact
the doctor;
respect of the 1998 conviction (insofar as it related to the wholesaler’s
licence), Mr Ng was ignorant of the requirement
respect of the 1998 conviction (insofar as it related to storage), Mr Ng
was confused about the changeover of the product from
Schedule 4 to Schedule
respect of the 1998 conviction (insofar as it related to expired products), Mr
Ng was unaware that the sale of expired stock was
dealing with the remainder of the complaint (relating to the period
1995 to June 1996
), the Board referred to and implicitly accepted the
following:-
was unaware that his shop assistants had placed Schedule 3 medications in his
did not retain some original scripts as a result of poor practices learned as an
Ng supplied medication on out-of-date scripts to elderly patients at a time when
he was not fully aware of the relevant
supplied medication on non-conforming prescriptions from one doctor for one
patient through
carelessness
supplied a quantity of a restricted substance to one patient that did not accord
with a recognised therapeutic
circumstances where an inquiry of the prescribing doctor was called for;
supplied medication on a prescription when, using professional judgment, he
ought to have known it was
dispensed prescriptions without annotation with date and/or number and/or name
of pharmacy through
carelessness
approached doctors and a patient for ‘owing prescriptions’ in
circumstances acknowledged as
inappropriate
a result Mr Ng was cautioned and severely reprimanded in
month period of supervision was also
On 2 February 2007 Mr Ng was convicted of the matters included within the
present complaint
As noted, these convictions related to the period
November to December
Mr Ng’s conduct following the dates of the complaint
(including the mentoring regime)
relevant conduct that is the subject of these proceedings occurred between
September 2003 and February 2005.
his report dated 19 May
reported in more detail on his inspection of 17 February 2010 stating:-
“current and in order”
procedures were followed”
...“correct
procedures were being applied and...appropriate intervals endorsed”
...“demonstrated
knowledge and understanding of...procedures”
sales could be
substantiated as “real”
...“everything
was current and in order”
...“meeting
the professional standards”
...“systems
and procedures in place...were known and followed”
improved his practice standards and...is
no longer a
threat to the public”
In his Honour’s judgment of 22 October
concluded that the Tribunal’s decision of 29 April 2010 had proceeded on a
misunderstanding of Mr Mahony’s earlier
report dealing,
with the same
[20] As is usual practice in the
Tribunal, the HCCC and the pharmacist each called expert evidence on the nature
and significance
of the impugned conduct of the pharmacist. Mr Ng called a
Mr Mahony, who was a pharmacist with 40 years of experience in the
and undoubtedly qualified by that wide experience to give the
opinions upon which Mr Ng relied...
[21] In respect of one particular matter, however,
the Tribunal of necessity relied on the report of Mr Mahony. This concerned
by him on 18 February 2010 to Mr Ng’s pharmacy, when he
interviewed Mr Ng and his staff, observed the operation of the pharmacy
carried out a detailed inspection. In respect of the supply of controlled
medicines and the maintenance of the Drug Register
he confirmed that everything
was current and in order and also that proper procedures were followed. In
connection with the supply
of anabolic steroids, Mr Mahony noted
“there were a few recent transactions for these items, however on
examining the retained
documents and computer records, the correct procedures
were being applied and appropriate intervals were endorsed on the
prescriptions”.
In respect of pseudoephedrine, Mr Mahony reported
that Mr Ng “provided a copy of the Quality Care Pharmacy Practice
for the supply of pseudoephedrine ... [which] had been audited in
February 2010 as QCPP standard”. He noted that Mr Ng had
demonstrated
the procedures and showed copies of records of previous transactions which
procedures were confirmed with Mr Ng’s
registered pharmacist and his
two staff members who “demonstrated their knowledge and understanding of
these procedures”.
In respect of false and misleading entries in the
dispensary computer access was provided to the computer and various reports
Alphapharm and similar generic supplier products were produced.
Mr Mahony concluded that it was ”evident from these reports
sales matched transactions on client/patient records and a sample of these
records could be substantiated as real persons”.
Mr Ng also had
addressed the issues concerning membership of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia and the Pharmacy Guild of Australia
and, so far as the breaches which
had been the subject of his conviction in the Local Court “everything was
current and in
order”. It is apparent from this report that Mr Ng had
corrected his previous failings in respect of matters which were the
the complaints brought against him and no other breaches were reported.
[24] Mr Mahony was, not surprisingly,
cross-examined on the report.... He was taken to his conclusion that the
pharmacy was “not
functioning professionally and cannot continue in its
present mode” and asked whether this expressed concerns “that the
pharmacy as it is presently functioning presents a risk to public health and
safety”. Mr Mahony’s response was this—
No, I can’t conclude exactly that. If I can explain, the issues were
that within the standards of the QCPP ... there were lots
of standards there
which related to some occupational health and safety issues, whether they be
lighting, whether they be cleanliness,
whether they be whatever. They were well
below the standard and I can’t necessarily say that the public were being
put at risk
by that, but it was below the standard that one would have
He agreed that this meant it was below the standard “that one would
reasonably expect of a pharmacist with an equivalent level
of training and
experience”. However, as appears below, this was not a reference to
Mr Ng’s actual practice as a pharmacist:
in no sense was it
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct.
[25] Mr Mahony was then taken to those parts of
his report that noted that some cardboard boxes of credits had been in the
for more than six months, stock appeared to be overflowing on every
shelf and that the dispensary was small and disorganised with
a counter that did
not provide adequate workspace. He agreed that these were all matters that
indicated the pharmacy was below a
standard which he would “expect as
appropriate”. It was put to Mr Mahony that it “expressly
demonstrates that as
at today’s date you had ... real concerns about the
standard at which the pharmacy was working”. He answered—
I can’t entirely agree with that particular statement. If I can just
comment that my concern was not that Mr Ng couldn’t
operate the
pharmacy at that level, but that standards would have to change and to meet what
I would say is the real standard of
pharmacies of this size at this location
needed to have, so that it was a case of he was definitely below the recommended
but, if he was going to be able to demonstrate that he wasn’t
going to have a problem in the future, then his standards had
to be higher than
those that were existing now and those which he had previously
understood.
[26] Mr Mahony’s references to the shop
being “dirty, unsafe, untidy and disorganised” concerned power
points, steps
and locations of items which were posing risks, mainly to pharmacy
staff rather than patient care. Significantly, he denied that
the problems of
layout and so on to which he had referred created the potential for mistakes to
be made in the dispensing process,
I don’t believe that as a corollary. I think that my major concern
was actually Mr Ng’s total work level and workload,
because there
were things which were inefficiently handled and creating extra demands on him
as an individual and to some extent
as a professional. I don’t believe he
actually was demonstrating that he was not providing a level of service to his
but to do that he was working quite a deal inefficiently to provide
that level of service.
[27] Mr Mahony was then taken to comments under
a heading “Waiting Prescription Items” to the effect that his
“showed some items not collected since before Christmas, some
not labelled, did not match attached prescriptions, marked ‘Immediate
supply required’ had not been collected some weeks after being
dispensed”. He explained that these were matters of concern
“more an inefficiency and probably to Mr Ng’s detriment that he
has stock that is sitting on a shelf that
isn’t going to be collected and
isn’t going to be paid for by the client, that should be in the dispensary
not a patient care issue, it is more an economic business
issue”. Further explanations along these lines were given but it
necessary to refer to them.
[28] The thrust of Mr Mahony’s report is
clear. To the extent that Mr Ng’s level of disorganization
contributed to the
matters identified in the complaints, it was undesirable but
the criticisms concerned the management of his shop, not breaches of
professional standards properly so-called...
The Tribunal referred to the submission
made by counsel on behalf of the HCCC that Mr Ng should be deregistered and
that at least
one year should elapse before he could apply for re-registration
and went on to state —
The Tribunal considered that given the whole of the evidence of
Mr Ng’s breaches of the legislation and his actions and omissions
that led to the findings of professional misconduct against him and his current
unfitness to be registered, that a period of at least
two years must elapse
before he may apply to the Tribunal, or any successor Tribunal for an order
allowing re-registration...
As I have already implied, it was
significant that Mr Mahony’s inspection of Mr Ng’s
pharmacy disclosed that, so far as
he could ascertain, Mr Ng was not in
breach of any of the legal, or, for that matter, ethical obligations imposed on
him by virtue
of his being a pharmacist. The substance of his criticisms were,
leaving aside commercial considerations, that Mr Ng continued to
practical situation where some such breaches might more easily occur. A
conclusion, therefore, that Mr Ng was indifferent
to the need to act
lawfully and ethically as a pharmacist could not fairly or properly be drawn
upon the basis of Mr Mahony’s
report. The relevant legislation and
regulations imposed specific duties which, of course, a pharmacist must follow.
But, if he or
she does so, his licence to work as a pharmacist cannot be taken
away because the way in which he complies with those obligations
is thought to
be inefficient, commercially unwise or otherwise unedifying. Still less does a
pharmacist undertake not to “overwork”
— whatever that might
mean. Just because most pharmacists wear a white coat and their shops present an
attractive commercial
face to the public, and that this is what any reasonable
and sensible pharmacist would do, does not mean that wearing jeans and a
tee-shirt and working in a mess is in any way improper, of itself. Nor does it
seem to be fair or proper to reason that, because
a degree of inefficiency and
disorganization contributed to Mr Ng’s substantive misconduct, his
continuance of the messy and,
in the broader sense, “unprofessional”
mode of conducting his business meant that his evidence of remorse should be
After all, so far as his legal obligations were concerned,
Mr Mahony found that, indeed, he had changed his practices. Nor was there
any basis for inferring that, at all events, Mr Ng’s general conduct
of the pharmacy business had not improved, perhaps markedly,
for all that this
was insufficient in Mr Mahony’s opinion. It should be obvious that
dispensing drugs on prescriptions that
did not comply with the legal
requirements has nothing to do with untidiness, let alone messy
The Tribunal, in my respectful opinion,
elided the professional requirements of pharmacy with
“professionalism” in the
broader sense and failed to give adequate
consideration to Mr Mahony’s explanations of the opinions expressed
in his report.
Indeed, this evidence was not mentioned by the Tribunal. In this
respect it is worth noting, I think, that Mr Mahony’s evidence
his inspection was not at all the subject of controversy, nor was it (or could
be) suggested that his explanations were not
entirely conscientious, truthful
and unaffected by bias towards Mr Ng. It was, of course, not necessary for
the Tribunal to discuss,
let alone mention, all the evidence but where an
important conclusion is reached upon evidence whose true import cannot be
appreciated
without weighing up the explanation not referred to and those
explanations are, in substance, contrary to the conclusion drawn, it
difficult to avoid the inference that the essential character of the evidence
has been mistakenly understood.
Mr Mahony attended at Mr Ng’s pharmacy in February 2010 and he reviewed Mr
Ng’s practice at that time.
Mahony’s reports indicate that the matters the subject of the complaints
had been rectified by Mr Ng. In particular:
Dangerous Drugs Register was checked and was in order.
procedures were being followed in respect of controlled substances.
procedures were being followed in respect of the supply of anabolic
procedures were being followed in respect of the supply of
pseudoephedrine.
the judgment of Adams, J, Mr Mahony has produced the following further
Foundational
Mentoring Report (27 November
Report and Business Plan (17 January
Visit Report (14 March
Report (16 April
“prescription
handling procedures have been refined and work well”
of retained prescription paperwork is much improved”;
Health Inspection
April 2011);
NSW Health Inspection Report (9 May
report (27 June
the judgment of Adams J, Mr Ng has taken steps to comply with relevant
requirements in respect of the matters the subject of
the complaint.
his report dated 9 May 2011, Mr Mahony concluded:
Mr Ng demonstrated to my satisfaction that he was meeting the
professional standards as they related to the particulars of the complaint
against him.
The Pharmacy had systems in place that were known and followed by Mr Ng
and his staff as they relate to the particulars of the complaint
to the order of the Tribunal Mr Ng was unable to practice as pharmacist for
approximately
between May and November 2010.
accordance with the orders of Adams J, Mr Ng executed an undertaking in which he
agreed to comply with a prescribed supervision
to that programme he appointed Mr Mahony as his business mentor.
17 January 2011 a business plan was prepared and provided to the Pharmacy
Council. It was approved by the Pharmacy Council on 10
February 2011. Pursuant
to the programme the Pharmacy Council also proposed the names of three
independent
Ng practised as a pharmacist under the supervision of Mr Ho. This arrangement
commenced after 13 December 2010, being the date
that the Pharmacy Council
granted approval to Mr Ho to act as Mr Ng’s supervisor. From that time, Mr
Ho worked at the pharmacy
on Sunday, Monday and Tuesdays. On these days Mr Ng
worked as a pharmacist under Mr Ho’s supervision. For the balance of the
week (save for Saturday) Mr Lee worked as pharmacist in charge and Mr Ng
performed administrative and retail
to the business plan substantial renovations to the pharmacy were commenced.
Those renovations had been substantially progressed
but not yet completed by the
time of Mr Mahony’s site visit on 14 March
Mahony noted that in terms of the requirements of the supervisory programme,
these were, where possible, completed and complied
with and otherwise in
28 March 2011 Mr Christopher Piggott was asked to act as independent auditor of
the business
March 2011, Mr Piggott attended at the pharmacy without notice to Mr Ng. He
provided a report on 3 April 2011 in which he approved
the business plan and
indicated that at the time of his inspection the condition and operation of the
pharmacy was consistent with
the implementation of the business plan.
Mahony conducted a further site visit on 11 April 2011 (while Mr Ng was away on
a short break). By this time the renovations to
the pharmacy had been completed
and the pharmacy had been substantially changed and
Mahony observed that, despite the disruption of the renovation works, there had
been a number of sensible and practical work flow
changes. These include
refinement of prescription handling procedures, storage and handling of
paperwork, positioning of items awaiting
collection and improved practical
workspaces.
photographs in Mr Mahony’s report demonstrate a marked improvement in the
Mahony also noted that an experienced new staff member was about to join the
pharmacy and this would be an important step in achieving
the goal of a
satisfactory QCPP audit within the next 3 months and enabling Mr Ng to practise
unsupervised.
total cost of the renovation to Mr Ng was $99,700 (including
new staff member, Ms Dietz, joined the pharmacy on 19 April 2011. She has over
experience.
undertaking provided by Mr Ng to the Supreme Court stipulated that he could only
practice as a pharmacist, under on-site supervision,
pending communication of
the Council’s approval. Mr Ng also undertook that he would not work as a
pharmacist in his own pharmacy
until he employed such additional staff as
required by the approved business
latter requirement was achieved by the hiring of Ms Dietz. Mr Ng was informed
through Mr Mahony that he was permitted by the
Pharmacy Council to practise as a
pharmacist without supervision.
summary, since November 2010 Mr Ng has:
Mr Mahony as his mentor;
a detailed and approved business plan;
substantial renovations to the pharmacy;
new staff for the pharmacy;
until April 2011, as a pharmacist under the supervision of Mr Sidney Ho;
implemented
new and improved practices, a number of which have become possible due to the
improved work environment.
to January 2005, Mr Ng has had a focus of compliance with the requirements that
he transgressed, which gave rise to the
circumstances of the complaints. Since
November 2010, in addition, Mr Ng has undertaken the considerable task of
restructuring the
pharmacy practice so as to ensure that the risk of
transgression in the future is reduced.
his actions since November 2010 Mr Ng has demonstrated his commitment to having
a properly functioning pharmacy which best allows
him to ensure compliance with
all relevant legislative and regulatory provisions.
Further independent assessments of Mr Ng following the judgment
pharmacy was inspected by Mr Piggott as part of an independent audit on 29 March
. According
to Mr Piggott:-
My thoughts are that Mr Ng is having his eyes opened about
Community Pharmacy in an Australian business-sense. In some areas he is
slowly but he is very acceptant of his Mentors teaching...The B.P prepared by
Patrick Mahony is sound, normal and achievable
in my estimation.
Ho worked at the pharmacy until late March/early
provided a reference and gave oral evidence. He states in his reference
I found him to be respected by most of his customers and his
practice is ethical and professional and in line with current way of
practice...
Aside from the appearance of the pharmacy and increment of staffing, Peter
has been working hard to improve his practice as a pharmacist,
to minimise the
error in the DD register, he stressed that DD items to be checked in every
transaction promptly, so discrepancy can
be verified and corrected immediately.
I found the DD register is up to date and the scripts are properly checked and
pharmacy was inspected by Mr Cox for the Pharmacy Council in the week commencing
4 April 2011. According to Mr Mahony he was told
by Mr Cox that his report was
The 15 April 2011 Inspection
oral evidence of Ms Dolan made plain just how extensive the inspection on 15
April 2011 was; two officers were there for between
4 to 5 hours and they
conducted a thorough assessment.
Dolan gave evidence that:-
Dangerous Drugs Register was examined back to January 2010,
bundle of currently held prescriptions was examined,
of sales of pseudoephedrine were examined and these were found to have been kept
in the proper manner,
product offered for sale was examined.
report of the inspection of the pharmacy on 15 April 2011 makes the following
complaints:-
packs of items that were not registered goods or listed goods (paragraph 6
display identification of the pharmacist in charge (paragraph
location of the key for the safe containing the register (paragraph
safe for the register (paragraph 9);
inconsistencies
between the register and quantities dispensed for 1 prescription on 25 March
2011 and 1 prescription on 12 April 2011
(paragraphs 10(a)-(b))
inconsistencies
in 3 instances (one, by one tablet only) between a stock check performed as part
of the visit and the register (paragraph
supply on 2 August 2010 on a non-conforming prescription (paragraph 12);
inconsistencies
in 2 instances between the National Controlled Drugs System and the register
(paragraph 13);
in 3 instances to apply the appropriate warning statement (paragraphs
instance of unlabelled substance in the dispensary (paragraph 17);
stock (paragraph 18).
respect of the matters reported on, Mr Mahoney has expressed the following
it does not provide the perfect report card, it does demonstrate the
considerable progress made in the preceding six months
since this mentoring
(the items complained of)
have been discussed in my monthly reports
and are scheduled to be completed within the agreed
was determined that the exclusion of inappropriate stock items would wait until
renovations was complete and stock organised into
a logical sequence and the
employment of experienced staff would make this process
supervising pharmacists (Mr Lee and Mr Ho) were the persons
responsible for the activities of the pharmacy (rather than Mr
safe achieves the spirit of the regulation and had never been complained about
incorrect pharmacist ID was a procedural error by the supervising
pharmacists
was not the pharmacist in charge at any stage during the period under
investigation
redevelopment of the dispensary has lead to more shelving, better lighting and
better space allocation. As with the front of the
shop, inappropriate and excess
stock has been scheduled to begin as soon as this tribunal hearing is
Ng’s evidence about the matters arising from the inspection was that:-
understood that the goods referred to at paragraph 6 of the report were
registered or
be more careful in the future;
the pharmacist in charge ID display (referred to at paragraph 7 of the report)
was the responsibility of the supervising
(noting that 15 April was Mr Ng’s first day back after a
safe key (referred to at paragraph 8 of the report) was kept in a drawer next to
the pharmacist
he did not know that this was impermissible but had now changed his
safe (referred to at paragraph 9 of the report) is 50 years old, weighs at least
500kgs and has never been complained about
steps would be taken to comply with the regulation;
the matters referred to at paragraph 10 of the report:-
Lee dispensed the medication on 12 April
dispensed the medication on 25 March 2011 under the supervision of Mr
thought it appropriate to use the dispensing date as the supply date for the
register. He now realised this was incorrect and
would not do so again in the
the matters referred to at paragraph 11 of the report:-
Endone tablets were returned
supply to Patient C was written up in the register using the dispensing date as
Hypnodorm count was out by one tablet probably because of an inadvertent count
by a locum at an earlier
non-conforming prescription (referred to at paragraph 12 of the report) was not
was a human error in counting and recording the patches arising from the
packaged quantity and confusion (referred to at paragraph
were given in respect of the prescriptions referred to at paragraphs 15 and
unlabelled white jar did not contain items for
stock is checked before being issued, and
A mitigating factor – Mr Ng’s medical
Ng was examined by Dr Klug, psychiatrist, on 30 March 2011. He provided a report
dated 27 April
oral evidence to the Tribunal. Dr Klug noted Mr Ng suffered from
panhypopituitarism since childhood, requiring him to take
hormones in order to
function properly. These include oral medication and injections. Dr Klug noted
in his report:
He said he takes his oral medication regularly but sometimes did
not have testosterone injections as frequently as he should which
caused him to
become tired and lethargic. He said that
this was the case at around the time
it was brought to the notice of the health department that he failed to complete
the DD register
appropriately
[emphasis added]
Klug expressed the opinion:
It is significant, in my view, that his problems occurred in the
context of his long standing panhypopituitarism, for which he has
been receiving
replacement hormonal treatments. He said, however, that when he was working
long hours, he was probably excessively
lethargic and fatigued because he did
not have sufficiently frequent injections of testosterone which are required on
a two to three
weekly basis. Clearly, the rate at which he was receiving the
testosterone injections can be validated through the file notes by
his treating
GP. If this was so, I regard it as a contributing factor and, without in any way
wanting to pre-empt the decision of
the Tribunal, probably a mitigating factor
in the events about which the complaint was made.
Mr Ng is now attending to his health more
assiduously
[emphasis added]
Klug gave evidence that a failure to take hormone replacement treatment would
give rise to a risk of psychiatric illness, particularly
depression. In all the
circumstances he considered it preferable that Mr Ng be under the care of an
endocrinologist. Dr Klug thought
the effect of the illness could well be lack of
motivation.
noted earlier, Mr Ng’s explanations of circumstances surrounding the
matters complained of included a reference to the fact
of this condition. Mr Ng
has not been challenged on any of that material.
Ng gave evidence that over the timeframe of the contraventions he had rarely
taken the injections as prescribed. If he was stressed
he would put it off. He
avoided the injections because of an anxiety about them.
Events Following the Adjournment of the Present Hearing on 12
to the adjournment of the present hearing in May 2011 Mr Ng has taken further
measures, in collaboration with Mr Mahony,
to ensure that he is complying with
his obligations as a pharmacist.
Mahony’s report dated 27 June
the steps that have been taken since 12 May 2011.
Mahony met with Mr Ng a week after the adjourned hearing and gave him 36 hours
to consider his position. Mr Ng confirmed he was
100% committed to the process
embarked upon followed the hearing before Adams J –“Peter chose
to continue with the mentorship
and to allocate all resources and all his time
to demonstrate his commitment to be a good pharmacist and meet all of his
professional
obligations”.
Mahony and Mr Ng agreed to the following as an immediate way forward:
suitably qualified and recognised trainer to address all aspects of the Poisons
and Therapeutic goods Act.
withdraw from
being pharmacist in charge (including closing the pharmacy on Sundays) to devote
time to improving professional skills
and focusing on health issues, and
implementation of QCPP standards in the pharmacy.
Robert Dash, Sydney University lecturer and author of the
Guide to the New
South Wales Medicines and Poisons
was engaged to provide a review of the practice, provide training and a
supervised written examination.
Dash was engaged on Mr Ng’s behalf by Gadens Lawyers by letter dated 1
Pursuant to the Tutoring Agreement Mr Dash was engaged to provide Mr Ng with
seminars dealing with professional obligations under
the Poisons
&Therapeutic Goods Act and Regulations and any other relevant legislation.
In addition, Mr Dash was required to test
Mr Ng as to the matters covered.
Dash met with Mr Ng on four occasions, including the examination session.
Details as to the sessions are set out in Mr Dash’s
statement dated 22
Dash attended at the pharmacy and assessed the reference material available to
Mr Ng, he ensured Mr Ng had access to relevant
up-to-date material and requested
Mr Ng to undertake materials relating to Schedules 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the Poisons
Subsequently,
there was a two hour tutoring session and a further visit to the pharmacy when
Mr Dash took the opportunity to check
the reference material available to Mr Ng.
During the tutorial, Mr Dash went through each schedule and asked Mr Ng to
describe what
the requirements were under various circumstances.
Mr Dash’s overall impression was that “[Mr Ng] had done his
Dash supervised a 1 ¼ hour examination that was held at the University of
Sydney on 14 July 2011. Mr Dash designed the examination
paper in order to test
Mr Ng in respect of requirements for the handling of medicines in Schedules 2,
3, 4 and 8 of the Poisons
examination paper and answers, including Mr Dash’s handwritten comments,
are annexed to Mr Dash’s
Dash’s evidence is that Mr Ng’s examination results “indicated
that he now has a good working knowledge of his
professional obligations as a
pharmacist in the handling of medicines and
In his oral evidence, Mr Dash said that, based on the examination result, he
concluded that Mr Ng’s “knowledge was comparable
with that that I
would expect of a reasonable practising
pharmacist”.
Mahony’s report confirms that Mr James Le was engaged as Pharmacist in
Charge from 7 June 2011 (Mr Quincy Le had provided
this position between 27 May
to 6 June).
“Interim Pharmacy Management Plan 27 May 2011” sets out a clear
description of the respective duties of the pharmacist
in charge and the
pharmacy owner.
Mahony also sets out in detail the obligations and responsibilities of Mr James
8 June 2011 Mr Mahony again attended the pharmacy “and noted everything
was in place as outlined
Arrangements were made for Mrs Kane of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia to attend
at the Pharmacy to progress implementation of QCPP
into the practice.
meeting took place on 24 June 2011 at the pharmacy between Mrs Kane, Mr Ng and
Mr Mahony. Mrs Kane’s letter dated 24 June
detailed action plan, incorporating organisational elements, proper procedures
and plans for ongoing training. The plan
culminates in an internal audit to
review compliance against QCPP in late September, followed by an external audit
using a QCPP assessor
the conclusion to his report Mr Mahony confirms that the mentoring program is on
track to achieve the proposed outcomes. The initial
stages of the program
focussed on achieving the necessary major structural changes to the pharmacy.
The issues identified in the
PSU inspection have been addressed. Further steps
taken include installation of a dedicated DD cupboard meeting the specifications
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
and Regulations. Mr Mahony also notes
that implementation of QCPP is well underway.
reference to his role as mentor, Mr Mahony confirms his objective is to achieve
long term change, addressing all issues of a
professional and commercial nature.
This process is necessarily
late June 2011, Mr Stephen Cohen, a practising pharmacist with over 40
years’ experience, agreed to supervise Mr Ng in the
performance of his
professional duties as a
pharmacist.
Cohen found Mr Ng to be helpful, co-operative and committed to improving his
Cohen has supervised Mr Ng for six hours per day, two days per week, and
submitted weekly reports together with an overview report
dated 22 July
inspected the dangerous drugs register each time he visits the pharmacy and has
found it to be up-to-date and the processing of
dangerous drugs scripts to be
orderly and streamlined;
observed Mr Ng to be complying with the requirements for putting medication into
the fridge and recording the temperatures in
observed Mr Ng’s practices in respect of prescription records to be
appropriate and orderly;
observed that Mr Ng has implemented a process for identification of short-dated
stock, which has been very helpful and appears
to be working;
found the presentation of the pharmacy to be good and he does not have any
concerns about it; and
observed that Mr Ng is following appropriate procedures in relation to incident
Cohen has expressed the opinion, based on his personal experience with and
observation of Mr Ng, that Mr Ng is fit to practise
pharmacy and is not a risk
to members of the
Piggott provided a further report dated 22 July
he commented favourably on improvements implemented by Mr Ng at the pharmacy
since his previous visit in March 2011. Mr
Piggott recorded
levels were adequate;
signage was new, clean and professional;
Ng’s procedures for recording Schedule 8 poisons accorded with
“normal protocol”;
had installed a new drug safe which was securely fastened to a brick wall and
was away from public gaze;
correctly monitored the medicines fridge;
dispensary was uncluttered, well-stocked, orderly, clean and tidy, and generally
gave a professional, efficient appearance; and
complete presentation of Mr Ng’s front-of-store was very good.
response to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Piggott confirmed that, based on
his experience with Mr Ng, he “would give him
the key” to his own
pharmacy, for Mr Ng to work
appropriate orders having regard to the findings, considered in light of Mr
Ng’s conduct after the complaint
A continuing regime of supervision/mentoring and education is
appropriate
is a public benefit to ensuring that the public resource represented by Mr
Ng’s education and experience is not lost unless
he is permanently unfit
to practice.
earlier Tribunal’s conclusion of permanent unfitness was based upon
conclusions drawn from the evidence that Adams J held
were not open.
any event, this Tribunal has received further evidence and must bring its own
collective mind to the task of determining appropriate
assessing the significance of Mr Ng’s antecedents, it should be borne in
mind that:-
1995 and 1998 convictions related to the period April 1995 to October 1997
– about 14 or so years ago;
2001 Board decision related to these convictions and other conduct in the period
January 1995 to June 1996 – again, about
14 or so years
several years, 1997 to 2003 Mr Ng did not come to the attention of the
authorities.
to the present matters:-
2007 convictions related to a two months in 2004 (now, several years ago);
other conduct the subject of the present complaint occurred in the period
September 2003 to February 2005 (now, more than 6 years
is to be determined is
best evidence of that is provided by Mr Mahoney, Mr Piggott, Mr Dash and Mr
Cohen. Present fitness is also supported by the evidence
of Mr Ho and the
inspection by Mr Cox. There is no contrary peer opinion.
inspection of 15 April 2011 proved that the journey to compete reformation is
not complete. That, however, is consistent with
the mentoring regime. If the
reformation was complete, the mentoring would be at an end. However, the
developments since the May
2011 hearing demonstrate Mr Ng’s
commitment to the cause of reformation and also what can be achieved in a
relatively short
period of time when there is a proper structure in place.
is no basis for inferring that any of the conduct complained of in the present
complaint was deliberate, as opposed to careless
(with the exception of the
Alphapharm aspect, which did not affect the general public and gave rise to no
health issue).
the Court of Appeal has said, dishonest conduct involves matters of degree. It
is a matter on which the views of the practitioner’s
peers are entitled to
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
. Examples of
dishonesty will differ in their perceived seriousness and will not necessarily
require deregistration: ibid at [72]
Ng’s conduct in respect of Alphapharm was an isolated incident, for which
he has expressed remorse. It should not disqualify
Mr Ng from continued
practise as a registered pharmacist.
is every reason to believe that the mentoring programme will elevate Mr
Ng’s practices to the standard that is expected.
There is no reason for
concluding that the mentoring program must inevitably fail. And, therefore,
there is no basis for properly
concluding that Mr Ng must be permanently
appropriate orders are for the continuation of the current mentoring regime and
implementation of a business plan for a period
of a further 18 months, so as to
complete the proposed two year programme, together with such further orders for
supervision, education
and audit as the Tribunal thinks appropriate.
implementation of the Mahony business plan and associated renovation of the
pharmacy mean that Mr Ng is now in a position to practise
as a pharmacist in a
positive environment that is conducive to compliance with relevant requirements.
The improvement in the pharmacy
is demonstrated by the “before and
after” photographs in Mr Mahony’s report.
Piggott emphasised that he saw the benefits of the business plan developed by Mr
Mahoney as being that it “is really quite
thorough and expansive”;
that its various elements “create a whole traditional Australian pharmacy
which the majority
of us recognise as ... a pharmacy in Australia”; and
that, provided it becomes “part and parcel of his everyday
procedure”,
then “at the end of a year or some years, you will have
a pharmacy that will be professionally acceptable to the Australian
still profitable so that it can support professional services and
Subsequently,
in response to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Piggott elaborated on his views
concerning the business plan in the
Q. ... Do you think that business plan would have brought about
the professional change that was maybe required of him?
A. I think so, yes. Because the business plan starts by talking about
quality care, it talks about protocols with dispensing, it
includes schedule 8
registers, it may talk about opening and closing a shop but it certainly talks
8 safe as well. So I've given that
question some thought, and I think it's - what else could Patrick
Mahony do I thought to myself.
I thought he'd done quite an expansive
Ng has given evidence as to his remorse regarding his transgressions. He
expressed his remorse in his original witness statements
from February and March
Ng’s remorse was also acknowledged by Mr Mahony in his initial report,
which was based on a pharmacy visit and interview
in February
Ng gave oral evidence as to his remorse at the earlier
not challenged on the issue. Nor has he been challenged on this at the present
observed by Adams J, the basis on which the earlier Tribunal found a lack of
remorse was misconceived. Reliance was placed on
Mr Mahony’s comment that
that the pharmacy was not on 18 February 2010 functioning professionally and
that the business had
not changed sufficiently “to prevent a recurrence of
past problems”. However, these comments were misconstrued by the
as they were limited to matters related to the running of the pharmacy business
and were not related to intent to comply
with applicable
provisions.
further mater relied on by the earlier Tribunal was a rejection of
Mr Ng’s evidence that he had he telephoned doctors to discuss
prescriptions with them on two occasions because he was unable to produce notes
of the conversations at the hearing. Mr Ng had not
been challenged on this
evidence and it was incorrect of the tribunal to reject his
error was magnified when used as a basis to reject the evidence that Mr Ng was
remorseful.
Ng pleaded guilty to the charges that were brought against him and, where
appropriate, he admitted to the Tribunal the particulars
of the complaints
against him. The evidence is that Mr Ng is ashamed and remorseful in respect of
the events that have occurred.
He is supported by Mr Mahony. Neither of their
evidence on this topic is challenged and it ought to be accepted.
evidence does not support the conclusion that in all probability Mr Ng is
permanently unfit to practice.
other cases in which de-registration has been ordered, the Tribunal can be
comfortably satisfied that the public interest will
be protected by Mr Ng
remaining registered pursuant to a continuing regime of mentoring, supervision,
education and audit. That
comfort arises from the achievable goals of the
approved regime, the safeguard provided by the regular reports to the Pharmacy
provided by Mr Mahony, and the evidence of Mr Dash, Mr Piggott and
7 years have elapsed since the events giving rise to these proceedings. During
this time Mr Ng has endeavoured rigorously to
observe his obligations as a
pharmacist. He appeared before the Tribunal in March 2010 expressing his
willingness to participate
in a supervision and mentoring programme. Since
November 2010 he has been fully committed to such a programme. His pharmacy has
been transformed. It is now an organised and functioning workplace. He has a
proper business plan which has been approved by the
Pharmacy Council’s
independent auditor Mr Piggott (who described the plan as realistic and
achievable).
Importantly,
Mr Mahony is of the opinion that Mr Ng has made great strides forward and,
having achieved phase one of the programme,
being the substantial structural
changes to the pharmacy, he is now in a position to implement further
improvements to practice under
Mr Mahony’s mentorship. Mr Mahony’s
opinions have been corroborated by the progress that has occurred in the period
12 May 2011.
the Tribunal’s earlier decision, Mr Ng has made a commitment to
rehabilitation, implementing structural changes to his
pharmacy and is
proceeding with the mentoring programme with Mr Mahony.
Tribunal can be satisfied that Mr Ng will bring his pharmacy practice to the
required level. Critically, Mr Ng has the support
of Mr Mahony on this issue.
The Tribunal can also take comfort from Mr Ng’s actions in stepping aside
from pharmacist in charge
in order that he can concentrate on improving
professional skills and his health, and the assistance obtained from Mrs Kane in
establishing
a plan to implement QCPP.
Tribunal should accept Mr Mahony’s evidence. His expertise is self
evident from his resume – significantly, Mr Mahony
not only has
technical expertise and some 40 years’ experience, he is familiar with the
demands of current practice in a community
pharmacy. Mr Piggott’s
evidence was that he holds Mr Mahony in high
Significantly,
the HCCC has not tendered any contrary expert or peer review evidence at the
current hearing.
The previous period of supervision in 2001 does not prove
that further supervision and mentoring would be ineffective
of the orders made by the Pharmacy Board on 14 February 2001 was as follows
Peter Wing Keung Ng is not to practise except under the
supervision of a pharmacist or pharmacists, approved and appointed by the
for a period of three months from the effective date of these orders. The
period of supervised practice must be at least
30 hours per week, for a maximum
of nine hours per day, over a maximum of five days per week to a total of at
least 65 days over
the three month period.
The supervising pharmacists will be pharmacist in charge at all times they
are present in the pharmacy and their responsibilities
will include every aspect
of the operations of Ryde Pharmacy. The supervising pharmacists will provide
monthly reports to the Board
which will include any recommendations or
suggestions for changes in procedures and policies in Ryde Pharmacy.
fact that Mr Ng underwent a period of supervision pursuant to this order in 2001
does not indicate that a further period of supervision,
mentoring, education and
audit would now be ineffective.
is so for at least the following reasons:
2001 supervision period was of a short duration (3 months only).
illustrated by the reports prepared by the
supervisors,
the supervision in 2001 did not have the benefit of clear criteria or
performance indicators.
supervision in 2001 did not include the setting and assessment of medium-term
and long-term goals.
fewer than 5
supervisors
were appointed in 2001, resulting in a form of supervision that was
inconsistent, unfocussed and unsustained.
the supervision was concluded, there was no appropriate “follow-up”
or monitoring by the supervisors at appropriate
intervals (eg after 6 months or
12 months), to ensure that the supervision had been effective.
supervision period in 2001 was not accompanied by any independent audit.
supervisors in 2001 were required to supervise “
every aspect of the
operations of
” the pharmacy. They did not have, as their focus, the
procedures for the receipt, storage and dispensing of drugs of addiction,
maintenance of the dangerous drugs register.
the reports of the supervisors in 2001 reveal that much of their attention was
directed to the physical aspects of the pharmacy,
its layout and state of
tidiness and to staffing levels, rather than those aspects of Mr Ng’s
practices of which complaint
is made in the present proceedings.
fundamentally, Mr Ng has now demonstrated, by his conduct, that:
has already implemented significant improvements in his practice;
has a firm resolve to continue to do so; and
has a clear insight into the inadequacies of some of his past practices, the
necessity for continuing improvements, and the reasons
Ng’s insight, and his commitment to change, are due in no small part to
the advice and instruction he has now received from
Mr Dash, Mr Piggott, Mr
Cohen and Mr Mahony, and to his time of reflection away from practice during the
recent period of suspension
following the first Tribunal decision. Mr Ng did
not have the benefit of those experiences at the time of his 2001 period of
supervision.
continuing regime of supervision, mentoring and audit is inherently more likely
to be effective in the present circumstances than
The Tribunal should impose appropriate conditions upon Mr
Ng’s continuing right to practise
together, the evidence of Mr Mahony, Mr Dash, Mr Piggott and Mr Cohen indicates
that Mr Ng is presently fit to practise and
is not a danger to the public,
albeit that he would benefit from continued supervision, mentoring and
education. The Tribunal should
fashion orders which will make Mr Ng’s
entitlement to practise conditional upon compliance with a regime which
incorporates
those elements.
Court of Appeal has said that it is “[c]learly ... fallacious” to
reason that, if a particular condition is reasonably
necessary, the practitioner
must lack a precondition to entitlement to continued practice and accordingly
the need to impose the
condition demonstrates unfitness to practice:
[2007] NSWCA 326
70 NSWLR 323
all the circumstances, the Tribunal should permit Mr Ng to continue to practise,
but subject to conditions of the kind explained
as follows by Mr Piggott in
Q. You've obviously had an opportunity to speak to Mr Ng
at length on at least the two occasions that you went to his shop, and you
given material relating to Mr Ng's background and a letter from Gadens. If
the Tribunal's decision was one which permitted
Mr Ng to continue to
practice, do you have a view as to the kinds of conditions that it might be
appropriate for the Tribunal to
A. My thoughts are that Peter Ng is a work in progress and that some
conditions could be applied. The sorts of things that I feel,
that I would
suggest is that peer review is good for Peter Ng and good for the profession and
the public. I - it's not just about
the words that we all practice
under; it's a matter of an understanding of how pharmacists can work in an
environment with sometimes
great stress and busyness, and I think it's best
solved when you - so I would suggest once or twice or week that a
pharmacist is
asked to be there, but more importantly, I would suggest to Peter
Ng that he mixes at conferences or continuing education and makes
a particular
point of mixing with good Australian pharmacists. I think we can learn a lot
more by peer review than sometimes having
it in vast written documents.
Q. You described Mr Ng as a work in progress in that last answer.
What do you mean by that statement?
A. I can - I can see improvements and I think there needs to be
improvements. And—
Q. I realise at the end of the day it's obviously a matter for the
Tribunal, but having regard to your knowledge of Mr Ng, do you
have a view
as to whether he's capable of being improved, to a level which would be
satisfactory?
A. I have a view that he is capable of being improved. I have a view
that he - he understands that some of the things that he previously
thought Australian pharmacy runs like, that that was unacceptable and that he,
even in broader areas, needs to improve his pharmacy
professional and commercial
Subsequently
in his oral evidence, Mr Piggott was asked to comment upon the objectives and
proposed duration of such supervision.
Mr Piggott’s evidence was as
Q. You were asked a number of questions about the suggested
requirement for supervision, and you said in your earlier evidence that
Mr Ng was a work in progress. So I wanted to ask you two things; firstly
what did you contemplate would be the objective of supervision,
if there's a
supervisor there what are they doing and why is that beneficial firstly?
A. What they would be doing is giving Mr Ng interaction with other
peers. I see examples and hear of examples from lawyers of the
difficulty of
pharmacists working in isolation, and I think it's a serious problem in our
profession, but also in all other vocations.
I see great value in Mr Ng
having the ability to mix with other professional peers and my thoughts were one
or two days a week.
I know that that can be taken to mean - that's
probably your decision to make.
I think that it would be very good for Mr Ng to - to be
aware of procedures and systems and protocols. I learn myself when I work
for - if I - if I work with a son or a daughter or something
like that, or even another pharmacist, just the way that they do things,
and - and sometimes I'll help them and sometimes they'll help me. So
I sense that Mr Ng has been in isolation and I sense that that
has - has not been good. And I believe that one or two days plus the
other things that I said; conferences, continuing education,
really for his own
good to be doing that, to be mixing.
Q. Now the second question was this; given that he's a work in progress
in your opinion, do you have a view as to how long it might
be appropriate to
impose these requirements, for example the supervision and the other
A. Well my opinion for what it's worth is that 12 months would be
of the kind, and for the duration, described by Mr Piggott fall well within the
range of conditions conventionally imposed
by this Tribunal, and the predecessor
Pharmacy Board of New South Wales, in cases of professional misconduct where, as
pharmacist has implemented improvements in his or her practice since
the time of the misconduct.
Illustrations of appropriate orders imposing conditions on
continued practice
decision of the Court of Appeal in
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 182
provides a recent illustration of protective
orders which impose detailed conditions upon continued practice, including peer
supervision.
The appeal concerned a consultant psychiatrist in respect of whom
the Medical Tribunal had upheld a complaint of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct. The Court of Appeal set aside the orders of the Tribunal and made
orders imposing conditions on continued
practice to the effect
practitioner practise only as a member of a practice including at least two
other psychiatrists;
circumstances where one of the other psychiatrists (approved by the Medical
Council of New South Wales) undertakes to provide supervision
between the practitioner and the supervisor for at least two hours on a
fortnightly basis in the first 3 months and thereafter
on a monthly basis;
by the supervisor at such meetings of the cases of all new patients of the
practitioner and all patients with a significant
change in their condition, the
medical records kept by the practitioner, clinical outcomes, patient follow-up
and communication with
referring practitioners;
by the supervisor of a record of matters discussed at each meeting in a format
approved by the Medical Council;
by the supervisor to the Medical Council in writing and in a format approved by
the Council, within 7 days of each meeting;
requirement that the supervisor inform the Medical Council immediately of any
concern in relation to the practitioner's compliance
with the requirements of
supervision or clinical performance of the practitioner, or if the relationship
of practitioner and supervisor
Court of Appeal has recently observed that a legitimate consideration in respect
of protective orders is whether the orders made
reveal inconsistency of approach
on the part of the Tribunal, when viewed against other decisions revealing
similar kinds of misconduct:
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
submissions set out below some relevant decisions of this Tribunal and of the
Pharmacy Board which illustrate the range of circumstances
in which orders have
been made providing for detailed regimes of supervision, mentoring and education
in order to protect the public
in cases of professional misconduct including in
respect of the dispensing, storage and recording of drugs of addiction.
cases demonstrate that a regime involving similar elements would be an available
and appropriate means of addressing the misconduct
of Mr Ng in a manner that
protects the public and advances the objectives of the legislation.
HCCC v Sayegh
[2011] NSWPHT 1
, this Tribunal concluded that the
respondent had engaged in professional misconduct constituted by:
to comply with statutory requirements concerning drugs of addiction and
restricted substances;
supply of restricted substances and known drugs of abuse, to and self-prescribed
by, a medical practitioner whose authority concerning
drugs of addiction had
been withdrawn and in quantities and/or for a purpose that did not accord with
recognised therapeutic standards;
supply of a drug of addition in the name of one patient for on-supply to unknown
patients, without ensuring that the medication
was appropriate for the needs of
the intended patients, that it was labelled with adequate directions or that the
patients were counselled;
between October 2006 and August 2007, to make an inventory of drugs of addiction
stock during the prescribed period, contrary
to cl 117 of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
between 23 October 2006 and May 2007 (other than one week), to ensure that the
name of the prescriber and the prescription
number was recorded in the drug
register, contrary to cl 112 of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
, in relation to the supply
to keep certain dispensing or other records; and
between 30 October 2006 and 15 August 2007, to make entries in the drug register
in relation to the receipt and supply of
drugs of addiction, contrary to cl 112
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Tribunal regarded the respondent’s conduct as “extremely
serious”: [220]. The Tribunal was not satisfied, on
the evidence, with
the assurances given by the respondent as to his future practice conduct and
acceptance of the wrongfulness of
his admitted failures; nor was it satisfied
that the respondent has demonstrated sufficient insight into his behaviour:
The Tribunal ordered that:
respondent be cautioned and severely reprimanded;
respondent’s registration as a pharmacist be suspended for
such suspension, the respondent’s right to practise be conditional upon
the appointment of a mentor by the NSW Pharmacy
Council to advise and assist the
respondent in the management of his pharmacy practice for a period of 12 months,
such mentor to
report to the Council as and when required by
period of 3 years, the respondent complete at least 40 continuing professional
development credits per year;
12 months, the respondent complete the “Dug Use and Misuse” course
offered by the Australian College of Pharmacy;
period of three 3 years, an auditor appointed by the Council attend the pharmacy
to conduct an audit, at approximately 6 monthly
intervals, of the
respondent’s practices relating to the receipt, possession, recording,
storage, supply and inventory checking
of drugs of addiction;
3 months, the respondent deliver to a panel of pharmacists selected by the
Council, a presentation on a pharmacist’s
obligations concerning the
receipt, possession, supply and recording of drugs of addiction; and
years, the respondent maintain membership of professional associations and,
within 12 months, obtain QCPP accreditation.
HCCC v Tran
[2010] NSWPHT 4
, the Tribunal was satisfied that the
respondent had engaged in professional misconduct constituted by
[137]-[138]:
the period 7 February 2007 to 17 December 2007, dispensing prescriptions for
oxycodone 80mg to a patient in quantities not in accordance
with recognized
therapeutic standards;
the period 23 May 2007 and 12 November 2007, dispensing prescriptions for
diazepam 5mg to a patient in quantities not in accordance
with recognized
therapeutic standards;
to make a periodic inventory of drugs of addiction in stock between 1 March 2007
and 30 September 2007, for which the respondent
was convicted and fined in the
Local Court on a charge of breaching clause 117(1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
to enter details of transactions into a drug register between 11 October
2006 and 1 December 2007, for which the respondent
was convicted and sentenced
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
for 41 charges of breaching clause 112 of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Tribunal concluded that the cause of each of the respondent’s failures had
been identified and addressed—in the case
of issues relevant to drugs of
addiction, by assistance in his practice management; and in respect of the legal
obligation to ensure
appropriate supply of drugs of addiction and restricted
substances consistent with the relevant therapeutic standard, by his improved
knowledge, understanding, application and acceptance, of the necessary
processes: [150]. The Tribunal ordered that:
respondent be cautioned and reprimanded;
mentor be appointed by the NSW Pharmacy Council to assist the respondent in
relation to the management of his pharmacy practice
relevant to his legislative
obligations, for a period of 12 months, such mentor to report to the Council as
and when required by
a period of 3 years, the respondent complete at least 40 continuing professional
development credits per year;
to 31 March 2012, the respondent complete the “Dug Use and Misuse”
course offered by the Australian College of Pharmacy;
period of 3 years, an auditor appointed by the Council attend the pharmacy to
conduct an audit, at approximately 6 monthly intervals,
respondent’s practices relating to of the Respondent’s compliance
with and procedures concerning legislative requirements
relevant to receipt,
possession, recording, storage and inventory checking requirements for drugs of
addiction and for ensuring appropriate
quantity and purpose in the supply of
drugs of addiction;
3 months, the respondent deliver to a panel of pharmacists selected by the
Council, a presentation on a pharmacist’s
obligations concerning the
receipt, possession supply and recording of restricted substances and drugs of
addiction; and
years, the respondent maintain membership of professional associations and,
within 12 months, obtain QCPP accreditation.
[2010] NSWPB 1
, the respondent admitted, and the Pharmacy
Board was independently satisfied, that the respondent, the sole proprietor and
in charge of a suburban community pharmacy, had engaged in
professional misconduct constituted by:
supply of large quantities of pseudoephedrine based products to known and
unknown persons during the period from 1 April 2003
to 8 April 2004, failure to
record the supply of pseudoephedrine products, making false entries concerning
the supply of such products,
and failure to take adequate steps to satisfy
herself that each relevant supply was in a quantity and for a purpose in
with recognised therapeutic standards;
supply of a large quantity of various pseudoephedrine products to unknown
persons in circumstances where the outer packaging was
removed and/or tablets
were removed from their blister packs;
making of a large number of false entries in her dispensing records regarding
the supply of Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack size
and failure to record the
supply of various other pseudoephedrine based products in the pharmacy’s
dispensing records in accordance
with the Director General’s requirements;
the subject of a conviction against the respondent for an offence of supplying
false and misleading information in response
to a notice issued by the NSW
Health Department , in contravention of
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
Board found that the conduct “amounted to a complete abrogation of the
Respondent’s professional responsibilities
and is of a very serious
nature” (p 10). The Board ordered that (pp 11-12):
respondent be reprimanded for engaging in dishonest conduct whilst performing
her legal and professional obligations as a pharmacist
and as a pharmacy
respondent, within 2 months, submit operating procedures, including medication
management plan for the supply and recording of
Schedule 2 and Schedule 3
respondent, within 6 months, deliver a seminar to a panel of pharmacists
approved by the Board on the subject of the management,
supply and recording of
pseudoephedrine based products and related ethical responsibilities for her
pharmacy practice;
respondent’s right to practise be conditional on the appointment of a
mentor pharmacist as approved by the Board for a period
of 6 months, during
which period the mentor was to report to the Board every 2 months on such
subject matter as directed by the Board;
respondent undertake educational requirements involving the maintenance of
professional memberships, continuing professional education
and maintenance of
QCPP accreditation for the pharmacy for a period of 5 years; and
respondent continue consulting with a treating practitioner, for 3 monthly
review for not less than 12 months, and provide all
necessary consents to enable
the treating practitioner to report to the Board.
[2006] NSWPB 2
, the respondent admitted
professional misconduct, in the period May 1998 to October 1999, constituted
supply to the public of goods past their expiry date;
to record the supply of drugs of addiction in the drug
supply of drugs of addiction of prescriptions that were non-compliant with the
provisions of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
to retain prescriptions for prescribed restricted substances (steroids);
discrepancies
in the pharmacy records regarding the receipt and supply of certain prescribed
restricted substances and drugs of addiction;
a pharmacy assistant to enter information into and sign the drug register;
the subject of convictions of the respondent on 14 charges of not keeping drugs
of addiction stored apart from other substances
in a separate safe.
Board referred to the remedial measures implemented by the respondent in his
practice since the date of the breaches (p 7) and
concluded that the respondent
“has had substantial rehabilitation” and “has learnt the value
of open communication
with peers and colleagues and a mentor” (p 9). The
Board ordered that (pp 10-11):
respondent be reprimanded;
respondent undertake educational requirements involving the maintenance of
professional memberships, continuing professional education
and maintenance of
QCPP accreditation for the pharmacy for a period of 3
a period of 3 years, the respondent submit to an annual inspection/audit of the
policies and procedures relating to the receipt,
handling, storage and
dispensing of prescription only medicines and, in particular, Schedule 8 drugs
in his pharmacy and any other
pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary
interest; and
period of 3 years, the respondent utilise the services of an experienced
pharmacist, approved by the Board as a mentor, such
mentor to visit the pharmacy
at least 3 times per year and to provide a report to the Board of the issues
discussed at each visit,
within 1 month of each visit.
[2005] NSWPB 1
, the respondent admitted
professional misconduct
constituted by:
to record the receipt of various drugs of addiction, including methadone syrup
in the drug register and the failure to record
the balance of methadone syrup in
the drug register after each transaction, in contravention of legislative
requirements;
prescriptions for drugs of addiction which did not comply with various
provisions of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
supply to two customers of pethidine ampoules on various occasions between
September 1998 and June 2000 without a current prescription
or authorisation
and/or without an emergency prescription from a prescriber, in circumstances
where the respondent knew or ought
to have known that the customers were either
drug dependent or addicted to such medications;
supply to a customer between February 2001 and April 2001 of quantities of a
drug of addiction (endone tablets) in quantities
not in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards; and
to ensure that proper systems were used in the pharmacy to account for the
receipt, supply and disposal of drugs of addiction.
Board accepted the submission of the HCCC that the misconduct should be
“considered very seriously because it involves dealing
with Schedule 8
drugs which are dangerous and also because it occurred over a considerable
period of time” (p 10). The Board
ordered that (pp 11-12):
respondent be reprimanded;
respondent complete at least 30 hours of continuing professional education each
year for 3 years and complete the course “Drugs
of Abuse and Misuse I and
II” provided by the Australian College of Pharmacy;
respondent maintain professional memberships and QCPP accreditation for the
pharmacy for a period of 5 years;
period of 3 years, the respondent utilise the services of an experienced
pharmacist, approved by the Board as a mentor, such
provide a report of an annual inspection/audit of the pharmacy’s policies
and procedures relating to the receipt, handling,
storage and dispensing of
Schedule 8 drugs; and
visit the pharmacy on at least 3 other occasions in each of the 3 years;
6 months, the respondent undertake an Ethics Course from St James Ethics
Centre, being an individual program of not less than
[2000] NSWPB 2
, the Board concluded that the respondent had
engaged in professional misconduct constituted by:
properly to keep a drug register;
to keep an accurate inventory of drugs of addiction; and
to store schedule 3 medicines in an area to which the public did not have
Board held that the failure to maintain the drug register continued over a
lengthy period of time and demonstrated a serious departure
from professional
standards (p 3); that the potential for harm was “real and
extreme”; that the respondent had been
given ample time to rectify the
problems in the drug register but had failed to do so; and that “the
important role of the
drug register in the receipt and supply of schedule 8
medications cannot be underestimated in regard to the protection of the
(p 4). The Board ordered that (pp 4-5):
respondent be reprimanded and cautioned;
respondent attend a medical practitioner of the Board’s choosing, in
respect of the respondent’s suspected memory
problems, within
1 month, so as to determine his fitness to practise;
a period of 3 years, the respondent submit to 3 monthly inspections of all
pharmacies in which he has an interest either as a
proprietor or an employee,
such inspections to be conducted by an experienced pharmacist nominated by the
Board and to include examination
of the keeping of records relating to schedule
6 months, the respondent complete a module on “Purchasing and Stock
Control” of the Advanced Diploma in Community
Pharmacy Management offered
by the Australian Institute of Pharmacy Management and, within 3 months
thereafter, present a seminar
on this subject to 3 pharmacists nominated by the
1 month, the respondent submit to the Board a written policy relating to the
recording of the receipt and supply of schedule
8 drugs and that he make himself
available to discuss this policy with 3 pharmacists, nominated by the
Board, at a seminar on a date
to be fixed; and
respondent complete continuing professional education requirements.
[1996] NSWPB 7
, the respondent admitted professional
misconduct constituted by:
supply of morphine, pethidine and methadone, in the period June 1991 to July
1992, to a person with whom the respondent had a
personal relationship, and who
had a severe drug addiction, in contravention of the
Drug, Misuse and
Trafficking Act
to make appropriate entries in the drug register and the making of inaccurate
records, so that lesser amounts of the drugs
were recorded than were actually
to carry out the required inventory of the drug register;
supply of drugs without a prescription and in circumstances where the respondent
attempted to conceal his actions at the time.
Board observed that, in respect of certain of the conduct, the respondent had
received convictions in the Local Court and been
sentenced to a total of 300
hours’ community service (p 2). The Board described the
respondent’s conduct as “very
serious” (p 3). The Board
ordered that (pp 3-4):
respondent be severely reprimanded;
respondent be suspended from practice for 3 months;
completion of the period of suspension, the respondent be permitted to practise
only under the supervision of another pharmacist
until such time as he has
successfully completed a Pharmacy Board Review and satisfied the Board as to his
fitness to practise without
supervision; and
respondent fulfil specified continuing education requirements.
[1996] NSWPB 5
, the Board was satisfied that the
respondent had engaged in professional misconduct constituted by:
to record the receipt of a large number of schedule 8 drugs;
of several prescriptions which were more than 6 months’ old;
to balance the drug register in March and September each year, as required by
Poisons Regulations
This conduct had resulted
in the respondent being convicted in the Local Court of 56 offences under the
Poisons Act
Board said that “a major contributing factor” to the
respondent’s breaches of the
Poisons Act
was “a lack of
management competence”; and that it was “of serious concern”
to the Board that “the
system for control of drugs of addiction was
compromised by poor management skills and lack of planning” (p 4). The
ordered that (pp 4-5):
respondent be reprimanded;
12 months, the respondent complete a course of management training specifically
applicable to the business operations of his
respondent immediately seek and take advice from a reputable and competent
adviser or advisers, approved by the Board, regarding
the following aspects of
his pharmacy:
structure including a five year business plan;
and planning for the relocation of the pharmacy;
management and control; and
procedures and documentation of a protocol;
respondent provide interim reports to the Board, providing details of his
progress with each of the preceding, after 3 months
and 6 months respectively,
and a final report after 12 months.
these cases it may be seen that, as matter of principle, public interest and
consistency, it is appropriate for the Tribunal
to impose upon Mr Ng a
series of conditions which will ensure that he will continue in the significant
efforts he has made to reform
his practice.
Appropriate form of protective orders in the present
Ng respectfully submits that public safety would be protected and advanced by an
appropriate regime of mentoring, supervision,
education and audit.
appropriate form of protective orders would be to the following
respondent be cautioned and reprimanded;
respondent’s right to practise be conditional upon the appointment of a
mentor by the NSW Pharmacy Council to advise and
assist the respondent in the
management of his pharmacy practice for a period of 12 months, such mentor to
visit the pharmacy twice
weekly and to report to the Council once a
a period of 3 years, the respondent complete at least 40 continuing professional
development credits per year;
12 months, the respondent complete an appropriate educational course or module
identified by the Tribunal;
period of 3 years, an auditor appointed by the Council attend the pharmacy to
conduct an audit, at approximately 6 monthly intervals,
respondent’s practices relating to the receipt, possession, recording,
storage, supply and inventory checking of drugs
of addiction;
3 months, the respondent deliver to a panel of pharmacists selected by the
Council, a presentation on a pharmacist’s
obligations concerning the
receipt, possession, supply and recording of drugs of addiction; and
years, the respondent maintain membership of professional associations and,
within 12 months, obtain QCPP accreditation.
RESPONDENT’S SUPPLEMENTARY
SUBMISSIONS
THE 15 APRIL ‘AUDIT’
has been remitted is the determination of the appropriate protective order for
the professional misconduct that was found by
the first tribunal.
is important, therefore, to focus on what lead to that finding for the purposes
of determining what that conduct establishes present
that is done, it will be instantly appreciated that the misconduct involved many
things in combination, with particular emphasis
on three matters.
noted at paragraph 64 of the primary submissions, the misconduct found related
(Particluar 10);
(Particular 6); and
(Particular 8).
Alphapharm complaint related to the making of false or misleading entries. That
behaviour has not been replicated and there is
no basis for inferring that it
has continued based upon the 15 April ‘audit’.
Steroids complaint related to the supply of anabolic steroids on non-conforming
prescriptions. Again, that behaviour has not been
replicated and there is no
basis for inferring that it has continued based upon the 15 April
Hypnodorm complaint related to the supply of drugs other than in accordance with
therapeutic standard. Again, that behaviour
has not been replicated and there
is no basis for inferring that it has continued based upon the 15 April
Accordingly,
there is no basis for inferring that this conduct (regarded by the first
tribunal as “seriously unethical”
has continued or is likely to
recur. The conduct in respect of these matters occurred over the following
(October to November 2004);
(January 2003 to October 2004); and
(February to October 2004).
anything, the recent audit proves that this conduct has not continued and is not
part of any present practice of pharmacy by Mr
is no finding that the other matters complained of, separately from the
Alphapharm, Steroids and Hypnodorm complaints, established
professional
in relation to those other matters, however, the ‘audit’ establishes
that conduct has not been continued and is unlikely
audit was thorough.
Dolan’s evidence included the following:-
inspection continued for 4-5
the inspection a printout was obtained for the drugs supplied to the pharmacy
for the period from 1 January
inspection, accordingly, involved a review of records from 1 January
particular, the DD register from that
S8 prescriptions on the premises were all reviewed for
complete dispensing records for 5 patients were
‘owing’ report for S4, S4D and S8 medications was produced and
considered and regarded as being
satisfactory
records for the S3R recordable drugs, the pseudoephridine products, were
reviewed and seemed to be properly
product was examined for expiry
product was examined for compliance with height regulations for schedule 6
DD Register was compared to the stock in the
are a number of positive conclusions to be drawn from this.
with them in the order that the other conduct appeared in the
complaint:-
1: To the extent that a stocktake did not occur, it was because the pharmacist
in charge found discrepancies and did not
complete the task. There is no
suggestion that Mr Ng, because of illness, fell behind in his work and failed to
keep up to date;
2: This particular related to the regular failure to record the ordinary receipt
of drugs into the pharmacy. There has
been no replication of this
3: This particular related to the failure to record the ordinary supply of drugs
by the pharmacy. There has been no replication
of this conduct, although the
audit exposed mis-recording (using the ‘dispensing’ date as opposed
to the ‘supply’
4: This particular also related to a failure to record the ordinary receipt of
drugs and has not been replicated.
5: This particular related to supply on non-conforming prescriptions and has not
been replicated.;
7: This particular relate to the recording of psuedoephedrine and has not been
replicated;
8: This particular related to the supply other than in accordance with a
therapeutic standard and has not been replicated.
to all of these original complaints, Mr Ng sais his practise had changed. There
was no cross-examination to suggest that it had
not. The evidence of the audit
established, if anything, that change had occurred and that Mr Ng is capable of
learning and improving.
Returned medication
to Ms Dolan :-
returned Endone should have been put on a “page of destruction”:
T61.11, and quarantined: T61.13, in the safe: T61.18;
Endone were in separate boxes with a rubber band: T67.15
rubber band was put around the returned stock: T73.33, 166.26, 167.1, 173.28 and
possibly a note: T170.21, but Mr Ng accepted that
was unlikely: T171.8
use of the rubber band was the ‘usual’ practice: T73.39.
Dexamphetamine
to Ms Dolan the entry on 1 April could not be correct as there was then no
stock: T62.25.
the customer rang up, the prescription was ‘dispensed’: T73.4;
was not enough in stock, so an order was placed: T73.5;
stock arrived on 6 April: T73.6;
forgot to enter the dispensing into the book because of the date of
‘dispensing’ and the date of pick up: T73.8, 91.19,
made his record based upon the belief that he had to record the date of
‘dispensing’ rather than the date of supply:
did not make a record on 1 April because there was no stock wheresoever: T89.37,
90.3, 90.23;
now understood that he should have entered the date of supply: T90.41,
to Mr Mahoney the error was also that of Mr Lee: T258.6.
prescription was received and ‘dispensed’ on 25 March: T72.28;
‘dispensing’ was the clerical act: T223.32 and the process would not
have been complete until the pharmacist in charge
checked things and he only
dispensed in this sense: T224.18-47;
was found to be not enough in the safe: T72.30;
patient was advised to come in on Monday: T72.33;
Monday the stock came in and the quantity was entered in the register:
patient collected only part of the prescription on Monday because he lacked
funds: T72.38.;
was ‘dispensed’ on 25 March in the sense of being put through the
computer: T80.45, 81.40;
did not think that the entry for 25 March recorded ‘supply’: T82.10,
82.43, 85.35;
thought he had to enter the date on the label: T83.43;
accepted that he might have been wrong: T83.38;
the date of supply is what should be entered, he would make that the date in the
register in the future: T84.3.
to Mr Mahoney:-
error did not reflect a fundamental lack of understanding on Mr Ng’s part:
in fact made a record and that was part of his obligation:
was a misinterpretation by Mr Ng: T257.13;
was potential for confusion in what was required: T257.19;
was “a procedural thing not a fundamental error process”:
to Ms Dolan, one of the pharmcists should have had the key on their person:
was not aware of the requirement for the key to be kept on his person:
intends now to keep the key the correct way and had done so since: T78.43;
key was kept in a drawer within sight of the pharmacists and right next to the
dispensing computer: T79.26;
had only started putting the key in the drawer (for about 6 weeks): T119.39;
now had the safe key separate (and demonstrated that): T120.1
to Mr Mahoney:-
keys were secured: T256.29;
would have been attended to as part of QCPP compliance: T256.29
Out of date stock
to Ms Dolan, it took her two hours to find: T68.37.
was checked at the time of dispensing: T109.21;
were periodical checks of the shelves: T109.25;
proposed to request a shop assistant to assist with checking on a monthly basis,
in addition to the existing checking by himself
and the other pharmacist:
checking otherwise occurred on a ‘day to day basis’: T163.30,
to Me Mahoney:-
was no medication in the shop that was out of date: T255.31;
was a strategy to fix the issue: T255.41;
was a job description for the pharmacist charge that would have attended to
expired stock in the dispensary: T256.2
AustL or AustR
was aware that stock on sale had to have an AustL or Aust R: T77.19;
was unaware the stock lacked such registration: T77.30;
proposed to make sure in the future that the products had such registration:
of the items obtained from the Chinese shop had now been checked and had AustL
or AustR numbers: T115.14;
did not expect that any of the products would not have an AustL or Aust R number
especially when earlier purchases of other
products had had such: T155.12,
187.17, 188.15.
to Mr Mahoney:-
had been identified as something to be attended to: T253.46;
was not practical to attend to this at the time goods were shifted for the
renovations: T254.35;
don’t necessarily look to see if there is an AustL or Aust R when you
unpack the item: T270.42;
assume it has that level: T270.43;
were probably 50-100 pharmacies in Sydney that would not comply:
adequacy of his safe had never previously been raised with him: T80.12;
was going to mount a safe: T80.24, as a priority:
According to Mr Ng:-
spoke to Mr lee who told him that this had been done: T86.26; 87.18;
Lee had told him a few days before Mr Ng gave his evidence that he had found the
discrepancy in the Endone but did not enter it:
Lee had found that the Hynodorm was one tablet out and Mr lee wanted to find out
how the discrepancy had occurred: T87.22;
agreed that Mr Lee should have entered what he found on the audit: T87.3;
these matters had been brought to his attention by Mr Lee , he would have
investigated: T87.38;
Lee was the pharmacist in charge: T87.29;
Mr Ng accepted responsibility: T88.17.
to Mr Mahoney:-
primary responsibility was on the then pharmacist in charge, not Mr Ng:
Ng’s situation at the time was very different from that of the normal
relationship between a proprietor and the pharmacist
T252.42-253,23;
responsibility was that of the pharmacist in charge: T277.3
Warning labels
Hart was orally warned: T105.44;
was unable to recall whether the ancillary label was affixed:
could not find the label on his system: T106.7;
would make sure that the correct written warning was now given: T107.5
SOME RESPONSES TO HCCC
SUBMISSIONS
to the cases relied upon by the HCCC, the following comments are made:-
[1997] NSWPB4
practitioner’s misconduct was regarded as wilful (rather than
inadvertent);
No doubt this,
in part, stemmed from his belated submission defending his actions and accusing
the Board of ‘persecution’;
It was concluded
at page 4 that his “refusal” to comply showed
“contempt”;
practitioner showed neither insight nor capacity for change
[1999] NSWPB9
The practitioner
lacked insight and had failed to learn from his mistakes: page 1;
He had a long
history of supplying without prescription yet did that again “because he
felt sorry for the guy”: page 2;
practitioner’s conduct was characterized by “a lack of
insight” and he had “failed to learn fro his mistakes”:
The practitioner showed neither insight nor capacity for
[2002] NSWP1
The practitioner
supplied drugs without prescription at higher than normal prices: pages 1,
The practitioner
showed no remorse: page 1;
The practitioner
accepted that there was no excuse for his conduct: page 3
The conduct
continued for 2 years: page 3;
The practitioner
had been “evasive” in his evidence: page 3;
The supply was
in unmarked envelopes “in an attempt to conceal and cover up his
actions”: page 3;
The effect was
to sabotage efforts to beak drug dependence: page 3;
The conduct
involved “blatant flouting” and “unacceptable”
ethics”: page 4;
The practitioner
“does not appear to have any insight”: page 4;
There had been a
“blatant disregard for the well-being of a member of the public”:
The practitioner showed neither insight nor capacity for
[2002] NSWPB 2
The practitioner
initiated supply without prescription: pages 1, 5;
The practitioner
was not frank or honest with PSB officers: page 3;
The practitioner
admitted complete disregard for patient safety: page 4;
The practitioner
“neither appeared to have any insight into her actions nor to have
recognized the seriousness of her conduct”:
pages 2, 5-6;
The Board did
not regard the completion of some educational courses as establishing that she
had ‘pulled herself together’:
The practitioner showed neither insight nor capacity for
[2002]NSWDC1
appropriate to have regard to “remorse, change in attitude and change in
practice”: page 8;
There had been
“significant changes to the keeping of practice records”: page
There was some
prospect that the practitioner might re-offend: page 8;
appropriate to suspend for 6 months, rather than remove her name from the
register as done by the Board: page 9
The practitioner was regarded as demonstrating insight and capacity for
change, hence the different outcome.
[2009] NSWPHT 1
The tribunal
paid regard to the words of Kirby, P in
Law Society v. Foreman
the extent they address the encouragement of rehabilitation and importance in
utilizing to the full, the skills of talented
people”: paragraph
v. McGrego r
[1989] NSWCA 218
The conduct of
the medical practitioner was fraudulent;
The fraudulent
conduct had been repetitive and occurred over a period of 2 ½ years;
The likelihood
of repetition was acknowledged as a relevant matter, albeit not a determinative
matter: 2.46;
The fraudulent
conduct was regarded as demonstrating a failure to appreciate basic standards
and to be the kind of conduct that would
not be tolerated: 2.48;
Desai v. Rogers
was regarded as illustrative of the correct approach where there was fraud:
practitioner’s fraud contradicted the most basic requirements and involved
systematic abuse: 4.7
The facts were very different. The case is useful only to the extent that it
highlights the likelihood or repetition as relevant but
determinative
[2003] NSWDC1
The practitioner
had not learned the lessons of hos earlier malpractice: page 1;
The practitioner
was “reactive”: page 1;
evidence that the practitioner had set about responding to the decision of the
Board to correct inadequate practices: page
It was necessary
to have regard to these efforts: page 6;
Whilst there had
been “very real progress”, the earlier conduct had not been
“comprehensively eradicated”:
It was a mater
of concern that the practitioner “had not put his practice into proper
shape”: pages 8-9;
“striking” examples of the “incomplete process of
rehabilitation”: page 8;
There may still
be “undetected shortcomings”: page 8;
There was a
continuing indication that the practitioner “lacks refined management
skills” page 8;
The efforts made
by the practitioner were “inadequate”: page 11;
Nevertheless,
there had been “real effort”: page 11;
appropriate to deal with the mater by way of ‘strict supervision’:
The practitioner was regarded as demonstrating insight and capacity for
change, hence the different outcome
does not apply the
approach for medical
practitioners to pharmacists. In any event, the comments of Hope JA need to be
read in the context of the particular
conduct of the medical practitioner that
his honour was describing as “reckless” and showing a
“disregard to the
authority for the proposition that
“the public ought to be protected from the risk of a pharmacist repeating
any misconduct
that me be engaged in”.
Dr Klug gave evidence that:-
appreciated the importance of ensuring that entries in the DD Register were
appreciated the importance of complying with the auditing requirements of the DD
may well be a connection between Mr Ng’s ‘past difficulties’
and the absence of testosterone
problems have a “very
association with psychiatric
Ng did not use the illness as an excuse, it was ascertained by Dr Klug as a
result of routine inquiry of Mr
Klug’s impression was that Mr Ng had not been having injections as
frequently as he should have in the
could explain an extended period of
non-compliance
illness produced by panhypopittuitarism most commonly produces depression with
drive/initiative
Ng requires care by an endocrinologist, as well as a GP, for the
: Costs should be argued after the outcome is known. Costs should not
follow the event, regardless of the outcome having regard, inter
alia, to the
late service of evidence by the HCCC and the adjournment occasioned by that.
Mr Peter Ng, you have been found to have committed professional misconduct.
You have brought yourself as a professional and the profession
of pharmacy as a
whole into disrepute. You have committed errors of both omission and
commission.
Despite greater than twenty years experience as a pharmacist your lack of
discipline and lack of accuracy in record keeping (non receipting,
recording and
misleading entries in Schedule 8 register) coupled with poor stocktaking
(Schedule 8 products) demonstrate fundamental
flaws in your practice of
pharmacy. Committing illegal actions that have brought you in front of the
courts would lead any pharmacist
to be profoundly concerned that you should be
practicing as a registered pharmacist.
The inputting of thousands of false prescription records for the purpose of
even ascertaining the increased discount that may flow
therefrom coupled with
the supply of Schedule 8 medicines on legally non-complying prescriptions that
had substantial therapeutic
risks again demonstrates flaws in your practice at a
most fundamental level.
The non-recording and inadequate recording of sales of pseudoephedrine is
particularly serious as it is of great public concern and
risk and so well known
within the profession it is hardly conceivable that a practicing pharmacist
would not have full protocols
to ensure its safe distribution to the public.
The delivery of medications, including a Schedule 8 drug, to a patient in a
public hospital on 8 September 2011 demonstrated poor
professional judgment and
caused risk to the patient and interfered with his medical care. Inadequate
enquiries beforehand and lack
of notification at the time of delivery evidence a
totally inadequate understanding of the obligations of a pharmacist in the safe
dispensing of medicines.
You have gone to some expense to address these flaws. You have employed
consultants and despite their sincere efforts there is scant
evidence that you
have made fundamental changes to your manner of practice. The inspection by the
PSU in April 2011 in addition
to the evidence at the Tribunal leaves us
disappointed that your practice is so far below the accepted standard that you
to the public.
[2010] NSWSC 1220
; Orders paragraph 3 at Hearing Book Volume 1, page
To the extent
that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular, it is at
Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
149.3-150.2
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages 275.8,
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4 Tab
Hearing Book,
Volume 4, Tab 51 page
To the extent
that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular it is at
Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
150.2-151.6
Mr Vincent’s opinion (that the conduct showed gross incompetence) was
referred to at [15], there was no express acceptance
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4 Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
cross-examination of Mr Ng invited him to elaborate on how he had changed:
Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
163.8-164.5
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages
271.9-272.2
Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, page
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
extent that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular, it is
at Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
155.8-156.8
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
Book, Volume 4 Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
Tribunal asked questions at Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages 167.5-168.3,
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
extent that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular, it is
at Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages 156.8-159.1
(where he was not challenged
on the conversations he claimed to have had with Doctors Jackson and Cook and
where he said, without
contradiction, that he did not have the medical knowledge
to judge whether the high dose was suitable for relieving the withdrawal
symptoms of heroin: T157.7). Questioning by the Tribunal took place at pages
J said that the Tribunal fell into error in its rejection of Mr Ng’s
evidence about contacting doctors:
[2010] NSWSC 1220
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
extent that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular, it is
at Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
159.2-160.2
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages 305.2,
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 1, Tab 2 pages
124.8-125.4
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
extent that there was any cross-examination of Mr Ng on this particular, it is
at Hearing Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages
160.2-161.9
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 pages
Book, Volume 3, Tab 26 page
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 5, Tab 5 paragraph
Book, Volume 1, Tab 2, pages 161.1,
Book, Volume 4, Tab 51 page
Book, Volume 1, Tab J paragraph
Book, Volume 1, Tab J paragraph
held that the Tribunal erred in this regard, through a misunderstanding of Mr
Mahony’s evidence:
Adams, J held that the Tribunal misunderstood the purport of Mr Mahony’s
report: [28], [36]-[43],
appears to be a reference to Mr Ng’s evidence that he contacted Dr
Jackson, a finding that Adams, J held was not open on
the evidence:
Book – Volume 1 – Tab U, page 383 at
Book – Volume 4 – Tab 51
Hearing Book – Volume 1, p 82 at approx point 6, “I was under the
understanding that was not my
Book, Volume 4, Tab 48, page 160 [supply of
Betamethasone]
Book, Volume 4, Tab 48, page 160 [wholesale supply without a licence, keeping of
a Schedule 3 substance in a room with public
access, supply after expiry
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab
Book, Volume 1, Tab
Hearing Book,
Volume 1, Tab
Hearing Book,
Volume 5, Tab
Hearing Book
– Volume 1 – Tab P
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 1, Tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 1, Tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 1, Tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab
programme is set out at pp18-19 of the affidavit of Rory O’Connor dated 4
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle – Volume 1, tab
Respondent’s
Hearing Bundle – Volume 2, tab 8 at [103] –
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle – Volume 1, tab 9,
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle – Volume 1, tab 9,
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle – Volume 1, tab
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle, Vol 2, tab 2,
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle, Vol 2, tab 2,
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle, Vol 2, tab 2,
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle, Vol 2, tab
Respondent’s
Hearing Bundle, Vol 2, tab 8 at
Hearing Book, Volume 1, tab W,
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab
thought his last date was March 29 whereas Mr Ng said it was 5
Respondent’s Hearing Bundle – Volume 2, tab
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab 2 (page
in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
9 in Volume R2, page
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraphs
Exhibit 10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraphs 38,
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraphs
Exhibit 10 in Volume R2, paragraphs
Exhibit 10 in Volume R2, paragraph
10 in Volume R2, paragraph
Respondent’s
Book, Volume 2, Tab
third last paragraph. Dr Klug said in oral evidence that this was not an excuse
proffered by Mr Ng but his assessment based
on the history he
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 4,
Respondent’s Volume
Respondent’s Volume 4, tab 5, p
Respondent’s Volume 4, tab 5, para 12 to
Transcript 331:45 –
Respondent’s Volume 4, tab 5, pp
Respondent’s Volume 4, tab 5, para
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 4, p
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 4, p
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 4, p
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 3, p
Respondent’s Volume 3, Tab 4, p
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 6, para 4,
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 6, para
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 6, para 27-28 and Annexures D and E (pp 20-26);
Transcript 375:39 –
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 6, para 38-43; Transcript
395:04-396:02
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 6, para 44; Transcript 376:23-41;
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab
Respondent’s Volume 4, Tab 4, pp 1-3; Transcript 346:25 –
Hearing Book Volume 5, tab 3 (in particular at [85] onwards) and tab 5 (in
particular at
Hearing Book Volume 5, tab 4 at
Book Volume 1, tab 2 at
a matter Mr Mahony also made clear in his oral evidence: Transcript
See Adams J judgment at
Hearing Book, Volume 4, Tab 53, page
Book, Volume 4, Tab 45, pages
Hearing Book, Volume 4, Tab 45, page
Transcript 371:11-35
– about 90% suffer a psychiatric
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter