URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PNQ [2013] NSWGT 39 (12 December 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 39
(12 DECEMBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
12 December 2013 at regional NSW
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr Malcolm Schyvens (President)
Professional Member:
Dr Carolyn West
Community Member:
Ms Jennifer Newman
Guardianship – application for guardianship
order – brain injury - vulnerability – issues of accommodation and
care decisions - pending legal proceedings – legal services
function – guardianship order made appointing Public
Financial management – application withdrawn with
consent of the Tribunal.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 12 December 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian as Mr PNQ's guardian for a period of 12
months to make decisions on his behalf as required
and authorised the Public
Guardian to exercise the following functions:
Accommodation
To decide where Mr PNQ may reside.
To decide what health care Mr PNQ may receive.
To make decisions for Mr PNQ in relation to access to
legal services.
and Dental Consent
To make substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental
treatment, where Mr PNQ is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to Mr PNQ
Tribunal also consented to the applicant’s request to withdraw her
application seeking the appointment of a financial manager
to manage the estate
The applications and issues identified
is useful to repeat the Tribunal’s analysis of the applications and
arising issues as provided in the Tribunal’s prior
reasons for the hearing
conducted on 23 September 2013 whereby the proceedings were adjourned for a
period of approximately 2 months.
application in respect of Mr PNQ was lodged with the Tribunal by Ms FWW on 1
August 2013 seeking the appointment of a guardian
for him, and the appointment
of a financial manager of his estate. Ms FWW is Mr PNQ’s case manager.
She is employed by a Community
Service Provider.
PNQ, who is of indigenous background, is reported to have sustained a
significant traumatic brain injury which may be as a result
of a motor vehicle
accident. He sustained severe orthopaedic injuries in this accident which
occurred approximately two (2) years
FWW submitted in her application to the Tribunal that we should appoint the
Public Guardian as his guardian and the New South Wales
Trustee and Guardian
(“the NSW Trustee”) as the financial manager of his estate. At the
time of filing the applications
Ms FWW was concerned that Mr PNQ was making poor
choices, and that he may have been involved in improper use of his prescribed
medication, Oxycontin.
Tribunal notes that the following information was provided to it either in the
documentary evidence before it or at the earlier
hearing conducted on 23
September 2013 and was not contested.
PNQ was born on 13 August 1981. As earlier noted, he is aboriginal. He has two
(2) former partners with whom he is asserted to
remain on good terms. He has
nine (9) children from these relationships, and enjoys his children spending
time with him. It is asserted
that, as a result of his accident, his younger
children can only spend time with him if he has assistance. Mr PNQ’s
are said to be very important to him, and that prior to his accident he
had the care of some of the children.
PNQ is reported to have been educated to primary school level, leaving school in
Year 6 and never attending High School. As a young
man he is reported to have
travelled around Australia. He obtained qualifications to drive heavy
machinery. He is asserted to have
been an A grade footballer and to have played
for many clubs.
23 February 2011 Mr PNQ was a front seat passenger in a motor vehicle accident.
The car in which he was travelling is reported
to have hit a tree. He was
trapped in the car for some time, and conveyed by ambulance to regional Hospital
A where he is reported
to have had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13. He is asserted
to have sustained severe orthopaedic and internal injuries as a result of
accident. These injuries required his transfer to a Sydney Hospital on 4 March
2011. He was thereafter transferred to regional
Hospital B on 29 April 2011 and
to the Rehabilitation Unit at regional Hospital C on 24 May 2011 ultimately
being discharged on 31
August 2011.
his accident Mr PNQ received support from his mother with whom he resided, and
with whom he is reported to have had a close
and loving relationship.
Unfortunately, his mother died approximately twelve months ago. Mr PNQ’s
brother is also reported
to have died recently.
PNQ is asserted to have obtained public housing following the death of his
mother with the assistance of a social worker, Mrs NFG.
27 June 2013 Mr PNQ’s service coordinator from the Department of Community
Services reported that the provision of services
to Mr PNQ had been
“seriously impeded” by the presence of young males at Mr PNQ’s
accommodation. The service coordinator
Mr PNQ] meets them at
the door and says he is ok and the others call out that he is taken care of. I
have advised my staff not to
enter if he is not alone, as this area has a
reputation for bad dealings. The staff find [Mr PNQ] very polite and feel he is
intimidated
by the others in the house.
FWW reported on 25 July 2013 that she had been involved with assisting Mr PNQ
for the previous four (4) months. Following assessment
she asserts Mr PNQ
declined support from Aboriginal Home Care and the Aboriginal Medical Service.
At an unspecified date she asserts
she was made aware that Mr PNQ and other
young males in his house were reported to be using prescribed medication
illegally by melting
and injecting Oxycontin and morphine patches. A young man
is asserted to have overdosed at Mr PNQ’s property and been transported
regional Hospital B.
FWW states “
I then contacted [the regional] Police who say that they
suspect [Mr PNQ] is selling his medication although this is speculation and
PNQ] also reported his medication stolen.
FWW has contacted Mr PNQ’s general practitioner. The general practitioner
is asserted to express concerns about Mr PNQ’s
the hearing of the Tribunal conducted on 23 September 2013 the Tribunal
concluded that the proceedings should be adjourned
for a period of approximately
2 months. The adjournment was primarily due to the non-attendance of Mr PNQ, and
his sister, Ms TEC,
who the Tribunal understood had intimated that she might
wish to be appointed as her brother’s guardian.
further hearing was conducted in [Mr PNQ’s town] on 12 December 2013 to
facilitate the attendance of Mr PNQ and Ms TEC.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. Through
discussion with all participants as
to the nature and possible effect of a guardianship order, it is fair to report
that there was
ultimately no conflict in these proceedings.
Tribunal notes that Mr PNQ, together with a support worker from a disability
employment service, Mr ASD, and his Uncle, Mr LKJ,
arrived approximately some 15
minutes after the hearing commenced. The Tribunal recounted to the newly arrived
participants evidence
and submissions it had received since the hearing had
Tribunal sought the participants’ views as to the non-attendance of Ms
TEC, Mr PNQ’s sister. Ms FWW opined that Ms
TEC’s involvement with
her brother had declined in recent months and that in her last conversation with
Ms TEC, Ms TEC had
advised that she was “taking a step back” from
assisting her brother as she was struggling with some personal matters,
least of which were the relatively recent deaths of her (and Mr PNQ’s)
mother and a brother. Mr PNQ advised the Tribunal
that Ms TEC “could not
make it today” and did not disagree with the views expressed by the
applicant as to Ms TEC’s
non-attendance. Accordingly, the Tribunal
determined that there was no evident basis as to why the proceedings should not
as scheduled.
the hearing, Mr PNQ was a willing participant in the proceedings and struck the
Tribunal as being forthcoming and honest
despite clearly exhibiting that he was
challenged by the conceptual issues before the Tribunal.
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
GUARDIANSHIP
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to guardianship
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability
which prevents him from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Mr PNQ someone for whom the Tribunal
could make an order because he has a disability which prevents him from being
able to make
important life decisions
Guardianship Act 1987
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he/she is “a
person in need of
a guardian.” A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing
his or her person”
(section 3(1)
Guardianship Act 1987
). A person
with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation
(section 3(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
her application, Ms FWW states that Mr PNQ has a brain injury together with
physical limitations and part paralysis as a result
of a motor vehicle accident.
Tribunal had the benefit of a detailed report dated 26 March 2013 and authored
by Ms QWR, clinical neuropsychologist with the
a regional Brain Injury
Rehabilitation Service (NSW Health). In her report, Ms QWR notes that Mr PNQ was
referred to her for a clinical
neuropsychological assessment and that he
attended with Ms QWR for testing on 5 March and 22 March 2013.
terms of executive functions, Ms QWR noted that Mr PNQ evidenced marked
difficulties with executive functions and that he struggled
with planning and
organisation of material. She also noted that Mr PNQ was severely impaired in
tests of verbal abstract reasoning
and arithmetical reasoning.
QWR provides the following summary of her impressions following testing as
It is clear that [Mr PNQ] sustained extremely
severe physical/orthopaedic injuries as a result of the motor vehicle accident
in February
2011. It is not as clear whether he sustained a significant head
injury at the time. Some of the anecdotal evidence would attest
to this having
occurred, but the history has been confusing and there is no evidence of anyone
suspecting a significant TBI during
his admissions to four different hospitals.
If he had sustained head injury of the severity to have caused the major
cognitive disabilities
currently evident, this would presumably have been picked
up at some point during the initial recovery period? He would have had
sustain an extremely severe head injury to account for the level of cognitive
disability now identified. However, there is some
anecdotal evidence of change
and he was previously able to pass TAFE certifications and sustain employment in
various jobs. This
is purely speculative, but it may be that [Mr PNQ] was
previously fairly low functioning and that a less severe head injury has added
to the overall weight of impairment. It is [Mr PNQ]’s stated experience
that he has had more trouble with communication and
remembering since the
accident. Given the obvious impact of the accident, in causing such severe
physical damage to the rest of his
body, it would reasonable to assume that
there was also likely to be a level of brain injury due to
acceleration/deceleration forces,
but unfortunately the extent of this cannot be
accurately determined. No gross damage was evident on his CT head scan. It may
that his strong pain medications have contributed somewhat to his attentional
difficulties, but again are unlikely to account for
the range and severity of
impairments identified.
[Mr PNQ] presents with an extremely low level of cognitive functioning
overall, with current IQ scores well below the ‘borderline’
His memory and new learning abilities are limited, though there was some benefit
to repetition and to recognition cueing.
Language difficulties have been
reported elsewhere. Add to this the severity of his various physical
disabilities, it is my understanding
that [Mr PNQ] would be eligible for
acceptance by ADHC services. He should also receive a disability pension, as it
is clear that
he will not be able to return to open employment. Given that it is
two years since the accident, natural recovery that would be anticipated
following traumatic brain injury is likely to be minimal from her on though some
change is still possible
QWR proceeds to make a number of recommendations in respect of Mr PNQ’s
future advancement in life, and of particular relevance
to the current
proceedings, made the following recommendation:
nature and severity of [Mr PNQ]’s cognitive impairments would also make it
difficult for him to make considered and reasoned
decisions on important
matters. While he would clearly have a view and this needs to be considered, his
poor memory, language difficulties,
poor planning and problem solving would
potentially lead to poor decision making. Thus, he should have a ‘trusted
with him when he has to attend important appointments, for example
for medical specialists, financial or legal matters. [Mr PNQ]
needs not to be
pushed to make rapid decisions, but be able to discuss and have alternate
suggestions put to him. If a situation
arises where a major problem arises or
decision and [Mr PNQ] is felt to be ‘at risk’ or being pushed to act
that is counter to his interests, the current Neuropsychology report
would support an application for appointment of a substitute
decision maker
through the Guardianship Tribunal
Mr PNQ advised the Tribunal that he believed he was “
” he agreed that he has a number of disabilities which he saw as
primarily stemming from the motor vehicle accident.
evidence before the Tribunal was uncontested. It was clear to the Tribunal that
Mr PNQ had been severely injured in a motor vehicle
accident which has most
likely left him with an acquired brain injury to some degree. The question of
whether Mr PNQ’s current
cognitive impairments are a result of the motor
vehicle accident or primarily due to a degree of cognitive impairment which was
prior to the accident is immaterial to the Tribunal in determining the
applications. The Tribunal concluded that irrespective of
cause, Mr PNQ is
currently a person with a low level of cognitive functioning and is therefore a
person who has a disability which
prevents him from making important life
decisions. He is a person for whom the Tribunal could make a guardianship
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order and what
order should be made?
the Tribunal was ultimately satisfied that there was a current need to make a
guardianship order in respect of Mr PNQ, it is
perhaps most useful to examine
the evidence upon which the Tribunal relied to reach this determination by
virtue of each of the functions
of guardianship the Tribunal concluded were
required to be provided to Mr PNQ’s appointed guardian.
(a) Accommodation
it would seem that since the death of his mother, Mr PNQ’s life has taken
a turn for the worse. Mr PNQ made it clear
to the Tribunal that he was
still not over mum’s death
” and in his own words noted
the important role that his mother played in his life: “
happened when my mum was around as she controlled everything, she controlled my
meals, she protected me
Mr PNQ’s mother’s death, there was a need for him to find alternate
accommodation in the regional area. The
evidence of all participants to the
hearing could be best summarised in that Mr PNQ is living in an undesirable area
of [the town]
which results in him being particularly vulnerable to those around
him who regularly take advantage of his circumstances.
applicant, Ms FWW, advised the Tribunal that the most urgent matter of
rectification in Mr PNQ’s life, in her view, was
the need to find him more
suitable accommodation, as his current accommodation renders him especially
vulnerable and is volatile.
Mr PNQ concurred with the applicant’s views
and advised that he desperately wanted to move from his current location
horrible – the wrong end of
view, in turn, was supported by Mr PNQ’s uncle, Mr LKJ, who described his
current accommodation as “
a terrible place, full of druggies where
people fight all night, it’s simply not safe.
evidence before the Tribunal, with which all participants were in vocal
agreement, was that Mr PNQ’s current residence made
him the subject of
constant theft, in particular, theft of medications prescribed to him, and that
he was unable to resist people
who took advantage of him in this way.
Tribunal was satisfied that there was a current need for Mr PNQ to have a
guardian appointed with the function of making future
accommodation decisions
for Mr PNQ. Whilst strongly evincing an intention to move from his current
environment, it was evident to
the Tribunal that Mr PNQ was unable, due to both
his cognitive deficits and his financial predicament, to undertake the process
finding alternative accommodation in his own right. The Tribunal also
accepted the views of the participants to the hearing that
accommodation for Mr PNQ could result in a number of facets of his life
improving as outlined elsewhere in these reasons
for decision.
(b) Medical
and dental consent, healthcare and services
report provided to the Tribunal by Ms QWR, clinical neuropsychologist, provided
a number of recommendations to improve Mr PNQ’s
life, many of which could
be best described as forms of rehabilitation to assist him with overcoming the
injuries and deficits incurred
as a result of the previous motor vehicle
applicant, Ms FWW, advised that in the period that she had known Mr PNQ it was
clear to her that he was often in great pain as
a result of his ongoing
injuries. Mr PNQ confirmed this with the Tribunal and his physical presentation
at various stages during
the course of the hearing suggested that he was indeed
constantly in a degree of pain. The applicant expressed concern to the Tribunal
that it is her understanding that Mr PNQ has been without prescribed and
appropriate pain relief for his conditions for some period
of time due to the
refusal of local medical practitioners to provide him with pain relief on the
basis that his prescribed medications
often ended up in the hands of others to
whom Mr PNQ was vulnerable. Ms FGH, a social worker engaged in case management
since the start of 2013, agreed with the applicant that this was a
major problem for Mr PNQ and expressed the view that Mr PNQ had
effectively been
the subject of discrimination, that is, he was seen as being “
the druggie group
” and therefore was not being provided with suitable
pain relief.
PNQ confirmed that he was no longer able to receive prescribed pain relief, and
therefore, was often expending what little income
he had on acquiring substances
to alleviate his pain due to his inability to obtain prescription drugs for
Tribunal was satisfied that there was a current need for a guardian to be
appointed for Mr PNQ with the authority to make decisions
as to his healthcare,
the provision of services, and to provide substitute consent to medical and
dental treatment as required. The
Tribunal was satisfied that Mr PNQ was not
currently in receipt of requisite services and healthcare assessment and/or
to assist him in rehabilitation from the motor vehicle accident in
which he was involved. Of great concern to the Tribunal was that
Mr PNQ quite
clearly suffers from significant pain as a result of his injuries and has, for
some time, been unable to receive medical
treatment to assist in pain relief. It
was a clear that a guardian was necessary to be appointed for Mr PNQ to advocate
on his behalf
and to assert his rights to medical treatment and to appropriate
support services to ensure that he is the actual recipient of treatment
required, such as the administration of pain relief medications.
the Tribunal had no documentary evidence before it in relation to any legal
proceedings in which Mr PNQ was stated to be involved
concerning his motor
vehicle accident, the Tribunal was made aware that Mr PNQ had at times travelled
to various locations, including
Sydney, for the purpose of advancing unknown
legal proceedings.
response to the Tribunal’s enquiries, Mr PNQ advised that it was his
understanding that a local lawyer had been engaged to
take legal action against
the driver involved in the motor vehicle accident for “
claiming damages
.” It would be fair to say that Mr PNQ could only give a
very limited overview about the nature of the claim and the Tribunal
means certain as to whether indeed a claim was on foot, and if so, at what stage
the claim was at. Accordingly, the Tribunal
determined that there was a current
need for a guardian to be appointed with the function of the provision of legal
services to investigate
what, if any, claims are currently on foot in respect of
the motor vehicle accident involving Mr PNQ and to otherwise ensure that
proceedings engaged in, or commenced in, Mr PNQ’s name are in his best
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed.
earlier indications to the Tribunal were that Mr PNQ’s sister, Ms TEC, was
interested in seeking appointment as her brother’s
guardian, there was no
information before the Tribunal as at the time of the hearing that Ms TEC was in
a position to take on such
a role. Accordingly, the Tribunal not being aware of
any private person willing or able to be appointed as Mr PNQ’s guardian,
the Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian as Mr PNQ’s guardian.
How long should the order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one (1) year from
the date on which it was made. However, an order
of up to three (3) years can be
made, if the person the subject of the order has permanent disabilities, is
unlikely to become capable
of managing his or her person and there is the need
for an order longer than one year.
Tribunal decided to make an order for a period of one (1) year. A review after a
period of one (1) year will allow for an assessment
to be made as to whether the
appointment of a guardian has indeed made improvements in Mr PNQ’s life,
and if so, make a determination
as to whether an ongoing order is required or
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
the course of the hearing, the applicant, Ms FWW, advised the Tribunal that she
wished to withdraw her application in respect
of financial management.
applicant advised that she had had little involvement in Mr PNQ’s
financial affairs and could not expressly put before the
Tribunal evidence of
his incapacity to manage his own financial affairs. In any event, the applicant
advised the Tribunal that there
was a high probability that if the involvement
of a guardian over future months proved successful in terms of obtaining
accommodation for Mr PNQ, together with providing him with appropriate
healthcare and rehabilitation treatment, there would be minimal
likelihood of a
need for a financial management order.
Tribunal was satisfied that there was insufficient evidence before it at this
point in time to elect to continue to proceed to
hear the application. The
Tribunal consented to the applicant’s request to withdraw her application
seeking the appointment
of a financial manager to the estate of Mr PNQ.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (509 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter