URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
War [2008] NSWPB 5 (11 June 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 5
Kym Ayscough v Brian War
11 June 2008
The pharmacist was the sole proprietor of a small suburban pharmacy and
the subject of two complaints, one being a complaint based
on a conviction and
the other, a complaint of professional misconduct. The pharmacy had been the
fourth highest purchaser of Actifed
tablets in NSW in 2004.The conviction
complaint related to the pharmacist’s contravention of Clause 22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
regarding the supply on 3
occasions of multiple packets of pseudoephedrine based products to a police
undercover operative in late
2004 and early 2005.
The complaint of professional misconduct included the circumstances giving
rise to the conviction and alleged that such supplies of
pseudoephedrine based
products were made in circumstances where the pharmacist failed to ascertain
that each supply was in a quantity
and/or for a purpose in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards. The pharmacist had also supplied
pseudoephedrine based
products on a regular basis (up to 12 packets of Actifed,
30 pack size) to Mr Omar Hussein over a period of 10 months and from time
time Mr Daniel Grover over a period of 9 months, when he knew or ought to have
known that these persons were obtaining the supplies
for purposes other than
recognised therapeutic purposes and/or that they were “pseudo
runners”. These supplies were
also made in circumstances where the
pharmacist could not be satisfied that each supply was in a quantity and/or for
a purpose in
accordance with recognised therapeutic standards.
It was also alleged that on occasion the pharmacist supplied
pseudoephedrine based products to a customer, Mr Dawber, for the treatment
racing pigeons and that the pharmacist could not be satisfied that each such
supply was in a quantity and/or for a purpose in
accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards. The pharmacist had also supplied single packets of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets,
30 pack size on occasion to Mr Russ in
circumstances where it was alleged that the pharmacist had failed to satisfy
himself that
each supply was in a quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards. All the particulars of the
were admitted by the pharmacist as well as professional misconduct.
pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct in that he has demonstrated a
lack of adequate knowledge, experience, judgment
or care in the practice of
pharmacy and that he is guilty of other improper or unethical conduct regarding
the supplies to the police
undercover operative, Mr Hussein and Mr
Board is not comfortably satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that the
pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct in relation
to the supplies of
pseudoephedrine based products to Mr Dawber and to Mr Russ.
profession was on notice before the relevant period that pharmacies were being
targeted as a source of pseudoephedrine for the
illicit manufacture of
amphetamines. The pharmacist was aware of the procedures to be observed by
pharmacist for the storage and
supply of pseudoephedrine tablets.
determining the appropriate orders following a finding of professional
misconduct the Board has taken the following factors into
consideration:
a. The conduct was deliberate and serious, the first
step in a chain that leads to the supply of illegal and highly dangerous drugs
to the community,
b. The conduct was not isolated and took place over
almost a year,
c. the pharmacist admitted that he profited from the
sales and he was motivated by greed,
d. Lack of any real remorse in
relation to the effect of his conduct on the profession as a whole or on the
community. His remorse
was confined to his personal circumstances.
The references tendered on behalf of the pharmacist did little to assist the
g. The pharmacist is 70 years of age, a very experienced
pharmacist, close to the end of his career and does not intend to return
full time practise. The pharmacist continues to practise as a locum working 1
day per week.
pharmacist is severely reprimanded and fined $2,000. He is required to complete
within 6 months from the date of these orders
educative modules on Drugs of
Abuse and Misuse. He is also ordered to undertake an ethics course from St James
Ethics Centre and
whilst ever he holds a pecuniary interest in a pharmacy to
obtain and maintain membership of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Whilst
registered as a pharmacist he is to obtain and maintain membership with the
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia. The costs
of complying with these orders
are to be borne by the pharmacist.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 26 March 2007 into a
complaint of professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
(“the Act”) by Kym Ayscough, Nominal Complainant and
Registrar of the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales (“the
Complainant”),
against Brian War (“the Respondent”), a
pharmacist registered in New South Wales, formerly of Kench’s Pharmacy,
Wongola Crescent, Beecroft 2119 (“the Pharmacy”).
The Board of Inquiry dealt with a complaint dated 18 April 2006 (“the
Complaint”) as outlined in the following:
COMPLAINT 1
Respondent has been convicted in New South Wales of an offence under clause
22(a) of the Poisons and Therapeutic Regulation, 2002
Regulation”).
COMPLAINT 2
The Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct in that he
Demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, judgement or care in the practise of pharmacy
pursuant to section 19 A(a) of the Act, and/or
in other improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the practise of pharmacy
pursuant to section 19A(g) of the Act.
The particulars of the Complaint are:
COMPLAINT 1
the period 16 November 2004 until 10 May 2005, the Respondent supplied to a
police undercover operative named “Brad”
the quantities of
Pseudoephedrine based products set out in Annexure ‘A’ to this
complaint, contrary to clause 22(a)
of the Regulation.
7 July 2005 the Respondent was convicted of an offence under clause 22(a) of the
Regulation at Parramatta Local Court.
COMPLAINT 2
Respondent was at all relevant times the pharmacist in charge and sole
proprietor of the Pharmacy.
the period May 2004 to April 2005, the Respondent ordered from and was supplied
by pharmaceutical wholesaler, Mayne Group,
1204 packets of various
Pseudoephedrine based products, including 936 packets of Actifed, 30 pack size,
130 Telfast decongestant
tablets, 10 pack size, 66 packets of Zyrtec Plus
decongestant tablets, 10 pack size, 72 packets of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal
30 pack size and 38 packets of Sudafed Day/ Night tablets, 24 pack
at 27 May 2005 the Respondent’s Pharmacy had 3 packets of Actifed
30’s in stock, 6 packets of Zyrtec Plus decongestant
tablets, 10 pack
size in stock, 30 packets of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets, 30’s in
stock and no stocks of Telfast Decongestant
in the Pharmacy.
the period from November 2004 to March 2005, the Respondent supplied Mr Phillip
Dawber (aka Mr Keith Latimer) with 6 packets of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets
30 pack size on the dates listed in Annexure ‘B’ to this complaint
and on other occasions
from time to time, single packets of Actifed tablets, 30
pack size, in circumstances where:
Pharmacist was informed by Mr Dawber that the supply was for the treatment of
racing pigeons.
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets and an
active ingredient of
Actifed tablets.
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamine.
Respondent could not be satisfied that such supplies were in a quantity and/or
for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
the date specified in column one of Annexure ‘A’ the Respondent
supplied an undercover police officer named “Brad”
quantity of Pseudoephedrine based products appearing in column two of Annexure
‘A’ to this complaint, in circumstances
Respondent failed to ascertain that each supply was in a quantity and/or for a
purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient in all of the tablets referred to in Annexure
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamines.
the period from May 2004 to March 2005 the Respondent supplied Mr Omar
Hussein up to 12 packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack
size on a weekly basis.
the period from June 2004 to March 2005, from time to time, the Respondent
supplied between two and five packets of Telfast
Decongestant, 10 pack size
and/or Zyrtec Plus Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size, to Mr Daniel Grover.
supplies referred to in paragraph 6 and 7 above occurred in circumstances
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient of Actifed tablets, 30 pack size, Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablets,
10 pack size and Telfast Decongestant, 10 pack size and the active ingredient of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets,
30 pack size.
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamines.
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Mr Hussein and Mr Grover were
obtaining the supplies for purposes other than recognised
therapeutic purposes
and/or they were “Pseudo runners”.
Respondent failed to satisfy himself that each supply referred to above was in a
quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance with
recognised therapeutic
the period from May 2004 to February 2005 the Respondent supplied one packet on
the dates listed in Annexure ‘B’
to this complaint of Sudafed Sinus
and Nasal tablets, 30 pack size to Mr Ambrose Russ in circumstances where:
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is the sole active
ingredient of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets.
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamines.
The Respondent failed to satisfy himself that each supply referred to above was
in a quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic
THE EXHIBITS
The following documents were submitted to
the Board of Inquiry in evidence:
On behalf of the Complainant:
Exhibit 1 - One folder containing the following documents
dated 18 April 2006.
Certificate
under section 37(a)
Pharmacy Act 1964
Certificate
of Conviction issued by Parramatta Local Court dated 17 October 2005.
of Police Facts prepared by Constable Stacey Hessennberger for the local court
prosecution.
of Parramatta Local Court proceedings before Magistrate Garbett on 7 July
(2) issued under the Listening Devices Act 1985 dated 9 December and 29 December
Certificate
under section 27
Law Enforcement (controlled Operations) Act 1997
November 2004.
to conduct a controlled operation under
Law Enforcement (controlled
Operations) Act 1997
dated 16 November 2004.
of Detective Sergeant Nicholas Iorfino (3 pages).
check of PSE products undertaken by Mr M Power, a Health Department employee on
27 May 2005 at Kench’s Pharmacy and countersigned
by Mr War (1 page).
(7) dated 26 May 2005 and issued under section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Act 1966
for Demazin products, Sudafed products, Zyrtec Plus Decongestant
tablets, Telfast Decongestant tablets, Clarinase tablets, Actifed
tablets and
Logicin tablets.
War’s response to the
section 35(1)
Notices dated 6 June 2005 including a
report from Mayne Group and adjustment note summary and pharmacy dispensing
records (8 pages).
dated 17 August 2005 from Mr B Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser to Mr
record of interview of Mr War by Mr Martin Power and Mr Kenneth Thomson, Health
Department employees on 29 September 2005 (33
copy letter dated 14 September 2006 to Mr Albert Regoli and
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
- Schedule 7.
of Mr Regoli dated 18 October 2006 (13 pages) and Curriculum Vitae (1 page).
of Mr P J Freeman, Deputy Registrar, Pharmacy Board of NSW (2 pages).
from the Pharmacy Board Bulletin, August 1998 - “Storage and sale of
Pseudoephedrine tablets” and June 2001 -
“Pseudoephedrine
update”, Circular letter from the Registrar, Mr I Dean dated 20 December
1999 (2 pages) - “Matters
of public importance” and “Supply by
pharmacists of schedule 2 and schedule 3 medicines”, Circular letter from
the Registrar, Mr I Dean and the Chief Pharmacist dated 17 October 2001 “A
Matter of Public Importance - Compound pseudoephedrine
tablets”, Circular
letter from the Registrar, Ms K Ayscough dated 16 September 2004 -
“Pharmacy Initiative (Pseudoephedrine
Diversion).
Professional
articles including January 2000 Guild Bulletin extract - “Professional
misconduct complaints over inappropriate
pseudoephedrine supply”, August
2000 Guild Bulletin extract “Sale of Pseudoephedrine tablets continues to
be of concern”,
September 2001 Guild Bulletin extract “Compound Cold
Tablets”, March 2003 NSW Pharmacist extract “From Pharmaceutical
Service NSW Health”, March 2004 & 2005 Guild Bulletin extracts -
“Update from Chemical operations - Drug Squad, State
Crime Commission and
NSW Police”.
dated 19 December 2005 from the Health Services Manager, The Pharmacy Guild of
Australia, NSW Branch.
dated 15 December 2005 from the Branch Director, Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia NSW Branch.
On behalf of the Respondent:
Exhibit A – Bundle of Documents which included a certificate under
Pharmacy Act
, various character references and
letters and certificates of appreciation for community service.
The Respondent is 70 years old, having been born on 16 April
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 13
May 1958 and has since continually worked as a pharmacist
in New South Wales.
During the period the subject of the Complaints the Respondent was the sole
proprietor of Kench’s Pharmacy
at Beecroft (“the Pharmacy”).
The Pharmacy traded 5.5 days per week including half a day on Saturdays. The
was the only pharmacist on duty, with the exception of a locum
pharmacist on Thursdays.
The Respondent sold the Pharmacy on or about 19 February 2007 after being the
proprietor of the Pharmacy for approximately 15 years.
However, the Respondent
continues to do locum work at the Pharmacy on Saturday mornings.
In 2004 there were 1740 pharmacies in New South Wales. Notwithstanding the
fact that the Respondent’s Pharmacy was relatively
small, Health
Department records indicate that it was the fourth highest purchaser of Actifed
tablets in 2004.
During the period May 2004 to April 2005 (“the relevant period”),
pseudoephedrine was a Schedule 2 substance and as such
could be sold without a
prescription. However, pharmacists have both legal and professional requirements
imposed upon them in relation
to Schedule 2 substances. The legal requirements
are set out in the Regulation. Pursuant to clause 22 of the Regulation, a
specified in any schedule of the Posions List under the Regulation
must not be supplied in a quantity or for a purpose which is not
in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards.
The Pharmacy profession was on notice, prior to the events the subject of the
Complaints, that pharmacies were being targeted as a
source of pseudoephedrine
for the illicit manufacture of amphetamines. It is the Board’s practice to
publish a Bulletin from
time to time containing articles on professional
practice, Board guidelines and disciplinary reports. Every person who is a
pharmacist in New South Wales is sent a copy of the Bulletin. It is
dispatched to the addresses of pharmacists as notified in the
register of
pharmacists at that time. There is evidence before the Board of Inquiry that the
Board published Bulletins in August
1998 and June 2001 warning pharmacists that
they were being targeted by criminals as a source of pseudoephedrine for the
manufacture of amphetamines.
In particular, the August 1998 Bulletin asked pharmacists to apply the
following special procedures to the storage and sale of pseudoephedrine
“- Pseudoephedrine tablets in packs of 60 and 90 should be stored in
the dispensary and handed out only by a pharmacist who
is satisfied that the
product is in a quantity and for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards, and
- Attempts to purchase multiple packs of pseudoephedrine tablets in packs of
30 tablets should be referred to the pharmacist in charge
who, before handing
out the multiple packs, must be satisfied that the purchase is in a quantity and
for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards”
The Board also sent a letter to all registered pharmacists in New South Wales
dated 20 December 1999 warning the profession that it
was a requirement to
institute the special procedures “
immediately and without
In evidence is a letter from the Pharmacy Guild of Australia (“the
Guild”). That letter records that the Respondent has
had continual
membership of the Guild since he joined on 14 April 1981. That letter confirms
that from time to time the Guild sent
Bulletins to its members.
Behind Tab 19 of Exhibit 1 are copies of professional articles including
January 2000 Guild Bulletin extract – “Professional
complaints over inappropriate pseudoephedrine supply”, August 2000 Guild
Bulletin extract “Urgent Notice”
and “Pseudoephedrine”,
July 2001 Guild Bulletin extract “Sale of Pseudoephedrine tablets
continues to be of concern”,
September 2001 Guild Bulletin extract,
“Compound Cold Tablets”, March 2003 NSW Pharmacist extract
“From Pharmaceutical
Service NSW Health”, March 2004 & 2005
Guild Bulletin extracts “Update from Chemical Operations – Drug
State Crime Commission of NSW Police”. As a member of the Guild, it
is reasonable to assume that the Respondent would have
received these
publications from the Guild.
There is also a letter from the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia
(“PSA”). That letter records that the Respondent has
had continual
membership of the PSA from 1 January 2006. That letter also states that all
financial PSA members receive the periodical
the Australian Pharmacist and, when
it has been published, the NSW Pharmacist. As a member of the PSA, it is also
reasonable to assume
that the Respondent would have received the Australian
Pharmacist June 1996 and February 1998 editions, including the NSW Pharmacist
Supplement and information on Standards for the supply of Schedule 2/Schedule 3
medications.
In any event, the Respondent admits that he was aware prior to May 2004 that
those associated with the illicit manufacture of amphetamines
were attending on
pharmacies to obtain one or more packets of pseudoephedrine and that he was
aware of the special procedures required
to be applied by pharmacists in
relation to the storage and sale of pseudoephedrine tablets.
The first Complaint is that the Respondent has been convicted of an offence
under the Regulation in relation to the supply of pseudoephedrine
undercover police operative known as “Brad”. That conviction was
recorded on 7 July 2005.
The second Complaint concerns the alleged supply of pseudoephedrine based
products to five persons (including the undercover police
operative known as
“Brad”) by the Respondent in the following circumstances: Firstly,
in respect of the supply to each
person it is alleged that such supply was in
excess of ordinarily recognised therapeutic purposes and in quantities in excess
same; Secondly, it is alleged that the supply was made in circumstances where
the Respondent should have suspected or knew in relation
to three of those
persons that the pseudoephedrine products supplied were likely to be diverted
into the illicit manufacture of methylamphetamine;
Thirdly, it is alleged that
the supply was made between May 2004 and March 2005, by which time the
profession as a whole had been
on notice for a number of years that pharmacies
were being targeted by those seeking the supply of pseudoephedrine based
in order to use them in the illicit manufacture of methylamphetamines;
Finally, it is alleged the supply was made in circumstances
where the Respondent
was a very experienced pharmacist, having been first registered in 1958.
All of the particulars of each Complaint have been admitted by the
Respondent. However, the Board of Inquiry makes the following observations
relation to the evidence of the circumstances surrounding the Respondent’s
supply to each of the five persons:
Phillip Dawber (aka Keith Latimer)
It is alleged that during the period
November 2004 to March 2005 the Respondent supplied Mr Dawber (aka Mr Latimer)
with 6 packets
of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Tablets 30 pack size on the following
dates: 13 November 2004; 18 January 2005; 25 February 2005; 7 March
15 March 2005; and 21 March 2005, and on other occasions from time to time
supplied single packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack
The Respondent gave evidence before the Board of Inquiry that:
He did not know
Mr Dawber personally;
The first time
Mr Dawber came into the Pharmacy the Respondent asked Mr Dawber if the
Sudafed was for himself and he also asked “what
medical condition do you
The second time
Mr Dawber came into the Pharmacy he again told the Respondent that he wanted the
Sudafed for himself;
The Respondent
recorded the supplies to Mr Dawber in the computer so there was a full record of
the supplies to Mr Dawber for anyone
using the computer
He only supplied
Mr Dawber one packet at a time;
On a subsequent
visit Mr Dawber informed the Respondent that the Sudafed was for the treatment
of racing pigeons and he showed the
Respondent a letter from a vet;
He genuinely
believed that Mr Dawber was using the Sudafed for the treatment of racing
He did not know
that Mr Dawber was a Sudafed runner until he saw Mr Dawber’s photograph in
a Guild Bulletin and after that time
he did not make any further supplies to Mr
The Respondent’s evidence before the Board of Inquiry is
consistent with his responses in interview with Martin Power of the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the Department of Health on 29 September
The peer reviewer, Albert Regoli, in his report dated 18 October 2006 stated
that he disapproved of the Respondent’s conduct
in relation to the
supplies to Mr Dawber to a moderate degree and expressed the view that such
conduct would invite the moderate
disapproval of the general body of his
reputable and competent colleagues. Mr Regoli’s criticism of the
Respondent’s
conduct was essentially directed to the Respondent’s
failure to verify the vet’s letter and to check the suitability
The undercover police operative known as “Brad”
It is alleged
that the Respondent made the following supplies of pseudoephedrine based
products to Brad:
10 December 2004 Five packets of Sudafed Day/Night 30 mg tablets, each
containing 24 tablets
15 December 2004 One packet of Clarinase 240 mg tablets, containing 7 tablets
and two packets of Sudafed Day/Night 30 mg tablets,
each containing 24
14 January 2005 Two packets of Sudafed Day/Night 30 mg tablets, each pack
containing 24 tablets
There is no dispute between the parties concerning the lawfulness of the
undercover operation.
The Certificate of Expert Evidence of Detective Sergeant Nicholas Gerard
Iorfino dated 4 May 2005 that was in evidence before the
Board of Inquiry states
that from the quantity of the drug purchased by Brad, PSE could be converted to
4.9 mg of pure Methylamphetamine.
At street level purity (5%) this quantity of
the drug would be increased to 98 grams with a potential street value of $9,800
In the peer review report, Mr Regoli expressed strong disapproval of the
Respondent’s conduct and stated that he was of the
view that such conduct
would invite the strong disapproval of the general body of his reputable and
competent colleagues.
Omar Hussein
During the period from May 2004 to March 2005 the Respondent
supplied Mr Hussein with up to 12 packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack
The Respondent gave evidence before the Board of Inquiry that:
More often than
not he would order the drugs in advance for Mr Hussein.
That sometimes
he would wrap the drugs up for Mr Hussein in brown paper because there were too
many to fit in a normal chemist bag.
He was ashamed
He believed Mr
Hussein needed the drugs for the illicit manufacture of amphetamines.
He charged Mr
Hussein up to $25 in the last three to six months that Mr Hussein was attending
the Pharmacy, when he was charging normal
customers around $18.
He continued to
sell the drugs to Mr Hussein because he was making money out of it and that he
was greedy.
In the peer review report, Mr Regoli expressed strong disapproval
of the Respondent’s conduct and stated that he was of the
view that such
conduct would invite the strong disapproval of the general body of his reputable
and competent colleagues.
Daniel Grover
During the period from June 2004 to March 2005, from time to
time, the Respondent supplied between 2 and 5 packets of Telfast Decongestant,
10 pack size and/or Zyrtec Plus Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size to Daniel
The Respondent gave evidence before the Board of Inquiry that:
When Mr Grover
first came in he came in with four or five people who looked like they had come
Mr Grover told
him that he was going to use the drugs on his dogs and that he had a dog
At some stage
after Mr Grover’s first visit the Respondent formed the view that Mr
Grover’s request for pseudoephedrine
based products was not related to
animals but was related to making illegal drugs.
After he formed
that view he continued to supply Mr Grover because he was scared of Mr Grover
and he had a couple of break-ins after
In the peer review report, Mr Regoli expressed strong disapproval
of the Respondent’s conduct and stated that he was of the
view that such
conduct would invite the strong disapproval of the general body of his reputable
and competent colleagues.
Ambrose Russ
During the period from May 2004 to February 2005 the
Respondent supplied one packet of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets, 30 pack size
to Mr Russ on the following dates: 7 May 2004; 4 June 2004; 25 June 2004; 21
July 2004; 25 August 2004; 21 September 2004; 3 November
2004; 3 December 2004;
and 25 February 2005.
The Respondent gave evidence before the Board of Inquiry that:
He did not know
Mr Russ personally.
The first time
Mr Russ came in he had a real cold.
He genuinely
believed that Mr Russ was using the drugs for himself.
supplying the drugs to Mr Russ, he asked Mr Russ if he was on any other
medication and whether he had high blood pressure
or any other symptoms.
After he saw Mr
Russ’s photograph in the Guild Bulletin with the other Sudafed runners he
did not see Mr Russ again.
In his peer review report, Mr Regoli states that he was unable to
form an opinion in relation to the Respondent’s conduct concerning
As noted above, the Respondent has admitted all of the particulars of each of
the Complaints. In respect of the second Complaint,
the Respondent also admitted
professional misconduct in relation to the whole of that complaint.
Having regard to the totality of the evidence before the Board of Inquiry,
the Board is comfortably satisfied in accordance with the
standards enunciated
in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
that the Respondent is guilty of
professional misconduct in relation to the conduct complained of in relation to
the first Complaint.
In relation to the second Complaint, the Board is
satisfied on the basis of the Briginshaw standard that the Respondent is guilty
of professional misconduct in that he has demonstrated a lack of adequate
knowledge, experience, judgment and care in the practice
of pharmacy and that he
is guilty of other improper or unethical conduct in the practice of pharmacy,
insofar as the particulars
of the Complaint relate to the supplies to
“Brad”, Mr Hussein and Mr Grover.
However, the Board is not satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that the
Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct insofar as
the conduct
particularised in paragraphs 4 and 9 of the Complaint relates to the supplies to
Mr Dawber and Mr Russ. This is not fatal
to the second Complaint, as
paragraphs 4 and 9 are merely particulars of the second Complaint and taken
cumulatively with the rest
of the particulars of the Complaint, the Complaint
that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct conduct in that he has
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, experience, judgement and care in the
practice of pharmacy and that he is guilty of other
improper or unethical
conduct in the practice of pharmacy is made out.
In considering penalty, protection of the public is of paramount importance.
This protection is obtained by ensuring that those who
are unfit to practise do
not continue to hold themselves out as being fit to practise, and by ensuring
that high standards of practice
are maintained (Law Society of NSW v Bannister
[1993] NSW LST 6). The object of providing protection to the public includes
others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards
required of them (Law Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408).
However, it also
includes balancing the economic interest which is involved in utilising, to the
full, the skills of talented people
who have undergone years of rigorous
training but who may have misconducted themselves (McBride v Walton NSWCA
unreported, 15 July
1994 at 12; Law Society of NSW v Foreman at 409):
In determining what consequences or orders should follow from the finding of
professional misconduct, the Board has taken into consideration
(a) The conduct which is the subject of the finding of professional misconduct
was deliberate and serious;
(b) The fact that the Respondent engaged in this conduct as late as 2004
highlights the deliberate and wilful nature of his misconduct;
(c) The conduct was not isolated and took place over almost a year;
(d) The Respondent admits that he profited from the sales;
(e) The Respondent admits that his conduct was motivated by greed;
(f) The conduct can be seen as the first step in a chain that leads to the
supply of illegal and highly dangerous drugs to the community;
(g) The Respondent did not express any real remorse in relation to the effect of
his conduct on the profession as a whole or the
community more generally. The
only remorse he expressed was in relation to his personal position.
(h) The letters of reference tendered on behalf of the Respondent do little to
assist the Board of Inquiry. Those referees which
acknowledge having knowledge
of the Complaints, refer to the conduct as “a lapse...in the application
of professional judgment”
or “an unfortunate error”, which
would suggest that the referees are not familiar with the full background of the
Complaints;
(i) The Referees also refer to the Respondent’s “honesty and
integrity” and the high level of respect for the Respondent
community, but they fail to mention anything about what the Respondent has done
to restore such high regard following
on from such seriously flawed conduct. The
letters of reference also fail to mention anything about what has changed in the
Respondent’s
life since the events the subject of the Complaints that
would provide reassurance that the Respondent has seen the error of his
understands the potential consequences of his actions insofar as the profession
and the community are concerned.
On the other hand, at 70 years of age the Respondent is very
close to the end of his career and does not intend to return to full
practise. He has many years of experience behind him as a registered and
accredited pharmacist. The Respondent continues to
practise as a locum working 1
day per week at the Pharmacy. He also gave evidence at the hearing that he
wishes to make more time
for community activities.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, the Board, whilst concerned
that the Respondent is somewhat lacking in remorse in
relation to the potential
consequences for the profession and the community resulting from his conduct, is
not satisfied that the
protection of the public would be served by the removal
of his name from the register. However, for the reasons outlined above, the
Board considers the conduct to be of a serious nature and accordingly makes the
following orders:
War is severely reprimanded.
War is fined the sum of $2,000.
War is required to complete within 6 months of the date of these orders the
modules Drugs of Abuse and Misuse Part I and II,
provided and administered by
the Australian College of Pharmacy Practice and Management.
War is to arrange to undertake an Ethics Course
from St James
Ethics Centre. This course is to be an individual program of not less than 20
hours contact. Mr. War is required to
provide a report from the Centre as to
satisfactory completion of the program within six months from the date of these
ever Brian War is registered as a pharmacist he is to do all things necessary to
obtain and maintain membership of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia. Proof
of membership is to be provided to the Board within 28 days of his renewal of
registration each year.
ever Brian War holds a pecuniary interest in the business of a pharmacist he is
to do all things necessary to obtain and maintain
membership of the Pharmacy
Guild of Australia. Proof of membership is to be provided to the Board within 28
days of obtaining any
such pecuniary interest in a pharmacy and on renewal of
membership each year.
3, 4, 5 and 6 are to be completed at Brian War’s own expense.
The effective date of these orders will be one month following the
day on which Brian War is advised by registered post at his address
appears on the register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter