URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lin [2010] NSWPB 1 (8 June 2010)
[2010] NSWPB 1
Kym Ayscough v Kelly Lin
8 June 2010
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged the supply of large
quantities of pseudoephedrine based products to known and unknown
persons during
the period from 1 April 2003 to 8 April 2004, failure to record the supply of
pseudoephedrine products and making
false entries concerning the supply of such
products. The pharmacist was at that time the sole proprietor and pharmacist in
of a suburban community pharmacy. During this period the pharmacist was
alleged to have supplied Omar Hussein with over 2,000 packets
pseudoephedrine based products. It was alleged that the pharmacist had failed to
take adequate steps to satisfy herself that
on each occasion a supply was made
that such supply to Mr Hussein was in a quantity and for a purpose in accordance
with recognised
therapeutic standards. The complaint also alleged that the
pharmacist knew or ought to have known that Mr Hussein was using such
for non therapeutic purposes or that Mr Hussein was a “pseudo
runner”. The complaint of professional misconduct
also alleged the supply
of a large quantity of various pseudoephedrine products to unknown persons in
circumstances where the outer
packaging was removed and/or tablets were removed
from their blister packs. With respect to such supplies it was also alleged that
the pharmacist had failed to satisfy herself that the supplies were in a
quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic
standards. The pharmacist made a large number of false entries in her dispensing
records regarding the supply of Logicin
Sinus tablets, 30 pack size and failed
to record the supply of various other pseudoephedrine based products in the
dispensing records in accordance with the Director
General’s requirements.
There was also a conviction complaint,
which related to a conviction on 26 July 2006 against the pharmacist for an
offence under
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
. That conviction concerned the supply of false and misleading
information in response to a notice issued by the NSW Health Department
section 35(1).
Before the hearing the pharmacist admitted the particulars of
each complaint and admitted that such particulars amounted to professional
misconduct.
Board is independently satisfied regarding both complaints that the particulars
of the complaints have been proved to the requisite
standard and that such
conduct amounts to professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 19A
Pharmacy Act
conduct evidenced by the complaints amounted to a complete abrogation of the
pharmacist’s professional responsibilities.
Such conduct is of a very
serious nature.
making orders for the protection of the public the Board has had regard to the
rehabilitative steps taken by the pharmacist since
this conduct occurred.
However, the Board also remains concerned about the potential for the pharmacist
to be persuaded by family
members or aggressively manipulative persons such as
Mr Hussein, to act other than in accordance with her professional obligations.
The Board is also of the view that the pharmacist’s medical issues should
continue to be monitored.
Board ordered that the pharmacist be reprimanded for engaging in dishonest
conduct whilst performing her legal and professional
obligations as a pharmacist
and as a pharmacy owner.
pharmacist was ordered to submit operating procedures for the supply and
recording of Schedule 2 / Schedule 3 products and to
deliver a seminar to a
panel of pharmacists approved by the Board. The Board also made educative orders
involving the maintenance
of professional memberships, continuing professional
education and maintenance of QCPP accreditation for the pharmacy for a period
pharmacist’s practice was made conditional on the appointment of a
pharmacist mentor for a period of 6 months with reports
being made to the Board.
The pharmacist was also required to continue consulting with a treating
practitioner and to authorise regular
reports to be made by the treating
practitioner to the Board.
costs of undertaking and compliance with the Board’s orders are at the
pharmacist’s expense.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 30 April 2008 into a
complaint of professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
”) by Kym Ayscough,
Nominal Complainant and Registrar of the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales
the Complainant
”) against Kelly Lin (“
”) a pharmacist registered in New South Wales.
of Inquiry dealt with a complaint dated 22 May 2007 (the
”) as follows:
The Respondent has been convicted in NSW of an offence under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act,
Particulars of Complaint One
May 2004 the Respondent supplied information
in answer to a Notice under
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic
, 1966 concerning Pseudoephedrine based tablets, which information,
the Respondent knew was false and misleading in a material manner,
contrary to
Section 35(4)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
26 July 2006 the Respondent was convicted of an offence under
Section 35(4)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
, 1966 at Hornsby Local Court.
5 October 2006, the Respondent’s severity appeal was dismissed and her
conviction was confirmed.
COMPLAINT TWO:
The Respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct in that she has:
i. Demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, experience, judgement or care in
the practice of pharmacy pursuant to section 19A(a)
of the Act, and/or:
in other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy
pursuant to section 19A(g) of the Act.
Particulars of Complaint Two:
Respondent was at all relevant times, the pharmacist in charge and the sole
proprietor of the Pharmacy.
the period 1 April 2003 to 8 April 2004 (the “
”), the Respondent ordered from and was supplied by
pharmaceutical wholesalers, Australian Pharmaceutical Industries Limited,
Limited t/as Sigma, a total of 6,464 packs of pseudoephedrine based products,
a. 906 packs of Actifed Tablets, 30 pack size;
b. 1,873 packs of Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size;
c. 2,372 packs of Telfast Decongestant, 10 pack size;
d. 1,232 packets of Zyrtec Plus Decongestant Tablets, 10 pack size;
e. 72 packets of Chemist Own Sinus Relief Tablets, 30 pack size; and
packets of Demazin 6 Hour Tablets, 30 pack size and 3 packs of Demazin Sinus
Tablets, 30 pack size.
at 8 April 2004 the Respondent’s Pharmacy had no stock of Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size, no stocks of Demazin
Sinus tablets, 30 pack
size and no stocks of Chemist Own Sinus Relief, 30 pack size in the Pharmacy.
As at 8 April 2004, the Respondent’s
Pharmacy had:
a. 11 packs
of Telfast Decongestant, 10 pack size;
b. 84 packs of Actifed Tablets, 30 pack size;
c. 1 packet of Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size.
the period from 1 November 2003 until 31 January 2004 the Respondent’s
Pharmacy supplied Mr Omar Hussein up to 200 packets
at a time of various
Pseudoephedrine based products including Telfast Decongestant Tablets, 10 pack
size and/or Actifed Tablets,
30 pack size and/or Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack
size up to a total of about 2,000 packets of pseudoephedrine based products, in
circumstances where:
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient of Telfast Decongestant Tablets, Actifed Tablets
and Logicin Sinus
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor substance used in the illicit manufacture
amphetamines;
Respondent failed to take any or any adequate steps to satisfy herself that each
supply referred to above was in a quantity and/or
for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards;
Respondent knew or ought to have known that Mr Hussein was obtaining the
supplies for purposes other than recognised therapeutic
purposes and/or that he
was a “pseudo-runner”.
a Health Department employee’s inspection of the Pharmacy on 10 February
2004, the Respondent made 831 false entries
in the Pharmacy’s dispensing
records for Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size contrary to clause 173(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Respondent’s Pharmacy supplied the following pseudoephedrine based
products, a total of 3,754 packets, to unknown persons;
packets of Telfast Decongestant Tablets, 10 pack size;
packets of Zyrtec Plus Decongestant Tablets, 10 pack
packets of Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size;
packets of Actifed Tablets, 30 pack size; and
packets of Chemists Own Sinus Relief Tablets, 30 pack size.
supplies referred to in the previous paragraph were made in circumstances
Respondent did not record the supply of the products referred to in paragraphs
c. and e. above;
manufacturer’s outer packaging was removed from these products and/or
tablets were removed from their respective blister
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient of all the products referred to in the proceeding
Respondent know or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor substance used in the illicit manufacture
of amphetamine;
Respondent failed to satisfy herself that such supplies were in a quantity
and/or for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic
the relevant period the Respondent did not record, in a matter approved by the
Director-General, the details of the supply
of pseudoephedrine products, namely,
up to 1,835 packets of Logicin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size and 72 packets of
Chemists Own Sinus
Relief Tablets, 30 pack size in accordance with clauses 23(2)
and 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
THE EXHIBITS
Documents were submitted to the Board of
Inquiry in evidence:
On behalf of the Complainant:
Exhibit 1 - Tabulated folder containing the
documents including the complaint, transcripts from the Local Court and District
proceedings, a certificate of pharmacist registration, stock checks for
pseudoephedrine based products at the pharmacy, notices issued
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
and Ms Lin’s
response to such notices, peer review evidence and media releases and articles
regarding pseudoephedrine products.
On behalf of the Respondent:
Exhibit A - Tabulated folder containing
statements from Ms Lin and other parties, references and certificates,
correspondence concerning
the supply of pseudoephedrine based products and
medical reports.
Evidence was given before the Board by the Respondent, Doctor Sam Borenstein,
Clinical Psychologist and Ms Pao Chu Wen, the Respondent’s
The Respondent was born in Burma on 9 September 1977.
She obtained her pharmacy qualifications from the University of Sydney and
subsequently registered as a pharmacist in April 1999. As an employed
pharmacist, the Respondent worked in a number of community
pharmacies. In
February 2003, the Respondent purchased Taylors Pharmacy at Turramurra. As at
the date of hearing, the Respondent
remained the sole proprietor of that
pharmacy. According to the register of pharmacies, the Respondent has no other
pharmacy ownership
During the relevant period, the Respondent had no regular staff and was the
pharmacist in charge. The Respondent had one to two pharmacy
assistants and her
parents also helped out in the Pharmacy from time to time.
The Pharmacy traded 5.5 days per week - on week days from 8.30am to 6.30pm
and on Saturdays from 9am to 2pm. The Pharmacy dispensed
prescriptions per day. The applicable pharmacy dispensing software was FRED and
it was used for recording the supply
of pseudoephedrine products to the public.
At the relevant time the Respondent’s wholesale suppliers where Australian
Pharmaceutical
Industries Limited (API) and QDL Limited t/as Sigma. The
Board’s enquiries show the Respondent was a member of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia (NSW branch) since 30 July 1997 and her membership of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia dated from 9 October 2003.
The Respondent through her counsel, admitted each and
every particular of Complaint One and Complaint Two and that such conduct
to professional misconduct within the meaning of the Act.
The complaints concern events in 2003-2004. There are
five main areas of complaint.
Firstly, the Respondent was convicted in the Local Court of an offence under
section 34(5)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
, 1966 in that she
provided information that she knew was false and misleading to the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch in response to
a notice. That information was in
respect of records the Respondent said were legitimately made in relation to
recording various
pseudoephedrine based products. The Respondent was convicted
of that offence after a plea of guilty, she was fined $500 and ordered
Court costs of $67.
The Respondent then appealed to the District Court as to the severity of the
penalty and that appeal was heard and determined by Judge
Freeman on 5 October
2006. The Respondent’s counsel pressed for a
, however, his
Honour ultimately dismissed the appeal and confirmed the conviction and the
Magistrate’s orders. The Board also
notes the following comments made by
Judge Freeman:
“I understand that the
[Respondent]
, on the material before
me, was somewhat overpowered in the way in which she managed the shop she owned,
the record keeping that
was required of her, perhaps because of some confusion,
perhaps because she was in some diminished state emotionally and
psychologically.
If I were dealing with the offence of failing to keep the
proper records I probably would deal with the offence under
thing that troubles me most is that however she got herself into this situation
when the investigation started, according
to her own answer, the first thing she
thought of doing was being dishonest. If that is her first choice I don’t
think I should,
in the circumstances, apply the section.”
The second area of complaint is in relation to the supply of pseudoephedrine
based products. During the period 1 April 2003 to 8 April
2004 the Respondent
ordered 6,464 packets from wholesalers (particularised in 2 of Complaint 2).
However, as at 8 April 2004 the
Respondent only had 96 packets in the shop
(particularised in 3 of Complaint Two). Importantly, from about 1 November 2003
January 2004 the Respondent admits that she supplied Omar Hussein, a known
pseudo runner, with up to 200 packets at a time of various
pseudoephedrine based
products up to a total of about 2,000 packets. The Respondent admitted in
evidence that she was aware from
started supplying Mr Hussein with pseudoephedrine products, that pseudo runners
using pseudoephedrine products for the illicit manufacture of
methylamphetamine and that such activity was the basis for the rescheduling
certain packets of pseudoephedrine from Schedule 2 to Schedule 3R.
The Respondent also gave evidence that on the last occasion that she supplied
Mr Hussein, in or about late 2003, she supplied him
with about 1,300
packets of pseudoephedrine packets with a value of approximately $20,000. The
Respondent said that Mr Hussein attended
at the shop during opening hours,
although there were no customers or other staff in the shop with her at that
time. She then handed
over the packets in two to three green or black large
garbage bags. The Respondent was not paid on this occasion and Mr Hussein
walked out dragging two to three very large garbage bags full of pseudoephedrine
products. The Respondent gave evidence that she
did not see Mr Hussein again and
that she did not attempt to follow up payment from him or to contact the police,
Pharmacy Board,
the Guild or the Society. The Respondent said that she was
scared that Mr Hussein or one of his associates might try to hurt her
The Third area of complaint is that the Respondent made 831 false entries in
the dispensing records for Logicin, contrary to the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
. It is the making of those false entries which is related
to the conviction.
The fourth area of complaint is that the Respondent supplied 3,754 packets of
pseudoephedrine products to unknown persons. This area
of complaint arises in
the most extraordinary circumstances.
In the Respondent’s reply to the Chief Pharmacist at the Department of
Health NSW dated 27 April 2004 (which enclosed the admitted
falsified records)
she stated:
It also includes the documents in regard to the doctors from
Myanmar requesting the cold and flue (sic) relief medications to supply
patients in Myanmar over the bad winter last year. As you are aware that the
pharmaceutical products in Myanmar are unreliable
and predominantly ineffective.
I was asked to help. The doctors in Myanmar who had asked my help are not
strangers but are good friends
of my relatives in Myanmar. I was reassured about
the credibility of those doctors and also supplied with the confirmation that
products had be safely received
The Respondent also included the following letters from the alleged Myanmar
doctors with her response:
Letter from Dr Tun Myat, M.B.B.S. (Ygn) to Miss Kelly Lin dated 12 August
I am Dr Tun Myat form (sic) Myanman (Ex-Burma). Your family and relatives
are patients of mine. Your cousin had mentioned to me that
you own a pharmacy in
Sydney, Australia. This year in Myanmar we are having very cold and wet weather,
which is very unusual from
every other years. My colleges (sic) and I have
surgeries in Yangoon and some parts of Myanmar and we desperately need cold and
medicines. We have cold and flue (sic) medications from China and India but
these are sub-therapeutic and not very pure and I find
them quite ineffective.
Therefore I am asking you if you can send medications with following active
ingredients (1) Cetirizine,(2)
Triprolidine, (3) Fexofenadine, and (4)
Pseudoephedrine before we have many people experiencing this very cold winter in
Since people in Myanmar have hepatitis A, B and C in most cases, thus I
will be grateful if you can send preparations that do not
contain Paracetomol,
which is hepatoxic. My colleges (sic) and I will be supervising patients in
taking these medications and I will
take full responsibility in ensuring safety
usage. I will need the above medications for about 300 patients to last for one
It would be a great advantage if you could send the first lot before we
enter the winter in Myanmar? One (sic) I’ve received
these medications I
will sign to prove that I received all medications and that these medications
have not gone anywhere else
Letter from Dr Tun Myat to Ms Kelly Lin dated 6 February 2004:
Dear Kelly,
I am writing to confirm that I have received the following
(a) Telfast Decongestant (to tablets/pack) x 1,200
(b) Zyrtec Plus Decongestant (10 tablets/pack) x 700
(c) Actifed (30 tablets/packs) x 300
(d) Logicin Sinus Tablets (30 tablets/packs) x 900
Your kind help is greatly appreciated, especially at this time of the cold
season. The medicines you had sent are not only efficacious
but also well
tolerated by our patients. Thanks again and if you need anything from Myanmar,
do not hesitate to ask.”
The Board notes that the letter referred to above purports to pre-date the
first visit of Mr Bruce Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical
Department of Health NSW on 10 February 2004. However, according to the evidence
that the Respondent gave at the hearing
she only realised the seriousness of the
matter after Mr Battye attended at her pharmacy and it was only after that visit
told her mother to call her cousin to obtain letters from the doctors
to confirm receipt of the medicines and after that there were
no requests for
further deliveries. Accordingly, at the very least, there is serious doubt cast
upon the date this letter was actually
Letter from Dr Min Swe to Ms Kelly Lin dated 30 July 2003
I hope that you have already heard about me through your cousin in
Myanmar. I am a good friend of your cousin, Tint Lwin, and he mentioned
that you are running your own pharmacy in Sydney, Australia. I need to ask you a
favour. I have been trying to acquire cold
and flu medications that are
efficacious and safe. Most of the cold and flu medications that are currently
available in Myanmar
come from neighbouring countries and I have reserve over
their effectiveness and safety.
I have been using cold and flu preparations containing Pseudoephedrine and
H,-antagonists, thus it will be more appropriate if you
could send me cold
preparations with those ingredients. Moreover, if it is possible, I would prefer
to use preparations that do not
contain Paracetomol because of its potential
toxic effect on the liver.
I would be grateful if you could send the cold and flu preparations from
Australia. I am looking forward to hear from you and your
appreciated
Letter from Dr Min Swe to Ms Kelly Lin dated 15 February 2004:
Thanks for your help. As you have requested the following is a
summary list of the pharmaceutical products I have received up to
1. Zyrtec Plus Decongestant x 77 packs
2. Telfast Decongestant
x 250 packs
3. Chemist-owned Sinus Relief x 72
4. Logicin Sinus Tablets x 100 packs
5. Actifed x
Thanks again for your help and the medicines you had sent had been very
useful throughout the winter. Your generosity will be appreciated
and if I could
The Respondent was asked by the Chairman at the hearing about the English
skills of Doctors in Burma. The Respondent gave evidence
that they have good
written English but they have problems with speaking and hearing and listening.
She further advised that it is
quite usual to obtain correspondence in English
from the people she deals with in Burma.
When the Respondent was interviewed on 3 March 2006 by Alex Gavrilovic, an
officer of the New South Wales Department of Health, Mr
Gavrilovic put to the
Respondent that what really happened here was:
“...you’ve sold these 100 packets to pseudo runners like Omar
and that this Myanmar thing is just a way of explaining
where this 1000 packets
have gone, isn’t that - isn’t that really the story?”
The Respondent denied this proposition.
At the hearing the Respondent gave evidence that the first contact that she
had in relation to the medicines to be supplied to Burma
was through her mother,
Pao Wen. The Respondent stated that her mother received a call from her cousin
in Burma, Tint Lwin, in or
conversation about medications to be supplied. The Respondent says that she then
her mother to get the doctors to write to her stating the medication they
required. The Respondent says that her mother subsequently
showed her the letter
from Dr Min Swe dated 30 July 2003. The Respondent read the letter but then
nothing happened for three or four
months because they did not receive any
further phone call from her cousin regarding who was visiting Australia. Then,
to the Respondent’s evidence, about the end of October beginning
of November 2003, her mother received a call from her cousin
saying that his
friend from Burma would be visiting Australia and that he would give the
Respondent’s mother’s contact
number to the visitor to contact them
when he arrived in Australia. The Respondent gave evidence that when the visitor
arrived in Australia he called her mother and asked when and where he
could pick up the medications for Tint Lwin, so her mother
gave the visitor the
pharmacy address and asked them to come after business hours. This apparently
went on every time a visitor came
from Burma to collect medicines from the
Respondent’s pharmacy, for the period November 2003 to February 2004, when
of the NSW Department of Health alerted the Respondent to her
obligation to keep proper records of supplying pseudoephedrine based
The Respondent gave evidence that she did not speak to her cousin, Dr Swe or
Dr Myat personally. She also gave evidence that she did
not investigate
their credentials or the doctors’ practices “
purely because
”. However, the Respondent had
never met this cousin and her mother had only met him on about 3 occasions prior
to coming to
The letters the Respondent received from the doctors in Burma did not make
reference to the quantity of medications, the price they
were prepared to pay or
how the medicines were to be supplied or received. The Respondent gave evidence
at the hearing that in order
to determine the quantity to be supplied she
by the number of people that is likely to get
sick in Burma
The Respondent was also asked during cross-examination about the reference in
Dr Myat’s letter of 12 August 2003 to 300 patients,
however, she denied
that she had regard to that figure and said that she determined the quality of
what to send to Dr Myat in the
same way as she determined how much to send to Dr
Swe and said “
I wanted to help and send as much as I could to
”. She has admitted that she sent more than what Dr Swe
When asked during cross-examination “
What was as much as you
the Respondent answered that it depended upon the number of
people visiting Australia from Burma. The Respondent gave evidence that
received visitors on four occasions that came and went back, two of which were
families - meaning more than one person. The Respondent
gave evidence that the
amount each visitor could bring back was dependent upon what other luggage they
also had to take back, but
she estimated based on her own travel experience that
each visitor would probably be able to take back two suitcases.
Further, the Respondent and her mother both gave evidence at the hearing that
the Respondent took the medicines home and they, together
Respondent’s father, Robert Lin, removed all of the medicines from the
original blister packs and placed the single
tablets into jars. The Respondent
gave evidence that the smallest jar that was used for this exercise was a
glucosamine jar that
usually contained approximately 200 capsules of
glucosamine. She also gave evidence that they also used the jar that would
be used for aqueous cream and sorbolene cream, about 500 gm and also
protein powders jars, which hold approximately 1 kilogram. The
Respondent gave
evidence that she put a pharmacy blank label on each of the jars and wrote the
brand name, together with the medical
name, the generic name, and strength and
the expiry date.
Given the Respondent’s description of how the medicines were supplied,
it is quite remarkable Dr Swe and Dr Myat refer to the
receipt of packets in
their letters. The Respondent also conceded during cross-examination that the
medicines she was providing were
not available in the same form and packaging in
Burma as Australia. However, the Respondent also gave the following
explanation:
When my mother spoke to my cousin in Burma, she, my mother, has to
know how much to ask for from the two doctors. Therefore, because
invoices and statements come per packet, my mother simply gave my cousin number
of tablet, how many pack, price per pack,
to Tint Lwin, my cousin
However, the Respondent also said that she was not in her mother’s
presence when this conversation apparently took place.
The Respondent also gave evidence that the cost price of the medicines she
supplied to the doctors in Burma was approximately $25,000.
apparently gave the cousin details of the number of packets and price per packet
so that he could get the money from the
two doctors to pay for the medicines.
The Respondent gave evidence that she believed that the doctors had paid for the
and that money was being held in her cousin’s bank account in
Burma. She also gave evidence, as did her mother, the father,
Robert Lin, has
had access to those funds when he has travelled to Burma and that the money has
also been used to look after his
mother in Burma. The Respondent’s mother
was asked at the hearing if she ever enquired of Tint Lwin about how much money
in the account to which she replied:
I never ask him and my husband - I never ask my husband
It was put to the Respondent during cross-examination that the evidence she
had given as to the circumstances in which she supplied
the medications to the
doctors in Burma, including the circumstances in which she said that she
expected payment, were not correct.
The Respondent answered: “
statement about sending the tablets to the two doctors in Burma, that is all
Further, notwithstanding the $20,000 worth of medicines that the Respondent
handed over to Mr Hussein in or about late 2003 without
payment, according to
her evidence she generously supplied approximately $25,000 worth of medicines
during the period November 2003
to February 2004 to the doctors in Burma which
did not result in any direct payment to the Respondent or to her pharmacy
- the money apparently being held in her cousin’s bank account in
Burma. The Respondent also gave evidence that during the
financial year 2003 to
2004 she paid herself about $50,000 after tax that year and that the pharmacy
made a profit of about $150,000.
The Board’s findings in relation to Professional
In considering the complaints before it, the Board needs to be
satisfied to the standard articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of
probabilities, but that having regard to the serious nature of the charge and
consequences, the satisfaction cannot be produced by “
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect references
As noted above, the Respondent has already admitted the particulars of
Complaints One and Two and that such conduct amounts to professional
misconduct.
Pursuant to section 19D(1)(a) of the Act a complaint may be made against a
pharmacist that has been convicted in New South Wales of
an offence. In this
matter, the Respondent was convicted in New South Wales of an offence under
Section 35(4)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act,
. The Board
is independently satisfied that the particulars of Complaint One have been
proved to the requisite standard and that
such conduct amounts to professional
misconduct.
In relation to Complaint Two, the Board is independently satisfied to the
requisite standard the particulars of the complaint have
been proved to the
requisite standard and that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of section
19(a) and (g) of the Act in that she has
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, experience, judgement or care in the
of pharmacy and/or she has engaged in other improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy.
The Board further notes that whilst there are some inconsistencies in the
Respondent’s and her mother’s version of events
concerning the
supply of medicines to the two doctors in Burma, in particular, relating to the
date the letter from Dr Myat dated
6 February 2004 was created, the Board
finds that the essential parts of the complaint, being the particulars set out
of Complaint Two, have been admitted by the Respondent and
independently proved to the requisite standard.
The Board also finds that such conduct amounted to a complete abrogation of
the Respondent’s professional responsibilities and
is of a very serious
Consequences of Misconduct
The protective orders available to the
Board following a finding of professional misconduct are set out in Section 20
of the Act.
In considering penalty, the Board has also had regard to the following
In her statement dated 14 January 2008 the Respondent states:
“a. I have read every update in the Poisons Schedule. I have set
aside time to learn to keep up with changes made to the Poison
recognise the importance of the Guild Bulletins, newsletter from the
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and other articles
related to the Pharmacy
profession.
attended seminars particularly on the topic on pseudo runners. I also attended
other seminars organised by the pharmacy of Australia
and various other
organisations. I also took part in the pseudoephedrine survey to aid the effect
of Project Pseudo. I have attached
all relevant documents and certificates
I was convicted, I have undertaken implementing the second edition of Quality
Care Pharmacy program and completed the accreditation
May 2007....
Taylor’s Pharmacy Turramurra is accredited under the Quality Care Pharmacy
the incidents in 2003-2004, I now have both my parents working with me from the
opening to the closing of pharmacy. We arrive
and leave the Pharmacy together at
the same time. I now feel more secure.
in-house security is checked and maintained regularly. Annual testing is done to
ensure well functioning of panic buttons and
motion sensors. There is also
warning upon entry about the security system to deter troubles
customers....
g. The pharmacy is well lit inside and outside to increase
The Respondent was seen by Dr Sam Borenstein, clinical psychologist, on 18
July 2006 for the purpose of preparing a report for the
Local Court proceedings.
This report has not tendered in evidence at this hearing before the Board.
However, Dr Borenstein gave
evidence at the hearing before the Board that
the Respondent had informed him that in March 2003 she purchased the Pharmacy
not long after she was experiencing some difficulties. She was becoming
more depressed and anxious. Dr Borenstein gave evidence that
the Respondent told
him she was being subject to some pressure from certain customers, or clients,
who would come in towards the
end of the day in particular and seek certain
medicines, saying that the previous pharmacist had agreed to this. The
Respondent also
told him that she was more fearful, more obsessive in her
working habits as a way of coping with her increased stress, continually
checking. She became more wary, vigilant, on edge. She developed symptoms of
anxiety. She was referred to a psychiatrist, Dr Teo,
who increased her
anti-depressant medication, which had already been commenced by her GP. Dr
Borenstein diagnosed the Respondent
as suffering from an adjustment disorder
with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. Dr Borenstein also gave evidence at the
hearing that
anxiety and depressed mood can impair a person’s judgement.
When asked in what way, Dr Borenstein answered:
It impairs concentration. It can impair, of course, memory and
motivation, application to task, focussing attention, and they of course
in turn impair judgement
In Dr Borenstein’s assessment the Respondent had responded to demands
placed upon her from a position of fear and that fear
would have impaired her
judgement. He also gave evidence that as at the time he saw the Respondent in
July 2006 much of the symptoms
of those disorders had been resolved, although
she was still on the anti-depressant Zoloft, 300 mg per day at that time.
At the conclusion of the hearing on 30 April 2008 the Board requested that
the Respondent obtain a report from her treating psychiatrist,
Dr Teoh, for its
further consideration before making a determination in this matter. A report
from Dr Teoh dated 14 June 2008 was
In that report Dr Teoh states that he reviewed the Respondent on 24 May 2008,
however, he had not seen her since 2006. Dr Teoh states
the Respondent informed
him her mother has suffered a coronary artery disease and consequently was not
able to help her. She had
been working long hours and her anxiety symptoms had
escalated because of the increased stress at work. She also told him that she
had to cope with insufficient staff to assist her, although she is coping and is
being assisted by her father, and occasionally by
her mother. The Respondent
also told Dr Teoh that she ceased taking Zoloft 300 mg a day about 6 months
prior. The Respondent has
been treated for hypothyroidism with Orixine and she
has gained weight, however, she has been coping with meditation and stress
management.
Dr Teoh expressed the view that the Respondent’s presentation is
consistent with an adjustment disorder with mixed depression
and anxious state
(DSM IV diagnostic criteria). However, at that time he did not think that the
Respondent required any anti-depressant
medication. He also recommended that the
Respondent attend psychiatric review and monthly counselling to assess her
progress for
the next 12 months. Dr Teoh was of the view that the Respondent was
fit to continue working as a pharmacist at this stage.
The Board has also had regard to the three personal references tendered on
behalf of the Respondent which all suggest that the presentation
records was totally out of character and that she is otherwise an honest,
hardworking and caring person.
In all the circumstances, the Board is satisfied that there is little risk of
a recurrence of the Respondent participating in the
same conduct that is the
subject of the complaints.
However, the Board is concerned that the Respondent is primarily now
supported by her parents, both emotionally and in the Pharmacy
and yet it was
through the agency of her mother that she engaged in this conduct in respect of
the supply of the medicines to Burma
in contravention of her professional
obligations. The Board, however, notes that according to Dr Teoh’s report
the Respondent’s
mother is now only playing a very limited role in the
Pharmacy, but that seems to have led to staffing problems and increased pressure
on the Respondent. Accordingly, the Board in formulating its orders seeks to
ensure that the Respondent has sufficient supportive
mechanisms in place to
protect against the possibility of her being persuaded by family members or
characters such as Mr Hussein
to act other than in accordance with her
obligations. The Board is also concerned that given the Respondent’s
medical issues,
it is important that such condition continues to be
The Board makes the following orders:
Lin is reprimanded for engaging in dishonest conduct whilst performing her legal
and professional obligations as a pharmacist
and as a pharmacy owner.
two (2) months from the effective date of these orders Kelly Lin is to submit to
the Board a satisfactory, written operating
procedure for Taylor’s
Pharmacy. Such operating procedures are to include a medication management plan
for the supply and
Recording of Schedule 2 and Schedule 3 drugs, including
pseudoephedrine products.
six (6) months from the effective date of these orders Kelly Lin is to deliver a
seminar to a panel of pharmacists approved
by the Board, on the subject of the
management supply and recording of pseudoephedrine based products and related
ethical responsibilities
for her pharmacy practice.
Lin’s right to practice shall be conditional upon her submitting to the
appointment of a mentor pharmacist as approved
by the Board for a period of 6
months. The approved pharmacist shall provide a report to the Board every two
(2) months for a period
of six (6) months from a date to be nominated by the
Board. The subject matter of such reports is to be directed by the Board.
a period of five (5) years from the date of these orders, Kelly Lin is to
maintain a Quality Care Pharmacy Program Accreditation
for Taylor’s
Pharmacy or any other pharmacy business in which she holds a pecuniary interest
during that period. As part of
the ongoing Quality Care Pharmacy Program
Accreditation Kelly Lin is to agree to the conduct of an annual standard
maintenance assessment
in each of the 5 years and to consent to the results
of those assessments being provided to the Board annually.
a period of 3 years from the effective date of these orders, Kelly Lin is to do
all things necessary to maintain her membership
of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia, NSW branch while ever she practices as a pharmacist. Proof of
membership is to be provided
to the Board by 30 June each year.
Kelly Lin holds a pecuniary interest in the business of a pharmacy she is to do
all things necessary to obtain and maintain
membership of the Pharmacy Guild of
Australia. Proof of such membership is to be provided to the Board by 30 June
Lin is to complete at least 20 hours per year, for the 3 years from the
effective date of these orders, of Board approved continuing
education (CPE), at
least 10 hours of which per year must be in face to face contact activity.
Kelly Lin is to provide the Board
with documents evidencing completion of the
required CPE activities no later than 31 December 2010, 31 December 2011 and 31
Lin is to attend upon Dr Ben Teoh, or another medical practitioner (the
Medical Practitioner
”) nominated by Kelly Lin and approved
by the Board, for 3 monthly review for not less than 12 months from the
effective date
of these orders. Kelly Lin is to provide a copy of the full
transcript of the proceedings before the Board on 30 April 2008 and
this decision of the Board to the Medical Practitioner no later than 14 days
from the effective date of these orders.
Kelly Lin is to provide all necessary
consents to enable the Medical Practitioner to report to the Board confirming
the dates that
Kelly Lin has attended for consultation. Further, Kelly Lin is to
provide all necessary consents to enable the Medical Practitioner
to notify the
Board in the event that:
becomes aware of or forms the opinion that Kelly Lin suffers from any physical
or mental impairment, disability, condition
or disorder that detrimentally
affects or is likely to detrimentally affect Kelly Lin’s physical or
mental capacity to practice
Lin fails to attend for treatment;
Lin fails to comply with any treatment measures (including failure to take
medication prescribed by her treating doctors or
attend for counselling).
Lin is to bear all the costs of complying with the orders of the Board referred
The Board’s orders become effective one (1) month from the
date on which Kelly Lin is notified by registered post at her address
appears in the register of pharmacists for New South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter