URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1330.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Manboom Pty Ltd atf the Outdoor Signage Unit Trust v Jemena Gas Networks (NSW) Ltd (No 2) [2025] NSWSC 1330 (11 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Manboom Pty Ltd atf the Outdoor Signage Unit Trust v Jemena Gas Networks
(NSW) Ltd (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1330
Hearing Date(s):
8-9 October 2025
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
(1) I answer the first separate question referred to in
the order of Peden J made on 28 August 2025:
(2) I answer the second separate question
referred to in the order of Peden J made on 28 August 2025, as amended by the
Stern J made on 9 October 2025:
(3) I answer the third separate question
referred to in the order of Peden J made on 28 August 2025:
(4) I answer the fourth separate question
referred to in the order of Peden J made on 28 August 2025:
(5) The plaintiffs to pay the
defendant’s costs of the determination of the separate questions.
Catchwords:
TORTS – trespass to land – underground trespass –action
in trespass in relation to underground gas infrastructure
determination of questions – whether installation and continued presence,
maintenance and use of gas infrastructure
done pursuant to statutory authority
– nature of ownership and possession of gas infrastructure
Legislation Cited:
AGL Corporate Conversion Act 2002
(NSW), ss 15(a), 15(d)
Australian Gas
Light Company Act 1837
(NSW), ss 2, 9, 11, 31, 48, 51, 52, 57, 58
Gas Light Company Act 1858 (NSW), ss 1, 3, 4, 5
Electricity Supply Act 1995
Electricity Supply Amendment (Protection of
Electricity Works) Act 2006
Gas Act 1986
(NSW), ss 3, 4, 5, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 57, 113, 114, 118, 125, 130, 131
Electricity Act 1935
(NSW), ss 4, 6, 6A, 6B, 23, 28, 29, 30
Electricity (Amendment) Act 1985
Gas and Electricity (Gas Repeal)
Amendment Act 1986
Gas Supply Act 1996
Railways Act 1912
(NSW), ss 4, 15, 16
Hunter River Railway Company Act 1853
Interpretation Act 1987
Railways Act 1855
Property and Conveyancing Legislation Amendment Act 2009
Electricity Act 1990
Sydney Railway Company Act 1849
(Division of Functions) Act 1932
Water Industry Competition Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing & Allied Trades
Union of Australia
(1932) 47 CLR 1
[1932] HCA 9
Asciano Services Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(2008) 235 CLR 602
Attorney-General v Great Eastern Railway Co
[1880] UKHL 2
(1880) 5 App Cas
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2018) 262 CLR 157
[2018] HCA 3
Finance Corporation Ltd v Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd
(1995) 36 NSWLR
Benning v Wong
(1969) 122 CLR 249
[1969] HCA 58
Boensch v Pascoe
(2019) 268 CLR 593
[2019] HCA 49
Bowtell v Goldsbrough, Mort & Co Ltd
(1905) 3 CLR 444
[1905] HCA 60
Brown v West
(1990) 169 CLR 195
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Pacific National (ACT) Limited
70 NSWLR 544
[2007] NSWCA 325
Commissioner of Main Roads v The North Shore
(1967) 120 CLR 118
[1967] HCA 41
Conexa Sydney Holdings Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2025] NSWCA 20
Ex parte Ryan
[1899] NSWLawRp 68
LR (NSW) 274
Gallen v Strathfield Municipal Council [1971] NSWLR 122
Williams Staff Pty Ltd v Sydney Water Corporation
(2021) 249 LGERA 109
Kathleen Investments (Australia) Ltd v Australian Atomic Energy
(1977) 139 CLR 117
[1977] HCA 55
Melville v Townsville City
[2004] 1 Qd R 530
[2003] QCA 456
Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co
Limited v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR
Newcastle-under-Lyme Corporation v Wolstanton Ltd
[1947] Ch 92
Shore Gas Co Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
(1940) 63 CLR 52
Price v Spoor
(2021) 270 CLR 450
[2021] HCA 20
Quirindi Shire
Council v Gigli
(1985) 3 NSWLR 178
(1947) 74 CLR 613
Randwick Corporation v Rutledge
(1959) 102 CLR 54
Richardson v Austin
(1911) 12 CLR 463
[1911] HCA 28
Rosebanner Pty Ltd
v Energy Australia
[2011] NSWCA 28
Rosebanner Pty Ltd v EnergyAustralia
[2009] NSWSC 43
223 FLR 406
Rowe v Shilson
[1833] EngR 233
(1833) 4 B&AD 726
Scanlan’s New Neon Ltd v Tooheys Ltd
(1943) 67 CLR 169
The King v The Severn and Wye Railway Company (1819) 2 B&ALD 645; 106
Valuer-General Victoria v WSTI Properties 490 SKR Pty Ltd
Wacando v Commonwealth
(1981) 148 CLR 1
[1981] HCA 60
Texts Cited:
A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles, ed James A H Murray
(1914, Clarendon Press)
Brendan Edgeworth, Butt’s Land Law (7th ed,
2017, Lawbook Co)
Principal judgment
Manboom Pty Limited (ACN 067 574 010) as trustee
for the Outdoor Signage
Unit Trust (First Plaintiff)
Outdoor Signage Pty Ltd (ACN 635 831 695) as
trustee for the Outdoor Signage Unit Trust No. 3 (Second Plaintiff)
Gas Networks (NSW) Ltd (ACN 003 004 322) (Defendant)
Representation:
P M Wood / D J Delany (Plaintiffs)
T F Robertson SC / NA
Wootton (Defendant)
Solicitors:
Arnold Bloch Leibler
(Plaintiffs)
MinterEllison (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/168556
Publication Restriction:
Court has before it four questions which, on 28 August 2025, Peden J
ordered should be determined separately, and before, any
other question in the
proceedings (the separate questions). The separate questions, as amended by me
in terms agreed between the
parties by order of 9 October 2025, raise what are,
primarily, questions of statutory construction. They are as follows:
1. Was the installation by AGL of the Gas Main Assets at the land that became
the Property pursuant to statutory authority, as alleged
in paragraphs C[10] and
C[21] of the defendant’s Third Further Amended Commercial List Response,
Australian Gas Light Company Act 1837
Australian Gas Light Company Act 1858
such that the defendant has a complete defence to the plaintiffs’ claims
of trespass and trespass on the case pleaded at C[24]
and C[33] of the
plaintiffs’ Further Amended Commercial List Statement.
2. Is the continued presence, maintenance and use of the Gas Main Assets at the
land that became the Property done pursuant to statutory
authority, under:
Australian Gas Light Company Act 1837
Australian Gas Light Company Act 1858
Gas and Electricity Act 1935
Gas Act 1986
Gas Supply Act 1996
such that the defendant has a complete defence to the plaintiffs’ claims
of trespass and trespass on the case pleaded at C[24]
and C[33] of the
plaintiffs’ Further Amended Commercial List Statement.
3. Has the plaintiffs’ ownership and possession of the land that became
the Property been subject to, and qualified by, the
defendant’s ownership
and possession of the Gas Main Assets installed in and on the land and the
defendant’s statutory
powers to maintain and use the Gas Main Assets, as
alleged in paragraph C[21](q)(v) of the defendant’s Third Further Amended
Commercial List Response, such that the defendant has a complete defence to the
plaintiffs’ claims of trespass and trespass
on the case pleaded at C[24]
and C[33] of the plaintiffs’ Further Amended Commercial List Statement.
Gas Supply Act 1996
(NSW) excluded the plaintiffs’
claims of trespass and trespass on the case pleaded at C[24] and C[33] of the
plaintiffs’
Further Amended Commercial List Statement, as alleged in
paragraph C[30] of the defendant’s Third Further Amended Commercial
Response, such that the defendant has a complete defence because the plaintiffs
do not have the actionable claims for trespass
or trespass on the case pleaded
at C[24] and C[33] of the plaintiffs’ Further Amended Commercial List
Statement in respect
of the continued presence of the Gas Main Assets in and on
the land now the Property.
separate questions are posed in seemingly absolute terms, asking whether the
identified matters, in each case, provide a complete
defence to the
plaintiffs’ claims in trespass. In oral submissions both parties submitted
that questions one and four permitted
only of a yes/no answer, but
questions two and three might be answered in a qualified way, on the basis
there was a defence to trespass
as regards some of the periods of the alleged
trespass but not otherwise. I have approached the separate questions on that,
questions arise in proceedings in which Manboom Pty Limited (ACN 067 574 010) as
trustee for the Outdoor Signage Unit Trust
(the first plaintiff) and Outdoor
Signage Pty Ltd (ACN 635 831 695) as trustee for the Outdoor Signage Unit Trust
No. 3 (the second
plaintiff) (together, the plaintiffs) contend that it is a
trespass for gas infrastructure (Gas Main Assets), installed by the Australian
Gas Light Company (AGL) in 1976 and 1982 and now owned and used by the
defendant, Jemena Gas Networks (NSW) Ltd (ACN 003 004 322)
(Jemena), to be on a
property in Mascot, New South Wales. The plaintiffs seek both damages and an
order that Jemena remove the Gas
Main Assets.
statement of agreed facts with annexures (SOAF) was tendered on the hearing of
the separate questions, as was an updated version
of a plan showing the location
of some of the Gas Main Assets in 1977. As the difference in area and various
iterations of title
are largely immaterial to the separate questions, I use the
term “the Property” to denote the land which was owned by
Transport Commissioner of NSW in 1976, by the State Rail Authority in 1982, and
which ultimately came to be owned, at
different points in time, by the first and
second plaintiffs, and on which the Gas Main Assets were installed and have at
all relevant
times been located (noting that this differs from how that term is
used in the SOAF). The periods of alleged trespass (having regard
to the date
from which the first plaintiff became the registered proprietor of the Property
as set out in the SOAF), are 29 November
1995 to 19 December 2000 and 13
September 2021 onwards.
the reasons given below, the separate questions should all be answered
The parties
present purposes, it suffices to observe that the first plaintiff owned the
Property from 29 November 1995 until 13 September
2021 and thereafter the second
plaintiff has owned the Property.
is an agreed fact that Jemena, as the successor of AGL, is the owner and
operator of a gas network which distributes natural gas
to residential and
industrial customers across New South Wales, and which includes the Gas Main
of the Gas Main Assets were installed in 1976 (1976 Gas Assets). The remainder
were installed in 1982 (1982 Gas Assets). It is
an agreed fact that AGL owned
and used the Gas Main Assets from the time that they were installed on the
Property until about 3 January
was established by the
Australian Gas Light Company Act 1837
). The preamble to that Act stated:
WHEREAS the town of Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales is large and
populous and it would be a great advantage to all the inhabitants
such town were lighted with gas And whereas a very considerable sum of money
will be required for the purchase or leasing
of land and buildings and in the
erection of works and laying down mains and pipes in the said town of Sydney for
the manufacture
and conveyance of gas and it would be of great advantage and
convenience if powers were given to the several persons hereinafter
effectually to light the said town and to erect all necessary works for that
purpose but the same cannot be effected without
the aid and authority of an Act
of the Legislature.
preamble (read in the context of the Act as a whole) provides a clear indication
that at least one purpose of the
was to facilitate the town of
Sydney being lit by gas. That purpose was elaborated upon in
And be it further enacted That the said company shall be established for the
purpose of producing inflammable air or gas from coal
oil tar pitch or other
materials and for lighting and supplying with gas all public places roads
streets ways lanes passages and
buildings and also all private houses shops
manufactories properties and buildings within the said town of Sydney in
pursuance of
any contract or agreement to be entered into as is hereafter
mentioned and also for selling and disposing of all and every product
products refuse or residuum arising or to be obtained from the materials used in
or necessary for the manufacture of gas in such
manner as the said company may
think proper.
Gas Main Assets are not within the town of Sydney, as defined for the purposes
. However, as will become apparent, the
Australian Gas
Light Company Act 1858
) expanded the undertaking
of AGL to extend throughout New South Wales.
, a number of named individuals, and such other persons who
may from time to time own shares in the undertaking, were constituted
company of proprietors by the name AGL. Under s 10, it was provided that
the Act should not be taken to have created a body
corporate. AGL was thus a
statutory entity, but not a corporation. As a statutory entity, the capacity,
functions and powers of AGL
are to be found in the language of its constituent
statute, whether by reason of express provision or necessary implication: see,
by analogy,
Kathleen Investments
(Australia) Ltd v Australian
Atomic Energy Commission
[1977] HCA 55
(1977) 139 CLR 117
at 130 (Barwick CJ,
dissenting), 136 (Gibbs J), 141 (Stephen J) and 153 (Mason J);
[1977] HCA 55.
In this regard, the grant of a power carries with it the power to
do everything necessary, in the sense of being reasonably necessary
accomplish what is expressly provided, for its effective exercise: see eg
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union
(2018) 262 CLR 157
[2018] HCA 3
(Kiefel CJ), [52] (Gageler J), [114]-[115] (Keane, Nettle and
Gordon JJ).
s 2, it was provided that:
... it is expedient that the said company should have the power to contract for
or purchase ... for the purposes of the said company
any messuages building
lands tenements and hereditaments situate in the Colony of New South Wales ...
[and be] authorized and empowered
to purchase any lands messuages tenements and
hereditaments for the purposes of this Act.
this way AGL had the power to acquire interests in land for the purposes of the
to s 9, the provisions in the
extended and were to be
construed to extend to the company at all times during its continuance,
irrespective of who it was composed
of. Under s 12, AGL was permitted to
raise capital and to apply that capital “in establishing and carrying on
the said undertaking
and the purposes aforesaid” up to a limit which is of
no present relevance.
provided that the directors of the company shall direct the affairs and business
of the undertaking in “entering
into agreements or contracts for supplying
with gas all persons whomsoever and all public places roads streets ways lanes
and buildings and also all private houses shops manufactories and
buildings within the said town of Sydney where mains and pipes
shall hereafter
be laid” and “making enforcing and rescinding compounding and
compromising all contracts and bargains
touching or in anywise concerning the
same ...”. While the language of this section is somewhat difficult, I
would read this
as conferring authority upon the directors of AGL to make
contracts relating to the installation of gas infrastructure for the purpose
facilitating the supply of gas as provided for in the
Alternatively, as a matter of necessary implication, AGL, as a statutory entity,
would have had the power to enter into such contracts
to give effect to the
statutory purposes and powers in the
Attorney-General
v Great Eastern Railway Co
[1880] UKHL 2
(1880) 5 App Cas 473
at 478, cited by
Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v Multiplex Constructions Pty
(1995) 36 NSWLR 510
44 provided for the lawfulness of sales and conveyances to AGL and provided
all contracts bargains sales and conveyances which shall be made by virtue of
this Act shall without any other assurances in the
law whatsoever and without
enrolment be good valid and effectual to all intents and purposes.
, the preamble to that Act described the
as having united identified persons into a company of proprietors by the
name of AGL:
for the purpose of lighting and supplying with gas all public places roads
streets ways lanes passages and buildings and also all
private houses shops
manufactories properties and buildings within the town of Sydney in pursuance of
any contract or agreement to
be entered into as is thereinafter mentioned.
preamble to the
And whereas the said company are desirous of carrying on the said undertaking
beyond the boundaries and limits of the city of Sydney
and of increasing their
capital stock and to have full powers and authority conferred upon them for the
purposes aforesaid Be it
therefore enacted ...
provides a clear indication that the purpose of the
extend AGL’s undertaking throughout New South Wales, beyond the city of
Sydney and to confer powers and authority upon
AGL to do so. As to the
significance of a preamble on the question of the proper construction of a
statute, as held by Griffith CJ
Bowtell v Goldsbrough, Mort & Co
[1905] HCA 60
(1905) 3 CLR 444
[1905] HCA 60
and applied by Gibbs CJ, Mason,
Aickin and Wilson JJ agreeing in
Wacando v Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
(1981) 148 CLR 1
[1981] HCA 60:
where the words of a Statute are plain and clear, their meaning cannot be cut
down by reference to the preamble. But, if the words
are uncertain as applied to
the subject matter, and may bear more than one meaning, then you may, in a
proper case, refer to the
preamble to ascertain what was the occasion for the
alteration of the law.
It shall be lawful for the said company to light and supply with gas all public
streets highways roads ways lanes passages and buildings
and also all private
houses shops manufactories properties buildings and grounds beyond the
boundaries and limits of the city of
Sydney to continue and extend the existing
mains and pipes of the said company and to erect additional works.
1 was said to give AGL the power to supply gas: McTiernan J in
Benning v Wong
(1969) 122 CLR 249
[1969] HCA 58.
Consistent with the preamble, this should be read as extending the ambit of
AGL’s lawful undertaking and the purposes of AGL,
and therefore also as
expanding the ambit of AGL’s statutory powers to acquire proprietary
interests and to enter into contracts:
see the discussion of ss 2 and 31 of
above. Alternatively, as a matter of necessary implication,
AGL, as a statutory entity, would have had statutory power to enter into
contracts to achieve the statutory purposes of the
to 5 dealt with some of the mechanics by which AGL was authorised to achieve the
purpose of the
, and I return to these provisions below. In
Benning v Wong
at 262, Barwick CJ observed that, unlike the
imposed no obligation on AGL to supply gas.
were repealed by ss 15(a) and (d) of
AGL Corporate Conversion Act 2002
(NSW), but that does not affect the
previous operation of those Acts as regards anything done or any right,
privilege, obligation
or liability acquired or incurred under them:
Interpretation Act 1987
Gas and Electricity Act 1935
) made further
provision relating to the supply of gas. AGL fell within the definition of a gas
company in s 3 of the
did not diminish
the express or implied powers of AGL deriving from the
. To this effect, s 4(4) provided:
The rights, powers and obligations of a gas company as existing at the date of
the commencement of this Act in respect of any matter
or thing which under this
Act may be dealt with by a board, shall continue in full force and effect until
varied under the provisions
of this Act.
introduced standards for the heating power, purity and pressure
of gas supplied by a gas company: s 23, and an obligation, on request,
supply gas to premises within 25 yards of a pipe of a gas company (subject to
certain conditions): s 28, but Jemena does not contend
provisions authorised the installation of the Gas Main Assets. It also
introduced a power of inspection by an officer
or servant of a gas company of
any premises in which a gas pipe had been installed: s 29. Section 30
imposed penalties for injuring
a gas pipe or other apparatus belonging to a gas
company. The plaintiffs accept that ss 29 and 30 of the
implicitly recognise Jemena’s ownership rights in the Gas Main Assets, and
this necessarily would include rights at the time
of their installation in 1976
and 1982. Jemena relies upon these provisions as giving AGL the exclusive right
to control, use and
protect gas infrastructure such as the Gas Main Assets which
is consistent only with AGL being the entity which was entitled to possession
the Gas Main Assets
Gas and Electricity (Amendment) Act 1985
amended the
Schedule 1 of the
s 6A into the
, requiring AGL to transfer to one or more
wholly owned subsidiary:
... that part of [its undertaking] which was reasonably necessary for the
purpose of the carrying on of gas activities by [it] within
the State as at
[the] commencement [of this section].
this purpose, “gas activity” was broadly defined, in a new s 6
introduced by the
to include “any
activity carried on for or in connection with the ... distribution or supply of
gas”. Undertaking was
defined to include assets. After such transfer, AGL
was itself precluded by a new s 6D of the
from carrying on
a gas activity. As to the mechanics of the required transfer, s 6B of the
provided that this was to be effected in the manner and on such
terms as were agreed between the Minister and AGL, which could include
making of a Ministerial Order. As is clear, under s 6B, transfer could be
effected by means other than Ministerial Order.
was largely repealed as regards gas regulation by the
Electricity (Gas Repeal) Amendment Act 1986
(NSW). The provisions
set out at [
] above were largely
reflected in the provisions of ss 3, 21-30 of the
Gas Act 1986
renamed the
Gas Industry Restructuring Act 1986
(NSW), (the
is pursuant to these provisions that, as is agreed, from around 3 January 1986
to date, Jemena has owned and used the Gas Main
Assets. Implicit in this is
agreement that, whether by Ministerial Order or otherwise, the Gas Main Assets
were transferred to Jemena.
As to this, the plaintiffs’ contention is that
the ownership of the assets vested from that date in Jemena because “the
statute tells us that implicitly or explicitly”. Consequently, the
plaintiffs submit, it is clear that the Gas Main Assets
did not, at any relevant
time, become a fixture on the Property.
The Property and the
licence to AGL
I have already observed, only limited aspects of the historical title to the
property are relevant.
by February 1972 the Commissioner for Railways, being a body corporate
established by the
Transport (Division of Functions) Act 1932
the registered proprietor of the Property (for convenience I use the term
Commissioner for Railways in this judgment to
refer also to its statutory
successors, being the Public Transport Commission of NSW from 1976 and the State
Rail Authority from
1982). Pursuant to s 4 of the
Government Railways
Railways Act
), the Commissioner for Railways
had authority to carry out that Act, including to lease and hold lands for the
purpose of the Act.
Land, including railways, lands on which railway buildings
may later be constructed and land within and outside of fences acquired
railway or tramway purposes was, under s 11, vested in the Commissioner for
Railways. Having regard to these provisions, I would
accept Jemena’s
submission that lands vested in the Commissioner for Railways were held for the
purpose of the
Railways Act
and (for reasons set out below) this was
a public purpose. The plaintiffs accepted, moreover, that there is no reason to
the Property, through which (as is an agreed fact) a freight railway
ran in 1976 and 1982, was used other than in accordance with
the purposes and
functions of the Commissioner for Railways as dictated by the governing Acts.
This is so notwithstanding that, as
is apparent from plans from 1977 and a
photograph from 1986, the Property extended for some distance on each side
beyond the railway
line itself.
the Gas Main Assets were installed, the statutory successors to the Commissioner
for Railways remained subject to the
Railways Act
. From 1987, the
Commissioner for Railways retained title over the land on which the freight
railway track ran, albeit that the land
on either side and the airspace over was
held by a company called Paskaidorjums Pty Ltd, who subsequently transferred
that land (which
included the Property) to the first plaintiff.
in February 1972, AGL entered into a licence with the Commissioner for Railways
that was deemed to have commenced on 1 January
1971 (the Licence). The Licence
the Commissioner has granted permission to the Applicant upon the terms and
conditions hereinafter appearing to enter upon various
lands (which expression
shall include bridges) vested in the Commissioner situate in the places and
otherwise as indicated in the
Schedules hereto annexed during the currency of
this Agreement for the purpose of laying maintaining and keeping and using
or thereon the various gas mains of the size and type set out in the
said Schedules (hereinafter called the said gas main crossings).
the plaintiffs place some reliance upon the fact that the Licence does not
describe itself as a “consent” for the
purpose of any legislative
provision, the language of “permission”, which one sees here, is
relevantly indistinguishable
from that of “consent”.
Licence included, and extended well beyond, the Property. Clause 5 of the
Licence permitted AGL:
under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Chief Civil Engineer or
other authorised Officer of the Commissioner (hereinafter
called the Engineer)
to construct and lay and use maintain and keep and from time to time renew the
said gas main crossings along
through under over or across the said lands vested
in the Commissioner the said gas main crossings to be of such size and type as
shall be fixed or determined by the Engineer.
Licence also permitted AGL to make connections to the gas main crossings:
cl 6 and provided that AGL was to make good any damage
caused in works
permitted by the licence: cl 7. It also provided that AGL was required to
remove the gas main crossings or any one
of them within one month if required to
do so by notice in writing: cl 7. It was, however, common ground that no
such notice was
ever issued under the Licence. The Licence also permitted the
Engineer to direct how the gas main crossings were laid: cl 8, and
that the Commissioner for Railways could require the position of the gas main
crossings to be altered at AGL’s expense:
cl 9. The Licence was
deemed not to create a tenancy: cl 16. What is described as “Former
Schedule ‘C’” of
the Licence, which appears to relate to the
form of Schedule C prior to amendments in 1978, included the 1976 Gas
Assets, and the
“Second Phase of Schedule ‘C’ for Mains Laid
post 1.1.1978”, included the 1982 Gas Assets.
issue has been taken as to the power of the Commissioner for Railways to enter
into the Licence. Jemena’s submission was
that it was an exercise of the
incidental powers of the Commissioner for Railways to maintain the safety of the
railway system. A
Ministerial Order made pursuant to s 6B of the
, at cl 21, made the Licence binding and enforceable by, against or
for Jemena and vested AGL’s property in the Licence in Jemena
with effect
from 5 January 1986.
is an agreed fact that AGL installed the Gas Main Assets pursuant to, and
subject to the terms of, the Licence. The question raised
by the first separate
question is whether this installation was also “pursuant to statutory
authority” under the
. The plaintiffs
concede that if so, Jemena has a complete defence to the plaintiffs’
claims in trespass, having regard to the
authority of
Pty Ltd v Energy Australia
[2011] NSWCA 28
(considered further below).
is an agreed fact that, upon the transfer of the Property on 5 June 1987 to
Paskaidorjums Pty Ltd, the Licence (which was for a
five year term but was
extended) terminated (to the extent that it related to the Property).
The Gas Main Assets
suffices to note that the 1976 Gas Assets comprised two gas mains, one of which
had a nominal diameter of 550 mm within an approximately
diameter steel casing, the other of which was a 350 mm gas main off take, a
connection, an underground housing structure with
steel access lids, above
ground cathodic protection test points and some above ground pipeline markers
and remote monitoring devices.
The 1982 Gas Assets comprised a gas main with a
nominal diameter of 100 mm in an approximately 250 mm casing and above
ground pipeline
markers. It is an agreed fact that the Gas Main
(1) are part of a network of primary gas network infrastructure, whose function
is to convey large volumes of high-pressure natural
gas to downstream regulation
stations; and
(2) are critical gas infrastructure for the supply of gas in the State of New
South Wales.
parties confirmed during oral submissions that they would not seek to tender any
additional material at the trial of the plaintiffs’
claims to establish
the use of the Property and that there will not be any attempt at trial to
adduce additional evidence which might
go to the question of the use of the
Property in 1976 and 1982 or which might otherwise go to the characterisation of
the property
for the purpose, in particular, of the
location of the 1976 Gas Assets, as at 1977, can be seen from the plan
[MISSING IMAGE: Plan showing location of Lot 1 in DP209847
& Lot 10 in DP1274360 overlayed over Jemena asset management 1977 route
alignment plan., Plan showing location of Lot 1 in DP209847 & Lot 10 in
DP1274360 overlayed over Jemena asset management 1977
route / alignment plan.
is apparent from this is:
(1) The approximate boundary of the title held by the Commissioner for Railways
at the time is shown in green. The approximate boundary
of the Property (albeit
that the land on which the rail line itself is located does not fall within the
Property save for the airspace
above the rail line), is marked in red (albeit
that to the east and west the boundary is the green line which meets the red
(2) In 1977 there was only a single rail track running through the Property. At
some point subsequent to this that apparently became
two rail tracks, (although
the answers to the separate questions in no way turn on this).
(3) Where measured, the distance from the centre point of the railway line to
the 550 mm gas main (part of the 1976 Gas Assets) is
12.5 metres.
(4) It appears that in some places the distance between the railway line and the
550 mm gas main is more than 12.5 metres, seemingly
roughly equivalent to
the 17.8 metre measurement (which can be seen on the plan but which does not
itself measure distance between
the 550 mm gas main and the railway line),
and in some places it is less.
regards the 1982 Gas Assets, their location can be gleaned from the photo below
which was taken in 1986:
shows the location of all of the Gas Main Assets (marked with black lines)
vis-à-vis the boundaries of the titles held
by the Commissioner for
Railways as at 1986 (marked in pink and green) and the railway line. The Gas
Main Assets run along the side
of the railway line to the north west of Robey
Street, then proceed to cross the railway line a little north west of Robey
then go along the side of the railway line (between the railway line and
Qantas Drive), and pass under Robey Street. At some places
when running broadly
parallel to the railway line the Gas Main Assets look to be further than the
12.5 metres referred to above as
regards the 550 mm gas main that forms
part of the 1976 Gas Assets, and it is difficult to put a precise measurement
upon the extent
to which this is the case.
The separate
the framing of the separate questions, it appears to be accepted by both parties
that if any of the separate questions are answered
qualified “yes”, then the plaintiffs’ claims in trespass
cannot be maintained, at least
to the extent of the affirmative answer. The
plaintiffs submit, however, that if the answer to the first of the separate
is “no”, then none of the other separate questions can be
answered “yes” unless Jemena can identify some
statutory provision
or provisions permitting the Gas Main Assets to remain on the Property after the
termination of the Licence.
is necessary, at the outset, to observe that there is an ambiguity as to the
phrasing of the separate questions. Each question
is framed as raising an issue
as to the application of the relevant law to the facts (which I will call the
first part of the question).
The questions then each include words (which I will
call the second part of the question) “such that [(paraphrasing) Jemena
has a complete defence to the plaintiffs’ claims of trespass]”.
their face, therefore, the questions appear to raise the possibility that the
first part of the question could be answered “yes”
but, depending
upon the answer to the second part of the question, the question as a whole
could be answered “no”. However,
the way in which the parties both
approached the questions in their submissions indicated that this was not how
the questions should
be understood. Rather, the parties approached the questions
on the implicit predicate that the answer to the first part of the question
dictated the answer to the question as a whole. So understood, the second part
of the question gives context to the first part of
the question but does not
raise any additional matters for the Court’s determination. Consistent
with this, the parties did
not in their submissions separately address whether,
if the first part of any of the questions was answered in the affirmative, that
constituted a complete defence to the trespass claims. Rather, the answer to
each question as a whole was assumed to follow the answer
to the first part of
each question. That is how I propose to approach the separate questions.
the hearing of the separate questions, I raised with the parties an issue as to
which party bore the onus of proof on the issues
raised by the separate
questions. The plaintiffs’ position is that the drafting of the separate
questions is such that I should
assume that the trespass or trespasses are made
out, and approach the questions as if they raise only issues as to whether
has a good defence, in which case the onus rests on Jemena. Jemena, by
contrast, contended that the separate questions raise issues
which go to the
heart of whether or not there is a trespass, in particular as to whether or not
the plaintiffs had or have possession
of the stratum of land where the Gas Main
Assets are located. Absent possession, Jemena contends, the plaintiffs could not
in a claim in trespass.
Ultimately,
my answers to the separate questions do not in any way rest on the onus of
proof. I have concluded, however, that the
question of onus must be answered by
reference to the substance of the issues raised by the separate questions. It
follows that I
do not accept that the phrasing of the separate questions
necessarily leads to the onus resting on Jemena. Rather, it is for the
plaintiffs to establish their possessory interest and, if this is established,
it is for Jemena to show some lawful justification
for any interference
occasioned by the presence of the Gas Main Assets. If Jemena had a right of
possession as regards the strata
of land where the Gas Main Assets were located
at the time of the claimed trespass, or if Jemena was the owner of those strata
land, then there could be no trespass because there could not be interference
with the plaintiffs’ right to possession of those
strata of land: see eg
Brendan Edgeworth,
Butt’s Land Law
(7th ed, 2017, Lawbook Co) at
[6.430] (and the authorities cited therein). Cases such as
JK Williams
Pty Ltd v Sydney Water Corporation
(2021) 249 LGERA 109
[2021] NSWLEC 23
, which consider whether there is statutory authority for an
otherwise tortious act, are thus readily distinguishable, as they consider
very different question.
to the extent that the answers to the separate questions turn on matters of
statutory construction, the statutory text must
be read in context and in
accordance with its purpose, recently described by the High Court as
“[t]he required approach”:
Valuer-General Victoria v WSTI
Properties 490 SKR Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 23
first separate question
issue at the heart of the first separate question is whether AGL had statutory
authority to install the Gas Main Assets at the
Property. A subsidiary issue is,
if so, whether the installation was pursuant to that authority. It is convenient
to summarise key
elements of the parties’ submissions on the first
separate question before explaining my answer, in the course of which I will
consider the relevant legislation and some additional matters raised in the
parties’ submissions.
doing that, however, it is necessary to consider what the words “pursuant
to statutory authority” mean for the
purpose of the first separate
question. Particularly having regard to the character of AGL as a statutory
entity, those words could
direct attention simply to whether or not, directly or
indirectly, statute authorised AGL to install the Gas Main Assets, including
virtue of the fact that there was statutory authority for AGL to enter into the
Licence, the terms of which authorised the installation
of the Gas Main Assets.
Alternatively, those words could require some direct authorisation, by statute,
of the installation of the
Gas Main Assets. The parties approached the first
separate question, however, on the premise that it should be answered
only if I were to be satisfied that there was some direct
statutory authority under the
installation of the Gas Main Assets. This was so notwithstanding that there was
no suggestion by either party that AGL (a
statutory entity) was not authorised
to enter into the Licence. Given that the separate questions have been framed by
the parties,
I will address the first separate question consistent with the way
in which the parties approached it.
The parties’
submissions
submits that authorisation to install the Gas Main Assets can be found in the
because the Gas Main Assets were installed on
land which would fall within the ambit of “passages and public
in s 3 of the
, which I discuss below. In this
regard, Jemena relies upon the location of the Gas Main Assets, which it
describes as within the
curtilage of the railway line and, in the alternative,
upon the purposes of the
1912 Railway Act
which it submits were such that
the Property would be characterised as a “public place” for the
purposes of the
. Jemena also relies upon s 1 of the
or s 52 of the
which, as noted below, was picked
, as statutory authority for the installation of the
Gas Main Assets. Jemena contends that the Licence can be understood as providing
both the consent of the Commissioner for Railways to the installation of the Gas
Main Assets and as making additional provision as
regards how those works should
be effected. That, Jemena says, explains why the Licence was entered into in
circumstances where there
was in any event statutory authority for the
installation of the Gas Main Works.
plaintiffs frame the first separate question as being whether the Licence was
unnecessary because AGL had exercised statutory
authority in installing the Gas
Main Assets. The plaintiffs submit that the
did not confer
statutory authority to install the Gas Main Assets, as the location where they
were installed is neither a passage
nor a public place within the meaning of the
. The plaintiffs also submit that it is necessary for Jemena to
prove that, on an objective assessment, albeit not necessarily as
a matter of
subjective belief, AGL in fact installed the Gas Main Assets pursuant to
statutory authority as opposed to under, and
subject to the terms of, the
Licence, submitting that the issue raised by the first separate question should
be distinguished from
issues that arise as to whether or not an administrative
decision maker’s acts were authorised by statute, as discussed in
Mercantile Mutual
Life Insurance Co Limited v Australian
Securities Commission
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
Brown v West
[1990] HCA 7.
In this regard, the plaintiffs contend that the
first separate question should be approached consistently with the approach
by Preston CJ in
JK Williams Staff
where the issue was whether
statutory authority provided a defence to what would otherwise have been a
Legislative authorisation for the installation of the
Gas Main Assets
first separate question requires close attention to a number of features of the
combined operation of the
, as applicable to the
installation of Gas Main Assets in 1976 and 1982.
] above, I would infer
that the purpose of both the
was to put AGL in
the position that it could light and supply an identified range of places with
gas, first within the town of Sydney
) and later in New
South Wales beyond the city of Sydney (in the
). That purpose
included enabling AGL to install infrastructure to enable it to supply with gas
and light that range of places. That
purpose informs the proper construction of
provided for AGL to extend its undertaking beyond the city of
Sydney in three ways. First, as just observed, by expanding the ambit
purpose for which statutory powers were conferred upon AGL beyond the city of
Sydney as reflected in the preamble and by s
] above). Consistent
with this, I would read s 1 of the
as having the effect
that powers conferred on AGL, such as the power to enter into contracts or
acquire interests in property, could
lawfully be used for this expanded
statutory purpose. Section 1 also strongly suggests that Parliament
intended that AGL could lawfully
light and supply with gas and continue and
extend the existing mains and erect additional works in a range of public and
locations going well beyond the locations identified in s 3 (see
It follows that, to the extent that contracts or proprietary rights enabled
AGL to light and supply with gas “all public streets
highways roads ways
lanes passages and buildings and also all private houses shops manufactories
properties buildings and grounds”
outside of the city of Sydney, or to
continue and extend the existing mains and erect additional works, s 1 of
provided statutory authority for AGL to perform those acts.
one view, s 1 might also be construed as having itself authorised AGL to
erect additional works such as the installation of the
Gas Main Assets
irrespective of whether that was authorised elsewhere in the
by contract or proprietary right. That construction of s 1 is, perhaps,
supported by the fact that the
replaced a complex description of
authorisation of works, in s 48 of the
, with a far more
streamlined scheme of regulation in ss 1, 3-5 of the
balance, however, given that, as set out below, s 3 makes specific
provision for the installation of infrastructure, consistent
with the principle
stated by Gavan Duffy CJ and Dixon J in
Anthony Hordern &
Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing & Allied Trades Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
(1932) 47 CLR 1
[1932] HCA 9
, I would accept the plaintiffs’
submission that these general words do not themselves provide statutory
authority (within the
meaning of the first separate question as construed by the
parties) for the installation of the Gas Main Assets.
1 also shows that Parliament divided the places which AGL could light, supply
with gas, and continue existing mains and erect
additional works, between public
and private places. I would infer that Parliament intended that classification,
namely between public
and private, broadly to cover the field. There is no
reason to think that there was some intermediate category (between public and
private) in which AGL was not authorised to extend its undertaking. This is so
notwithstanding the curiosity in the drafting as between
the preamble, which
referred to “all public places roads streets ways lanes passages and
buildings and also all private houses
shops manufactories properties and
buildings” (as the undertaking to be continued), and s 1 which
referred to “all public
streets highways roads ways lanes passages and
buildings and also all private houses shops manufactories properties buildings
grounds”. Given that this curiosity has no apparent explanation or
rationale, I attach no significance to these differences.
direct statutory authority was given, in ss 3 and 4, to the erection of
certain infrastructure and undertaking of certain
works. These sections stated:
3. It shall be lawful for the said company from time to time to make and erect
in places beyond the city of Sydney additional buildings
gasometers machinery
and other works to erect and maintain posts pillars lamps and other apparatus in
all or any streets roads highways
passages and other public places to dig and
sink trenches and drains for the purpose of laying fixing altering and repairing
to lay fix alter and repair mains and pipes stop-cocks syphons plugs and
branch pipes in through under or across all or any streets
roads highways
passages and public places and from time to time to alter the position of all or
any mains pipes stop-cocks syphons
plugs and branch pipes And also at the
request of the owners or occupiers of public or private houses buildings
manufactories or
grounds to carry branch pipes from all or any mains or pipes
into or through any such public or private houses buildings manufactories
grounds for the purpose of lighting the same and to erect and set up proper
machinery and apparatus for such purpose and to repair
and amend the same when
4. The said company shall relay reinstate and make good to the satisfaction of
the commissioners trustees surveyor or other persons
or person having the
control direction or superintendence of the same the stones ground soil or
pavement of any and every street
road highway passage or public place which
shall have been broken up by them under the authority of this Act and shall
same shall be so relaid provide proper lights at night and take all
other necessary and proper precaution to guard the trenches drains
and pits made
by them in any roads streets highways or public places and to prevent accident
or damage to passengers cattle or carriages
And in case the said company shall
make default in relaying reinstating or making good such stones ground soil or
pavement as aforesaid
or in placing and setting up such lights at night or in
taking such necessary and proper precaution as aforesaid the commissioners
trustees surveyor or other persons or person having such control direction or
superintendence as aforesaid may relay reinstate and
make good the same and
provide such necessary and proper lights and the expenses thereof shall be
repaid on demand by the said company
to such commissioners trustees surveyor or
other person or persons as aforesaid.
is immediately apparent, a specific power to construct lighting and gas
infrastructure, including to fix alter and repair mains
and pipes (as opposed to
branch pipes), was conferred under s 3 only in some of the places referred
to in the preamble and where
authorised AGL to
light and supply gas and to continue existing mains and erect additional works.
More particularly, s 3 provided
no express authority for AGL to install
mains infrastructure in, through, under or across the private places described
in the preamble
and in s 1. It can also be observed that, as regards public
locations, “ways” was not included in s 3 (but was included
the preamble and s 1) and “other public places” was included in
s 3 (but not in s 1).
to these matters, the plaintiffs placed much emphasis upon the fact that
s 48 of the
, which was the relevant provision in that Act
directly authorising the installation of gas infrastructure, authorised the
installation
of such infrastructure under, across and along “ways”,
but no such authorisation was conferred by s 3 of the
submitted that it should thus be inferred that Parliament intended that, under
, gas infrastructure could not be installed in, through,
under or across railways. That submission should be rejected. This is not
instance of Parliament using significantly and materially different wording
which might suggest that Parliament intended a different
meaning to be conveyed:
Melville v Townsville City Council
[2004] 1 Qd R 530
. The word “way” does not have such a distinct meaning,
when considered by reference to those words that were included
, that any particular conclusion should be drawn from its
absence. I would thus not construe the words “streets roads highways
public places” to exclude anything that could also fall within the ambit
of a “way”.
together, ss 3 and 4 do two things:
(1) provide express authorisation for installation of gas infrastructure in the
identified public locations (in s 3) and impose certain
obligations upon
AGL in respect thereof (in s 4); and
(2) provide express authorisation for the laying of branch pipes into or through
public or private houses, buildings, manufactories
or grounds, upon the request
of the owner or occupier of those premises, for the purpose of lighting such
premises, and also to repair
or amend such works (in s 3).
contrast to s 48 of the
, there is nothing in ss 3 and
which authorises the installation of gas pipes (other
than branch pipes for the purpose of lighting the premises where the work is
be conducted) “into or against any dwelling-house or dwelling-houses
manufactories public or private buildings”, or
through such buildings, or
grounds, (for the purpose of carrying gas to or lighting other premises), with
the consent (or in the
latter case previous consent) of the owner and occupier
for the time being of such private premises. The plaintiffs contended that
necessarily followed that there was no statutory authority under the
to lay gas mains (as opposed to branch pipes which are specifically
dealt with in s 3 of the
) on private places. Thus, they
submit, there was no statutory authority to install the Gas Main Assets unless
the location where
they were installed fell within the ambit of s 3 of the
. I agree that no direct authorisation is conferred under
for gas infrastructure (other than branch pipes) to
be installed on private property. Consistent with the preamble and s 1 of
, it appears that Parliament intended that such works could
lawfully be carried out by AGL beyond the boundaries of the city of Sydney
where it had a contractual or proprietary entitlement to do so.
, installation of gas infrastructure such as the Gas
Main Assets was potentially authorised in two ways:
(1) where it was carried out pursuant to a contractual or proprietary
entitlement; or
(2) where it fell within the ambit of s 3 of the
construction of the
avoids the absurdity of reading the
to have had the effect that gas mains could not lawfully have been
installed in, on, under or through any land that did not fall
within the ambit
of s 3, which I would infer would preclude such installation on, under or
through large swathes of land in New South
Wales. It also gives s 1 of the
real work to do, and is consistent with the cardinal rule for
the construction of statutes authorising works, set out by Barwick
Benning v Wong
at 256, that a statute will not be construed to authorise
an interference with common law rights (without compensation) “without
unambiguous and compelling language”. The spectre of the erosion of common
law rights, as raised by the plaintiffs, simply
does not arise given that
consent is required for installation of gas infrastructure in public places
(under s 52 of the
picked up in the
discussed at [
below), a request is required for installation of branch pipes from the owner or
occupier of premises under s 3, and installation
will otherwise require
some contractual or proprietary entitlement.
third way in which the
operated as regards AGL’s expanded
undertaking was by providing, in s 5, that s 52 (together with
ss 57, 58, 59, 65, 67-79)
beyond the boundaries of the city of Sydney, and that those
provisions should be read and construed as if they were repeated in the
. Section 52 provided:
And be it further enacted That it shall not be lawful for the said company to
break up or disturb the pavement or ground in any way
road street lane or other
public place or passage for the purpose of laying down any main pipe or main
pipes without the consent
in writing of the town surveyor commissioners
surveyors trustees or other persons having the control of such pavement ground
street way lane or other public passage or place respectively first
obtained but nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed or
construed to
prevent the said company from laying down repairing or altering such main pipes
(after such consent as aforesaid) or
from opening taking up or removing any of
the ground stones soil or pavement or otherwise in or of any road street way
lane or other
public passage or place whatsoever for the laying down repairing
or altering of any such pipes or of any apparatus leading from such
after such consent as aforesaid.
application of s 52 of the
is entirely consistent with the
analysis of the ways in which the installation of gas infrastructure could be
authorised at [
above. The Licence, in which the Commissioner for Railways gave permission for
the installation of the Gas Main Assets, readily
supplied the necessary consent
if it were the case that the Gas Main Assets were installed in a place falling
within the ambit of
“streets roads highways passages and public
places” in s 3 of the
. I would add that
Jemena’s submission that s 52 provided an independent authorisation
for the installation of the Gas Main
Assets must be rejected. Section 52
operated against a background of the authorisation conferred either by s 48
or s 3 of the
, or by a contractual
or proprietary entitlement, and, as the plaintiffs submit, it conditioned the
exercise of powers by AGL and
(contrary to Jemena’s submission) did not
confer additional powers. To the extent that s 52 provides that neither the
nor once picked up, the
prevented AGL
from installing or repairing gas infrastructure (subject to consent being
given), it is entirely consistent with Parliament
intending that AGL could
lawfully do so pursuant to contractual or proprietary entitlements (again,
subject to consent being given).
prohibited any person from laying a pipe “to
communicate with any pipe belonging to the said company” without the
of AGL. It is relevant to the extent that it recognises AGL as the owner
of the pipes that it laid. There is nothing in the
that this ownership interest was limited to pipes laid under s 3 as opposed
to pursuant to a contractual or proprietary
entitlement. Section 58 of the
provided that it was an offence for any person to wilfully,
maliciously or negligently damage “any of the mains or service pipes
of” AGL. Again, this recognises the ownership interest of AGL in its pipes
and there is nothing to suggest that this ownership
interest was limited to
pipes authorised under s 3. In this way, these provisions provide some
(albeit limited) support for the analysis
final matter to note is that there is no equivalent in the
s 51 of the
. This section provided that, if required to do
so by a subsequent occupier at the expiration of a previous tenancy, AGL must
gas infrastructure which is in a house or other buildings, if that
infrastructure had been installed with the consent of the previous
(unless it was otherwise stipulated or agreed). Thus, where gas infrastructure
was installed pursuant to a request of an
occupier or owner of premises or
grounds, as provided under s 3 of the
, Parliament should be
taken to have intended that this infrastructure could remain in place
notwithstanding a change in occupation.
In cases where gas infrastructure was
installed as provided under a contract, Parliament should be taken to have
intended that infrastructure
installed in the premises or grounds could remain
in place notwithstanding a change of ownership or the termination of the tenancy
of the contractual counterparty.
Was the installation of the Gas
Main Assets authorised by s 3 of the 1858 Act?
follows from the analysis above that the answer to the first separate question
turns on whether the Gas Main Assets were installed
on land which falls within
the ambit of the words “any streets roads highways passages and public
places” in s 3 of the
. This is a question of
construction which turns on the text, context and purpose of the Act. Consistent
with the approach taken by
O’Connor J in
Richardson v Austin
[1911] ArgusLawRp 46
(1911) 12 CLR 463
[1911] HCA 28
, the proper construction of the term
“public place” should not be approached in the abstract, but must
turn on the subject
matter and purpose of the
. For the reasons
given below, I have concluded that a railway and a reasonable curtilage around
the railway falls within the ambit
of “other public places” in
. In these circumstances, it is unnecessary to
consider whether it might also be described as a “passage”.
with text, as I have already observed, the concept of “public” in
was used in contradistinction to the concept of
“private” places. In this context, I would infer that as regards
other than branch pipes, in s 3 Parliament was identifying places
that were public, as opposed to private, places. The language used
also makes it
clear that Parliament was not intending to limit the authority conferred by
s 3 only to streets, roads, highways and
passages, but intended that
authority be granted in respect of “other public places”
(notwithstanding that s 1 does not
include these words). To the extent that
some genus can be derived from the words that precede those general words, so as
ejusdem generis
rule of construction applicable:
[1947] HCA 19
(1947) 74 CLR 613
at 623-624;
[1947] HCA 19 (Latham
CJ), all of
the words connote some thoroughfare or means of passage or conveyance of people
or goods from one place to another. That
genus could readily comprehend a
railway, and (for the reasons set out below) its reasonable curtilage, as it
provides a means of
passage from one place to another to both members of the
public and their freight, upon payment of such fare or sum as is required.
would reject the plaintiffs’ submission that the common genus is an
unrestricted public right of access to the location.
There may well not be
unrestricted public right of access to a street, road, highway or passage and,
in any event, there is nothing
that suggests that gas and
lighting infrastructure should only be installed by AGL in places to which the
public had unrestricted
also note that, somewhat before the
passed, in both
The King v The Severn and Wye Railway Company
B&ALD 645; 106 ER 501 and in
Rowe v Shilson
[1833] EngR 233
(1833) 4 B&AD 726
110 ER 62, railways were found to fall within the ambit of descriptions that
may, in today’s context, seem unexpected. In
the first of these cases a
railway was described as a “road”, and in the second a railway was
described as a “new
public way”. Moreover, whilst I am mindful of
the dangers of reliance upon dictionary definitions, where, as here, it is
to consider what intention should be inferred from words used in the
19th century, some assistance can be taken from the definition
of a railway,
A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles
, ed James A H
Murray (1914, Clarendon Press)
Oxford English Dictionary
was then called), as “1. Way or road laid with rails ... also, the way
composed of rails thus laid” and “b. Any
line or set of rails
intended to facilitate the motion of wheels or other apparatus”. This is
entirely consistent with, at
least, the genus of locations in s 3 of the
comprehending a railway and indeed might suggest that a railway
fell within the ambit of a “road”.
this regard, in 1976 and 1982 when the Gas Main Assets were installed, the
railway on the Property was not just a thoroughfare
but also had a public
character. It provided a means of carriage available to the public and both the
land so used, and the railway
itself, was vested in the Commissioner for
Railways for the purposes of the
Railways Act
. These purposes were
directed towards the public good, tethered as they were to the establishment of
railways in New South Wales
including for the carriage of passengers, livestock
and goods under the administration of the Commissioner for Railways (or his or
her statutory successor) (see eg, ss 15 and 16 of the
). As to this, I would reject the plaintiffs’ contention that a
place can only have the necessary public character if it is
generally accessible
to the public. There is no reason why such a limited use of the word
“public” should be attributed
to Parliament. My conclusion is
consistent with the approach taken in
Ex parte Ryan
[1899] NSWLawRp 68
(1899) 20 LR (NSW)
, albeit by reference to a very different statutory question, where the Court
characterised a railway as a public thoroughfare notwithstanding
that there were
restrictions on the ways in which the public might use it. It is also consistent
with the recognition of Windeyer
Randwick Corporation v
[1959] HCA 63
(1959) 102 CLR 54
[1959] HCA 63
that a place may be
characterised as being for public recreation and enjoyment even when only
certain members of the public were
allowed access to parts of the premises.
that s 3 provides authorisation for the erection of lighting infrastructure
and the digging of trenches and drains for the purpose
of laying mains in,
through, under or across the places identified in s 3, Parliament would
also be presumed to have intended to
authorise installation of infrastructure
in, through, under, or across, a reasonable curtilage on either side of the
actual thoroughfare
itself. It would be wholly impracticable if the digging or
sinking of trenches, the laying of pipes or the erection of lighting
infrastructure
were to take place only on or under the thoroughfare itself. That
would necessarily cause significant upheaval and inconvenience,
such that I
would not infer that Parliament intended such a result. Moreover, in any
instance in which gas mains or other infrastructure
were to cross a railway
line, it would be expected that works laying the pipes and digging trenches
would need to be carried out
on a reasonable curtilage of the railway itself. It
can also be observed that both the preamble to, and s 1 of, the
suggest that public places would comprehend public buildings. Consistent
with this, the words “other public places” should
not be narrowly
construed only to include the actual thoroughfare or means of passage, as
opposed to surrounding or necessary public
buildings or land associated with the
thoroughfare or means of passage.
for context, both s 4 of the
and s 52 of the
, picked up by s 5 of the
, suggest that the places
falling within s 3 (other than as regards a branch pipe) were expected to
be under the control, direction
or superintendence of a town surveyor,
commissioners, surveyors, trustees or other person “having the
control” of the
place. That indicates that one aspect of a public place
within the meaning of s 3 is that it is under the control or
superintendence
of some form of public official or authority. That is entirely
consistent with land under the control of the Commissioner for Railways
or her statutory successor) being a public place for the purposes of s 3 of
take judicial notice, consistent with the submissions of both parties, that
Parliament would be presumed to have been aware of the
existence of railways in
New South Wales. Legislation concerning railways in New South Wales dates back
Sydney Railway Company Act 1849
(NSW) and the
Hunter River
Railway Company Act 1853
(NSW), both of which authorised the building of
railways outside the city of Sydney. Parliament would also be presumed to have
aware that by 1855 the railways and other property had been purchased by
the government of New South Wales and vested in the Commissioners
for Railways,
as provided in the preamble to the
Railways Act 1855
(NSW). Contrary to
the plaintiffs’ submission, however, I would not reason from this that
Parliament should be taken, by omission,
to have excluded railways from the
ambit of s 3. Rather, I would read the words in s 3 as having been
intended to encompass thoroughfares
other than those specified, such as
to the plaintiffs’ submission, I do not attach any material significance
on the question of construction to the fact
that s 4 of the
refers to reinstatement and making good of “stones ground soil or
pavement”, but not railway lines or sleepers. Those
words should be given
a practical construction and be read as capable of extending to whatever ground
needed to be made good.
for purpose, it is consistent with the purpose of the
to be authorisation for gas mains to be laid in, through, under or across
railways, including a reasonable curtilage thereof.
First, the purpose of the
was to enable AGL’s undertaking to extend beyond the
boundaries of the city of Sydney. That undertaking involved both supplying
to, and lighting, a range of places. I would readily infer that Parliament
intended that AGL’s undertaking beyond the city
of Sydney could include
the lighting of railway lines, along with other thoroughfares, and the supply of
gas for this purpose. That
would plainly have been in the public interest. That
supports a construction of s 3 that enables gas infrastructure to be
in, through, under, or across, railways. It is speculation to suggest,
as the plaintiffs did, that Parliament had any concerns that
gas infrastructure
or lighting might be dangerous if in proximity to railways.
as with the other locations identified in s 3, there could be great public
benefit in gas mains being laid along, through
or under railway lines. As
thoroughfares, these were locations where there would be means of access and
transportation available
which would facilitate the laying and repair of gas
mains and infrastructure. They were also locations where there had already been
some public works undertaken, and the land was vested in the Commissioner for
Railways such that the works would not interfere with
private rights. They would
also likely be locations where the laying of gas pipes may be expedient, in that
they link settlements
it would be somewhat absurd for Parliament to have intended to exclude railways
from the ambit of s 3, given that this would
likely lead to considerable
additional expense and inconvenience in any circumstance in which the most
direct route for a gas main
to travel would be through, under or across a
railway line or its reasonable curtilage. It would also readily be inferred that
would have intended the protections of s 4 of the
and s 52 of the
(applied by s 5 of the
) to apply where gas infrastructure and associated works were carried out
through, under or across a railway line.
given the very real public benefits that could flow from enabling the supply of
gas, and lighting, throughout New South Wales,
I would not narrowly construe the
ambit of the authorisation provided by s 3 of the
that, consistent with my analysis above, this would not interfere with private
light of this analysis, the words “streets roads highways passages and
public places”, in particular the words “public
s 3, should be construed to include a railway and its reasonable
is thus necessary to consider whether the position of the Gas Main Assets
vis-à-vis the railway itself is such that I should
find that their
installation was authorised by s 3 of the
. What is a
reasonable curtilage in this context must be determined by reference to the
legislative context, which is one in which
the digging and sinking of trenches
is envisaged, including to cross under a thoroughfare. That suggests that a
reasonable curtilage
should include sufficient area for such works, and that it
was not intended that this should be an unduly narrow area. Whilst it
possible to be precise as to the distance between the Gas Main Assets and the
railway line as it was in 1976 and 1982, the
Gas Main Assets appear to have run
along the line of the railway within a distance of likely nothing more than
from the centre of the single railway line present in 1977,
and that where they are directed towards the railway line they are somewhat
closer. I would characterise this as being within a reasonable curtilage of the
railway so as to fall within the ambit of s 3 of
in circumstances where, on the analysis above, AGL was authorised under s 3
to install the Gas Main Assets, that installation should
be described as being pursuant to statutory authority. As the plaintiffs
accepted before this Court, this is not a question that turns upon the
subjective understanding of those who decided to, or in fact,
conducted the
installation. It is a characterisation dependent upon construction of the
having regard to what occurred. Taking that approach,
irrespective of the fact that the installation was clearly authorised by the
it was also pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by
. It would be wholly artificial to find otherwise
simply on account of the existence and terms of the Licence, which, in any
provided the necessary consent for the purposes of s 52 of the
(applied by s 5 of the
and included
a range of clauses which regulated the mechanics of the installation and use of
first separate question should be answered “yes”.
Notwithstanding
that the parties are agreed that the rest of the separate questions do not arise
unless I have answered the first
separate question “no”, I have
decided that this is an occasion in which it will enhance efficiency overall if
my response to all questions, albeit with greater brevity than might
otherwise have been required: by analogy with the approach discussed
Boensch v Pascoe
(2019) 268 CLR 593
[2019] HCA 49
that the parties agree that the trespass claims cannot succeed if the answer to
the first separate question is “yes”,
to have utility, the rest of
the separate questions should be approached on the (false) assumption that the
first separate question
was answered “no”. They should, however, be
approached on the basis that the installation of the Gas Main Assets was
lawfully undertaken in accordance with the provisions of the Licence, and on the
basis that AGL was authorised to enter into the
Licence. Neither of those
propositions was disputed by either party. They should also be approached on the
agreed basis that the
Gas Main Assets were at all relevant times owned by either
AGL or Jemena.
The second separate question
second separate question asks whether there was and is statutory authority for
the continued presence, maintenance and use of
the Gas Main Assets at the
Property. It invites attention not just to the
but also to the
Gas Supply Act 1996
). This question also invites attention to the periods of the
plaintiffs’ claims of trespass, that is from 29 November 1995
December 2000, and from 13 September 2021 onwards.
parties’ submissions
key contention is that its obligation to continue the supply of gas at all times
was explicit in the
. Broadly, it contends that
, being the applicable legislation over the
periods of the claimed trespasses, provided AGL, now Jemena, with statutory
to retain the Gas Main Assets on the Property and to maintain,
control, use and protect them. Prior to 1996, it says that that authority
as a matter of necessary implication from the
, but after 12 July
1996 when the
came into effect, such authority was expressly
conferred under s 52. In this regard, Jemena contends that the relevant
legislation
conferred upon Jemena duties to supply gas and to maintain and to
protect the Gas Main Assets as well as a power to prevent others
from occupying
or interfering with those assets. Once that is accepted, Jemena submits, it must
have a form of statutory licence
or authority to occupy or possess the land
where the Gas Main Assets are situated, which necessarily precludes any claim in
arising. Jemena contends that this position is, in particular,
supported by the decisions of
North Shore Gas Co Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (NSW)
(1940) 63 CLR 52
[1940] HCA 7
North Shore Gas (No
Commissioner of Main Roads v The North Shore Gas Co Ltd
(1967) 120 CLR 118
[1967] HCA 41
North Shore Gas (No 2)
Sydney Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2025] NSWCA 20.
By way of fallback
submission, Jemena contends that if its submissions relying upon the
were not accepted, then a right to occupy or possess
arises by implication under the
. Given my findings, it is not
necessary to address this submission.
plaintiffs contend that, construed consistently with the presumption outlined at
] above, none of
the provisions relied upon by Jemena conferred any entitlement in AGL or Jemena
for the Gas Main Assets to remain
on the Property. In this regard they rely also
on the presumption, which they derive from
Services Pty
Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(2008) 235 CLR 602
[2008] HCA 46
(but which in fact derives from a judgment of Evershed J discussed
] below), that
Parliament is not to be presumed to create an interest in land if the statute
does not refer to the incidents normally
associated with the creation of such an
interest. The plaintiffs rely, critically, upon the assumption that there was no
authority for the installation of the Gas Main Assets. This, they say,
is a crucial point of distinction between the facts before
the Court in
, and the present case. They also contend that Jemena had no
entitlement to have the Gas Main Assets remain on the Property after
the Licence
terminated. They submit, moreover, that it would be “startling” if
the Commissioner for Railways (or his
or her successor in title) could have been
precluded from requiring removal of the Gas Main Assets pursuant to his or her
under the Licence by reason of the provisions of the
they say this is the logical corollary of Jemena’s contention.
Was or is there legislative authorisation for the Gas Main
Assets to remain on the Property?
The position up until and including 11 July 1996
plaintiffs did not dispute that, under the
, Jemena was a gas
distributor, the Gas Main Assets were part of a reticulation system and the
distribution of gas through Jemena’s
pipes was a primary gas activity
within the meaning of s 3
Nor did the plaintiffs dispute that
Jemena engaged in the reticulation of gas within s 4 of the
including using the Gas Main Assets. Under s 5(2), in the event
of inconsistency with any other Act in relation to any matter in respect
applied, it prevailed. Under s 31(4),
“[n]otwithstanding the provisions of [its] relevant Act”, Jemena was
to “do any act or thing necessary for or reasonably incidental
to engaging in the reticulation of gas if authorised to do so
Act”. The position is, thus, that the
not limit the statutory entitlements expressly or impliedly conferred by the
provided that a gas distributor shall not, without the
written approval of the Minister, “realise or dispose of an asset or
assets if to do so would significantly impair the continuing ability of the gas
distributor to carry on the gas activities carried
on by it”. On its face,
this suggests that Parliament considered that a gas distributor had some
proprietary interest in gas
infrastructure, as it presupposes that a gas
distributor would have power to realise or dispose those assets. Section 64
It is the duty of the directors of a gas distributor to consider the interests
of gas users as well as the interests of shareholders
of the gas distributor.
provisions had the effect that, at least subject to Ministerial approval, as
Jemena submits, it was under a statutory duty to
retain the Gas Main Assets,
noting, as indicated above, that it is agreed that these are critical gas
infrastructure.
was also a duty under s 107(4) (subject to a power under s 108 in
limited circumstances to refuse) for a gas distributor to
connect premises to
the gas distributor’s reticulation system, and to supply gas, where a
request is made from a person who
occupies premises on land, the boundary of
which is not more than 20 metres from an appropriate gas main (as defined) of a
distributor.
Under s 107A(1), a gas distributor such as Jemena had a
(a) to develop and maintain an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of
gas supply, and
(b) subject to paragraph (a), to comply, in so far as it is economical to do so,
with any reasonable request to supply gas to premises.
ss 113(1) and (2), if a failure to maintain supply was due to compliance
with a requirement under the
or “anything not within the
control of the gas distributor”, then the distributor would not be guilty
of an offence under
the Act. A failure of, or interference with, gas supply
could be excused, under s 113(3), where the failure was caused by
maintenance
(including repair) provided that reasonable notice was given (other
than in an emergency).
regard to these provisions, under the
Jemena was under a
duty (albeit in some circumstances qualified) to supply gas and to maintain its
supply of gas. This is consistent
with the observation made by Barwick CJ
Benning v Wong
at 262 as regards the duty on AGL to supply gas under
In order to comply with this obligation a gas distributor
such as Jemena would need to maintain, control, access and use its gas
reticulation system.
imposed obligations upon Jemena, as a gas distributor,
to supply gas of a prescribed standard: s 114. Also, under s 118,
obligations
were imposed upon Jemena, as a gas distributor which operated a gas
distribution system, to:
(a) maintain engineering records of the system which are, in the opinion of the
Corporation, adequate,
(b) carry out a comprehensive programme for the maintenance of the system and
review that programme at least once every 12 months,
(c) ensure that the system is operated and maintained in accordance with the
regulations.
Jemena submits, it was thus obliged under the
to maintain and
control its gas distribution system, which would include the Gas Main Assets.
Whilst no power to enter for this purpose
is expressly conferred by the
, a power to do so must be implied, for the purpose of Jemena carrying
out its obligations under the
s 125, a gas distributor’s gas inspector was given the power to enter
any land, premises or place for the purpose of discontinuing
supply for offence
or non-payment.
Section 130
130 Damage to reticulation system
(1) A person shall not wilfully or by culpable negligence damage or otherwise
interfere with:
(a) any part of the gas reticulation system of a gas distributor, or
(b) any metering device or gas regulator, or seal affixed to a metering device
or gas regulator, supplied by a gas distributor.
Penalty: 100 penalty units or imprisonment for 12 months, or both.
(2) This section does not apply to anything done with the approval of the gas
distributor.
a person contravened s 130, the gas distributor concerned was entitled (in
addition to any other right or remedy) to recover $50
for each contravention in
addition to any damage suffered by the distributor as a result of the
contravention: s 131.
s 130 did not require Jemena itself to protect gas infrastructure such as
the Gas Main Assets from the interference or occupation
of others, it had the
effect that persons, including any owners or occupiers of the land within which
gas infrastructure was situated,
were prohibited from damaging or interfering
with it without the approval of the gas distributor. In this way, it gave a gas
distributor,
such as Jemena, the right to control what was done, by others, to
infrastructure such as the Gas Main Assets.
explanatory note to the
Gas Bill 1986
, which was enacted as the
explained that the objects of the bill included:
to provide for the maintenance, protection and inspection of gas reticulation
would accept that this is one of the purposes of the
. Moreover,
one way in which the
sought to achieve that object was, as
explained above, to place on a gas distributor such as Jemena certain duties and
regard to this legislative scheme, Jemena’s contention that under the
there was an implied statutory right for the Gas Main Assets to
occupy or possess the land where they are installed should be accepted.
or not a right is to be implied turns on both the legislative purpose and the
detail of the applicable legislative scheme.
As Basten JA explained in
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Pacific National (ACT) Limited
(2007) 70 NSWLR 544
[2007] NSWCA 325
, the correct approach
when considering such issues is to identify the relevant statutory power or
interest and identify the consequences
as may flow from the scheme without
assuming that the those legal consequences will be the same as would flow from
an analogous general
law categorisation of the power or interest.
would simply make no sense were Jemena to have no right of occupation or
possession of the strata of land where its gas infrastructure
is located given
its obligations as explained above, the role which installed gas infrastructure
such as the Gas Main Assets plays
in the system of gas distribution and supply,
and the provisions to protect that system, as reflected in the
It would also undermine the statutory purpose of facilitating and maintaining
gas supply to the requisite standards were landowners
and occupiers entitled to
require the removal of critical gas infrastructure such as the Gas Main Assets
(noting that they could
not themselves remove them). It is, moreover, reasonably
necessary to the fulfilment of its statutory duties for Jemena to have an
implied statutory entitlement for its gas infrastructure to occupy or possess
the land where it is situated. This conclusion does
not in any way depend upon
whether the installation of such infrastructure was pursuant to some express
statutory authority or was
pursuant to a contract that AGL was authorised to
enter into. There is no reason why the precise indicia of the lawfulness of
installation
should impact upon continuing rights of occupation or possession of
strata of land where gas infrastructure is installed. In this
regard, it is
unnecessary to decide whether the position would be any different as regards gas
infrastructure that had not been lawfully
installed as there was no suggestion
that this was the case as regards the Gas Main Assets.
is unnecessary for the purposes of the second separate question to characterise
this entitlement as a matter of property law. It
suffices to say that it is an
entitlement in the nature of a statutory right of occupancy or possession, the
effect of which is that
Jemena has an implied statutory right of possession as
regards the stratum of land where the Gas Main Assets are located.
to the plaintiffs’ contention that it would be startling if such an
implied right were to overcome contractual rights under
the Licence, there is
nothing outlandish about subsequent statutory rights conflicting with
contractual entitlements: see eg
Scanlan’s New Neon Ltd v Tooheys
(1943) 67 CLR 169
[1943] HCA 43
, and, as the Licence terminated well
before the periods of claimed trespasses, it is unnecessary to consider whether
Jemena could
contract out of its statutory entitlements under the
: see eg the discussion in
Price v Spoor
(2021) 270 CLR 450
[2021] HCA 20
(Steward J).
analysis is also consistent with judicial consideration of the rights associated
with gas infrastructure such as the Gas Main Assets.
As explained by
Windeyer J in
Benning v Wong
at 294 (in dissent as to the
Gas mains are not themselves land or an interest in land:
Commissioner for
Main Roads v. North Shore Gas Co. Ltd.
120 CLR 118
[1967] HCA 41].
But by virtue of its statute the Gas Co. was in lawful occupation of the land
where its mains lay:
R. v. Brighton Gas Light and Coke Co.
[1826] EngR 610
108 ER 173].
plaintiffs contend that this observation is necessarily dependent upon AGL
having been authorised by statute to lay the Gas Main
Assets, as they were in
Benning v Wong
. No such qualification is stated by Windeyer J.
Moreover, it is difficult to see why his Honour’s analysis should depend
there having been statutory (as opposed to contractual) authority for the
laying of pipes in circumstances where AGL had obligations,
under the applicable
legislation, to maintain its gas assets and to supply gas, including by using
those assets.
mains and pipes were also considered by the High Court in
North Shore Gas (No
. The issue was whether, for rating purposes, gas infrastructure including
mains and pipes were goods, wares or merchandise for the
purpose of the
Duties Act 1920-1933
(NSW). Rich J held that they were not. His Honour
observed, at 61-62, that gas mains and pipes had been:
placed in the ground for no temporary purpose, but to serve the end for which
they are designed. In other words, they will remain
in the soil until they have
exhausted their useful lives, and then only will they be removed. They remain,
however, the property
of the company. They are placed in roads and other public
places not belonging to the company and there they lie
in alieno solo
in contemplation of law owned and possessed by the company. ... The pipes are
buried to serve as a permanent or quasi-permanent
means of conveying and
supplying gas from reservoirs or containers to the various points of consumption
The problem arises from the
provisions of the company’s Private Act, which
authorizes it to place the pipes in the soil of the roadways and other places,
to remove them, to control them and to retain the ownership and in effect the
possession of them.
observations were cited with apparent approval by the plurality in
Shore Gas (No 2)
, where the North Shore Gas Company sought compensation for
the statutory resumption of land in which its gas mains and pipes were
which had the consequence that the gas mains and pipes were destroyed. This
claim depended, in part, upon the company showing
that its interest in the gas
mains and pipes constituted an interest in land: at 125. The plurality rejected
that contention but
observed that:
The exercise of the right to lay pipes in another’s land is not intended
to make, and does not make, for the better and fuller
enjoyment of the land and
the right, when exercised, confers a right to occupy some part of the land in a
very limited and special
plurality then said, at 127-128, that the answer to the question raised in the
case was supplied by the decision of Evershed J
Newcastle-under-Lyme
Corporation v
[1947] Ch 92
at 103-104. There, his
Lordship explained that the undertakers of pipes and cables laid under special
acts should be treated as having
“no greater rights or interests ... than
are necessary for the fulfilment of the object of the statute” and that,
regard to this, they had the interest of “licensees without any
title, legal or equitable, in the land itself”.
North Shore Gas (No 2)
at 131, Windeyer J (agreeing in the result)
said that it was “futile really to try to classify and describe the [North
Gas Company’s] rights in respect of mains and pipes under streets
and roads according to the traditional categories and terminology
of the law of
real property”. His Honour then observed at 132 that decisions regarding
the status of mains and pipes for rating
purposes established that:
while a gas-pipe is embedded in the soil the land where it is is in the
occupation of the gas company.
133 his Honour referred to the company’s “mere right of
occupation” and said that the right was in fact “sui
His Honour also accepted what Evershed J said in
at 134, described the company as having “something more than a mere
revocable licence”.
analysis in each of these cases supports my conclusion that Jemena is in lawful
occupation or possession of the land where the
Gas Main Assets are located.
is also necessary, in this context, to consider the decision of Ward J in
Rosebanner Pty Ltd v EnergyAustralia
[2009] NSWSC 43
223 FLR 406
Rosebanner (SC)
in which one issue was
whether electricity infrastructure, which was claimed to be a trespass on the
plaintiff’s land, had
been lawfully erected. There was no suggestion of
any contractual or proprietary entitlement to erect the infrastructure at the
it was erected, albeit that an easement was created for the transmission
line, but not the pole, stays or feeder line (together,
the pole), some 2 or 3
years later. Ward J held that the applicable legislation authorised the
erection of the infrastructure and
then turned to consider whether there was
authority to maintain the infrastructure on the premises. Having considered
Sydney Electricity Act 1990
(NSW), her Honour said at
I consider that the
Sydney Electricity Act
, by giving Sydney Electricity
the function of “the provision
and maintenance
of works for the
supply of electricity” (s 5(1)(b)) and by transferring to it the
assets of Sydney County Council (Sch 5, s
4) (which included the
electricity infrastructure), demonstrated sufficient legislative intention that
Sydney Electricity have the
authority to maintain those assets in place where
they had previously been lawfully installed, notwithstanding the absence of an
express power of entry onto private lands for that purpose. (emphasis in
Honour then considered the
Electricity Supply Act 1995
(NSW), noting in
of that Act which conferred a right to enter premises
for the purpose of maintaining electricity works. Ward J concluded at
Therefore, even if the
Sydney Electricity Act
did not by implication do
so, in my view, the
Electricity Supply Act
(by vesting ownership of the
electricity infrastructure in EnergyAustralia
and by giving
EnergyAustralia the power to enter onto premises, inter alia, to maintain
electricity works for the purposes of exercising
its functions under that or any
other Act in circumstances where one of the principal statutory functions of
EnergyAustralia was
to establish, maintain and operate facilities for the
distribution of electricity (s 9(2) of the
Energy Services Corporations
), impliedly conferred on EnergyAustralia a licence to keep in place not
only any electricity infrastructure installed by it under
the Act but also
electricity infrastructure lawfully installed by its predecessor, even where
that infrastructure was on private
appeal, the Court of Appeal found that the pole was lawfully erected, upholding
one of the bases upon which Ward J found that there
was statutory authority
to erect the pole. At [97], the Court held that the respondent was entitled to
keep the pole on the land
and there was no trespass in its continued presence on
the land. It should be noted that this was a finding that there was no trespass,
not that acts which would otherwise have been a trespass were justified by
statutory authority. At [98] the Court explained this
conclusion:
The pole became vested in the respondent as successor to the Sydney County
Council. It was owned by it as part of its electricity
Electricity
The respondent had the power to alter or maintain
(in the sense of look after) it
, and was entitled to enter on lot
1234 for the purpose of maintaining or repairing it
(s 54(1)(b)).
appellants could not interfere with it
, or even climb on it
In respectful agreement with the primary judge, in our opinion
this necessarily carried with it an entitlement to keep on lot 1234
the respondent’s electricity infrastructure, the pole, originally lawfully
erected on the land. The appellants could
not remove it or complain that its
presence on their land was a trespass.
the legislative scheme under the
did not contain all of these
indicia, and, in particular, there was no express statutory conferral of
ownership in the
(although the plaintiffs accept ownership as a
matter of common law), and no express entitlement in AGL to enter the Property
maintain the Gas Main Assets, this analysis is consistent with my analysis
set out above. It will rarely be the case that the indicia
relied upon to found
a right to maintain infrastructure on property will be identical as between
cases. What is necessary, in that
context, is to consider whether the statutory
indicia present suffice to indicate that such an entitlement should be implied.
the reasons I have already given, as was the case in
the present case it should.
to the extent that the plaintiffs contend that
distinguishable from the present case because the lawful authority for the
installation of the Gas Main Assets derived (as is
assumed for the purpose of
the second separate question) from the Licence and not statute, that contention
should be rejected. The
fact that in
, and indeed in
v Strathfield Municipal Council
[1971] NSWLR 122 and
Quirindi Shire
Council v Gigli
(1985) 3 NSWLR 178
which were both noted in
at [95], the authority for installation of the infrastructure
derived from statute does not suggest that a different consequence
where lawful authority for installation was pursuant to a contract which was
itself entered into pursuant to statutory
authority. As I have already observed,
there is no good reason why a different consequence would flow from the
legislative scheme
for that reason.
should finally be noted that in
the Court, at [102], referred
to the enactment of the
Electricity Supply Amendment (Protection of
Electricity Works) Act 2006
which had inserted s 53 into
Electricity Supply Act
and which was to the effect that an
“action by an owner or occupier of land did not lie against a
‘network operator’
by reason of the presence in, on or over the land
of existing electricity works, or the operation or use of the electricity works,
save where there was a registered easement”. The Court confirmed that this
legislation, which it described as “precautionary”
at [104], did not
alter its conclusion as to the correct interpretation of the legislation prior
to its introduction.
The position after 12 July 1996
position is all the more clear after 12 July 1996 when the
into operation. The objects of the
at s 3(1) include,
relevantly:
(a) to encourage the development of a competitive market in gas, so as to
promote the thermally efficient use of gas and to deliver
a safe and reliable
supply of gas in compliance with the principles of ecologically sustainable
development contained in
Protection of the Environment
Administration Act 1991
(b) to regulate gas reticulation and gas supply, so as to protect the interests
of customers,
(b1) to facilitate the continuity of supply of natural gas to customers
as is clear from the second reading speech in the Legislative Council on 19 June
1996 for the Gas
Supply Bill 1996
, which became the
, one of the
aims of the
was to facilitate third party access to the natural
gas distribution systems by establishing a right of third party access to the
pipelines and pipes which deliver gas to the final customer. It was also noted
in the second reading speech that the access to be
provided by the bill would
“apply to the natural gas distribution or reticulation systems such as
those owned and operated
by the AGL Gas Companies”.
purposes would be undermined were there no entitlement for gas infrastructure
owned by entities such as Jemena to remain
applies as regards gas works, distribution pipelines and gas
networks, all of which are defined in the Dictionary to that Act. It
agreed fact that the Gas Main Assets fall within the ambit of those definitions.
Jemena is a network operator under the Act.
Provision is made in s 50 for a
network operator to serve a notice requiring that work be carried out if it
“has reasonable
cause to believe that any structure or thing placed in, on
or near its gas works is destroying, damaging or interfering with those
works” (noting that this provision was amended by the
Legislation Amendment Act 2021
(NSW), but not so as to alter the meaning set
out above). If the work is not carried out within a reasonable time the network
may carry out the work itself. A similar power is conferred under
s 50A where a network operator “has reasonable cause to believe
the carrying out or proposed carrying out of excavation work in, on or near its
gas works” could destroy, damage or interfere
with those works or could
make them a potential risk to public safety. Thus, a network operator such as
Jemena has a right to take
steps to protect its gas infrastructure, including
from acts of the owner of the land where they are located (and that is made
in s 50A(6)). Significantly, under both ss 50 and 50A, a
network operator may apply for an injunction to prevent the placement of
structure or thing, or excavation works.
Sections 55
to 64 deal with the rights of entry and inspection of gas industry inspectors,
and the consequences of those rights being
exercised. Section 72 makes it an
offence to prevent, hinder or obstruct an inspector exercising functions under
66 provides that a person must not interfere with “a network
operator’s gas works unless authorised to do so by
the network
operator”. Sections 67 and 68 make similar provision as regards gas
meters and seals, and s 69 provides that a
person “must not connect a
gas installation to a network operator’s distribution pipeline or
distribution system unless
authorised to do so by the network operator”.
analysis at [
] above applies
equally as regards the
. Jemena had at least an implied statutory
right for the Gas Mains Assets to remain on the Property pursuant to the
and above that, however, it is necessary to consider the consequence of
s 52 of the
, upon which (for obvious reasons) Jemena placed
particular significance. This provides that:
52 Ownership of gas works
(1) A network operator is the owner of its gas works, whether or not the land
in, on or over which they are situated is owned by
the network operator.
(2) A network operator’s gas works are not to be taken in execution of any
judgment against a person other than the network
operator under any process of a
(3) The provisions of this section have effect despite anything contained in
Real Property Act 1900
Section 52(3)
was added by the
Real Property and Conveyancing Legislation Amendment Act
(NSW), (the
) cl 3.9 of Schedule 3 (at the same
time as analogous provisions were added into
Electricity
(the legislation considered in
Water Industry Competition Act 2006
(NSW) (the legislation
considered in
). As the plaintiffs recognise in their written
submissions,
is confirmatory of the position that pertained from at
least the time of the
, that a gas distributor such as Jemena
owned its gas infrastructure irrespective of who owned the land on which it was
located. Further,
as the plaintiffs accepted in oral submission, they are no
different materially than the
Water Industry Competition Act
the second reading speech to the
, Mr Collier, Parliamentary
Secretary said:
In an attempt to limit and clarify the extent of the statutory exceptions the
bill proposes to amend section 42—the key section
Real Property
—which establishes the features of indefeasibility. The amendment
provides that
is to prevail over any inconsistent provision of any
other Act or law unless the inconsistent provision provides otherwise. During
preparation of the bill the Department of Lands undertook a review of New South
Wales legislation to identify any existing provisions
that could potentially
impact on the principle of indefeasibility. An amendment is to be made to those
Acts that are intended to
create unrecorded statutory interests in land to
confirm that the provisions of the identified Act will override
Real Property Act 1900
Payne JA (with whom Ward P and Stern and McHugh JJA agreed)
explained in
at [93], the right conferred by
Water Industry Competition Act
(which is relevantly the same as
s 52(1) of the
), is to confer an exclusive use of a piece
of land, being the stratum of land occupied by the pipeline. The particular
features his
Honour relied upon at [93] were that the appellant in that case had
statutory rights to exclude all others from the stratum of land,
to control and
exploit the stratum for reward, and the right of alienation which necessarily
includes the infrastructure in the existing
stratum of land it occupies. The
same can be said of the Gas Main Assets given the rights conferred by the
despite the plaintiffs’ attempts to distinguish
notwithstanding that the conclusion of Payne JA was reached in a case concerning
Duties Act 1997
(NSW) (the issue in
being whether
pipelines were an interest in land under that Act), his Honour’s analysis
in this respect did not depend to any
significant extent upon provisions in the
His Honour’s conclusion as to construction of
Water Industry Competition Act
applies equally to
s 52(1) of the
this regard, whilst it is true that at [107] Payne JA referred to the
definition of an “interest in land” in the
analysis of statutory context, I do not regard that as diminishing the force of
his Honour’s construction of
Water Industry
Competition Act
by reference to its own text and purpose, nor as providing a
substantive basis upon which his Honour’s analysis can properly
distinguished here. His Honour’s observations at [107] are in no sense
integral to his Honour’s conclusion as to statutory
construction, which
relied primarily upon the text and purpose of the
Water Industry Competition
distinguishable from the present case on the basis
that the sale of the Gas Main Assets could only, under the
to a licensed network operator, that the land on which the infrastructure was
was largely Crown land or that the question of
construction arose in the context of an issue under the
were the terms of
Water Industry Competition Act
provided that charges should not be paid by licensed network operators, critical
to his Honour’s construction of
None of these matters go to the
essence of Payne JA’s reasoning.
the plaintiffs’ submissions as to the entitlement to levy a charge on gas
infrastructure not turning upon an ownership
interest, however, I have placed no
significance on s 51 of the
(which is equivalent to
Water Industry Competition Act
) in my reasoning.
held, at [101], that
Water Industry
Competition Act
was “designed to make clear what was always the
intention of
” of that Act, which was to confirm that
“the unrecorded statutory interest in land created by s 64(1) would
the interest in that land recorded pursuant to
Property Act
At [128], his Honour held that the legislative context
differed significantly from that of the
Water Industry
Competition Act
given that that legislation did not include provisions
equivalent to those in
Water Industry Competition Act
In both respects, the analysis applies equally to s 52 of the
contrary to the plaintiffs’ submission, the fact that the
does not include any provision equivalent to
Electricity Supply Act
, precluding any action by the owner or occupier of
land against the network operator by reason of the presence or operation or use
of electricity works, does not stand against my conclusions as set out above.
Section 53(2)
was added to the
Electricity Supply Act
in 2006 by the
Electricity Supply Amendment (Protection of Electricity Works) Act
speech of the Hon Mr Tripodi, Minister for Energy, in the Legislative
Assembly when the bill that introduced these amendments
was read a second time
suggests that the amendments were introduced because of uncertainty as to
whether long term use combined with
the statutory rights and responsibilities of
network operators to operate, maintain and repair essential electricity
infrastructure
would provide a defence to actions in nuisance and trespass. As
Ward J said in
Rosebanner (SC)
at [75], “recognition by the
legislature of uncertainty” does not mean that, properly construed, the
legislation did
not in any event protect network owners; see also
at [102]–[104] (at [
note that the plaintiffs reserved their right to say, on any appeal from my
orders, that
was wrongly decided.
The answer to
the second separate question
follows that the second question should be answered “yes”.
Throughout the periods of the trespass claims Jemena had,
at least, implied
statutory authority for the continued presence, maintenance and use of the Gas
Main Assets at the Property. Moreover,
and whilst my answer to the second
separate question does not depend upon this, from 12 July 1996, Jemena had a
statutory interest
in the stratum of land where the Gas Main Assets were
The third and fourth separate questions
follows from the conclusions I have already reached that the third and fourth
separate questions should also be answered
party contended that anything other than the usual order as to costs should be
made. Accordingly, the orders I make are:
(1) I answer the first separate question referred to in the order of
Peden J made on 28 August 2025: Yes.
(2) I answer the second separate question referred to in the order of
Peden J made on 28 August 2025, as amended by the order of
made on 9 October 2025: Yes.
(3) I answer the third separate question referred to in the order of
Peden J made on 28 August 2025: Yes.
(4) I answer the fourth separate question referred to in the order of
Peden J made on 28 August 2025: Yes.
(5) The plaintiffs to pay the defendant’s costs of the determination of
the separate questions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (434 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter