URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/650.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aboriginal Housing Office v Corrie (Social Housing) [2013] NSWCTTT 650 (23 December 2013)
Aboriginal Housing Office v Corrie (Social Housing)
[2013] NSWCTTT 650
December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Social Housing Division
APPLICATION NO:
SH 13/35776
Aboriginal Housing Office
RESPONDENT:
Sarah Corrie
APPLICATION:
Application under
Section 91(1)(a)
Residential Tenancies Act
for a termination order due to supply of prohibited drug from the
11 October 2013 at Newcastle
APPEARANCES:
Mr Paul White appeared on behalf of the applicant.
Mr Griffiths of the
Northern NSW Aboriginal Tenants Advice Service appeared for and with the
respondent.
Whether the tenant permitted the use of the residential premises for the
purposes of supply of a prohibited drug.
LEGISLATION:
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2002
Residential
Tenancies Act 2010
Landlord. Tenant. Supply of prohibited drug from residential premises.
Termination of residential tenancy agreement.
residential tenancy agreement is terminated in accordance with
Section 91(1)(a)
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
of the residential premises is to be given to the landlord.
accordance with
Section 114(1)
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
order for possession is suspended until 20 March 2014.
tenant is to pay a daily occupation fee, being 1/7 of the weekly rebated rent,
from 17 December 2013 to the date possession is
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
4 July 2013 NSW Land and Housing Corporation
made an application for a
termination order under
Section 91(1)(a)
Residential Tenancies Act
(“the Act”),
and an order for the payment of an
occupation fee.
respondent to the application is Sarah Corrie, (“the
22 July 2013 the name of the applicant was amended to Aboriginal Housing Office,
(“the landlord”).
matter was listed for hearing at Newcastle on 11 October
Act applies to residential tenancy agreements for premises situated in NSW. A
residential tenancy agreement is an agreement under
which a person grants to
another person, for value, a right of occupation of premises for the purpose of
use as a residence.
4 November 2011 the landlord entered into a residential tenancy agreement giving
the right to occupy premises at Rutherford NSW for value,
(i.e. the payment of rent on a weekly basis).
residential tenancy agreement is not an agreement to which the Act does not
apply. (See Section 8 of the Act).
premises are not premises to which the Act does not apply. (See Section 7 of the
91(1)(a) of the Act provides that the Tribunal may, on application by a
landlord, make a termination order if it is satisfied
that the tenant, or any
person who is occupying or jointly occupying the residential premises, has
intentionally or recklessly caused
or permitted the use of the residential
premises for the purposes of the manufacture, sale, cultivation or supply of any
drug within the meaning of the
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
114(1) of the Act provides that the Tribunal may suspend the operation of an
order for possession of residential premises
for a specified period if it is
satisfied that it is desirable to do so, having regard to the relative hardship
likely to be caused
to the landlord and tenant by the
suspension.
114(2) of the Act provides that the Tribunal may impose an obligation on a
tenant to pay a specified occupation fee for the
period for which an order of
possession is suspended.
Tribunal has jurisdiction under the Act to make an order terminating the
residential tenancy agreement and an order for the payment
of an occupation fee.
the tenant intentionally or recklessly caused or permitted the use of the
residential premises for the purpose of sale or
supply of a prohibited
an order of termination under Section 91(1)(a) of the Act is mandatory or
discretionary.
APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE
applicant tendered the following documents:
(a) 5 coloured photographs, including photograph of cannabis leaf seized during
execution of search warrant at residential premises
on 5 December
(b) Transcript of police interview with Ty Cruikshanks, the tenant’s
ex-boyfriend;
(c) Notes of police interview with the tenant;
(d) Residential tenancy agreement;
(e) Court attendance notice, facts sheets and statement of Senior Constable Glen
Reid in relation to matter of
Police –v- Ty Cruikshanks
Glen Reid gave sworn evidence to the Tribunal on behalf of the
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
tenant tendered the following documents:
(i) Statement of Sarah Corrie;
(ii) Letter from Senior Constable Craig Bullen;
(iii) Letter from Ty Cruikshanks;
(iv) Letter from Karen Riley (Mr Cruikshanks’ mother);
(v) Letter from Kerrie King (the tenant’s mother);
(vi) Letter from the Principal of Telarah Public School;
(vii) Bail document for Ty Cruikshanks;
(viii) Copy of Ty Cruikshank’s driver’s licence;
(ix) Medical certificate;
(x) Centrelink statement;
(xi) NSW Land and Housing Corporation v Johnstone
[2010] NSWCTTT
tenant gave sworn evidence to the Tribunal.
4 November 2011 the landlord and the tenant signed a residential tenancy
agreement giving the tenant the right to occupy the residential
premises at
Rutherford.
tenant is an aboriginal woman who resides in the residential premises with her
four children who are aged between 4 and 11. She
has lived in public housing
since she was 17.
of the tenant’s children attend Telarah Public School. The School
Principal, Tony Gadd, provided a letter in support of
the tenant remaining in
the residential premises. Mr Gadd stated:
“Miss Corrie’s 3 children attend our school and are currently
well engaged and demonstrate satisfactory attendance. They
participate actively
in school life by joining in both cultural and sporting activities and have
strong relationships with their
This has not always been the case and it has been in close partnership
with Miss Corrie that the school has supported her to help
her children be
successful at school. Their transition to Telarah Public School was difficult
and it would be a shame to enforce
Miss Corrie to enrol her children in another
public school.”
tenant has known Ty Cruikshanks for a number of years. Mr
Cruikshanks lives with his mother at another address in
Rutherford.
a number of occasions in 2012, the tenant allowed Mr Cruikshanks to stay
overnight at the residential premises.
Cruikshanks wanted to move in with the tenant, but she refused because of his
addiction to marijuana.
October 2012 the tenant was struggling with depression and other issues arising
from past and continuing domestic violence at the
hands of the father of her
October to December 2012, Mr Cruikshanks stayed with the tenant a few nights per
week, so that she could sleep.
5 December 2012 police executed a search warrant at the residential premises.
Cruikshanks declared to police that he had cannabis in the premises. Police
seized a bag containing 31 grams of cannabis leaf and
two bags containing a
total of 62 grams of cannabis head. Mr Cruikshanks’ mobile phone
was seized and contained text
messages relating to drug transactions. He
admitted to selling cannabis from the residential premises in small, (0.5 gram
and 1 gram),
$10.00 and $20.00 deals, to support his habit as a cannabis smoker.
He said that the tenant had nothing to do with the drug transactions.
Cruikshanks told police that he did the transactions in the backyard of the
residential premises, up the road, in the alleyway,
or up at the
Cruikshanks said that he didn’t want the tenant to know what he was doing.
He was asked,
“Did Sarah have any knowledge what was going on?”
, “I think she kinda maybe knew but she, I didn’t
actually tell her.”
He said that the tenant never saw the transactions
taking place.
Cruikshanks admitted to selling cannabis to 15 to 20 of his friends in the week
before his arrest. He said that he had been dealing
drugs from the residential
premises for a week or two.
tenant was questioned by police. She signed Senior Constable Glen Reid’s
notes of the conversation which appear below:
“Q. What can you tell me.
don’t really know much. Ty smokes a lot and sells a bit – to himself
money for more pot or to pay my bills.
Q. Have you sold any cannabis for him.
you been present when Ty has dealt cannabis to other
A. Yeah, I’m usually out Friday or Saturday night.
Q. Have you done anything to stop it.
A. Yeah. Fought about selling drugs.
Q. You were aware of the cannabis - 3 ounces of pot in your house.
Q. What was Ty’s intention with the 3 ounces.
A. Smoke it, I’m not sure.
Q. The money.
A. Some of money was mine.
Q. Where did the money come from.
A. Some was mine, some was his.
Q. Was any money from drug sales.
A. I did tell him to stop selling cannabis and save it.
Q. How long has he been living here.
A. On and off for a month.
Q. Are you and Ty in a relationship.
A. Just seeing each other – not a relationship.
you tell me about what happens when someone buys drugs from your
I’m in the lounge room, Ty will come in the kitchen, depends where the
kids are, someone comes to the house, usually his
mates, they just turn up, they
talk, the person asks how much cannabis they want, they pay Ty money and Ty
gives them cannabis wherever
he has stashed it.”
tenant denied that she made admissions to Police, that she knew that Ty was
selling drugs from her house. The tenant maintained
that on the morning the
supplying drugs. She said
that she never took notice of what was going on around
her. She did not know that Ty was supplying drugs. She only had knowledge
Ty’s addiction to, and possession of, marijuana.
tenant provided a letter from Ty Cruikshanks. He stated that the tenant never
knew of his criminal activities, until the morning
of 5 December
2013, when the Police came to the house. He asserted that the tenant would not
have such behaviour around
her children. He wrote:
“Sarah and her children should not be removed from their home
because of me, they had nothing to do with it and are
tenant provided a letter from Mr Cruikshanks’ mother, Karen Riley. Ms
Riley wrote that the tenant had no idea or involvement
in her son’s
activities:
“She is innocent in all this as are her children. Sarah is a loving,
caring mother who would never allow this type of activity
to go on in her house
around her children. Neither Sarah or her four children should be made to pay
for the mistakes of my son,
he put Sarah and her children in a position that he
had no right to and for that he has paid the price with the law as well as
his friendship with Sarah and her family.”
tenant provided a statement from her mother, Kerrie King. Ms King visited her
daughter 3 to 4 times a week during 2012. She never
saw any drugs or
drug-related activity at the residential premises. She described her daughter as
“very anti-drug”.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Senior Constable Reid’s
notes of the conversation with the tenant on 5 December
2012 are truthful and
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenant knew that Mr
Cruikshanks sold cannabis from the residential premises
on a number of occasions
in late 2012.
the matter of
Department of Housing v CTTT
[2003] NSWSC 150
J considered the proper meaning of the word “permitted”. His Honour
said that it connoted an authorisation of the
use, allowing the behaviour to
occur, turning a blind eye to the use, or not taking steps to prevent a
contravention. I respectfully
adopt His Honour’s reasoning.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenant permitted the use
of the residential premises for the sale of cannabis
leaf. She turned a blind
eye to Mr Cruikshanks’ drug dealing from the premises and took no steps to
leaf is a prohibited drug within the meaning of the
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985
scale of the drug supply operation was small - at the lowest end. I am satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that Mr Cruikshanks
supplied 15 to 20 people
with cannabis leaf in $10.00 (0.5 grams) or $20.00 (1 gram) deals over a period
of one to two weeks.
tenant was not charged with any criminal offence.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenant was not involved in
the supply or sale of drugs from the residential
tenant’s culpability was that of a passive bystander. Although she was not
actively involved in the drug transactions, she
permitted Mr Cruikshanks
to use the residential premises for this purpose.
Constable Bullen wrote a letter in support of the tenant. He advised that the
tenant assisted police with their enquiries and
has never been charged with an
offence involving drugs.
tenant stated that she was unaware that her tenancy could be terminated because
Ty was in possession of marijuana. If she had
known this, she would not have
allowed him in her home. She would not have put herself and her children in that
tenant ended her relationship with Mr Cruikshanks following his arrest and he
has not stayed at the residential premises since
that day. I accept that the
tenant regrets letting Mr Cruikshanks stay with her.
tenant is very concerned to keep a roof over the heads of her children. She says
that she has learnt from this experience and
guarantees that nothing like this
will ever happen again. She asks for another chance.
the residential tenancy agreement is terminated, the tenant and her children
will have nowhere to live. Her parents are unable
to assist. She has no
references. She has never lived in private rental accommodation.
tenant has been “a wreck” since she received notification of the
Tribunal application. She has been worried sick,
not knowing what to do.
tenant provided a medical certificate dated 18 July 2013, verifying that she is
suffering from acute depression and anxiety arising
from the prospect of
tenant’s mother, Ms King, stated that her daughter has gone through a lot
since childhood, including being a victim of domestic
violence, which is still
ongoing. The tenant has suffered depression for many years and she attempts to
deal with her problems on
of domestic violence, the tenant tries to avoid conflict and did not watch
everything Ty Cruikshanks did with his friends
at her house.
moving to Rutherford, the tenant has come a long way. The children have settled
down, their school work has improved, they play
sport on the weekends and have
their friends over to their home.
King is concerned that if the tenant has to move, it will set her and her
children back.
Application of the relevant
91 of the Act provides:
91 Use of premises for illegal
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by a landlord, make a termination order if
it is satisfied that the tenant, or any person who
although not a tenant is
occupying or jointly occupying the residential premises, has intentionally or
recklessly caused or permitted:
(a) the use of the residential premises or any property adjoining or adjacent to
the premises (including any property that is available
for use by the tenant in
common with others) for the purposes of the manufacture, sale, cultivation or
supply of any prohibited drug
within the meaning of the
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985
(b) the use of the residential premises for any other unlawful purpose and that
the use is sufficient to justify the termination.
(2) In considering whether to make a termination order on the ground specified
in subsection (1)(b), the Tribunal may consider (but
is not limited to
considering) the following:
(a) the nature of the unlawful use,
(b) any previous unlawful uses,
(c) the previous history of the tenancy.
(3) The termination order may specify that the order for possession takes effect
immediately.
(4) A landlord may make an application under this section without giving the
tenant a termination notice.
(5) The Tribunal may make a termination order under this section that takes
effect before the end of the fixed term if the residential
tenancy agreement is
a fixed term agreement.
application of Section 91 of the Act was recently considered in the case of
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v Cain
This was an appeal against the Tribunal’s
refusal to make a termination order, despite being satisfied that the tenant was
the residential premises for the supply of a prohibited drug. The landlord
took the decision on appeal arguing that, being satisfied
of the illegal
conduct, the Tribunal had no discretion to refuse to make a termination order.
The Court agreed with the landlord,
holding that Section 91(1)(a) required the
Tribunal to order termination of the residential tenancy agreement. The only
discretion was to determine when possession was to be returned.
the matter of Cain, Her Honour Judge Gibson stated:
“The determination of issues relating to the construction of
statutes turn upon the particular statutory context in each case.
intention of the legislature must be ascertained, rather than embarking on a
course of construing individual provisions
in isolation (Ward v Williams, supra
at 505). The question of how to interpret the word “may” is to be
solved from th4e
context, from the particular provisions, or from the general
scope and objects of the Act which confers the power (Ward v Williams,
505, citing Julius v Bishop of Oxford (1880) LR 5 AC, at p 235).
The discretions given to the adjudicator under s 91(1)(b) clearly relate
to the very broad range of conduct which could be encompassed
by ‘unlawful
conduct’. Such conduct could range from conducting a brothel on the
premises, to cases where the nature
of the unlawful use was relatively minor and
there was a previously good tenancy history. In circumstances such as these,
and extent of the unlawful activities are clearly relevant as to
whether this streamlined procedure, which provides for the waiving
requirements, as well as for the making of an order of an immediate nature.
However, the serious nature of the offences under the
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act
identified in s 91(1) is such that no further inquiry is
required. I accept the submission of the landlord that a finding that the
tenant had in fact committed the unlawful acts referred to in s 91(1)(a) is
sufficient to trigger the issuing of a termination order
and that in those
circumstances, the section is mandatory, in much the same way that s 84 is
mandatory (Howard v B Miles Womens Foundation
Inc, supra).
This does not mean, however, that the termination must be immediate. The
terms of ss 91(3) and 91(5) do give the CTTT a limited discretion,
namely as to
whether or not the order should be immediate.”
I had a discretion whether or not to terminate the residential tenancy
agreement, I would exercise that discretion in favour of
the tenant and I would
refuse to make an order of termination, for the reasons appearing
tenant herself did not commit any unlawful act. Mr Cruikshanks’ illegal
conduct was relatively minor and took place over
a short period of one to two
weeks. The tenant ended her relationship with Mr Cruikshanks following his
arrest and assisted police
with their enquiries. He has not stayed at the
residential premises since.
tenant has a previously good tenancy history. The tenant has lived in public
housing since she was 17. No evidence was presented
of any other problems with
the present tenancy, or problems arising from any past tenancy.
tenant is an aboriginal women with four children aged between 4 and 11. The
children are settled at Telarah Public School and,
if they are required to move
from their home, they will be detrimentally affected. She has no references and
no alternative accommodation
with family or friends available. The tenant
suffers from depression and is a victim of domestic violence.
was no evidence presented of any serious adverse effects the tenancy has had on
neighbouring residents, or other persons. There
was no evidence presented
indicating that a failure to terminate the agreement would subject neighbouring
residents, or other persons,
or property, to unreasonable risk.
tenant has never been in breach of an order of the Tribunal.
Unfortunately,
in accordance with the decision in Cain, I do not have a discretion whether or
not to terminate the residential tenancy
agreement. As I am satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that the tenant permitted the residential premises to
be used by Ty
Cruikshanks for the purpose of the sale of a prohibited drug,
namely, cannabis leaf, an order of termination is mandatory.
tenant provided me with a copy of the decision in the matter of
NSW Land and
Housing Corporation v Johnstone
NSWCTTT 602
(“Johnstone”).
The decision concerned an application for
termination under the
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
That act is no
longer in force, having been replaced by the
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
There was no provision similar to
Section 91(1)(a)
in the former act.
the matter of Johnstone, the Tribunal was satisfied that the tenant had breached
the residential tenancy agreement by permitting
the premises to be used for the
storage and smoking of cannabis. The Tribunal Member found that, although the
breach was serious,
it had been remedied since the culprit, (not the tenant),
left the residential premises. The Tribunal Member exercised his discretion
allowed the tenant to remain in the premises.
accordance with the decision in Cain, I do not have such a discretion in
deciding an application under
Section 91(1)(a).
CONCLUSIONS
am satisfied that the tenant permitted the use of the residential premises for
the purpose of sale of a prohibited drug.
am therefore required to terminate the residential tenancy agreement under
Section 91(1)(a) of the Act, in accordance with the decision
of the premises is to be given to the landlord.
am satisfied that it is desirable to suspend the operation of the order for
possession until 20 March 2014, in accordance with Section
114(1) of the Act. I
am satisfied that failure to suspend the operation of the order for possession
would cause hardship to the tenant.
There is no evidence that suspension of the
order for possession would cause hardship to the landlord.
accordance with Section 114(2) of the Act, the tenant is to pay a daily
occupation fee, being 1/7 of the weekly rebated rent, from
17 December
2013 until the date possession of the residential premises is given to the
Notwithstanding
the making of an order terminating the residential tenancy agreement, I
sincerely hope that the Aboriginal Housing
Office may decide to give the tenant
a chance, by offering her a new residential tenancy agreement, so that she and
her children
can remain in their present home at
Rutherford.
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy
23 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (224 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter