URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lister v Woolworths Limited [2003] NSWCC 19 (28 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Lister v Woolworths
Limited [2003] NSWCC 19
Ruth A Lister
CASE NUMBER: 11580 of 2002 of 2003.00
WORDS: Statutes & Delegated Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage J
DATES OF HEARING: 28/07/03
TEMPORE DATE: 28/07/2003
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr P R Stockley instructed by Kennedy & Cooke.
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr L G
Stone instructed by Moray & Agnew.
1. This is an application by Ruth Anne Lister against her employer,
Woolworths Limited, in which she alleges injury on 5 June 2001
in Beverley
Street, Merimbula in the State of New South Wales, when while walking from her
place of abode to her place of employment
with the respondent, she tripped over
in a gully and suffered an anterior cruciate ligament rupture in her left knee.
weekly payments of compensation from that date to the present time
and continuing under s 35 (apparently a mistake for s 36) s 37,
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
("the Act"). She concedes in her
Application for Determination, from which I have just quoted, weekly payments of
compensation to
date, but alleges that these have been at the rate of $238 per
week from the date of injury abovementioned to the present time.
It is common
ground between the parties that in fact she has been paid for that period the
sum of $266.20 per week for the first
six months of incapacity under
Act, and thereafter under
of the Act.
1. The respondent admits that the applicant suffered injury in its employ, if
I may so put it, as alleged, and also admits that the
applicant continues to be
totally incapacitated as a result of it and has been at all material times, and
that she has dependent
upon her two totally dependent children. The only
dispute I have to determine is what is the correct "
current weekly wage
within the meaning of the Act for the applicant, and therefore
whether she has been paid at the correct rate by the respondent until
present time, or is entitled to be paid at some greater rate as she
2. The expression "
current weekly wage rate
" occurs in
in subsection (1) which reads:
The weekly payment of compensation to an injured worker in respect of any
period of total incapacity for work during the first 26
weeks of incapacity
shall be the amount of the worker’s current weekly wage rate.
3. Subsection (2) provides that in the section:
Current weekly wage rate, in relation to a worker, means the
worker’s current weekly wage rate determined from time to time
accordance with
4. Prima facie
entitles the present applicant to weekly payments of
compensation, taking into account her two dependent children, at rates
under the section and from time to time increased, which however must
not exceed 90 per cent of her average weekly earnings (subparagraph
subsection (2) of the section provides that:
The total weekly payment under subsection (1) shall not exceed the
worker’s current weekly wage rate determined from time to
accordance with
reads relevantly:
Subject to this section, a reference in this division to the current
weekly wage rate of a worker, being a worker who is incapacitated
for work and
who, immediately before being incapacitated -
(a) was remunerated under an award fixing or providing for the fixing of a
rate for a weekly or longer period (not being a worker
who belongs to a class of
workers prescribed by the Regulations for the purposes of paragraph (c)) - is,
at any time during the incapacity,
a reference to the rate of remuneration under
that award at that time for 1 week in respect of the work being performed by the
immediately before being incapacitated.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(d) was not a worker or employee to whom paragraph (a), (b) or (c) applies
- is a reference to the prescribed proportion of the worker’s
weekly earnings in respect of work being performed by the worker immediately
before becoming incapacitated or, if a specific
rate is prescribed by the
regulations for the purposes of this paragraph, is a reference to that
6. No party suggests that the regulations have so prescribed.
defines "award" relevantly as:
(a) an award in force under the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940 or an
award for industrial agreement, within the meaning of the Conciliation
Arbitration Act 1904 of the Commonwealth, that is in force.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(e) (without limiting the above) includes a state industrial
instrument,
and includes any such award, industrial agreement or other agreement or
instrument as from time to time amended.
"relevantly"
when quoting these provisions because the
omitted parts of them are not relied on by either of the parties here.
9. Further, the expression "
prescribed proportion
" in s 42(1)(d)
quoted above is defined in s 42(8) as:
80 per cent or, if the regulations prescribe some other percentage for the
purposes of this section, that other percentage.
10. It is common ground that the regulations have not so prescribed.
11. Exhibit A is a document headed
"Woolworths Supermarkets - NSW/ACT
Agreement 1991"
. On the front page it refers to its certification as an
agreement reached under s 170LJ of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
pursuant to s 170LT of that Act. It provides in clause 5.5.1 as follows:
A part-time employee may be engaged to work a regular number of rostered
hours to a maximum of 20 days in any 4 week cycle with a
maximum of 38 hours in
any one rostered week. These hours shall not be less than 40 hours per 4 week
cycle nor more than 140 hours
in a 4 week cycle.
12. In clause 5.5.5 it provides:
Part-time employees shall be paid an hourly rate equal to the approximate
weekly rate divided by 38. The provisions of this agreement
where relevant
shall apply to part-time employees on a pro rata basis.
13. Exhibit B, a claim form executed by the worker in respect of this injury,
contains evidence of what in any event the parties agree
is the hourly rate paid
to the applicant at all material times pursuant to Exhibit A, and this is
14. Exhibit D is a document prepared by the respondent, headed
and Part-time Employee Roster"
, signed by the applicant on 18 April 2001 and
by a person who is apparently, according to the inscription under the signature,
manager employed by the respondent, on 19 April 2001. It provides for work on
certain hours of the week in order to make up a roster
totalling 20 hours per
week, and immediately above the table setting out these hours on particular days
there is a clause, obviously
intended to refer to the applicant, reading
agree that this rostering arrangement would be applicable from 23.4.01"
date being handwritten.
15. It is common ground that the applicant’s weekly payments, to which
I have referred above, have been derived by multiplying
her hourly rate referred
to above of $13.31 by 20, representing 20 hours per week, as per Exhibit D, the
roster agreed to by the
applicant and the respondent, so as to reach a total of
$266.20, which the respondent says is the applicant’s current weekly
rate for the purposes of s 36 and s 37.
16. Exhibit C is a document headed
"PAYG Payment Summary",,
was told by Mr Stockley for the applicant who tendered it was similar to a group
certificate, which discloses that for the
financial year 1 July 2000 to 30 June
2001 the applicant’s gross earnings were $22,399. This, as he points out
in his helpful
written summary of argument, results in gross average weekly
earnings of $430.74. He says this is the best evidence available of
weekly earnings immediately before the worker became incapacitated on 5 June
2001 and I agree, assuming that, as I understand
from Mr Stockley was the case,
the calculation took into account the lack of earnings after the above date.
17. Applying to the above average weekly earnings the 80 per cent prescribed
proportion referred to in s 42(1)(d) as defined in s
42(8) in the provisions I
have quoted above, Mr Stockley says that the figure of $344.60 per week is
reached and this, he says, is
the applicant’s current weekly wage rate
pursuant to s 36 and s 37, and is the applicant’s true entitlement under
18. It is convenient now to trace how Mr Stockley says that is so. He says
that s 42(1)(a) quoted above does not apply because Exhibit
A is not an
" as defined in s 42(8). Mr Stone incidentally does not contend
that subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d) of that definition apply, which
reason I have not quoted them above, but he does contend that either
subparagraph (a) of the definition of "
" does apply or, if it does
not, that subparagraph (e) or the final words of the definition reading "
includes any such award, industrial agreement or other agreement or instrument
as from time to time amended
" do catch Exhibit A.
19. Mr Stockley first says that subparagraph (a) of the definition of
in s 42(8) does not apply to Exhibit A because it is not,
within the subparagraph:
An award in force under the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940 or an award or
industrial agreement, within the meaning of the Conciliation
and Arbitration Act
1904 of the Commonwealth, that is in force.
20. Mr Stockley draws my attention to the fact that Exhibit A is on its face
an agreement reached under s 170LJ of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
certified under s 170LT of that Act. When one looks at s 170LJ, one sees that
in subsection (1) it empowers an employer to make
an agreement with one or more
organisations of employees, membership requirements then being set out,
subsections (2), (3) and (4)
then making machinery provisions as to approval of
the agreement by employees. When one looks at s 170LT, one sees that it
in subsection (1) for an application to "
the Commission
meaning the Commonwealth Industrial Relations Commission, for the certification
of an agreement. Various requirements and other
consequential provisions are
set out in subsections (2) to (10) of the section. Obviously then, as is common
ground between the
parties, Exhibit A is an industrial agreement registered
pursuant to those provisions and therefore under the
Workplace Relations Act
21. Mr Stockley points out that there is no evidence that Exhibit A is
registered under the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940 (NSW)
and the respondent
does not suggest otherwise.
22. Mr Stockley points out that the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
(Cth) was repealed by cognate legislation to the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Industrial Relations (Consequential Provisions) Act 1988
, which provides that
"the Acts specified in
Schedule 1 are repealed
", that schedule including the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904. As Mr Stone points out, awards in force
that Act are preserved by s 7, which provides in subsection (1) that:
An award or order under the previous Act immediately before the
commencement continues in force after the commencement, subject to
Industrial Relations Act
, as if it were an award made under the
Relations Act
previous Act
is defined in the interpretation
section, s 4, as meaning "
the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
well as other provisions not here relevant.
24. Mr Stockley then traces how it is that by the
Workplace Relations and
Other Legislation Amendment Act 1996
(Cth), the name of the
Industrial Relations
was changed to the "
Workplace Relations Act 1996
" because in the
definition section,
, this appears:
In the schedule to this Act, unless the contrary intention
Workplace Relations Act
(a) so far as the context relates to a time before the day on which this
Act received the Royal Assent - the Industrial Relations
Act 1998 as in force at
that time; or
(b) otherwise - the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
25. Therefore, says Mr Stockley, while Parliament did
Industrial Relations Act 1988
when it passed the
Workplace Relations and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 1996
repeal the Conciliation and
Arbitration Act 1904 when it passed the
Industrial Relations (Consequential
Provisions) Act 1988
26. Mr Stockley says that while an award made under the Conciliation and
Arbitration Act 1904 may be an award under the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
because of that Act’s continuation provisions (see above), the converse
does not apply, because of the repeal of the former
Act by the latter, so that
neither an award or agreement under the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
award or agreement made under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
can be an award
or industrial agreement within the meaning of the Conciliation and Arbitration
Act 1904, because that Act was repealed
Industrial Relations
(Consequential Provisions) Act 1988
, even though that was not the position at
the time of the insertion of the definition of "
present form.
27. Mr Stockley also says that Exhibit A cannot be a "
state industrial
" within subparagraph (e) of the definition of "
because those words are apt to connote an award or agreement or other
provision operating only within a state. He draws attention
in this regard to
the fact that Exhibit A is expressed in its title to be the
"Woolworths
Supermarkets - NSW/ACT Agreement 1998".
28. Somewhat sceptically, I inquired of Mr Stockley what work in his
submission paragraph (e) in the definition of "
" in s 42(8) of the
Act had to do, in view of the fact that subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the
definition jointly cover New South Wales
State Awards and industrial or
enterprise agreements (subparagraph (b) referring to "
an industrial agreement
or enterprise agreement in force under the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940 or
the Industrial Relations Act
"). He submitted that "
state industrial
" within subparagraph (e) may connote an award or agreement
registered under interstate legislation because of s 13 of the Act, which
extends its coverage to persons employed in New South Wales to work outside the
State, in which circumstances, says Mr Stockley,
a Queensland industrial award
for example may apply. Similarly, he says, it is possible that some sort of
instrument may relate
to the wages and conditions of NSW Crown employees which
is not of a kind covered by subparagraph (c) of the definition of "
here under consideration; subparagraph (c) however refers inter alia
"“an agreement made under the Public Service Act 1979
". Be that as it
may, he says subparagraph (e) cannot apply to Exhibit A because it is registered
under federal legislation.
29. Therefore, Mr Stockley says, subparagraph (a) of s 42(1) of the Act does
not apply and, the respondent not contending that subparagraphs
(b) or (c) of
the subsection applies, and subparagraph (e) in his submission not applying,
subparagraph (d) applies, so that the
applicant is and has been entitled to be
compensated under both s 36 and s 37 of the Act at 80 per cent of her average
weekly earnings
in the financial year prior to injury as set out in Exhibit C
referred to above, no specific rate having been prescribed by the regulations
within the final words of subparagraph (d).
30. Mr Stone replies to these submissions as follows. He firstly says that
subparagraph (a) of the definition of "
" in s 42(8) does apply,
because the reference to "
an award or industrial agreement, within the
meaning of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 of the Commonwealth, that
" includes a reference to an agreement certified under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
. This appears in his written outline of
submissions prepared helpfully by other counsel but adopted in Mr Stone’s
able oral submissions. The respondent says it is open to me to take
judicial notice of the fact that the Conciliation and Arbitration
Act 1904 has
Workplace Relations Act 1996
subparagraph (a) may therefore be interpreted
“as though it referred to
Workplace Relations Act 1996
to quote page 2 of the written
outline of its argument.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) is then referred to in the written
outline, and it indeed provides that proof is not required about the provisions
coming into operation of "
" (meaning a Commonwealth Act)
(see subsection (1)(a)) and further provides (in subsection (2)) that a judge
may inform himself or
herself about these matters in any way that he or she
thinks fit.
32. The written outline then refers on page 4 to the cautionary remarks of
Stephen J in
Marshall v Watson
[1972] HCA 27
(1972) 124 CLR 640
at 649 where his Honour
Granted that there may seem to be lacking in the legislation powers which
it might be thought the Legislature would have done well
to include, it is no
part of the judicial function to fill gaps disclosed in legislation; as Lord
Simon said in
Major v St Mellons RDC
Newport Corporation (1952)
AC 189 at 191
“if a gap is disclosed, the remedy lies in an amending
and not in a
“usurpation of the legislative function
under the thin disguise of interpretation”
33. At the same page, however, the written outline refers also to
Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Limited v Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
, where Mason and Wilson JJ at 443 referred to a Court’s task in
construing an Act as being to ascertain the legislative intention
by reference
to the language of the instrument viewed as a whole and said that a literal
interpretation of the words of the Statute
may, in appropriate circumstances,
not be preferred if some other construction appears to conform to the
legislative intent ascertained
from the provisions of the Statute including the
policy which may be discerned from those provisions. Further, their Honours
there to the necessity to avoid statutory interpretations which are
absurd, capricious or unfair unless the language of a statute
is intractable.
34. I am, I am afraid, unpersuaded by the respondent’s submission in
this regard. This result I find distasteful because it
appears to me to be a
clear statutory anomaly that the New South Wales legislature has not, in
subparagraph (a) of the definition
” in s 42(8) of
the Act, included Commonwealth industrial awards or agreements within the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Workplace Relations Act 1996
included there also a reference to the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
but not the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
, it would I think have been possible to hold that a
reference to the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
meant and included a reference to
Workplace Relations Act 1996
, employing if necessary
(Cth), because what the
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 1996
did was to change the name of the
Industrial Relations Act
and then to provide that awards or agreements made under that Act continue
to operate under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
as if they were made under
that Act. That is not the statutory scheme however in relation to the
replacement
”, as the respondent’s written outline puts
it, of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 by the
Industrial Relations Act
Industrial Relations (Consequential Provisions) Act 1988
repeals the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904. Although it then goes on to
provide that awards made under the Conciliation
and Arbitration Act 1904 shall
continue in force as if they were awards made under the
Industrial Relations Act
, it does not otherwise preserve the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904,
which it repeals. I do not think that by this route it
can be said that an
industrial agreement certified under the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Exhibit A is, is an award within the meaning of the Conciliation and Arbitration
Act 1904 of the Commonwealth that is in force
within the meaning of subparagraph
(a) of the definition of "
" in s 42(a) of the Act.
36. I do not think either that Exhibit A can be said to be a "
industrial instrument
" within subparagraph (e) of that definition because
again I agree with Mr Stockley’s submission that this phrase is apt to
connote an industrial award, agreement or other instrument which only operates
within a state. That cannot apply to Exhibit A because
it operates also,
according to its very title, in the Australian Capital Territory. That alone,
no doubt, would have prevented its
registration in NSW. It is in any event
registered under federal legislation. I do not think that Mr Stone’s
submission that
this is pure coincidence, and that essentially Exhibit A
operates within New South Wales and is therefore a "
state industrial
", should be accepted.
37. Despite all this, is the operation of s 42(1)(a) saved here because of
the final words of the definition of "
" in s 42(1), "
and includes
any such award, industrial agreement or other agreement or instrument as from
time to time amended
"? Mr Stockley submits that it is not, because he says
that the meaning of this provision is controlled by the word "
which refers one to the categories set out in subparagraphs (a) to (e) over the
definition. That is to say, he says that "
" within the meaning
of those words must refer to an "
" as set out in subparagraph (a)
made under the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940 (NSW) or the Conciliation and
Arbitration Act 1904
(Cth) or under subparagraph (d) (which refers to "
award made by the Coal Industry Tribunal under the Coal Industry Act 1946
He says that "
industrial agreement
" refers to the "
referred to in subparagraph (a), (b) and (c) of the definition, and that
" is used to mean what is referred to in subparagraph (e) of
the definition. Consequently, he says the words "
industrial agreement
other agreement or instrument as from time to time amended
used in the final words of the definition of
" abovementioned,
cannot include agreements of a kind not referred to in the preceding
subparagraphs of the definition. They refer,
he says, to amendments made
from time to time
" to the awards, agreements and instruments referred to
in subparagraphs (a) to (e).
38. Mr Stone contends otherwise. He says the purpose of the section, s 42,
is to be discerned generally from the fact that in various
ways it limits
incapacitated workers’ compensation during incapacity by reference to
current weekly wage rates, so as to not
to make the term "
current weekly wage
" necessarily coextensive with actual average weekly earnings, and then
takes me particularly to the exclusion of such matters as
payments in respect of
shift work, overtime and other penalty rates effected by s 42(6)(a). Clearly,
he says, to effect this purpose
Parliament must have intended to include
agreements made under the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
in the definition of
, and the final words of the definition are a
"catch-all"
, as he put it, to include such industrial agreements as that
set out in Exhibit A which may not otherwise be covered by the subsection,
because the word "
" there simply means "
", so as to
other industrial award or agreement, such as Exhibit A, not
otherwise caught by the definition of "
" in the subsection.
39. With great reluctance, because I think that this case has exposed a
statutory anomaly, I think the intention of the final words
of the definition of
quoted above, as Mr Stockley submits, is merely to
include any amendments made "
from time to time
", to quote part of the
final words, to any award, industrial agreement or other agreement or instrument
as referred to in subparagraphs
(a) to (e) of the definition, so as to make it
clear that what is caught by those subparagraphs is not only the original award,
agreement, other agreement or instrument, but also any amendments
made to it "
from time to time
". That is the natural reading of those
final words, I think, and it would be to disregard the ordinary meaning of the
" occurring in them to interpret this wording as apt to include
category of industrial award or agreement not comprehended by
subparagraphs (a) to (e) preceding it. To hold otherwise would be
to ignore the
case quoted above, referred to very fairly in
the respondent’s written outline of submissions, even though I also note
Cooper Brookes’
40. This being so, I must uphold Mr Stockley’s submission that Exhibit
A is not caught by the definition of "
" in s 42(8) of the Act. It
follows that Mr Stockley’s submission that s 42(1)(d) of the Act applies,
so that the applicant
is and has been entitled to be compensated under ss 36 and
37 on the basis of a calculation of 80 per cent of his weekly earnings
the subparagraph, derived as set out at page 2 of Mr Stockley’s written
outline of argument, namely the sum of $430.75
per week reduced by 20 per cent,
as set out in paragraph 3 of his written outline of argument, so as to attain a
figure of $344.60
per week, being 80 per cent of the applicant’s current
weekly wage rate derived pursuant to s 42(1)(d) as above, is correct.
41. It is unnecessary for the purposes of these reasons to make formal
findings in relation to injury and incapacity, as they are
already admitted.
42. I make the following award in the applicant’s favour:
1. $344.60 per week from 5 June 2001 to 5 December 2001 under s 36 and from 6
December 2001 to date and continuing under s 37.
2. Credit to be given to respondent for payments of $266.20 per week from 5
June 2001 to date.
3. Respondent to pay applicant’s costs.
Mr P R Stockley instructed
by Kennedy & Cooke appeared for applicant.
Mr L G Stone instructed by
Moray & Agnew appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter