URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/844.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Mandoukos [2025] NSWPICMP 844; (31 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Mandoukos [2025] NSWPICMP
Nicolas Mandoukos
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
REVIEW PANEL
Elizabeth Medland
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Ian Cameron
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Les Barnsley
DATE OF DECISION:
31 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
single medical assessment; threshold injury dispute; claimant referred injury to
bone, facet joint, and cervical spine
due to foraminotomy surgery as a
consequence of injury sustained in the motor vehicle accident; original Medical
Assessor certified
a non-threshold injury; definition of “injury”
considered;
Mandoukos v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v May
Mahony v J Kruschich
(Demolitions) Pty Ltd
considered;
– Review Panel found
surgery causally related to the motor accident; Review Panel found the subject
surgery does not constitute
an injury for the purposes of the Act.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Assessment of threshold injury
Certificate issued pursuant to
Accident Injuries Act 2017
The Review Panel:
the certificate of Medical Assessor Todd Gothelf dated 15 February 2025,
that the following injury referred for assessment caused by the motor
injury to bone
– facet joint – cervical spine – due to foraminotomy surgery
performed by Dr McKechnie on 1 July
2020 as a consequence of injury sustained in
the MVA on 8 January 2019
is not an injury for the
purposes of the Act.
Accordingly, it is not necessary to determine if the
injury is a threshold injury as defined.
INTRODUCTION
Nicolas Mandoukos (the claimant) is a 62-year-old male who sustained injury as a
result of a motor vehicle accident that occurred
on 8 January 2019.
was the driver of a vehicle when another vehicle turned in front of him. The
claimant swerved to the left, in order to avoid a
collision with the other
vehicle and in so doing impacted a car and a light post.
claimant lodged a claim with Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (the insurer),
the compulsory third party insurer of the vehicle
considered to be at fault. The
insurer is liable to pay statutory benefits and/or damages to the claimant
pursuant to the provisions
Motor Accident Injuries Act
subject issue in dispute between the parties is whether any physical injury
suffered by the claimant as a result of the accident
is a threshold injury
(previously known as a minor injury – any reference to ‘minor
injury’ in this determination
is a reference to ‘threshold
threshold injury determination is an important one in terms of an injured
person’s entitlements under the MAI Act. If a determination
finds that the
motor accident has caused a non-threshold injury, then the gateway to ongoing
statutory benefits and an entitlement
to claim common law damages is opened.
to Schedule 2, cl 2 of the MAI Act, various matters are declared to be a medical
assessment matter including whether “the
injury caused by the motor
accident is a threshold injury for the purposes of the Act”.
medical assessment matter is determined in accordance with Division 7.5 of the
MAI Act. This means that the matter is determined
at first instance by a Medical
dispute about whether the claimant has suffered a threshold injury, is a medical
dispute, as defined by s 7.17 of the MAI Act,
and a medical assessment matter:
Schedule 2 cl 2(e) of the MAI Act.
referred injury for determination in the subject medical dispute is whether the
referred injury: “injury to bone –
facet joint – cervical
spine – due to foraminotomy surgery performed by Dr McKechnie on 1 July
2020 as a consequence
of injury sustained in the MVA on
essence, the task of determination of the Review Panel is as follows:
causation in
respect of the claimant undergoing the cervical spine surgery
whether the
subject surgery falls within the definition of “injury” for the
purposes of the MAI Act. The claimant submits
that the surgery constitutes an
injury, and conversely, the insurer submits that it is not an injury.
determined to be an injury, whether such injury is a threshold injury for the
purposes of the MAI Act.
claimant has traversed a long and arduous path in respect of the medical
threshold injury dispute (at the time a “minor” injury dispute) was
first assessed by Medical Assessor Wallace on
19 November 2019 through the then
Dispute Resolution Service of the State Insurance Regulatory Authority. He
certified that the cervical
spine injury was a minor injury for the purposes of
the MAI Act. He further certified that a referred injury of the right knee was
not caused by the motor accident and associated right knee treatment was not
related to the injury caused by the accident and was
not reasonable and
determination of Medical Assessor Wallace was the subject of a Review Panel
determination dated 14 April 2020. The certificate
of Medical Assessor Wallace
was confirmed.
further application for assessment of a threshold dispute was made by the
claimant. Medical Assessor Mohammed Assem provided a certificate
and reasons
dated 6 June 2022. The following injuries were reportedly referred to him for
assessment:
Cervical spine
– whether the cervical spine injury – radiculopathy caused by the
motor accident is a minor injury for
the purposes of the Act.
– whether the right knee injury – chondral damage and bone oedema
caused by the motor accident is a minor injury
for the purposes of the Act.
Assessor Assem certified that the claimant had suffered a soft tissue injury of
the cervical spine which was a threshold injury.
claimant lodged a review application in respect of Medical Assessor
Assem’s certificate. The application was referred by
the President’s
Delegate. The application was not accepted.
claimant thereafter lodged a summons with the Supreme Court seeking judicial
review of the Delegate’s decision and the medical
assessment of Medical
Assessor Assem. Justice Chen of the Supreme Court dismissed the summons:
Mandoukos v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2023] NSWSC 1023.
brief, Chen J found that an argument that the cervical spine surgery resulted in
the claimant suffering a non-threshold injury
was not put to the Medical
Assessor for the purposes of the medical dispute.
Proceedings
were then lodged on behalf of the claimant with the Court of Appeal. The Court
of Appeal, in a decision of
Mandoukos v Allianz Australia Insurance
[2024] NSWCA 71
), dismissed the appeal.
subject further medical dispute was thereafter assessed by Medical Assessor Todd
Gothelf. The Medical Assessor provided a certificate
dated 15 February 2025. The
Medical Assessor certified that the referred injury, being effectively the
surgery, is not a threshold
injury for the purposes of the MAI Act.
insurer sought a review of the medical assessment in accordance with s 7.26 of
the MAI Act (review). On 16 April 2025 the President’s
delegate determined
that there was reasonable cause to suspect the medical assessment was incorrect
in a material respect. As such
the review application was accepted and referred
to a Review Panel (the Panel).
14F of Schedule 1 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
Act) provides that the new review provisions apply in relation to a decision of
a new decision-maker. A “new decision
maker” is defined in
cl 14A(1) of Schedule 1 of the PIC Act. As the medical assessment the
subject of the review was made on
or after 1 March 2021, the new review
provisions apply.
new review provisions provide that a review panel consists of two Medical
Assessors and a Member assigned to the Motor Accidents
Division of the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission).
review of the medical assessment is not limited to a review of only that aspect
of the assessment that is alleged to be incorrect
and is to be by way of a new
assessment of all the matters with which the medical assessment is concerned: s
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A review panel determines
how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application: Rule 128
of the Rules.
Panel initially met via teleconference on 16 June 2025 and discussed the
evidence and the issues in dispute. A teleconference
was arranged between the
parties and Member Medland in order to clarify the issues in dispute to ensure
that the Panel addressed
all relevant matters.
teleconference with the parties and Member Medland occurred on 24 July 2025. At
that conference the parties agreed that a clinical
re-examination was not
required. In addition, it was confirmed that the issue of causation in respect
of the subject surgery was
in dispute between the parties and the Panel was to
provide a determination on such issue.
video conference examination was arranged to occur between the three Panel
members and the claimant on 14 August 2025 in order to
take an accurate history
and assist the Panel in making a determination on the issue of causation. The
examination proceeded as scheduled.
The Panel thereafter discussed the
examination findings and evidence at the conclusion of that conference. These
reasons have been
prepared collectively by all Panel members following such
discussions.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
term ‘threshold injury’ is defined in s 1.6 of the MAI Act. It
provides that a threshold injury is a soft tissue injury
or a threshold
psychological or psychiatric injury. Section 1.6(2) of the MAI Act defines a
soft tissue injury to mean:
“...an injury to tissue that
connects, supports or surrounds other structures or organs of the body (such as
muscles, tendons,
ligaments, menisci, cartilage, fascia, fibrous tissues, fat,
blood vessels and synovial membranes), but not an injury to nerves or
or partial rupture of tendons, ligaments, menisci or cartilage.”
1.6 also provides that the regulations may exclude or include a specified injury
from being a soft tissue injury or a threshold
psychological or psychiatric
injury. Part 1, cl 4 of the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (the
Regulations) further defines
threshold to include “an injury to the spinal
nerve root that manifests in neurological signs (other than
radiculopathy)”
and an acute stress disorder and an adjustment disorder.
5 of the Motor Accidents Guidelines (the Guidelines) are made pursuant to
s 10.2 of the MAI Act. The Guidelines contain the procedure
for assessing
whether an injury caused by a motor accident is a threshold injury for the
purposes of the MAI Act. Version 9.1 of
the Guidelines commenced on 1 April 2023
and applies to motor accidents occurring on or after 1 December 2017. In respect
medical assessment of whether an injury is a threshold injury, the
Guidelines relevantly provide:
General provisions for
5.3 The assessment will determine whether the injury related to the claim is
a soft tissue injury or a threshold psychological or
psychiatric injury caused
by the motor accident.
5.4 Insurers should not require injured persons to undergo diagnostic
imaging for the purpose of the insurer determining whether
the injury related to
the claim is a threshold injury. Diagnostic imaging is not considered necessary
to assess threshold injury.
5.5 A diagnosis for the purpose of a threshold injury decision must be based
on a clinical assessment by a medical practitioner or
other suitably qualified
person independent from the insurer.
5.6 The assessment of whether an injury caused by the accident is a
threshold injury for the purposes of the Act should be based
on the evidence
available and include all relevant findings derived from:
(a) a comprehensive accurate history, including pre-accident history and
pre-existing conditions
(b) a review of all relevant records available at the assessment
(c) a comprehensive description of the injured person’s current
(d) a careful and thorough physical and/or psychological examination
(e) diagnostic tests available at the assessment. Imaging findings that are
used to support the assessment should correspond with
symptoms and findings on
examination.”
5.7 to 5.9 of the Guidelines relate to whether an injury to a spinal nerve root
in the context of neurological symptoms is
classified as a threshold injury. An
injury resulting in radiculopathy will not be classified as a threshold injury.
5.6 of the Guidelines provides: “in assessing whether an injury to the
neck or spine is a soft tissue injury, an assessment
of whether or not
radiculopathy is present is essential.”
Radiculopathy
is defined in cl 5.8 of the Guidelines as follows:
“...radiculopathy means the impairment caused by dysfunction
of a spinal nerve root or nerve roots when two or more of the following
signs are found on examination when they are assessed in accordance with
‘Part 6 of the Motor Accident Guidelines
Permanent Impairment’.
(a) Loss or asymmetry of reflexes (see the definitions of clinical findings in
Table 6.8 in these Guidelines)
(b) Positive sciatic nerve root tension signs (see the definitions of clinical
findings in Table 6.8 in these Guidelines)
(c) Muscle atrophy and/or decreased limb circumference (see definitions of
clinical findings in Table 6.8 in these Guidelines)
(d) Muscle weakness that is anatomically localised to an appropriate spinal
nerve root distribution.”
5.9 of the Guidelines provides that neurological symptoms of the neck or spine
that do not meet the assessment criteria for
radiculopathy, will be assessed as
a threshold injury.
5D and 5E of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
(CL Act) apply to the MAI Act.
respect of the issue of causation, Part 6 of the Guidelines includes guidance.
Whilst Part 6 deals with permanent impairment, it
is still relevant to the issue
of causation in respect of threshold injury disputes.
6.7 of the Guidelines provides:
“There is no simple common
test of causation that is applicable to all cases, but the accepted approach
involves determining
whether the injury (and the associated impairment) was
caused or materially contributed to by the motor accident. The motor accident
does not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a contributing cause, which is
more than negligible. Considering the question ‘Would
this injury (or
impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?’ may be useful in some
cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be inapplicable in
circumstances where there are multiple contributing causes.”
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT UNDER REVIEW
examination of the cervical spine Medical Assessor Gothelf noted a scar
referable to the surgery performed, noting it to be a well
healed 4cm scar that
had not widened and there were no trophic changes.
was no reported tenderness to palpation of the neck spinous processes or
paraspinal muscles. There was a slight visible and
palpable deformity in the
posterior neck region and no observed muscle guarding or spasm. Reduced range of
motion was noted. Muscle
strength was 5/5 in all muscle groups. Sensation was
intact to light touch and pink prick in all dermatomal distributions. Reflexes
in the biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis were equal. No wasting or swelling
of the upper limbs was found.
consideration of the documentation, the Medical Assessor diagnosed a cervical
neck strain, and aggravation of pre-existing
C5/6 degenerative disc disease
caused by the motor accident.
respect of the subject surgery the Medical Assessor found the surgery performed
by Dr Simon McKechnie to be reasonable and necessary
and related to the subject
motor accident. He states: “the surgery resulted in injury to bone and
partial or complete rupture
of ligaments or tendons.”
Medical Assessor therefore certified that the referred injury was not a
threshold injury for the purposes of the MAI Act.
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s review submissions dated 11 March 2025
insurer submits that the Medical Assessor erred in finding that the foraminotomy
surgery constitutes a non-threshold injury. The
insurer submits:
“the insurer disputes that post-accident treatment can
transform a threshold injury into a non-threshold injury.
Even if it is accepted that the motor accident materially contributed to the
need for the foraminotomy surgery (which remains disputed),
the insurer submits
that the removal of bone or the partial or complete rupture of ligaments, bone
and cartilage during the foraminotomy
procedure, undertaken with therapeutic
intent and with the claimant’s consent, is not an “injury” for
the purposes
of the Act.”
insurer notes that the subject claim was the subject of judicial review
proceedings in the Supreme Court of NSW and a subsequent
appeal in the NSW Court
of Appeal. The insurer observes comments of Chen J in
Mandoukos v Allianz
Australia Insurance Limited
[2023] NSWSC1023 at [93]: “ordinarily, an
accident-related injury creates a need for treatment, but that treatment is not
“injury”, nor a “consequential injury”.
insurer further refers to the consideration of the meaning of
“injury” by the High Court in the case of
Military Rehabilitation
and Compensation Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
(2016) 257 CLR 468
definition of injury was considered in the context of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
. The majority said at [45] that if:
“something can be described as a sudden and ascertainable or dramatic
physiological change
of disturbance of the normal physiological state it may
qualify for characterisation as an ‘injury’.”
Gageler J at [75] said: “an injury, it has long been repeatedly explained,
is some definite or distinct “physiological
“physiological disturbance” for the worse which, if not
“sudden”, is at least “identifiable”.
insurer notes that the case of
was considered by the Court of Appeal
in the claimant’s case, and refers to the
comments of Stern
JA (Leeming and Kirk JJA agreeing) that consider the issue of the definition of
is noted by the insurer that the claimant reportedly told Medical Assessor
Gothelf that his symptoms improved after surgery and
did not identify any
evidence “showing an identifiable detrimental impact upon the
claimant’s symptoms or functioning
arising from the foraminotomy
procedure.”
insurer therefore submits “...that the physiological change due to the
foraminotomy surgery is not a harmful consequence
for the worse, and is
therefore not properly regarded as an “injury”.
is then submitted by the insurer that even if it is accepted that the accident
materially contributed to the need for the foraminotomy
surgery and even if it
is accepted that the consequences of the surgery could be an injury for the
purposes of the MAI Act, that
would be a “different” injury from the
injury to the claimant’s cervical spine sustained at the time of the motor
Claimant’s review submissions in reply dated 3
claimant’s submissions observe that the insurer relies heavily on the
obiter comments that were made (but left unresolved)
by the Court of Appeal in
the claimant’s case.
submissions note that the claimant cannot risk any further adverse costs orders
in judicial review proceedings and therefore does
not take an active role in the
insurer’s application to the President’s delegate. Nonetheless, the
claimant’s representatives,
having regard to the novel nature of the legal
issues, and for the benefit of the Commission in hearing counter-arguments to
raised by the insurer makes submissions that are summarised as follows.
claimant submits that the surgery was treatment, but treatment can cause further
injury. In this regard, the Guidelines are referred
to at cl 6.113 which
“the assessment of spinal impairment is made at the
time the injured person is examined. If surgery has been performed, then
effect of the surgery, as well as the structural inclusions, must be taken into
consideration when assessing impairment. Refer
also to clause 6.20 of these
Guidelines.”
submissions refer to the High Court case of
Mahony v J Kruschich
(Demolitions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 37
156 CLR 522
), where it
was held that where an injury is exacerbated by medical treatment, the original
tortfeasor remains liable for such exacerbation
so long as the plaintiff acted
reasonably in seeking or accepting such treatment. The submissions noting:
“that is to say,
the original tortfeasor will still bear legal
responsibility for the consequences of the surgery even if the treatment was
or performed negligently, provided the damage caused by the surgery was a
reasonably foreseeable consequence of the breach of duty.”
claimant submits that there can be no question of whether the “but
for” causation is established and the decision
the contention that the consequences of surgery are rightly to be regarded as
damage caused by the tortfeasor’s breach.
Hunter v Insurance Australia Ltd trading as NRMA Insurance
), is relied upon by the claimant. In that case the
claimant was receiving treatment in hospital after sustaining an in injury to
her foot in a motor accident. When in hospital she suffered an overdose of
patient-controlled analgesia and was for a period unconscious
and unresponsive.
The claimant subsequently sustained a psychiatric injury. Adamson J held at
“The Panel was obliged to apply the PI Guidelines
with respect to causation which, as set out above, incorporated common law
principles of causation. It is well established at common law that for there to
be a causal link between a consequence and a cause
it is not necessary that the
consequence be a direct consequence of the cause as long as it is reasonably
foreseeable. This principle
is illustrated by
Mahony v J. Kruschich
(Demolitions) Proprietary Limited
(1985) 156 CLR 522
[1985 HCA 37...
The High Court (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ) held that if
a plaintiff acts reasonably in seeking medical treatment
for injuries sustained
as a result of negligence, and is further injured by the medical treatment, the
original tortfeasor will be
liable for the consequences of the medical
treatment. The original injury is regarded as carrying some risk that medical
administered by reason of it will be negligently administrated.”
is then submitted that “...accordingly, it is evident that treatment
related to an injury related to an accident, can constitute
a further injury for
which the original tortfeasor is liable.”
answer to the insurer’s submission that it is necessary to identify
evidence showing a detrimental impact arising from the
surgery, in order to
determine consequential treatment constitutes an injury, it is submitted:
“the claimant does not accept
that, in the statutory context of the role
being performed by the assessor, detriment from the surgery need be established.
the true question is whether there has been disturbance of bone and
ligaments by reason of the negligently caused accident. The answer
question is undoubtedly ‘yes’.”
submissions refer to the claimant’s case in the Court of Appeal,
at [61] where the Court said:
apparent from these provisions that the Act contemplates that two or more
“injuries” may result from one
motor accident. It will necessarily
be a matter of fact and degree in each case whether what results from a motor
accident is properly
regarded as one, or more than one, injury. A range of
matters may be relevant to, but not necessarily determinative of, that question.
Such matters would include the nature of any harm or damage, the identifiable
physiological change or disturbance relied upon, whether
it is physical or
psychiatric/psychological, the body part(s) involved (if any), and whether the
harm or damage was sustained by
reason of the immediate impact of the motor
accident or from some later event, such as medical or surgical treatment or a
fall, which
itself resulted from the motor accident.”
claimant relies on the Review Panel decision in the matter of
Bridgefoot v
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2024] NSWPICMP 194
where the Panel contemplated whether a total knee replacement was a threshold
injury. The Panel found at [117] – [118]:
“when a word
in a statute is defined in terms of itself, then subject to the context, the Act
uses the word as appearing in
the definition in its natural and ordinary
meaning. In our opinion, the natural and ordinary meaning of the word
construed in its context in ss 3.11 and 4.1 of the Act, is
the harm, damage or disturbance to a person’s physiology that is
person or sustained by a person resulting from a motor accident. It is thereby
necessarily broader than the acute or frank
injury sustained in the mechanism of
the accident itself.
The expression’s textual co-location with “resulting from”
in ss3.11 and 4.1 of the Act inform the expression “caused”
appears in Schedule 2, cl2(e) of the Act work to introduce analysis of common
sense causal connexion between the mechanism
of injury and the harm or
disturbance to the person’s physiology (and indeed, psychology) resulting
from the accident. Thus
“injury” is established if it appears that
the motor accident is a necessary condition of the continuum of harm or
disturbance
claimant submits that had the claimant sustained the very same alteration to his
body state (ie, a skin laceration and removal
of bone) in the actual collision,
it would be accepted without question that the claimant sustained a
non-threshold injury and there
would be no need to prove additional detrimental
impact upon symptoms or functioning. It is submitted that “the alteration
to his body, in and of itself, is an injury resulting in physiological changes
that render it ‘non-threshold’”.
is submitted that the fact that the surgery may also have had beneficial effect
is irrelevant. It is submitted that the performance
of the surgery
“...cannot be divorced from its context”, in that the surgery was
performed at all due to the occurrence
of the initial injury.
DOCUMENTATION
Panel sent out interim directions requiring the parties to each lodge single
bundles of all documents relied upon. Bundles have
been received in compliance
with such directions. The Panel has considered the material provided in the
bundle lodged on behalf of
the insurer on 20 May 2025 consisting of 718 pages
– “Nicolas Mandoukos Insurers Review Panel bundle” and the
lodged on behalf of the claimant on 29 May 2025 consisting of 96 pages
– “Claimant’s Review Bundle”.
all documentation has been referred to within these reasons. Some documentation
has been referred to or summarised where directly
relevant to the findings of
the Panel. However, the Panel’s reasons have been prepared in the context
of all material having
been considered.
claimant suffered an earlier injury as a result of a motor accident on 1
December 2010. Dr McKechnie was consulted by the claimant
in relation to neck
pain arising from the accident. In a report dated 3 February 2011, the doctor
stated there was minimal pathology
on the cervical MRI and the claimant did not
require surgery. He was advised to continue analgesics and undergo an exercise
On 13 March 2013 the doctor recorded the claimant as suffering
persistent pain in the neck radiating across the right shoulder.
Endrey-Walder provided a report dated 20 March 2013. He found no clinical
evidence of radiculopathy when seen almost two years
prior and he thought that
the previously noted right sided C5/6 disc prominence may have increased in
size, possibly causing nerve
impingement.
CT scan of the neck dated 15 December 2010, noted an C5/6 annular disc bulge
extending towards the right neural foramen. An MRI
report of the cervical spine
28 February 2011 revealed a “small osteochondral bar at the
C5-C6 level, with no foraminal or canal stenosis”.
further MRI of 14 March 2013 is reported as demonstrating significant
spondylotic narrowing of the right C5/6 intervertebral foramen
with potential
compromise to the right C6 nerve root. No disc protrusion detected and there was
no canal stenosis.
claimant was assessed by Medical Assessor Johnson in respect of the earlier
motor accident and in a certificate dated 1 June 2012,
the claimant was
certified as suffering a 5% WPI in respect of the cervical spine. The claimant
was noted to have continuing constant
pain in the neck with occipital headaches
and pain radiating towards the right and left shoulders over the trapezius
the subject motor accident, an MRI of the cervical spine of 5 February 2019
showed early degenerative changes at the C6
level with a small disc bulge. Some
endplate osteophytes were noted a mild to moderate neural foraminal narrowing at
the left and
mild neural foraminal narrowing on the right. No significant
degenerative change or disc bulge/disc protrusion was seen.
further MRI of 31 May 2020 demonstrated discovertebral changes most marked at
C5/6 with mild cord compression. There was right and
potentially left C6
foraminal root compression and multilevel facet joint arthropathy with mild
foraminal narrowing but no other
evidence of root impingement.
are various reports of Dr McKechnie that have been considered, both pre and post
the subject accident. In a report to the claimant’s
representatives dated
15 June 2024 (which the Panel observes) the doctor confirms that the claimant
underwent a right C5/6 cervical
foraminotomy at Sydney Southwest Private
Hospital on 1 July 2020 (incorrectly referred to as 2024 by the doctor) for a
neck and severe right arm pain. The doctor notes that an MRI prior to
the surgery demonstrated a broad-based C5/6 disc protrusion
causing bilateral
foraminal stenosis and C6 nerve root compression, worse on the right side. The
doctor notes that during the surgery,
the medial part of the facet joint bone
was drilled to expose and decompress the C6 nerve root.
number of reports of Dr McKechnie are dated 19 August 2020, which appears to be
an error. The Panel has therefore taken note of
the stated examination dates
within the reports.
claimant was seen by Dr McKechnie on 29 May 2019 and the doctor reports a
history of the motor accident. The claimant complained
of neck pain with
intermittent sharp pain through the arms as well as the lower back with
intermittent right leg pain. At that stage,
and after reviewing the MRI, the
doctor stated he would like the claimant to continue with physiotherapy and
medication.
a review on 1 July 2019 the doctor noted the presence of a broad based C5/6 disc
protrusion causing mild to moderate bilateral
foraminal stenosis. Treatment
options were discussed and a referral given for cortisone injections. Following
review on 12 August
2019 it is noted the injections were unsuccessful and the
claimant was still complaining of persistent neck pain radiating across
shoulders and arms. It is at this point that the claimant was offered the option
of surgery. At that point, the claimant wished
to continue with nonoperative
treatment for a further six months.
review on 25 May 2020, the doctor noted the claimant had been reviewed nine
months prior. The claimant is noted to have
continued to experience pain in the
neck which then radiated through the right shoulder and arm with distal
numbness. A follow up
MRI was ordered. The doctor commented: “he may now
be a candidate for a right C5/6 foraminotomy as the pain is unilateral.”
review on 11 June 2020 the doctor noted ongoing symptoms with the MRI confirming
a broad-based C5/6 disc protrusion severely
compressing the right C6 nerve root
and causing mild impingement upon the C6 nerve root. The surgery was offered and
the claimant
noted that he wished to proceed.
surgery, the doctor reports on11 August 2020 that on review the severe
sharp-shooting pain through the right arm had resolved and there was still
occasional mild pain and numbness at times and he still
has residual headache
and neck pain.
General practitioner (GP) records
notes of Bankstown Family Medical Practice are noted. These were printed on 8
May 2019, and consultation notes begin on 3 February
2014. Depressed mood and
sleep issues are mentioned in the early part of these notes. On 7 April 2014 the
claimant complained of
headaches. No neck stiffness noted. A similar
presentation occurred on 13 June 2017 and
3 October 2017.
24 February 2015 the claimant is noted to have had a right shoulder ultrasound
and he was referred for an injection.
22 July 2015 back pain is noted, which was worse with movement.
up to the subject accident, and throughout the consultation notes, there is no
complaints of neck pain or radicular symptoms.
There are regular complaints of
unrelated health issues including depressive and psychological symptoms.
claimant presented to his GP, Dr Hatoum after the subject accident he day after
the subject motor accident on 9 January 2019.
He noted that he was T-boned by
another car and felt pain in the neck, back and shoulder. On examination the
doctor noted stiffness
with slight reduction in range of motion and mild
tenderness in the paraspinal muscles.
presented again on 11 January 2019 and noted that the pain was worse and he was
“not coping”.
15 January 2019 the claimant presented with lower back pain which he had
experienced before, but was not bothering him as much
as the neck, with same
having a constant ache. The doctor recorded muscular discomfort in the cervical
spine with a feeling of a
“constant buzz through the neck at C7”. He
was noted to be unable to drive and he felt an intermittent sharp tingle once
twice a day.
claimant also attended upon GP, Dr Costa, in Hurlston Park. The first
consultation is noted as 1 March 2019. The notes are scant.
The claimant was
prescribed Targin and referred for MRI scans.
questionnaire completed by the claimant notes neck pain at back of the head and
headaches and left shoulder pain together with back
RE-EXAMINATION
three members of the Review Panel attended the re-examination of the claimant
via audio-visual link on 14 August 2025.
Mandoukos was unaccompanied.
Past history
was a previous motor accident in 2010 in which Mr Mandoukos was a passenger. He
said that it caused serious injuries, including
to the chest. He said that it
took him seven years to recover. It was a head-on impact.
to that accident, Mr Mandoukos said his health was good and he was working as a
delivery driver.
2011 Mr Mandoukos was assessed by Dr McKechnie. He had right arm numbness and
right sided neck pain. The whole arm was said to
be numb. Surgery was not
recommended. Mr Mandoukos said he had a clavicular problem.
to the subject motor accident Mr Mandoukos was working as a construction
labourer. He said that it was heavy work.
other past history is sleep apnoea. Mr Mandoukos said that he did not use
Immediately
prior to the subject accident Mr Mandoukos said there were some limitations in
his abilities.
History of motor accident
8 January 2019, Mr Mandoukos was the driver of a vehicle. A vehicle turned in
front of him and there was an impact to the side
of the other vehicle. Airbags
did not deploy.
Mandoukos said that he was in “shock” with buzzing of the body. He
said that it was the whole body. He does not recall
hitting anything in the
ambulance attended and Mr Mandoukos was taken to Canterbury Hospital. Multiple
symptoms including arm pain were recorded.
hours later other symptoms developed. There were “mild” right sided
symptoms. These were the same symptoms as
in the first accident. These included
neck pain. [Note Dr Hatoum recorded neck pain on the next day].
usual GP is Dr Hatoum. Mr Mandoukos said that the lawyers later directed him to
Dr Costa. He went to Dr Costa because he was told
to by his lawyers and he
trusted them to do what was best.
Subsequent history
symptoms persisted. After 9 to 10 months Mr Mandoukos said that the symptoms
became “unbearable”. There was severe
pain on movement of his right
shoulder. It included symptoms of numbness in the right arm.
caused him to consult Dr McKechnie. There were two injections to the neck that
were not effective.
McKechnie recommended surgery and that was done on 1 July 2020. Mr Mandoukos
said that the surgery was successful and improved
his symptoms.
has been no return to work after the accident.
present, there are neck and right arm symptoms. These are significantly better
than prior to the surgery. There is pain and numbness
that can be precipitated
by sustained movement of the right arm.
Mandoukos said that he had difficulty rotating his head to the right and this
impact his driving.
medications are Panadeine Forte, Celebrex, Panadol Osteo.
there has been hip osteoarthritis diagnosed.
Review Panel concluded that the subject motor accident aggravated a cervical
degenerative disease that was previously asymptomatic.
The Panel finds that the
subject motor vehicle accident materially contributed to the need for the
surgery performed by Dr McKechnie.
making this finding the Panel has had regard to the documentation that
establishes the claimant suffers from pre-existing degenerative
changes of the
cervical spine. The Panel has noted the certification of a 5% WPI of the
cervical spine by a Medical Assessor in respect
of the earlier motor accident.
The Panel notes the claimant attended upon Dr McKechnie in respect of the neck
injury occasioned as
a result of the earlier motor accident, with the surgeon
not recommending surgery at that time.
there were initial complaints after the first accident in respect of the neck,
there is no evidence that sufficiently persuades
the Panel that the claimant was
experiencing any significant cervical spine symptoms in the years just prior to
the subject accident.
However, the medical evidence and the history provided by
the claimant to the Panel, is such that the Panel is satisfied that the
accident caused a significant aggravation of the claimant’s pre-existing
cervical spine degenerative condition. This
is evidenced by consistent
complaints of significant neck symptoms after the motor accident. The Panel
notes the failure of the non-surgical
treatment options to treat the
claimant’s symptoms and has had regard to the treating surgeon’s
reporting of worsening
symptoms following the accident. Whilst the claimant
evidently continues to complain of ongoing neck symptoms, the medical evidence
demonstrates an improvement in the symptomatology following the surgery.
regard to the reported severity of symptoms, including radicular complaints, the
Panel is sufficiently satisfied that it was
both reasonable and necessary for
the claimant to undergo the surgery. This is in circumstances where the claimant
had pursued alternative
treatment that did not alleviate his symptoms to any
significant degree.
Is the surgery an
established the necessary precondition that the subject surgery is causally
related to the subject accident, the critical determination
of the Panel is
whether the surgery can be considered an “injury” for the purposes
of the MAI Act, and if so, whether
the surgery constitutes a threshold or
otherwise injury for the purposes of the MAI Act.
is defined by the MAI at s1.4(1) to be:
means personal or bodily
injury and includes—
(a) pre-natal injury, and
(b) psychological or psychiatric injury, and
(c) damage to artificial members, eyes or teeth, crutches or other aids or
spectacle glasses.”
constitutes “personal or bodily injury” is not further defined
beyond the inclusions listed from (a) – (c).
Panel agrees with the comments of the Panel in the matter of
where it was observed that: “when a word in a statute is defined in terms
of itself, then subject to the context, the Act
uses the word as appearing in
the definition in its natural and ordinary meaning...”
reaching its findings, the Panel has had regard to the comments of the Court of
. Whilst the Court found that it was unnecessary to
decide whether surgery could constitute an injury for the purposes of the MAI
Act, nonetheless the Court made obiter comments that the Panel considers assists
in its determination. Whilst the remarks are obiter,
they are informative and
have provided guidance to the Panel.
JA (Leeming and Kirk JJA agreeing said at [51] – [54] the following:
personal nor bodily injury is itself defined. During the hearing of the appeal
senior counsel for Mr Mandoukos submitted
that any detrimental alteration to a
person’s body “should comfortably meet the definition of injury in
He submitted, further, that “[i]njury necessarily connotes
some harm, in ordinary English language”. In this regard he
relied upon
the decision of this Court in
Dean v Phung
[2012] NSWCA 223
JA, Beazley JA (as her Excellency then was) and Macfarlan JA relevantly
agreeing). There, his Honour held that, in ordinary
language, “an injury
is a harmful consequence”. That was in a factual context in which the
dispute was whether extensive
dental surgical procedures could themselves be an
act done “with intent to cause injury (for the purposes of
Liability Act 2002
(NSW)) in circumstances in which it was admitted
that treatment was unnecessary but had been presented as necessary and the
suffered from significant pain, concern and disruption of his life. It
should not, in my judgment, be construed as suggesting that
any harmful
consequence will, itself, necessarily be an injury. Read in context, that was
plainly not what his Honour was intending
to suggest. His Honour went to on
observe that a harmful consequence would not ordinarily be used to describe
“[s]omething
which is done with a therapeutic intent, that is, to prevent,
remove or ameliorate a disability or pathological condition, would
ordinarily be described”: at [30].
the context of workers compensation legislation, the “ordinary
sense” of the word “injury” has been held
to mean “some
definite or distinct ‘physiological change’ or ‘physiological
disturbance’ for the worse
which, if not ‘sudden’, is at least
‘identifiable’”:
Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Commission v May
(2016) 257 CLR 468
[2016] HCA 19
J); see also at [45] (French CJ, Kiefel, Nettle and Gordon JJ). In my judgment,
whilst this definition was arrived at in
a different legislative context, that
understanding of the word “injury” provides guidance as to the
ordinary meaning
of “personal or bodily injury” in
of the Act, at least as regards physical, as opposed to
psychological or psychiatric, injury.
Ultimately,
the submission advanced by senior counsel for Mr Mandoukos was that the
foraminotomy procedure fell within the definition
of injury in the Act
“in circumstances where surgery brings about an alteration in
the claimant’s body, and that alteration has only been brought
through the choice of the claimant in any real sense but, but by reason of
someone else having wronged them, then it is
in ordinary parlance in our
submission to be regarded as injury.”
circumstances in which, as here, the particular surgical procedure is not
contended to have been other than reasonably necessary,
and the Court was not
taken to any evidence showing an identifiable detrimental impact upon Mr
Mandoukos’ symptoms or functioning
arising from the foraminotomy
procedure, it may be doubted whether this submission should be accepted. That is
particularly so given
that the scheme of the Act is to provide treatment, care,
compensation and financial support to those injured in motor accidents.
having regard to my conclusions as to the ambit of the medical dispute referred
to the Medical Assessor, as set out below,
it is unnecessary to decide whether
or not Mr Mandoukos’ contention is correct. Moreover, given that this is a
matter which
may ultimately turn upon a detailed factual assessment, it is
undesirable for this Court to express any concluded view in circumstances
which there has not been any medical assessment of the impact of the surgery
upon Mr Mandoukos.”
Panel has taken the above to suggest that in the absence of evidence that the
surgery had an identifiable detrimental impact upon
the claimant’s
symptoms or functioning arising from the surgery, it is doubtful that the
surgery could be considered to constitute
an injury for the purposes of the MAI
considering whether the surgery has had a “detrimental impact” upon
the claimant’s symptoms or functioning, the
Panel is not sufficiently
satisfied that this has been the case. The claimant himself told the Panel that
the surgery had improved
his symptoms. The treating neurosurgeon, Dr McKechnie,
has reported in the review consultations following the surgery that symptoms
improved. However, it is noted that the claimant was recorded as having
continued neck pain, and the claimant described ongoing
pain and difficulties
arising from his cervical spine condition to the Panel during re-examination.
Overall, the evidence establishes
that the surgery has improved the
claimant’s symptomatology, rather than having a “detrimental
observed above, following the motor accident the claimant demonstrably suffered
significant cervical spine pain and symptoms that
had not been significantly
ameliorated by conservative treatment options. The claimant came to being
offered surgery which he eventually
accepted. The surgery was offered clearly
with therapeutic intent and has had the effect of ameliorating symptomatology,
to an extent. It is the Panel’s view therefore that these facts
suggest that the surgery performed would not fall within the
definition of
injury, when following the reasons of the Court in
Dean v Phung
[2012] NSWCA 223
as highlighted by Stern J in
Panel accepts that the surgery performed, and indeed any surgery, has the
consequence of the patient having a physiological change.
The Panel notes the
reference to the term “physiological change” by the Court in
at [53]. The Panel agrees that this reference to physiological
change in the workers compensation case of
Military Rehabilitation and
compensation Commission v Ma
257 CLR 468
[2016] HCA 19
provides guidance on the issue of whether the claimant’s surgery
constitutes an injury. The Panel notes the following was
found at [75] of
“More than a century of teasing out the
ordinary sense in which injury is used in the context of workers compensation
legislation
has shown that suffering an injury is not confined to “getting
hurt” (an injury might be constituted by nothing more
“something going wrong within the human frame itself, such as the
straining of a muscle or the breaking of a blood vessel”
[80]) but that
suffering an injury involves something more than merely “becoming
sick” [81]. An injury, it has long been
repeatedly explained, is some
definite or distinct “physiological change” or “physiological
disturbance”
for the worse which, if not “sudden”, is at least
“identifiable” [82]. The universality of that explanation
questioned [83], and the comment has fairly been made that “a distinct
physiological change is not itself an expression
of clear and definite
meaning” [84]. The expression has nevertheless been shown by repeated
usage to have utility as an exposition
of the particular sense in which injury
has been used, and continues to be used, in the particular legislative
Panel observes that the term “physiological change” is an especially
broad concept and finds that whilst the term
is informative in considering the
definition of injury, it does not encompass the entirety of what is required to
meet the definition
of injury for the purposes of the MAI Act. For instance, a
physiological change can include relatively simple physical changes, for
example, a change in heart rate, which in and of itself would not ordinarily be
accepted as being an injury. Put another way, the
Panel accepts that an injury
must involve a physiological change, but a physiological change per se does not
equal an injury having
the Panel would agree, as found in
, that the words
“resulting from” in
ss 3.11 and 4.1 of the MAI Act, require a
causal connection between the mechanism of the motor accident and the injury,
and that an
injury does not necessarily need to have been occasioned at the time
of the motor accident, the Panel does not make the finding that
“continuum of harm or disturbance suffered” constitutes an injury.
Panel finds that liability must generally flow to the insurer for any
consequence of the injury suffered, however any consequence
of that injury would
not necessarily fall within the definition of injury.
claimant’s reference to cl 6.113 of the Guidelines is noted. This clause
prescribes that when assessing impairment, the
effect of the surgery is to be
included in the assessment. The Panel finds, however, that impairment is not
necessarily synonymous
with injury. It is, a consequence of an injury. As noted
above, the Panel accepts that the liability for the consequences of the
will flow, yet the said consequences do not necessarily constitute an injury for
the purposes of the MAI Act.
Panel is of the opinion that the above is not inconsistent with the High
Court’s findings in
. The Court found that the original
tortfeasor will be liable for the exacerbation of an injury by medical
treatment. The Panel does
not accept that the decision in
far as to establish that medical treatment undertaken due to an injury
necessarily forms part of that original injury.
as noted in
, it was acknowledged that the High Court in
established that “... if a plaintiff acts reasonably in
seeking medical treatment for injuries sustained as a result of negligence,
is further injured by the medical treatment, the original tortfeasor will be
liable for the consequences of the medical treatment.
The original injury is
regarded as carrying some risk that medical treatment administered by reason of
it will be negligently administrated.”
the subject matter, and as discussed above, the Panel is not persuaded by the
evidence that the surgery was performed negligently
or caused an additional
injury. Instead, the evidence is such that the Panel is persuaded that the
surgery improved the claimant’s
Panel also observes that its conclusions are consistent with the findings of
Mandoukos v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
NSWSC1023 where he found at [93]: “ordinarily, an accident-related injury
creates a need for treatment, but that treatment
is not an “injury”,
nor a “consequential injury”.
considering the ordinary meaning of the word “injury”, the Panel is
of the view that for a physiological change to
be regarded as an injury for the
purposes of the MAI Act, indicia would include it having arisen unintentionally,
typically from
an external force outside the control of the affected individual.
Further, it would not be planned or deliberate, and it would have
adverse effect on the individual inflicted. In addition, it would not be
consented to by a reasonably minded individual.
this in mind, in respect of a surgical intervention performed with the intent of
treating an injury, such step is noted to be
a deliberate act, that is consented
to with the explicit aim of reducing or removing a disease, symptom or loss of
function. Surgery,
when performed in such context, involves predictable,
controlled disturbances to bodily tissue with a specific intention to avoid
adverse effects of that disturbance.
the subject matter, the step to undergo surgery was a deliberate and considered
act. The claimant had been offered the surgery
previously, however, chose to
continue pursuing conservative treatment. After failing to achieve sufficient
relief of his symptoms
the surgery was offered again, and the claimant agreed
and was advised of the risks and consented to the surgery. The aim of the
surgery was to provide relief to the claimant from his cervical spine symptoms.
The surgery resulted in an improvement of his pain
and function, however, not a
complete resolution of the symptomatology.
found the above, and in consideration of the evidence discussed above, the Panel
is of the view that the referred injury: “injury
to bone – facet
joint – cervical spine – due to foraminotomy surgery performed by Dr
McKechnie on 1 July 2020 as
a consequence of injury sustained in the MVA on 8
January 2019” does not constitute an injury for the purposes of the MAI
and therefore a determination of whether it constitutes a threshold injury
is not required.
Panel does observe, however, that in the event that the surgery was considered
to constitute an injury for the purposes of the
MAI Act, the removal of the bone
during the surgery, would then necessarily need to be deemed a non-threshold
injury. This is due
to the fact that the removal of bone is outside the
definition of a soft tissue injury as defined by
s 1.6 of the MAI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (565 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter