URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LXN (No 2) [2024] NSWCATGD 21; (22 November 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 21
Hearing Date(s):
22 November 2024
Date of Orders:
22 November 2024
Decision Date:
22 November 2024
Guardianship Division
R H Booby, Principal Member
The guardianship order for LXN made on 6 August 2024 has been reviewed. The
order now is as follows:
1. The Public Guardian is appointed as the
2. This is a continuing guardianship order for a period
of nine months from 22 November 2024.
3. This is a limited
guardianship order giving the guardian(s) custody of LXN to the extent necessary
to carry out the functions below.
guardian has the following functions:
Accommodation
To decide where LXN may reside.
guardian may authorise others including members of NSW Police and the Ambulance
Service of NSW to:
(i) take LXN to a place approved by the
(ii) keep her at that place.
(iii) return
her to that place should she leave it.
To decide what health care LXN may receive.
Medical/Dental consent
To make substitute decisions about proposed
minor or major medical or dental treatment, where LXN is not capable of giving a
(e) Sexual Assault Assessment
decisions on behalf of LXN in relation to any sexual assault assessment
conducted involving her, including decisions about
any physical examinations and
the taking of any specimens or samples such as blood samples and about
conducting any tests for the
presence of blood, semen or other
substances.
(f) Release of Sexual Assault Investigation
To make decisions on behalf of LXN in relation to the release
to NSW Police or other appropriate authority of any Sexual Assault Investigation
Kit concerning LXN, including any Forensic Protocol and any specimens, samples
or test results relating to a sexual assault assessment.
To make decisions about services to be provided to
(h) Legal services
To make decisions for LXN in
relation to access to legal services.
make decisions about whether or not LXN can travel to any place outside
(j) Passport
To make a decision about
whether or not the passport of LXN should be surrendered to the guardian or some
other authority the guardian
nominates pending a decision by the guardian
concerning travel.
(k) Restrictive Practices
or withhold consent to restrictive practices used to influence LXN’s
(l) Other Function
1. Visa - To make
decisions about LXN’s visa status.
2. To make decisions about
the use of an electronic tracking device to assist to locate LXN when
5. The condition of this order
(a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring LXN to an understanding of the
issues and to obtain
and consider her views before making significant
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – requested review of guardianship order – subject
person with an intellectual disability – subject
person citizen of another
country – holder of a temporary visa – subject person resides at a
safe house – not eligible
for assistance under the NDIS – reports of
trafficking, exploitation and abuse – application to augment the
decision-making
functions of the public guardian – whether to include
consent to forensic testing following alleged sexual assault function
whether to include consent to controls being placed on the subject
person’s free access to her environment function
– whether use of
GPS tracking device constitutes a restrictive practice – whether use of a
locked timed medication dispenser
constitutes a restrictive practice –
broad function of consenting to restrictive practices of a generic nature
order varied
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Provider Registration and Practice Standards) Rules 2018 (Cth)
Cases Cited:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
004: Requested Review of Guardianship Order
LXN (the person)
(applicant)
Public Guardian (appointed guardian)
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00261587
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
REQUESTED REVIEW OF GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
is a 27-year-old woman who is currently living in a safe house in Sydney. She
has no family in Australia.
is reported to have a complex history of trauma, including having been subject
to trafficking, exploitation and abuse. She is
reported to have a cognitive
impairment. She is currently on a Bridging Visa A (a temporary visa allowing her
to stay temporarily
in Australia while awaiting a substantive visa application
to be determined). She has no access to disability services, any support
services to meet her needs and she has no financial support.
6 August 2024, the Tribunal made a guardianship order appointing the Public
Guardian to make decisions for LXN. The Public Guardian
was authorised to make
the following decisions for LXN:
(1) Accommodation, including authorising others, including members of NSW Police
and the Ambulance Service of NSW to take, keep and
return LXN to a place
determined by the guardian;
(2) Health care;
(3) Medical/Dental treatment;
(4) Services;
(5) Access to legal services;
(6) Travel outside Australia;
(7) Whether LXN’s passport should be surrendered to the guardian or some
other authority pending a decision by the guardian
concerning travel; and
(8) Decisions about LXN’s visa status.
12 November 2024, the Tribunal received an application from MZE, a
Case Manager at a charitable organisation safehouse, seeking
a review of
the guardianship order to augment the decision-making functions of the guardian.
The hearing
the end of these Reasons for Decision is a list of witnesses who attended the
hearing. [Appendix removed for publication.]
What did the
Tribunal have to decide?
reviewing the current guardianship order at the request of MZE,
the Tribunal may confirm, vary, suspend, revoke, renew, or renew
was no evidence or submission to the effect that LXN was no longer a person in
need of a guardian, that the functions allocated
to the guardian on 6 August
2024 are inappropriate, or that the Public Guardian should not be the guardian.
Accordingly, the question
to be considered by the Tribunal is what, if any,
additional functions should be allocated to the guardian.
if any, additional functions should be added to the guardianship order?
Tribunal must consider all of the following matters set out in
Guardianship Act 1987
) before exercising its
discretion to make a further guardianship order:
(a) the views (if any) of:
(i) the person;
(ii) the person’s spouse;
(iii) the person’s carer; and
(b) the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships;
(c) the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments; and
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for the making of such an order.
matters have no hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration.
However, the Tribunal must undertake a balancing
exercise for its consideration
of the matters in
of the Act. When undertaking this task, the
Tribunal may be guided by the principles that are set out in
of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
the hearing, LXN was assisted by an interpreter in her primary language. She
sometimes said that she did not understand questions
put to her, and whilst
efforts were made to promote her understanding of the proceedings and the
matters discussed, the extent of
her understanding is unknown.
is relevant to repeat the medical information that the Tribunal previously
considered in making the guardianship order in August
2024 and that I took into
account in the current hearing. That evidence included the following:
“[9] [Dr Z] is a consultant psychiatrist who interviewed
[LXN] on three separate occasions. She described her as having
a severe and
permanent neurocognitive disorder with features of anterograde and retrograde
memory loss including substantial loss
of autobiographical memory, loss of
language skills (she now struggles to communicate in English and [her primary
language]) and
loss of calculation ability. She is unable to make
medical/dental, accommodation and support decisions independently due to her
to recall material factors relevant to these decisions and retain them
in working memory to use and weigh these factors and communicate
her decision.
She shows a lack of awareness of her own functional deficits, her support needs,
her lack of visa status which would
grant access to supports, and her lack of
[10] [Dr Y], clinical neuropsychological registrar [at a
public hospital], interviewed [LXN] on two occasions in April 2024 and
that cognitive test results revealed severe impairments (scoring in the
extremely low range) across all domains of functioning
including working memory,
speed of information processing, verbal and perceptual comprehension and aspects
of executive functioning
including verbal abstract reasoning and fluency. [Dr Y]
made a diagnosis of a major neurocognitive disorder due to an unspecified
disorder. She stated that based on [LXN’s] cognitive profile, complex
trauma history and post-traumatic stress disorder she
requires extensive support
in the community and is vulnerable and at risk of misadventure.
[11] [Drs Y and Z] have both thoroughly reviewed [LXN] and
agreed that she has a diagnosis of a major neurocognitive disorder
background of complex trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder, which
significantly affects her memory and her decision-making
is also relevant to consider the following matters that were taken into account
by the Tribunal when it made the guardianship order
“[17] [MZE] explained that [LXN] first came to the [safe
house] run by [a charitable organisation] in 2019. At that time
she had the
ability to engage with others, look for work and live independently. She was
referred to [the charitable organisation]
again in March 2024 by [another public
hospital] because of concerns that she had experienced modern slavery. During
the admission
procedures to the safe house, her ability to engage was very
limited. She was unable to remember the triple zero emergency number,
of the safe house and once she left the house independently she was unable to
return because she was not aware of the
location of the house. Staff would
receive calls from police from a variety of places including the airport. She
had been charged
with affray and not leaving licensed premises and has no memory
of attending the Local Court and consenting to the charges. She has
recent admissions to hospital, two of which were to a mental health unit. She
needs 24/7 support. Her ‘boyfriend’
regularly appears at hospital to
obtain confidential information about her. She has disclosed to staff that he
has attempted to strangle
her numerous occasions. The police have taken an
apprehended domestic violence order out against him, which he is currently
[18] [MZE] stated that the safe house is not suitable
accommodation because [LXN] cannot live independently. She has a bridging
but needs to apply for a protection visa. She is entitled to receive treatment
under Medicare but has no identity documents
to register and obtain a Medicare
card. She is not entitled to any Centrelink benefits. She has legal
representation for the Local
Court matter and her lawyer anticipates that the
charges will be dismissed when the court reviews the new neuropsychological
assessment.
If the charges are dismissed [LXN] can then apply for a protection
visa. She has a six-year-old son who is being adopted and she
will need legal
assistance in those court proceedings.
[19] [Ms X], Social Work Team Leader [at an acute mental
health unit], stated that her interaction with [LXN] indicated that she
risk of serious harm, manipulation and coercion. She met with her on
2 August 2024 with an interpreter but [LXN’s] responses
to all of her
questions were ‘I don’t remember’.
[20] [Ms W, director of a university operated non-for-profit
organisation], was reported to have had contact with [LXN] in 2019
recently. She was reportedly ‘shocked’ by her cognitive decline over
four years, her inability to recall any
information or communicate on any
her application seeking a review of the order, MZE seeks that the order includes
a function of consenting to forensic testing following
sexual assault, and consenting to controls being placed on LXN’s free
access to her environment.
a report to the Tribunal dated 21 November 2024, a migration support caseworker
at a charitable organisation indicates that recently
LXN disclosed that she had
experienced sexual assault. The caseworker accompanied LXN to a
public hospital, but LXN was not able
to consent to the release of a Sexual
Assault Investigation Kit (
) that includes specimens, samples or test
results relating to a sexual assault assessment.
Public Guardian was not able to consent to sexual assault investigation or the
release of the SAIK because it lacked the authority
to provide those consents.
the hearing LXN indicated that she did not remember going to hospital and did
not recall being sexually assaulted. When asked
if she agreed to the Public
Guardian speaking to medical practitioners and providing consent to the release
of a SAIK, she indicated
consent. However, as noted above, the extent of her
understanding of the proceedings is unknown.
Public Guardian was agreeable to augmenting the functions of the guardianship
order to include decision-making about sexual assault
investigation/assessment
and release of the SAIK.
regard to the evidence currently before me, and that accepted previously by the
Tribunal, I am satisfied that LXN is vulnerable
to physical harm and sexual
exploitation, and that the combined effects of her impairments prevent her from
reporting these incidents
and seeking appropriate investigation of them. Nor is
she able to consent to the release of the SAIK, to facilitate relevant police
activity. I was satisfied that formal consent is required for these matters and
that it is in the best interests of LXN to allocate
those decision-making
functions to a guardian.
her letter, the caseworker also indicates that LXN frequently leaves the safe
house with her whereabouts being unknown. It is not
known how she is returned to
the safe house, where she has been, and with whom. LXN does not know the address
of the safe house and
is sometimes found out in the community not knowing how to
return. At those times she has been put in touch with police or a hospital.
a letter dated 18 November 2024, Ms V, an occupational therapist, indicates that
LXN is not able to remember her address or to
navigate to her home when she is
out. Ms V opines that it is highly likely that when absent from the safe house,
LXN is being sexually
exploited. In support of that view, she indicates that at
times when LXN returns to the safe house she has cash, despite not having
to any social security or other recognised income. Ms V proposes that a GPS
tracking device be used so that if LXN were lost
or in danger, staff would be
able to locate her and provide assistance. To the extent that she understood
this proposal, LXN was
agreeable to the Public Guardian being authorised to
make decisions about the use of a tracking device to locate her as necessary.
Public Guardian was agreeable to augmenting the functions of the guardianship
order to include decision-making about the use of
a GPS tracker to locate LXN
when necessary.
is not eligible for assistance under the National Disability Insurance Scheme
(NDIS). However, to provide some guidance as the
categorisation of the use of
the GPS tracking device, MZE referred to an NDIS publication indicating that in
the view of the National
Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), the use of a GPS
tracking device does not constitute a restrictive practice where it is used
for support staff to assist a person should he or she get lost. I concur with
this view, as I consider that the proposed use of the
tracking device places no
constraints on LXN’s free access to her environment. However, I am
satisfied that the use of such
a device impinges on LXN’s privacy and as
such should be considered by a guardian who is able to consent to, or refuse
for, its use.
V also indicates that LXN needs a locked timed medication dispenser because her
memory impairment results in her forgetting to
take her medication or taking too
much medication. Staff at the safe house are not permitted to administer
medication and the house
is not staffed on a 24/7 basis. As a result,
LXN’s medication is not supervised, and the use of a locked medication
that dispenses appropriate medication is required to reduce the risk
of LXN overdosing on medication. I am satisfied that there is
implement this strategy for LXN’s health. It does amount to a restriction
on her free access to items in her environment
and, as such, constitutes a
restrictive practice. I am satisfied that there is a need for a guardian to
review that practice and
consent or refuse consent for its use.
was agreeable to the use of a locked timed medication dispenser and to the
Public Guardian making decisions about the use of that
Public Guardian was agreeable to augmenting the functions of the guardianship
order to include decision-making about the use of
a locked timed medication
dispenser as a restrictive practice.
the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Provider Registration and Practice
Standards) Rules 2018 (Cth), restrictive practices
are categorised as
environmental, mechanical, physical, chemical and seclusion. However, as noted
above, LXN is not eligible for
assistance under the NDIS. I have decided to
provide a function of consenting to restrictive practices of a generic nature
following reasons:
(1) As LXN is not eligible for the NDIS, there is no need to employ the NDIS
categories;
(2) Having regard to LXN’s complex presentation and circumstances it is
foreseeable that a guardian might need to consider
a restriction of a different
nature from the one involved in the use of the timed locked medication
(3) LXN’s circumstances have been well documented in this Reasons for
Decision and those of the Tribunal upon making the order
in August 2024
– I see little value in those circumstances being reiterated in a repeat
review process;
(4) I am satisfied that the Public Guardian is experienced in considering the
use of a range of restrictive practices and in making
decisions about their use
in the best interests of people under guardianship; and
(5) Having regard to the Public Guardian’s experience and expertise, and
to LXN’s communication and language difficulties
and her history of
trauma, I am of the view that it is in her best interests to avoid, if possible,
the need for a repeat hearing
should other restrictions be proposed.
the principles set out in s 4 of the Act
are to the effect that
LXN’s’ freedom of decision and freedom of action should be limited
as little as possible, I am
required to prioritise her best interests and
welfare. Whilst the guardianship order as augmented is highly restrictive of
freedom of decision and action, I am satisfied that, having regard
to her disability and social circumstances, the order is necessary
her welfare and best interests.
was no evidence that the previous order has adversely affected any family
relationship or LXN’s cultural and linguistic
environment or that renewing
the order would be likely to do so.
considered the evidence and reached the conclusions noted above,
I augmented the guardianship order to include the additional
sought and as indicted in the Tribunal’s order.
should the order last?
order made on 6 August 2024 was an order for twelve months. There was no
application to vary that order. I made the current order
nine months from today
to retain approximately the same review date envisaged when the original
order was made.
The following people attended the hearing and gave evidence:
Manager at a charitable organisation safehouse
the Migration
Support Caseworker at a charitable organisation
An interpreter participated in the hearing to assist LXN in
her primary language.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter