URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1333.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NSW Food Authority v David Tri Chau-Ngoc [2025] NSWSC 1333 (13 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
NSW Food Authority v David Tri Chau-Ngoc
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1333
Hearing Date(s):
2 October 2025; 17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
13 November 2025
Decision Date:
13 November 2025
(1) Defendant’s amended notice of motion filed on 23 September
2025 dismissed with costs.
(2) Stand over the proceedings to
the Court of Criminal Appeal Registrar’s list on 20 November 2025 at 10 am
to make directions
to prepare the matter for hearing and, if appropriate, fix a
date for hearing.
Catchwords:
CRIME – jurisdiction to prosecute executive liability offences under
the Food Act – absence of express power – whether
Food Authority as
a statutory body has implied power to prosecute Food Act offences
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – legislative purpose –
consideration of Act as a whole – text and context – coherence
outcome of construction
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Act 1979
Food Act 2003
Food Amendment
(Public Information on Offences) Act 2008
(NSW), sch 1 cl 4
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
Interpretation Act 1987
Miscellaneous Acts Amendment
(Director’s Liability) Act 2012 (NSW), sch 1 cl 1.13
Protection of the
Environment Operations Act 1997
Sydney Water Catchment
Management Act 1998
Water Management Act 2000
Miscellaneous Acts Amendment (Directors’ Liability) Bill
Food Regulation 2025 (NSW), cl 6
Cases Cited:
Authorised Officer Christine Tumney (NSW Food Authority) v Nutricia
Australia Pty Limited
[2007] NSWSC 1215
Chorlton v Lings
[1868] UKLawRpCP 71
(1868) LR 4 CP
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
(1955) 92 CLR 390
Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(1981) 147 CLR
Eades v Sundowner Caravan Parks Pty Ltd
[1983] VicRp 48
(1982) 48 LGRA 307
[2025] NSWCA 84
Green Leaf Australia Group Pty Ltd v Barnes, Chief
Regulatory Officer, Natural Resources Access Regulator
[2025] NSWLEC
Manton v Parabolic Pty Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 361
NSW Food Authority
v Inside Out Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 1278
NSW Food Authority v
Nutricia Australia Pty Ltd
(2008) 72 NSWLR 456
[2008] NSWCCA 252
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority (1998) 194 CLR 35;
Sydney Catchment Authority v Bailey
[2006] NSWLEC 616
SZTAL v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR 362
[2017] HCA 34
Taylor v The Owners – Strata Plan
(2014) 253 CLR 531
[2014] HCA 9
Warren Gibson, NSW Fair
Trading v Roberta Graham
[2013] NSWSC 1909
Texts Cited:
Halsbury’s Laws of England (4th ed, Vol 9)
Principal judgment
NSW Food Authority (Plaintiff)
David Tri Chau-Ngoc (Defendant)
Representation:
P English (Plaintiff)
M Shume / D Gray
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Lindsay Taylor Lawyers (Plaintiff)
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/393326
Publication Restriction:
On 22 October 2024,
the plaintiff, the NSW Food Authority (the
‘Food Authority’), filed 10 summonses seeking orders in relation to
10 offences
contrary to
Food Act 2003
) alleged to have been committed by the defendant,
Mr David Tri Chau-Ngoc, a director of Inside Out Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd
an amended notice of motion dated 23 September 2025, the defendant sought orders
that the proceedings be dismissed with costs for
the reason that the plaintiff
did not have power to institute this prosecution. This judgment deals with that
question. For the reasons
which follow, the defendant’s notice of motion
must be dismissed.
The facts and procedural history
10 summonses, each filed on 22 October 2024, sought an order to the following
1 An order pursuant to
s 246(1)(a)
Criminal Procedure
(NSW) that the Defendant, David Tri Chau-Ngoc, appear before the
Court to be dealt with according to law for the charge that, on or
October 2022
, at Silverwater in the State of New South Wales, he committed
an offence against
Food Act 2003
in that, Inside Out Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd committed an offence against
executive liability offence
), and the Defendant,
who was a director of Inside Out Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd, ought reasonably to
have known that the executive
liability offence would be or was being committed
and failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent or stop the commission of
Particulars:
(a) 4,800 1 litre bottles of JS x Inside Out Unsweetened Almond Milk
Collagen + Calcium + Prebiotics
(b) 4,800 1 litre bottles of JS Health x Inside Out Unsweetened Oat Milk
Collagen + Calcium + Prebiotics
(c) 4,800 1 litre bottles of JS Health x Inside Out Barista Oat Milk
Collagen + Calcium + Prebiotics,
(collectively, the
On or around
24 October 2022
, Inside Out Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd
sold the Products to Woolworths Limited (see invoice number Inv-35128 (Reference
0105316135))
Food Standards Code provision:
Clause 2(b) of Standard 1.2.6:
For the labelling provisions, storage conditions and directions for use
of a food are:
(b) if the food must be used or stored in accordance with certain
directions for health or safety reasons – those directions.
Conditions in accordance with which the Products were required to be
The Products must be kept refrigerated at all times (below 5 degrees
Storage Requirement
Storage instructions on the labels for the Products:
Contrary to the Storage Requirement, the Products were labelled as
“Once opened, keep refrigerated and consume within 5
Special executive liability
Section 21(3)
is an offence attracting executive liability
2 An order under
s 246(1)(a)
Criminal Procedure Act
(NSW) for the attendance of the Defendant before the Court to answer
the above offence.
3 That the Defendant be dealt with according to law for the
commission of the above offence.
4 An order that the Defendant pay the Prosecutor’s
5 Such orders pursuant to
the Court in its discretion sees fit to make.
summons related to an offence allegedly committed on 24 October 2022, the
particulars of which referred to the sale to Woolworths
Limited of an identified
quantity of Unsweetened Almond Milk, Unsweetened Oat Milk and Barista Oat Milk.
The remaining summons dealt
with the sale to Woolworths Limited of an identified
quantity of Unsweetened Almond Milk, Unsweetened Oat Milk and Barista Oat Milk
on 4 November 2022, 7 November 2022, 21 November 2022, 22 November 2022, 23,
November 2022, 24 November 2022, 6 December 2022, 11
January 2023 and 12 January
basis of each charge was an allegation that Inside Out committed an offence
, that such an offence was an
“executive liability offence” under
s 122(1)(i)
and for which the defendant, as a director of Inside Out, was liable.
provides that a person must not sell or advertise
for sale any food in a manner that contravenes a provision of the Australian New
Zealand Food Standards Code (the ‘Food Standards Code’). Inside Out,
the company, pleaded guilty in relation to the offences
alleged to have been
committed by it and has been sentenced:
NSW Food Authority v Inside Out
Nutritious Goods Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 1278.
6 November 2024, N Adams J made orders pursuant to
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) for the defendant to appear before the Court to
answer the 10 charges alleging that he committed an offence contrary to
15 July 2025, the defendant filed a notice of motion challenging the power of
the plaintiff to prosecute the defendant. Later,
on 29 September 2025, the Court
granted leave for the defendant to file an amended notice of motion dated 23
September 2025, alongside
an affidavit of Jason Benjamin Pham, the
defendant’s solicitor, sworn on 23 September 2025. That affidavit annexed
the amended
notice of motion and the transcript of proceedings before N Adams
amended notice of motion sought the following orders:
1 The matter is listed for 1 day preliminary pursuant to
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) on the issue of jurisdiction.
2 The proceedings be dismissed.
3 The Plaintiff pay the Defendant costs of the proceedings.
4 Liberty to apply on 3 days’ notice.
5 Such further or other orders as the Court sees fit.
2 A date to be set for the filing and service of the
Accused’s written submissions.
3 A date to be set for the filing and service of the NSW Food
Authority’s written submissions.
4 A date to be set for any submissions in reply.
plaintiff also filed an affidavit of Mr Lachlan Porteous dated 2 September 2025.
Mr Porteous is the Manager of Compliance Investigations,
Agriculture &
Biosecurity employed by the NSW Department of Primary Industries & Regional
Development. Mr Porteous was not
cross-examined. He gave evidence that he is an
authorised officer for the purposes of
there has been no delegation by the Food Authority of the power to institute a
prosecution for an executive liability offence
contrary to
Submissions
submissions of the parties were at times somewhat elusive. The original written
submissions prepared for the hearing fixed for
2 October 2025 ultimately played
little part, on either side, in the case presented. On 2 October 2025, the
defendant sought, and
was granted, an adjournment to 17 October 2025,
essentially on the basis that he was taken by surprise by the Food
Authority’s
reliance on the principle of implied authority to commence
prosecutions under the
In doing so the plaintiff relied on,
by analogy, at least part of the reasoning in
Sydney Catchment Authority
[2006] NSWLEC 616
, a decision not referred to in the
plaintiff’s original written submissions. A second set of submissions was
prepared and served
by each side and addressed orally on 17 October 2025.
defendant’s ultimate submission was that some sections of the
, conferred an express function on the Food Authority and
where there is an offence that relates specifically to the exercise of that
function, in this case
which deals with a breach of the
prohibition
notice, a sufficient nexus is met such that the power to prosecute (in this
offence) is incidental to another power or incidental to the
exercise of a function. The defendant submitted that no such specific
was conferred by the
on the Food Authority in relation to either
offences and therefore no sufficient nexus was
established such that the power to prosecute for the
offence was
incidental to another power or incidental to the exercise of a function.
Accordingly, it was submitted that the Food
Authority had no power to commence
the present prosecutions.
was originally submitted that the Food Authority had power to delegate the power
to prosecute
offences to a Local Council, but,
ultimately, this submission was abandoned. The defendant’s ultimate
submission, as refined
in oral address, was that the only persons who could
prosecute an offence under
are those expressly or
impliedly identified by the
as persons who can prosecute an
executive liability offence, which on their interpretation was limited to
“the Crown”.
The emanations of the Crown permitted to prosecute an
executive liability offence were not identified in any detail. The defendant
submitted that on its proper construction, the
did not identify
the Food Authority as a person who can prosecute such an offence. Accordingly,
the Food Authority had no power to
prosecute this offence.
plaintiff submitted that the legislative purpose of
was simply to limit
the ability to commence a prosecution for an executive liability offence to a
person who can bring a prosecution
for the offence, here, for offences contrary
. The plaintiff accepted that the Food
Authority was not expressly identified in the
as having the
power to prosecute an executive liability offence. The plaintiff submitted that
on the proper construction of the
, however, the Food Authority
is a person “who can bring a prosecution for the executive liability
will refer to the parties’ further submissions where appropriate in what
Consideration
Ultimately,
I consider (and the parties accepted) that the question to be determined is one
of statutory construction. The relevant
question to be answered is thus: does
the Food Authority have the power to commence these proceedings against the
defendant? The
answer to this question requires an analysis of the subject
matter, scope and purpose of the
prosecution of the defendant for offences contrary to
was commenced pursuant to
s 246(1)(a)
Criminal Procedure
, which provides as follows:
(1) A prosecutor may apply for an order—
(a) that a person alleged in the application to have committed
an offence that may be dealt with summarily by the court must appear
and place specified in the order to answer to the offence charged in the
Criminal Procedure Act
, a “prosecutor” means the
Director of Public Prosecutions or “other person who institutes or is
responsible for
the conduct of a prosecution and includes (where the
subject-matter or context allows or requires) an Australian legal practitioner
representing the prosecutor”.
offence allegedly committed by the defendant was under
122 Liability of directors etc for offences by
corporation—offences attracting executive liability
(1) For the purposes of this section, an
liability offence
is an offence against any of the following provisions
of this Act that is committed by a corporation—
(a) section 13,
(b) section 14,
(c) section 15,
(d) section 16,
(e) section 17 (1) or (2),
(f) section 18 (1)–(3),
(g) section 19 (1),
(h) section 20,
(i) section 21 (1)–(4),
(j) section 35,
(k) section 64,
(l) section 104 (1)–(4).
(2) A person commits an offence against this section if—
(a) a corporation commits an executive liability offence,
(b) the person is—
(i) a director of the corporation, or
(ii) an individual who is involved in the management of the
corporation and who is in a position to influence the conduct of the
corporation
in relation to the commission of the executive liability offence, and
(c) the person—
(i) knows or ought reasonably to know that the executive
liability offence (or an offence of the same type) would be or is being
committed, and
(ii) fails to take all reasonable steps to prevent or stop the
commission of that offence.
Maximum penalty—The maximum penalty for the executive liability offence if
committed by an individual.
(3) The prosecution bears the legal burden of proving the
elements of the offence against this section.
(4) The offence against this section can only be prosecuted by
a person who can bring a prosecution for the executive liability
(5) This section does not affect the liability of the
corporation for the executive liability offence, and applies whether or
corporation is prosecuted for, or convicted of, the executive liability
(6) This section does not affect the application of any other
law relating to the criminal liability of any persons (whether or
not directors
or other managers of the corporation) who are accessories to the commission of
the executive liability offence or are
otherwise concerned in, or party to, the
commission of the executive liability offence.
(7) In this section—
has the same meaning it has in the
Corporations Act 2001
of the Commonwealth.
reasonable steps
, in relation to the commission of an executive
liability offence, includes, but is not limited to, such action (if any) of the
kinds as is reasonable in all the circumstances—
(a) action towards—
(i) assessing the corporation’s compliance with the
provision creating the executive liability offence, and
(ii) ensuring that the corporation arranged regular
professional assessments of its compliance with the provision,
(b) action towards ensuring that the corporation’s
employees, agents and contractors are provided with information, training,
instruction and supervision appropriate to them to enable them to comply with
the provision creating the executive liability offence
so far as the provision
is relevant to them,
(c) action towards ensuring that—
(i) the plant, equipment and other resources, and
(ii) the structures, work systems and other processes,
relevant to compliance with the provision creating the executive liability
offence are appropriate in all the circumstances,
(d) action towards creating and maintaining a corporate culture
that does not direct, encourage, tolerate or lead to non-compliance
provision creating the executive liability offence.
s 246(1)(a)
Criminal Procedure
, (read with the definition in that Act of a “prosecutor”)
draws attention to whether the Food Authority is a person “who
can bring a
prosecution for the executive liability offence”, relevantly s 21(3).
The power of a statutory corporation to prosecute a criminal
an entity has power to prosecute for a criminal offence depends on a
construction of the relevant statute said to confer such
a power. Framed another
way, the question is whether, for the purposes of
, does the Food Authority have power to commence proceedings in relation
to an “executive liability offence”.
relevant principles in determining whether a NSW Government entity has power to
prosecute for a criminal offence have recently
been considered by the Court of
Gamage v Riashi
[2025] NSWCA 84
, the Court addressed the power
of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (‘ICAC’) to
prosecute criminal offences.
Basten AJA (with whom Leeming JA and Griffiths AJA
agreed) said of this question of statutory construction:
[12] The respondent claimed his authority to institute
proceedings for any offence derived from
Criminal Procedure
(NSW), which provides:
14 Common informer
Fines and Penalties Act 1901
A prosecution or proceeding in respect of any offence under an Act may be
instituted by any person unless the right to institute
the prosecution or
proceeding is expressly conferred by that Act on a specified person or class of
The respondent noted that none of the offences the subject of the CANs was one
with respect to which an Act expressly conferred the
right to institute
proceedings on a specified person or class of persons which did not include him.
Indeed, there was no such Act.
[19] The question, therefore, remains as to the scope of the
functions and powers of the Commission. While it is true that
naming of the Commission in the Regulation indicates a belief
on the part of the Attorney General of the day, who promoted the amendment
the Regulation in 2004, that the Commission could prosecute for
offences, that does not avoid the obligation of this Court to
consider whether, as a matter of statutory construction, that belief was
[20] The relevant provisions of the ICAC Act do not contain any
express function or power involving prosecution of criminal offences.
question is therefore whether such a function or power can be inferred
from the statutory context. Before noting the key provisions,
there are a number, two preliminary observations should be
made. The first is
that the boundaries of the Commission’s
have not proved easy to fix with precision. Cases determining some aspect
of the boundaries have on occasion been followed
by amendments. Elements of
uncertainty remain.
[21] Secondly, the fact that a finding of corrupt conduct is
often dependent upon the Commission being satisfied as to a relevant
offence, in combination with the need to maintain the boundary between opinions
formed by the Commission and the establishment
of a criminal offence by the only
arm of government capable of making such a finding, namely a court with criminal
means that the boundary has been hard to settle. ....
note in passing that
Criminal Procedure Act
is not relied
upon by the Food Authority here, by reason of
The question in
Gamage v Riashi
, however, was the proper construction of
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
) and its conferral of a species of prosecutorial
function on ICAC.
Court of Appeal emphasised the importance of the proper construction of the
powers of the
. The existence of specific prohibitions in the
on ICAC “recommending prosecution”, or even forming
an opinion about the commission of an offence, were emphasised by
[28] There is, self-evidently, no express conferral of a
function or power to institute criminal proceedings. In short, both the
legislative objects and the principal functions of the Commission are to
investigate, communicate to appropriate authorities about,
and to take steps to
limit opportunities for, corrupt conduct. The terms of ss 13(4) and 74B,
precluding the Commission including
in a report a finding of guilt or a
statement “recommending prosecution”, or even forming an opinion as
to such matters,
are inconsistent with the Commission having an implied power to
institute a prosecution itself.
will shortly return to the question of the guidance provided by
but it is to be noted at this stage that the Court of Appeal found
conferred implied or inferred power on the Commission
commence prosecutions for offences under that Act, despite the
Commission being precluded from commencing prosecutions for more general
criminal offences such as those under the
Crimes Act 1900
principles of statutory construction are clear. Construing a statutory provision
requires consideration of its text, context and
purpose. In
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 35;
[1998] HCA 28
, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ held that the “primary object of
statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
so that it is
consistent with the language and purpose of all the provisions of the
statute”, with the meaning of the provision
to be determined “by
reference to the language of the instrument viewed as a whole” quoting
Mason and Wilson JJ in
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
(1981) 147 CLR 279
at 320. Their Honours also referred to the
statement of Dixon CJ in
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
(1955) 92 CLR 390
at 397 that “the context, the general purpose and policy
of a provision and its consistency and fairness are surer guides to
its meaning
than the logic with which it is constructed”.
v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
[2014] HCA 9
, French CJ, Crennan and Bell JJ said this about the
primacy of construing the words of the statute:
[39] ...the task remains the construction of the words the
legislature has enacted. In this respect it may not be sufficient that
‘the modified construction is reasonably open having regard to the
statutory scheme’ because any modified meaning must
be consistent with the
language in fact used by the legislature. Lord Diplock never suggested
otherwise. Sometimes, as McHugh J observed
in Newcastle City Council v GIO
General Ltd, the language of a provision will not admit of a remedial
construction. Relevant for
present purposes was his Honour's further
observation, ‘[i]f the legislature uses language which covers only
one state of affairs,
a court cannot legitimately construe the words of the
section in a tortured and unrealistic manner to cover another set of
circumstances’.
(Footnotes omitted.)
statutory text, however, cannot be considered without regard to its context and
purpose. In
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2017) 262 CLR 362
[2017] HCA 34
Nettle and Gordon JJ said this:
[14] The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of
a statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the
regard is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded
at this first stage and not at some later stage and
it should be regarded in its
widest sense. This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary
meaning of a word, namely
how it is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the
process of construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise
that, understood in its statutory, historical or other context, some other
meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if its
ordinary meaning is not
consistent with the statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
(Footnotes omitted)
when considered, is used in its widest sense “to include such things as
the existing state of the law and the mischief
which, by legitimate means ...
one may discern the statute was intended to remedy”:
CIC Insurance
Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ). See also
Project Blue
statutory power can be derived expressly, impliedly or somewhere in between such
as “whatever the language used [in a statute]
necessarily or even
naturally implies is expressed thereby”:
[1868] UKLawRpCP 71
(1868) LR 4 CP 374
Eades v Sundowner Caravan
Parks Pty Ltd
[1983] VicRp 48
(1982) 48 LGRA 307
at 312, the Court referred
Chorlton v Lings
saying (see also
Manton v Parabolic Pty
(1985) 2 NSWLR 361
It is clear that an express provision may be made by whatever the language used
necessarily or even naturally implies.
the present case,
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) is important
in determining the relevant powers of the Food Authority. That section empowers
statutory corporations to do things
that are “necessary for, or incidental
to, the exercise of its functions”:
50 Statutory corporations
(1) A statutory corporation:
(c) may take proceedings and be proceeded against in its
corporate name
(e) may do and suffer all other things that bodies corporate
may, by law, do and suffer and that are necessary for, or incidental
exercise of its functions.
(4) This section applies to a statutory corporation in addition
to, and without limiting the effect of, any provision of the Act
by or under
which the corporation is constituted.
NSW Food Authority is constituted under
statutory body corporate representing the Crown:
objects of the
are stated as follows:
Objects of Act
The objects of this Act include the following—
(a) to ensure food for sale is both safe and suitable for human
consumption,
(b) to prevent misleading conduct in connection with the sale
(c) to provide for the application in this State of the Food
Standards Code.
Food Authority is defined as an “enforcement agency” by
. That is, the Food Authority is the “enforcement
agency” charged with ensuring food for sale is both safe and suitable
human consumption, preventing misleading conduct in connection with the sale of
food and providing for the application in NSW
of the Food Standards Code.
executive liability offence the subject of this prosecution was a contravention
of a provision owing its existence to the Food
Standards Code. That this is so
is clear from the following:
sets out the offences relating to food,
, the subject of the prosecution in this case against Inside
(2) The principal offences allegedly committed by Inside Out were under
Section 21(3)
provides an offence
of strict liability:
21 Compliance with Food Standards Code
(3) A person must not sell or advertise for sale any food that
is packaged or labelled in a manner that contravenes a provision
of the Food
Standards Code.
(3) The offences were allegedly contrary to
because Inside Out sold food that was labelled in a matter that contravened a
provision of the Food Standards Code.
(4) The Food Standards Code governs food safety in Australia. The specific
provision of the Food Standards Code that was contravened
was Standard
1.2.6(2)(b) ‘Information requirements – directions for use and
For the labelling provisions, storage conditions and directions for use of a
(b) if the food must be used or stored in accordance with
certain directions for health or safety reasons – those directions.
(5) ‘Food’ is defined in the
(1) In this Act,
(a) any substance or thing of a kind used, or represented as
being for use, for human consumption (whether it is live, raw, prepared
partly prepared),
(6) Proceedings for an offence under the
or associated
regulations can be dealt with before the Local Court or before the Supreme
an initial observation, the subject matter of “Compliance with the Food
Standards Code”, the explicit subject of s
21, is at the heart of the
. The Food Authority is the principal actor charged by the
with “enforcement” in NSW of the Food Standards
Code. Whilst it is true that the
does not provide a specific
power to the Food Authority to prosecute offences arising under the
, the role assigned by the
to the Food Authority by
and a number of other provisions I will shortly refer to, tends strongly in
favour of the conclusion that for offences arising under
the Food Authority has an implied power under the
to prosecute
offences arising under the
are a number of other criminal offences provided for by the
relevant in determining the present question of construction.
provides a criminal penalty for failing to comply with an emergency order. An
emergency order is one made by the Food Authority under
. In context, it would be a surprising conclusion that, as the
“enforcement agency” given express power to issue an emergency
order, the Food Authority was not also the body charged by the legislation as
being responsible for prosecuting any breaches of the
orders it had made.
provides a criminal penalty for providing information or a document that the
person knows is false in a material particular. Again,
it would be a surprising
conclusion that when false information is provided to the Food Authority as the
“enforcement agency”,
the Food Authority is not, on the proper
construction of the
empowered to prosecute the person who has
provided it with that false information.
gives power to the Food Authority “or an
enforcement agency” to issue a prohibition order.
provides for
a criminal penalty for contravention of a prohibition order. Again, it would be
a surprising conclusion that as the
“enforcement agency” given
express power to issue a prohibition order, the Food Authority, was not also the
body charged
by the legislation as being responsible for prosecuting any
breaches of the orders it had made.
provides for a criminal penalty for a failure of an approved laboratory to
notify the Food Authority about a change in the direct
or indirect interest in
the business of the laboratory. It would be a surprising conclusion that as the
body to whom the declaration
must be made, the Food Authority was not also the
body charged by the legislation as being responsible for prosecuting any
of the section.
of course it is not determinative in and of itself, it would be a strained and
incoherent outcome if the Food Authority had
an implied power under the
to prosecute some but not all offences arising under the
. The offences just mentioned, where the defendant ultimately accepted
the Food Authority had power to commence a prosecution, are
each important
although, compared to the subject matter of
peripheral. Why Parliament should be taken to have intended to have
granted power to the Food Authority to prosecute some, but not
all, offences
arising under the
was not explained by the defendant.
reject the submission that the Food Authority, as the principal defined
"enforcement agency" under the
, had an implied power to
prosecute some but not all offences supporting these core objects of the
. The prohibition effected by
requirement of the
. Understood in context, the
provides that the Food Authority is the principal entity charged with ensuring
food for sale is both safe and suitable for human
consumption, preventing
misleading conduct in connection with the sale of food and providing for the
application in NSW of the Food
Standards Code.
do not accept that the
should be construed as providing power to
the Food Authority to commence a prosecution of some more peripheral offences
for by the Act, but not offences at the core of effecting the objects
’s defined “enforcement
agency”, the Food Authority, has an implied power to commence prosecutions
for alleged breaches
, including breaches of
scope of the identified powers and functions of the Food Authority may be guided
by what is in
, entitled “Administration”. It is
necessary to consider a number of relevant provisions in that Part.
makes clear that the Food Authority is a statutory body representing the
Constitution
of NSW Food Authority
(1) There is constituted by this Act a body corporate
with the corporate name of the NSW Food Authority.
(2) The affairs of the Food Authority are to be managed by the
Chief Executive Officer.
(3) Any act, matter or thing done in the name of, or on behalf
of, the Food Authority by the Chief Executive Officer, or with the
authority of
the Chief Executive Officer, is taken to have been done by the Food
(4) The Food Authority is, for the purposes of any Act, a
statutory body representing the Crown.
, the Food Authority has such functions as are
conferred or imposed on it by or under the
or any other
108 Functions of Food Authority
(1) The Food Authority has such functions as are
conferred or imposed on it by or under this or any other Act.
(2) In particular, the Food Authority has the following
(a) to keep under review the construction, hygiene and
operating procedures of premises, vehicles and equipment used for the handling
or sale of food,
(b) to provide advice or recommendations to the Minister on the
establishment, development or alteration of food safety schemes,
(c) to regulate the handling and sale of food the subject of
food safety schemes to ensure that it is safe and suitable for human
consumption,
(d) to encourage businesses engaged in the handling or sale of
food to minimise food safety risks,
(e) to undertake or facilitate the education and training of
persons to enable them to meet the requirements of the Food Standards
food safety schemes,
(f) to provide advice, information, community education and
assistance in relation to matters connected with food safety or other
of consumers in food,
(f1) to make recommendations as to the maximum fees to be
charged by local councils in relation to inspections carried out under
37 by authorised officers of enforcement agencies (other than inspections in
connection with premises the subject of a licence
under a food safety scheme or
the granting of a licence under a food safety scheme),
(g) to carry out such research as is necessary in order
to perform its other functions.
(3) (Repealed)
of these functions refer specifically to the power to commence or carry on a
prosecution. Section 109(c), however, provides that
the Food Authority is
subject to the control and direction of the Minister, except in relation to
“decisions whether to institute
criminal proceedings in a particular
109 Ministerial control of Food Authority
The Food Authority is, in the exercise of its functions, subject to the control
and direction of the Minister, except in relation
to the following—
(a) the contents of any advice, report or recommendation given
to the Minister,
(b) decisions whether to grant, suspend or cancel a licence
held by a particular person under the regulations,
(c) decisions whether to institute criminal proceedings in a
particular case.
have concluded that the better construction of
is that it identifies a statutory function for the Food Authority to make
decisions whether to institute criminal proceedings in
a particular case free
from the control and direction of the Minister. The contrary construction, that
the function is limited to
making some decisions to prosecute (not including for
offences under
) in inconsistent with the
achievement of the statutory objects of the
Food Authority is an “enforcement agency” as expressly stated in
. As I have said, I have concluded that the Food
Authority’s responsibility as an “enforcement agency” extends
the prosecution of offences created by the
. This is because
that power is necessary for, or incidental to, the exercise of its functions
within the meaning of
Interpretation Act
, it is the duty of an “enforcement
agency”, subject to
, to exercise the functions conferred or imposed
on it by or under this Act or delegated to it under this Act. The Food Authority
is the “appropriate enforcement agency” for the purposes of the Food
Standards Code, as seen in
, definition of
“appropriate enforcement agency” (see also cl 6(1)(c) of the Food
Regulation 2025 (NSW)).
Food Authority also has an express power to delegate enforcement functions.
Section 109E
provides that the Food Authority may
delegate to specific persons or bodies “any function of the Food Authority
under this Act”:
(1) The Food Authority may delegate to—
(a) a member of staff of the Food Authority (whether by name or
by reference to the holder of an office), or
(b) an authorised officer, or
(c) a private subsidiary corporation, or
(d) the holder of an office prescribed by the regulations,
(e) an enforcement agency or a person holding a position
prescribed by the regulations as the head of an enforcement agency,
any function of the Food Authority under this Act that is not specified in
subsection (2).
(2) The following functions of the Food Authority cannot
be delegated—
(a) the power of delegation conferred by this
(b) any function under Part 3 (Emergency powers),
(c) any function under section 111B (Conditions and
limitations on exercise of functions by enforcement agencies).
(3) A delegate may sub-delegate to a person referred to in
subsection (1) any function delegated by the Food Authority if the
delegate is
authorised in writing to do so by the Food Authority.
(4) A function must not be delegated under this section
to an enforcement agency without the consent in writing of the enforcement
fact that the Food Authority cannot delegate any function under Part 3,
including its powers to commence a criminal prosecution,
is significant. It is a
further demonstration of the intention of the legislature that the Food
Authority’s responsibility
as the principal “enforcement
agency” under the
extends to the prosecution of offences
created by the
, the Food Authority may appoint a relevant body
to be an “enforcement agency” for the purposes of the
. A “relevant body” means “a local council, or the
Secretary of the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment
(but only in respect of Kosciuszko National Park)”:
, definition of
“relevant body”.
turn, the “enforcement agency” can appoint a person to be an
“authorised officer” for the purposes of the
. The powers of authorised officers include powers relating to
inspection and seizure (see
, the issuing of improvement notices (see
and the issuing of penalty notices where it appears that a person has committed
a penalty notice offence (see
is an important provision. The Food Authority may
keep a register of information about offences under the
Food Regulation relating to the handling or sale of food. The register may
contain information in relation to a person who
has been convicted by a court of
an offence under the
or the Food Regulation relating to the
handling or sale of food, or whose employee or agent has been convicted of such
an offence,
“including as to the enforcement agency or other body under
the direction of which, or on behalf of whom, the relevant prosecution
conducted” (s 133(2)(g)):
Register of offences
(1) The Food Authority may keep a register of information about
offences under this Act or the regulations relating to the handling
register of offences
(2) The register may contain any of the following information
in relation to a person who has been convicted by a court of an offence
this Act or the regulations relating to the handling or sale of food, or whose
employee or agent has been convicted of such
an offence—
(a) the name of the person,
(b) the name and address of the place of business at which the
offence was committed, including the local government area in which
(c) the name and address of the usual place of business
of the person,
(d) the trade name under which the person trades,
(e) if the person is a company, the name of the chief executive
officer and any director of the company,
(f) a description of the nature and circumstances of the
offence, the decision of the court, the penalty imposed and any forfeiture
(g) the enforcement agency or other body under the direction of
which, or on behalf of whom, the relevant prosecution was conducted,
(h) such other information of a general nature in
relation to matters connected with food safety or other interests of consumers
in food as the Food Authority thinks necessary.
(3) Information relating to a particular offence is not
to be published on the register until after the last day on which an appeal
be made against the conviction.
(4) If an appeal is made against the conviction,
information relating to the offence is not to be published on the register
a final order has been made on appeal affirming the conviction.
(5) The register of offences may be kept in such form as
the Food Authority considers appropriate.
(6) For the purposes of this Part, an order under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
in relation to
an offence is taken to be a conviction for the offence.
133, and subsection (2)(g) more specifically, plainly contemplate that an
“enforcement agency” is empowered to
conduct prosecutions for
offences under the
. This clear language requiring an
“enforcement agency” (which, as discussed, is defined as the Food
Authority or other
relevant bodies appointed by the Food Authority) to maintain
a record of prosecutions conducted by or on its behalf under the
, strongly supports a construction of the
as empowering
the Food Authority to conduct prosecution of those recordable offences, being
offences committed in breach of the
It is significant that
the recordable offences include
offences committed in breach of
, not merely the limited catalogue of offences accepted by
the defendant here as open to the Food Authority to prosecute. That recording
function is clearly given to the Food Authority by
The power to prosecute
these recordable offences is necessary for, or incidental to, the exercise of
the functions of the Food Authority.
is an important matter of context. The present version of
was introduced
by sch 1 cl 4 of the
Food Amendment (Public
Information on Offences) Act 2008
(NSW). The second reading speech of Mr
Nathan Rees which accompanied the passage of the Bill in the NSW Legislative
Assembly included
the following (with emphasis added):
In the past 12 months, the Food Authority alone successfully doubled its rate of
prosecutions. It finalised 16 prosecutions comprising
70 charges, which saw a
total of $139,000 in fines being imposed and $224,000 in costs being awarded.
And this is before we include
those prosecutions that are conducted by important
enforcement agencies such as local councils. These penalties actively serve as
notice to rogue operators that the Government will not hesitate to prosecute,
fine or shut down businesses that put consumers at
risk and do not follow the
letter of the law. However, as members would be aware, the public's access to
information about the performance
of food businesses, particularly food law
breaches, has emerged as a significant issue in the past year.
In response to public debate, the Food Authority commenced publishing
convictions on its website in July 2007. The Government recognised that
publication of successful convictions would provide additional
deterrents for
non-compliance by food businesses. In addition it also undertook a review to
identify options for the publication
of similar details of food businesses that
are issued with a penalty notice for food safety breaches. In doing so the New
South Wales
Government's objective[s] were clear—to push the boundaries in
enhancing the public's knowledge about food safety breaches
without unfair
impacts on the integrity and reputation of food businesses, and to deliver the
net effect of improving consumer information
and industry standards.
The authority works with local government to administer and enforce aspects of
, its regulations and the Food Standards Code. Many local councils
undertake food premises inspections and follow up enforcement action
and food service businesses. The authority's compliance work focuses on the
higher risk food businesses in the retail and
pre-retail sectors, including
primary production. (emphasis added)
above passages confirm that the reference to “the enforcement agency or
other body under the direction of which, or on behalf
of whom, the relevant
prosecution was conducted” in
s 133(2)(g)
reference to, at least, the Food Authority.
the plaintiff observed, there has been no delegation by the Food Authority to
other relevant bodies of the power to institute a
prosecution for an offence
contrary to
. I am satisfied that as a matter of
construction of the
, the Food Authority has the power to
prosecute such offences, which power is necessary for, or incidental to, the
exercise of the
functions of the Food Authority.
have concluded that the legislative purpose of
was to limit the ability to commence a prosecution for an executive liability
offence to a person who can bring a prosecution for
the offence under the
. Whatever the limits imposed by the section, the Food Authority
fell within the description of “a person who can bring a prosecution
the offence under the
.” Steps taken by the Food Authority to
offences protect the integrity of its core
function as the designated “enforcement agency” charged with
providing for
the application in NSW of the Food Standards Code. Although the
Food Authority was not expressly identified in the
as having the
power to prosecute any offence, including any executive liability offence such
, on the proper construction of the
, the power to do
so is necessary for, or incidental to, the exercise of the core functions of the
Food Authority, of ensuring food
for sale is both safe and suitable for human
consumption, preventing misleading conduct in connection with the sale of food
and providing
for the application in NSW of the Food Standards Code.
Relevant authority
powers of the Food Authority contemplated in the
contrasted with other cases where courts have refused to find a prosecutorial
power of a statutory corporation under the
relevant statute. One of these cases
that invites comparison is
Gamage v Riashi
, where Basten AJA (with whom
Leeming JA and Griffiths AJA agreed) found that ICAC did not have a power to
prosecute for criminal
offences arising from offences created outside the
itself. The following was said about the distinction between
investigatory and prosecutorial powers, and the legislative intention
grant the ICAC a more general power to prosecute:
[28] There is, self-evidently, no express conferral of a
function or power to institute criminal proceedings. In short, both the
legislative objects and the principal functions of the Commission are
to investigate, communicate to appropriate authorities about,
and to take
steps to limit opportunities for, corrupt conduct. The terms
of ss 13(4) and 74B, precluding
the Commission including
in a report a finding of guilt or a
statement “recommending prosecution”, or even forming an
opinion as to such matters,
are inconsistent with
the Commission having an implied power to institute a
prosecution itself.
[33] The conclusion that the Commission does not have
power to prosecute for the corrupt conduct it has investigated is consistent
with the following statement of Premier Greiner, in his second reading
speech for the 1988 ICAC bill:
“The third fundamental point I want to make is that
the independent commission will not be a crime
commission. Its charter
is not to investigate crime generally.
The commission has a very specific purpose which is to prevent corruption
and enhance integrity
in the public sector...
Honourable Members will note that the bill makes specific provisions to allow
the commission to refer matters to other investigatory
agencies to be dealt
with. Obviously, that will be the most sensible way to deal with the
majority of matters that will come to the
attention of the commission.
The commission will monitor those investigations and will retain the most
significant allegations of
corruption.
My fourth point is that the independent commission is not a purely
investigatory body. The commission has also a clear charter to
constructive role in developing sound management practices and making public
officials more aware of what it means to hold
an office of public trust and more
aware of the detrimental effects of corrupt practices. ... In preventing
corruption in the long
term, the educative and consultancy
functions of the commission will be far more important than its
investigatory functions.”
(Footnotes omitted)
statutory regime concerning ICAC is to be contrasted to that concerning the Food
Authority. The expressed powers conferred by
in relation to
decisions to prosecute and the conduct of prosecutions, as well as what the
responsible Minister said about prosecutions
of offences by the Food Authority
and Local Councils when
was introduced, weighs in favour of the Food
Authority having such a power.
I have pointed out, however, in
Gamage v Riashi
the Court of Appeal held
have power to prosecute offences arising under the
[51] While it is true that there is no express function
conferred on the Commission to prosecute for offences under its own Act,
taken to protect the integrity of its own investigation may readily fall within
the scope of the incidental powers conferred
by s 19(1) of the ICAC Act, as
being necessary in connection with or reasonably incidental to “the
exercise of its functions”.
The necessary process is identified in the
ICAC Act, s 116. Such a prosecution is not covered by the constraints on the
of reports to Parliament under Pt 8, nor the restrictions on those
functions under Pt 4 of the ICAC Act.
here, while it is true that there is no express function conferred on the Food
Authority to prosecute offences under the
, steps taken to by the
Food Authority to prosecute such offences to protect the integrity of its core
function as the designated
“enforcement agency” charged with
providing for the application in NSW of the Food Standards Code, may readily
fall within
the scope of the incidental powers as necessary in connection with
or reasonably incidental to “the exercise of its functions”.
Gamage v Riashi
is not inconsistent with the conclusion I have reached
Sydney Catchment Authority v Bailey
[2006] NSWLEC 616
, Biscoe J dismissed
a notice of motion challenging the power of the Sydney Catchment Authority to
institute prosecution for an offence
against the
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW). His Honour reasoned that, while the
did not confer an express prosecution power on the Catchment Authority to
Interpretation Act
, alongside
Sydney Water Catchment Management Act 1998
(NSW) which gave the
Catchment Authority such functions as were “necessary or convenient to
carry out any concurrence... role”
conferred on it under any environmental
planning instrument in relation to a catchment area, implicitly empowered the
Catchment Authority
to prosecute in that case. The Catchment Authority has a
role, functions and objectives which are vital to the health of the public
the protection of the environment. Its “
defined broadly to include any power, authority or duty. The Catchment
Authority, for example, has specific law compliance
functions conferred on it by
regulation, and has the concurrence function of deciding whether to concur in a
council’s consent
to the development of land in a special area. His Honour
considered that the prosecution was necessary for the exercise of the Catchment
Authority’s functions, in the sense of being appropriate or reasonably
required, and thus the Catchment Authority had a (non-exclusive)
commence criminal proceedings pursuant to
Criminal Procedure
regards the present prosecution, while
is not relied upon by the plaintiff
as a provision from which the Food Authority’s power to prosecute was
derived, Biscoe J’s
reasoning is instructive as it endorses the power of a
statutory corporation to prosecute where such a power is not explicitly stated
in the relevant instrument and where such a power is necessary to imply for the
statutory corporation to properly exercise its explicit
functions. To the extent
that the provisions of the
I summarised above (including the
reference to the Food Authority’s power to decide whether to prosecute and
responsibility
to record offences prosecuted by it or at its direction) do not
provide an express power on part of the Food Authority to prosecute,
power is necessary for, or incidental to, the exercise of the enforcement
functions the Food Authority was constituted to
case inviting comparison in this respect is
Warren Gibson, NSW Fair Trading v
Roberta Graham
[2013] NSWSC 1909.
In that case, Harrison J
“expressed” an intention that only the Director-General or his duly
appointed delegate could prosecute alleged
contraventions of the Act (such that
it would prevent other persons to prosecute pursuant to
Procedure Act
, as extracted above). Nevertheless, his Honour did not dispute
that the Director-General or his duly appointed delegate had a power
prosecute. In so reasoning, Harrison J noted along similar lines that any
express conferral of power should be made by, or can
be found in, language that
necessarily or even naturally implies it, although it may also be noted that,
with respect to the question
whether an authority has exclusive power to
prosecute given it operates as an abrogation of a longstanding common law right
to prosecute,
courts may be generally more reluctant to imply such an intention
if not expressly stated:
[24] In my view the first proposition illegitimately conflates
the investigative and prosecutorial roles and impermissibly reasons
cannot operate independently. There is no sound or principled basis for such a
contention. Indeed, there may well be good
reasons for keeping the two roles
apart. Prosecutorial objectivity is important and may on one view be more
efficiently maintained
if those with an intimate connection with assembling
evidence are not also drawn into making decisions about its forensic value.
[29] An Act must be read as a whole and in proper context.
Bovill CJ considered that if a fundamental right or entitlement were
altered by the parliament then one might logically assume that such an intention
would have been specifically incorporated
by proper drafting in the Act and not
left to be "expressly conferred by implication". That is so even if such an
implication can
theoretically be identified after a thorough examination of the
Act as a whole. Reading the
as a whole and in
context, it remains clear that there is no express conferral of prosecutorial
powers and functions upon any person
or any class of persons, and in my opinion
no such conferral can be identified by implication.
[30] The search must be, as a matter of language, for something
that is made known distinctly and explicitly and not left to inference.
be a search for something manifested by direct and appropriate language. Section
Fair Trading Act
is an example of precisely such a
provision and provides an instructive comparison. It is in these terms:
“68 Proceedings for offences
(1) Proceedings for an offence against this Act may be taken
and prosecuted only by the Director-General or, in the name of the
Director-General, by a person acting with the authority of the
Director-General.
(2) Proceedings for an offence under this Act or the
regulations may be dealt with:
(a) summarily before the Local Court, or
(b) summarily before the Supreme Court in its summary
(3) If proceedings are brought in the Local Court, the maximum
monetary penalty that the Local Court may impose for the offence
is 100 penalty
units, despite any higher maximum monetary penalty provided in respect of the
(4) In proceedings for an offence against this Act, an
authority to prosecute purporting to have been signed by the Director-General
evidence of that authority without proof of the signature of the
Director-General.”
[31] That section is a clear and pertinent example of the kind
of express provision contemplated by
Criminal Procedure
. An equivalent provision in the
conspicuously absent. Having regard to the terms of s 8 of the
Trading Act
, the potential interaction between it and the
Building Act
, and the ambulatory authority of the Director-General in the
administration of each, it is not in my opinion without significance
latter Act contains no similar or equivalent provision with a cognate operation.
It is by no means clear, and it is certainly
not clear to me, that
express conferral of power has been made by, or can be found in, language that
necessarily o[r] even naturally implies it
(Emphasis added)
may furthermore be noted that prosecutions of executive liability offences with
provisions equivalent to
or similar have been
the subject of decisions of the court. For example,
Protection of the Environment Operations Act
(NSW) provides
in identical terms that “[t]he offence against this section can only be
prosecuted by a person who can bring
a prosecution for the executive liability
offence”. The
Protection of the Environment Operations Act
contain, in terms, an express conferral of the right or ability to bring a
prosecution for an executive liability offence
in the way that the defendant
appears to contend is required.
explanatory memorandum and second reading speeches accompanying the passing of
Miscellaneous Acts Amendment (Directors’ Liability) Bill 2012
not provide guidance on the question of prosecutorial authority as to the
interpretation of
, its equivalent in the above
Protection of the Environment Operations Act
, nor other similar
provisions enacted at the same time as
defendant’s most persuasive objection to the conclusion I prefer is the
decision of James J in
Authorised Officer Christine Tumney (NSW Food
Authority) v Nutricia Australia Pty Limited
[2007] NSWSC 1215.
The defendant
submitted that James J held that under that earlier version of the
, the Food Authority had no express power, by virtue of
prosecute offences under the
. The following passage was
specifically relied upon by the defendant:
[66] I do not accept the submission made by counsel for the
plaintiff that
amounts to an express
conferring on the Food Authority of the right to institute a prosecution for an
offence under the
, within the terms of
Criminal Procedure Act
, and I reject the submission made by
counsel for the plaintiff to the effect that a function of instituting criminal
proceedings
was conferred by the
on the Food Authority,
which could be delegated by the Food Authority to an authorised officer and by
this means become a function
of an authorised officer under the Act, within s
least five things should be said about
. The first is that the
passage above was said in the context of his Honour’s finding that, on a
proper construction of the
, the Food Authority or its
authorised officers did not have power to issue the
notices against
Nutricia, in circumstances where the Food Authority had already commenced
criminal proceedings against Nutricia.
James J's finding about the power to
prosecute was clearly obiter.
the finding that
confer on the Food Authority
of the right to institute a prosecution for an offence under the
is not inconsistent with my finding about implied power. For the reasons I have
given, the subject matter, scope and purpose of the
makes clear
that (when read together with
Interpretation Act
taken by the Food Authority to prosecute such offences to protect the integrity
of its core function as the designated “enforcement
agency” charged
with providing for the application in NSW of the Food Standards Code, may
readily fall within the scope of
the incidental powers as necessary in
connection with or reasonably incidental to “the exercise of its
functions”.
concerned a prosecution commenced in reliance upon
Criminal Procedure Act
a provision which is not relied upon
predated the inclusion in the
of the current
versions of
The current version of
was substituted into the Act by sch 1 cl 1.13(13) the
Miscellaneous Acts
Amendment (Director’s Liability) Act 2012
(NSW). The present version
of s 133 was introduced into the
by sch 1 cl 4 of the
Amendment (Public Information on Offences) Act 2008
(NSW). No reference was
made to the former sections 122 and 133 in the judgment.
went on appeal and the Court of Criminal Appeal made no
reference to the passage at [66] I have quoted above:
NSW Food Authority v
Nutricia Australia Pty Ltd
(2008) 72 NSWLR 456
[2008] NSWCCA 252.
part of the ratio of the case it had been held that the Food Authority had no
power to bring the prosecution in the first place,
that would necessarily have
been the subject of consideration in the Court of Appeal.
have concluded that
does not stand in the way of my
conclusion.
the defendant also relied upon a recent decision of Pain J in
Australia Group Pty Ltd v Barnes, Chief Regulatory Officer, Natural Resources
Access Regulator
[2025] NSWLEC 109
in the Land and Environment Court.
Her Honour found that the regulator in that case did not have the implied power
to commence a prosecution.
That decision is distinguishable.
the regulator in that case, the Natural Resources Access Regulator
(‘NRAR’), was required to determine whether
proceedings for offences
under that legislation should be instituted by the Crown. NRAR is a NSW
Government agency and Pain J held
that it was not the Crown.
NRAR was required to keep a register, however, unlike the present case, the
register was only of civil matters, as evidenced
Water Management Act
(NSW), compared to
the extrinsic materials referred to by Pain J in
against the conclusion that NRAR had an implied power to commence a prosecution.
That is to be contrasted with the extrinsic
materials to the
which I have drawn attention.
is a quite different case to the
Conclusion and Orders
have concluded that on the proper construction of the
whole, the Food Authority’s core responsibility was as an
“enforcement agency” charged with providing for
the application in
NSW of the Food Standards Code. That core function extends to the prosecution of
offences prescribed in the
as a means of compelling compliance
with standards of conduct in relation to which those offences are created.
the Food Authority was not conferred an express power to prosecute executive
liability offences, having regard to the functions
of the Food Authority I have
described above and construing the
in context as a whole, the
power to prosecute offences arising under the
falls within the
scope of the incidental powers as necessary in connection with or reasonably
incidental to the exercise of its functions
which are, at their core, to ensure
food for sale is both safe and suitable for human consumption, to prevent
misleading conduct
in connection with the sale of food, and to provide for the
application in NSW of the Food Standards Code.
reason of the subject matter, scope and purpose of the
Authority as the authorised “enforcement agency” was as “a
person who can bring a prosecution for the
executive liability offence”.
The Food Authority was authorised to apply for the orders it sought from N Adams
s 246(1)(a)
Criminal Procedure Act
in this case.
defendant’s amended notice of motion should be dismissed with costs. As
summary prosecutions in the Supreme Court are now
rare, after consulting the
Chief Judge at Common Law, it has been determined that the Court of Criminal
Appeal Registrar is best
placed to make directions to prepare this matter for
hearing. Accordingly, I will stand this matter over to his list on 20 November
2025 at 10 am to make directions to prepare the matter for hearing and, if
appropriate, fix a date for hearing.
make the following orders:
(1) Defendant’s amended notice of motion filed on 23 September 2025
dismissed with costs.
(2) Stand over the proceedings to the Court of Criminal Appeal Registrar’s
list on 20 November 2025 at 10 am to make directions
to prepare the matter for
hearing and, if appropriate, fix a date for hearing.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (399 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter