URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/839.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davies v Aurizon Operations Ltd [2025] NSWPICMP 839; (30 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Davies v Aurizon Operations Ltd [2025] NSWPICMP 839
Daniel Davies
RESPONDENT:
Aurizon Operations Limited
APPEAL PANEL
John Wynyard
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Gregory McGroder
DATE OF DECISION:
30 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
appeal from 14% assessment regarding both upper extremities and scarring;
one-tenth deduction pursuant to
section 323
for both shoulders
adequately explained;
– imaging of right shoulder within
4-months of the injury disclosed sufficiently advanced pathology that Appeal
Panel experts
satisfied it must have contributed especially where claimant
directed to perform labouring task outside his job description;
applied; notwithstanding that claimant had been asymptomatic,
observations as to requirement to give detailed reasons in such circumstances;
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
considered and applied; one-tenth
deduction for the right shoulder confirmed; reasoning not sufficient to explain
similar deduction
for consequential left shoulder condition; imaging not taken
for 2 years; deduction revoked; MAC revoked (but result the same).
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
9 July 2025 the appellant, Daniel Davies, lodged an Application to Appeal
Against a Decision of Medical Assessor lodge. The medical
dispute was assessed
by Dr Robert Kuru, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment
Certificate (MAC) on 30 June 2025.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the Guides)
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent
Impairment,
(AMA 5). “WPI” is reference
to whole person impairment. “Baseline WPI” is a reference to the
total WPI assessed
before deduction for the effect of pre-existing injury,
condition or abnormality pursuant to s 323 of the 1998 Act.
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
20 May 2025 this matter was referred for a WPI assessment of injuries caused to
the right upper extremity (shoulder), left upper
extremity - consequential
condition and scarring TEMSKI that occurred on 28 May 2019.
Davies was employed as a storeman but on the date of injury was directed to use
a star picket driver to drive in star pickets when
he developed symptoms in his
right shoulder.
came to surgery on 1 November 2019, being an arthroscopic subacromial
decompression and bursectomy with resection of the acromioclavicular
Davies came to a second surgical procedure on the right shoulder on 19 March
the two surgeries he started developing pain in his left shoulder and on
September 2021 came to a left shoulder subacromial decompression.
Medical Assessor found that there had been a 10% WPI caused to the right upper
extremity (shoulder), from which one-tenth was
deducted, pursuant to s 323.
relation to the left upper extremity consequential condition, the Medical
Assessor found
4% WPI, from which he again deducted one-tenth.
the scarring, he found 1%, without deduction.
combined table value was 14%.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the worker to undergo a further
medical examination because
although error was found in the reasons, it could be corrected without the need
for further re-examination,
as the issue concerned the application of s 323 of
the 1998 Act.
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this decision.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions which have been considered below by the Appeal
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v
the Court of Appeal held
that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes of
fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
Medical Assessor noted the following investigation at [6] of the
DETAILS AND DATES OF SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS
I was able to review the following modalities of imaging on the Hunter
Imaging PACS site:
INVESTIGATION
X-ray right shoulder
Normal study
MRI right shoulder
Acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, rotator cuff
Tendinopathy.
Post-resection of the acromioclavicular joint,
rotator cuff tendinopathy, posterior degenerative tear with labral
I was able to review the following imaging on the Alto PACS site:
INVESTIGATION
Ultrasound left shoulder
Evidence of bursitis and insertional
tendinopathy.”
[8e and f] the Medical Assessor confirmed that a s 323 deduction was warranted
in relation to the two shoulder injuries.
explained his rationale for the deduction at
DEDUCTION (IF ANY) FOR THE PROPORTION OF THE IMPAIRMENT THAT IS DUE TO PREVIOUS
INJURY OR PRE-EXISTING CONDITION OR ABNORMALITY
(a) In my opinion the worker suffers from the following relevant previous
injuries, preexisting conditions or abnormalities:
(i) Right shoulder acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.
(ii) Left shoulder rotator cuff tendinosis.
(b) The previous injury, pre-existing condition or abnormality directly
contributes to the following matters that were taken into
account when assessing
the whole person impairment that results from the injury, being the matters
taken into account in 10a, and
in the following ways:
(i) Injury to the right shoulder and subsequent requirement for resection of
the distal clavicle is on the basis of aggravation
of a pre-existing
constitutional degenerative condition in the acromioclavicular joint
(ii) The development of symptoms from ‘over use’ of the left
shoulder can only occur in the context of pre-existing
constitutional rotator
cuff tendinopathy.
(c) The extent of the deduction is difficult or costly to determine so in
applying the
provisions of s.323 (2) I assess the deductible proportion as one
SUBMISSIONS
only issue raised by Mr Davies was as to the appropriateness of the s 323
deduction with respect to firstly the right shoulder
acromioclavicular joint
osteoarthritis, and secondly the left shoulder rotator cuff tendinosis.
submitted that the Medical Assessor did not refer to any evidence to
substantiate any contribution to the baseline impairment of
submitted that the evidence did not suggest any prior history of shoulder
Davies submitted that the Medical Assessor had adopted the wrong test in basing
his assessment on the mere existence of a pre-existing
condition without regard
to whether it contributed to the baseline impairment. We were referred to
and similar cases.”
Davies submitted that if there was evidence of impairment arising from the
pre-existing condition, it had not been referred to
by the Medical Assessor, and
he had accordingly failed to disclose his path of reasoning.
were referred as an example to
McNaughton v Engineering & Business
Services (NSW) Pty
failure to provide adequate reasons it was submitted also infringed Chapter 1.48
of the Guides.
The respondent
respondent submitted that Mr Davies had failed to establish that the Medical
Assessor had applied incorrect criteria, and it referred
to Chapter 1.6(b) and
Chapter 1.28 of the Guides. It also referred to
State of New South Wales (NSW
Department of Education) v Kaur
regarding the requirement to explain the actual path of reasoning given by a
Medical Assessor.
respondent submitted that the Medical Assessor had indeed provided sufficient
submitted that the Medical Assessor identified:
right shoulder
acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis;
left shoulder
rotator cuff tendinosis;
the MRI report
of 3 September 2019;
the ultrasound
of the left shoulder dated 3 September 2019, and
the ultrasound
of the left shoulder of 11 June 2021.
respondent submitted that the Medical Assessor had applied his clinical judgment
to define the injury, being an aggravation of
a pre-existing constitutional
degenerative condition in the acromioclavicular joint and that the development
of overuse symptoms
in the left shoulder. This would not have occurred without
the existence of a pre-existing constitutional rotator cuff tendinopathy,
is an unusual proposition that was not picked up].
respondent submitted that there is no evidence to suggest that the one-tenth
would be at odds with the available evidence and
that, in relying on his
expertise and clinical judgment, the Medical Assessor had applied the
requirements of Chapters 1.28 and 1.6
of the Guides.
were referred to
Cole v Wenaline Pty
and the three steps which
are now accepted as the criteria necessary in the application of s 323.
was submitted that the Medical Assessor had appropriately complied with those
respondent referred to
Ryder v Sundance
The Medical Assessor
had therefore explained how the pre-existing conditions would have made a
difference to the assessment of permanent
impairment, it was submitted. The
Medical Assessor's reasons complied with the dicta from
they supported a conclusion that, but for the
pre-existing condition, the
baseline impairment would not have been as great.
were also referred in this regard to
Elcheikh v Diamond Formwork (NSW) Pty
Limited (in liquidation).
were also referred to
settled authority as to the meaning of the
demonstrable error and it was submitted that the Medical Assessor had not erred.
CONSIDERATION
323 of the 1998 Act provides relevantly:
(a) in assessing the degree of permanent impairment
resulting from an
there is to be a deduction for any proportion of the impairment that is due to
any previous
or not it is an
compensation
been paid or is payable under Division 4 of Part 3 of
) or that is due to any pre-existing condition or abnormality,
(b) if the extent of a deduction under this section (or a part of it) will be
difficult or costly to determine (because, for example,
of the absence of
medical evidence), it is to be assumed (for the purpose of avoiding disputation)
that the deduction (or the relevant
part of it) is 10% of the impairment, unless
this assumption is at odds with the available evidence.
is well accepted that there are three steps to be considered in the application
of this section. In
Cole v Wenaline Pty
Schmidt J held that firstly
the level of impairment caused by the subject injury should be assessed –
what is described herein
as the “baseline impairment.” Her Honour
“What s 323 required, however, was that the evidence be
considered, so that it could be determined, firstly, what the level
impairment after the [subject] injury was. Secondly, whether a proportion of
that impairment was due to the [pre-existing
. Thirdly, what that
proportion was. Undoubtedly in undertaking this exercise, the medical members of
an Appeal Panel must utilise
their medical
judgement, knowledge and experience. Nevertheless, all stages of the
statutory exercise must be undertaken in the light of the evidence
and without
the making of assumptions not provided for by the section.”
the present case, the baseline assessments have not been challenged.
second step, therefore, was to enquire whether a proportion of that impairment
was due to Mr Davies’ pre-existing condition.
Essentially
the argument advanced by Mr Davies is that the Medical Assessor did not give
adequate reasons for making the s 323 deduction
for either shoulder.
submitted that in fact the Medical Assessor had adopted the wrong test in that
the deduction had been made on the basis of hypothesis
and assumption –
that because there was a pre-existing condition, it must have contributed to the
impairment assessed.
Davies' reference to
was of limited utility.
was a hearing loss appeal and the Medical Panel in that case confirmed that each
case depends on its own facts.
, Basten JA (Handley and McColl JJA agreeing) said at
“122 On the other hand, to fulfil a minimum legal
standard, the reasons need not be extensive or provide detailed explanation
the criteria applied by medical specialists in reaching a professional judgment:
(authority omitted). At least, that will be
so where the medical science is not
controversial: if it is, a more expansive explanation may be
medical science in the right shoulder case is uncontroversial. The issue is
whether there is any need for a more extensive or
detailed explanation, as the
medical specialists on the Panel recognise the criteria on which this deduction
explanation given by the Medical Assessor was:
“Injury to the
right shoulder and subsequent requirement for resection of the distal clavicle
is on the basis of aggravation
of a pre-existing constitutional degenerative
condition in the acromion load acromioclavicular joint.”
have above reproduced the radiological investigations that were before the
Medical Assessor, which demonstrated in an MRI scan
of 4 September 2019
“acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, rotator cuff tendinopathy.” Mr
Davies came to surgery with Dr
David Gill on
1 November 2019. Dr Gill
expected, we did find the cuff to be intact besides a little bit of
degeneration. The AC joint was very degenerative and
inflamed as well and I
resected this arthroscopically and performed a subacromial decompression. I
removed a large bursa as well....”
note that when he commenced employment with the respondent in April 2018, Mr
Davies said in his statement of 14 March 2024 that
he was asymptomatic in both
Schmidt J said at 91:
“The [Appeal Panel] noted,
correctly, that the fact that the pre-existing condition had been asymptomatic
did not preclude it
from contributing to the impairment being assessed. Nor,
however, could it be assumed that an asymptomatic condition did contribute
the impairment. Whether or not there had been any contribution had to be
determined on the evidence, which included the competing
specialist opinions on
the matter, as well as various other evidence.”
[25] of his statement, Mr Davies said he had never before done the work that he
had been required to do on the date of his injury.
However, the medical
specialists on the Panel agree that what was demonstrated in the MRI of 4
September 2019 was chronic acromioclavicular
osteoarthritis and rotator cuff
tendinopathy of such a degree that it needed resection, and the operation report
confirmed that
the chronicity of the acromioclavicular osteoarthritis was such
that the Panel is satisfied that it must have pre-existed the date
of injury, as
the MRI scan was only taken some four months later.
for the pre-existing osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint, the distal
clavicle would not have required resection. Table
16.27 of AMA 5 provides for a
further 5% upper extremity impairment. Thus, the severity of the
acromioclavicular osteoarthritis would
as a matter of medical probability, have
contributed to the baseline impairment. It is consistent that such a quiescent
would be made symptomatic by the unusual physical work Mr Davies was
required to do in May 2019, and the deduction is accordingly
reasonable.
ground is rejected, therefore, the Medical Assessor also made a one-tenth
deduction for the consequential condition to the left
shoulder, on the basis
that there was pre-existing constitutional rotator cuff tendinopathy. He did not
explain that decision any
further, and unlike the pathology in the right
shoulder, there were no images taken until the ultrasound of the left shoulder
performed in June 2021, some two years later. In this case it would seem
that the Medical Assessor was relying on an assumption which
was based on that
imaging. We are not persuaded that this condition was contributing to the
baseline assessment of the left upper
extremity, and this ground is made
note, however, that the result is the same, as the practical effect of a
deduction of one-tenth from 4% is the same as if there
had been no deduction.
MAC will accordingly be revoked to reflect this finding.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 30 June
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate is
attached to this statement of reasons.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Daniel Davies
Respondent:
Aurizon Operations Limited
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Robert Kuru and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Right upper
476 F 16-40
477 F 16-43
479 F 16-46
P 439 T 16-03
extremity –
consequential
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
[2006] NSWCA 284
Appeal papers
Appeal papers page
[2021] NSWPICMP
[2016] NSWSC
[2010] NSWSC
[2015] NSWSC
[2010] NSWSC 78
were two injuries under consideration. The words in parentheses replace
“second” injury and the previous “first
Appeal papers
Appeal papers page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter