URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/304.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Delmege v Director General NSW Fair Trading [2013] NSWADT 304 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Delmege v Director General NSW Fair Trading
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 304
Hearing Date(s):
7 August 2013
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
General Division
K Fitzgerald, Judicial Member
The decision under review is affirmed
Catchwords:
Property, Stock and Business Agents Act - Real Estate agent - refusal of
certificate of l registration - fit and proper person
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Licensing and Registration
(Uniform Procedures) Act 2002
Property Stock and Business Agents Act 2002
Property Stock and Business
Agents Regulations 2003
Cases Cited:
Australian Broadcasting Commission v Bond HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1990/33.html" \o "View Case"
; HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%20170%20CLR%20321" \o
"View LawCiteRecord" (1990) 170 CLR 321
Clarke v Commissioner for Fair
Trading HYPERLINK "http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2004/273.html"
\o "View Case"
[2004] NSWADT 273
Delmege v Department of Fair Trading
Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No 2) HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1955/28.html" \o "View Case"
McBride v Walton (NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 15 July
Principal judgment
Brett Phillip Delmege (Applicant)
Director General NSW Fair Trading
(Respondent)
Representation
A Rogers (Applicant)
- Solicitors:
Moloney Lawyers (Applicant)
M Nicoletti (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Delmege, the Applicant, has applied to the Tribunal for review of the
determination by a delegate of the Director General of NSW
Fair Trading ("the
Respondent") to refuse to grant him a certificate of registration as a real
estate salesperson in accordance with
section 18(1)(b)
and Registration (Uniform Procedures) Act 2002
in response to Mr
Delmege's application under the
Property Stock and Business Agents Act
(the "Act").
15 February 2013 the application was refused on the basis that the Respondent
delegate was not satisfied that the Applicant was
a fit and proper person to
hold a certificate of registration and he was therefore not entitled to hold
such registration.
Applicant requested an internal review of the initial decision and it was
affirmed on 19 March 2013. He subsequently sought external
review from the
issue for determination is whether the Respondent made the correct and
preferable decision. This is to be determined having regard
to any relevant
factual material and any relevant law: section 63(1) of the ADT Act.
Specifically,
in relation to the Applicant, the Tribunal must determine whether the Applicant
is a fit and proper person to hold a
certificate of registration under the
of the relevant background was not in issue between the parties. The Applicant
applied for a certificate of registration as a
real estate salesperson on 12
October 2012.
Applicant was a director of Delmege Asset Management Pty Ltd (ACN 138044943)
("Delmege Asset") from 9 June 2011 to 14 September
2012 during which time the
company lodged two applications with the Department signed by the Applicant. The
first was dated 11 September
2011 (First Application) and the second was
received on 18 July 2012 (Second Application).
each of the First and Second Applications the Applicant was asked whether any
director or person concerned with the management
of the corporation had, in the
preceding three years, been a director or person concerned in the management of
any externally-administered
body corporate (within the meaning of the
Corporations
each of the First and Second Applications the Applicant was asked whether any
director or person concerned with the management
of the corporation is a
director or person concerned in the management of any externally-administered
body corporate (within the
meaning of the
Corporations
relation to the First Application, the Applicant answered the first question
"No" and left the second question answer blank. Later,
following a request of
the Respondent to complete the application, the Applicant answered 'No' in
response to the second question.
the Second Application, the Applicant relevantly answered "Yes" to each of those
two questions and provided a list of externally
administered bodies corporate,
of which the Applicant was not a director.
the Second Application the Applicant also answered "No" to a further question
that asked whether any director or person concerned
with the management of the
corporation had in the preceding three years, been an undischarged bankrupt
(including in circumstances
where a bankruptcy has been annulled) or applied to
take the benefit of any law for the relief of insolvent debtors, compounded with
his creditors or made an assignment of his remuneration for their
Applicant was appointed a director of Surfside (Willoughby) Holdings Pty Ltd
(ACN 093522788) ("Willoughby") from 15 September
2006. On 28 February 2010,
Willoughby became an externally administered body corporate when receiver
managers were appointed until
5 April 2011. The corporate records list
Willoughby having a controller appointed on 22 June 2011 and, though disputed by
the Applicant,
there is nothing on the corporate records to suggest that
Willoughby does not remain an externally administered body
extract from the National Personal Insolvency Index confirmed that the Applicant
entered into a Personal Insolvency Agreement ("PIN")
under Part X of the
Bankruptcy Act on 5 March 2012.
to making its decision the Respondent requested that the Applicant provide an
explanation about why he did not disclose the
PIN or the external administration
of Willoughby in the previous applications that he lodged.
Correspondence
from the Applicant's former solicitors responded that the non-disclosure was
'more an oversight or clerical error.'
both the original decision and the internal review decision, the Respondent
determined that the Applicant was not a fit and proper
person to hold a
certificate of registration on the basis of his non-disclosure as outlined
Relevant Law
definition of licence in section 4 of the
Licensing and Registration (Uniform
Procedures) Act
) is to the effect that
a licence includes a certificate in the current circumstances.
12(4) of the Licensing Act provides that an application for a licence shall
contain such particulars as are required to complete
the relevant
18 of the Licensing Act states that a licensing authority may refuse an
application for a licence or certificate of registration.
"real estate salesperson" is defined by section 3(1) of the Act as
a person (other than the holder of a real estate agent's licence) who, as an
employee of a real estate agent or a corporation that
carries on the business of
a real estate agent:
exercises any of the functions of a real estate agent, or
engages in any other activity that is prescribed by the regulations for the
purposes of this definition.
10(1) of the Act provides that a person must not be, remain as, represent as,
act as or exercise any of the functions of a
real estate salesperson unless the
person is the holder of the relevant certificate of
registration.
19 of the Act states that an application must not be granted unless the
applicant is eligible to be granted the licence or
certificate of registration
concerned (as provided by section 14).
14(3)(b) of the Act provides that a person is eligible to hold a certificate of
registration only if the Director-General
is satisfied that the person is fit
and proper.
Fit and Proper
meaning of 'fit and proper' person in the context of section 14 of the Act in
relation to a licence was considered by the Tribunal
recently in a matter
involving another applicant, in not unrelated circumstances,
Department of Fair Trading
2013 NSWADT 269.
S Mongomery, Judicial Member, outlined the relevant law as follows and I adopt
that summary as relevant to the current circumstances.
meaning of the phrase 'fit and proper person' was discussed by the High Court in
Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No 2)
, at [9], where Dixon CJ, McTiernan and Webb JJ
"The expression 'fit and proper person' is of course familiar enough as
traditional words when used with reference to offices and
perhaps vocations. But
their very purpose is to give the widest scope for judgment and indeed for
rejection. 'Fit' (or 'idoneus')
with respect to an office is said to involve
three things, honesty, knowledge, and ability: 'honesty to execute it truly,
malice, affection, or partiality; knowledge to know what he ought duly
to do; and ability as well in estate as in body, that he may
intend and execute
his office, when need is, diligently, and not for impotency or poverty neglect
meaning of the phrase was also discussed in
Australian Broadcasting
Commission v Bond
170 CLR 321, where Toohey and Gaudron JJ said at [36] of their judgment:
"The expression 'fit and proper person', standing alone, carries no precise
meaning. It takes its meaning from its context, from the
activities in which the
person is or will be engaged and the ends to be served by those activities. The
concept of 'fit and proper'
cannot be entirely divorced from the conduct of the
person who is or will be engaging in those activities. However, depending on
nature of the activities, the question may be whether improper conduct has
occurred, whether it is likely to occur, whether it
can be assumed that it will
not occur, or whether the general community will have confidence that it will
not occur."
their Honours recognised, at [66], whether a person is a fit and proper person
involves a value judgement to be made in the context
of the particular activity
to be licensed.
McBride v Walton
(NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 15 July 1994), the
Court said that where there is evidence of misconduct, there should be
consideration
of any explanation for that misconduct, its seriousness to the
particular activity, the motivation of the person, whether the misconduct
isolated incident, the person's underlying qualities of character, and the
person's conduct since the incident and whether
this demonstrates recognition of
the misconduct and subsequent reform. The question may be whether improper
conduct has occurred,
whether it is likely to occur, whether it can be assumed
that it will not occur, or whether the general community will have confidence
that it will not occur.
The Applicant's Case
Applicant provided an affidavit in support of his application and gave evidence
before the Tribunal. He detailed a lengthy working
history in the construction
industry, including for his father's companies, and many
directorships.
Applicant explained that the provision of incorrect answers on the application
forms was as a result of his mistaken understanding
as to the meaning of the
words "body corporate" rather than because he was dishonestly answering the
says that at the time that he answered the questions, he associated the term
"body corporate" with the body corporate of a strata
plan. He says that he did
not associate or understand the term "body corporate" to mean "company".
says that in his experience, the term "body corporate" is used in the real
estate industry to describe the manager of either a
residential strata plan
block of units, or alternatively a commercial strata plan. His father had used
that term for over 20 years
and his experience of the term was in that context.
Applicant said in relation to the list of directorships that the list was
prepared by his accountant on his behalf and that he
didn't check the list. He
took no steps to check the list of companies before signing the declaration at
the end of each of the Applications.
Applicant claimed that in relation to the PIN he attended his family lawyers
who, although they were acting for him, provided
no advice written or otherwise
to him or his family in relation to the PIN. Further, the Applicant explained
that he thought that
by signing the PIN he had avoided bankruptcy but again did
not check this point before signing the declaration.
further gave evidence that from about 2003 or 2004, his stepmother suffered
serious health issues and that as a result he had to
become more involved in the
family business. The Applicant become a director of various companies including
Willoughby.
detail was provided about a series of transactions, loans and changes in the
surrounding economic circumstances that led to the
Applicant incurring
significant personal debt as a result of his directorship of Willoughby and the
provision of a personal guarantee
of loans for the company.
Applicant claimed that he was never the General Manager of Delmege Assets though
acknowledged under cross -examination that he
had in fact signed correspondence
to the Respondent as General Manager of that Company.
was also put on the Applicant's behalf that the relevant application forms were
ambiguous and did not suggest an individual should
obtain legal advice before
completing them.
was further put that while the term 'externally-administered body corporate' is
defined in the
Corporations
, the term 'body corporate' is not in fact defined in that Act.
Mr Rogers submitted that if the Applicant had in fact read the
Corporations
he would have been no better off in terms of his understanding of the
term 'body corporate'.
Applicant explained that he provided incorrect answers in the various licence
renewal application forms because he mistakenly
understood the meaning of the
words "body corporate".
was drawn by the Respondent to the second reading speech of the Strata Schemes
Management Bill (Strata Schemes Management
Miscellaneous Amendments Act) 1996
where it was discussed that one of the amendments was the change of the
description 'body corporate'
to 'owners corporation'.
any event the Applicant's explanation seems extraordinary given his significant
experience, including as a company director. It
is difficult to accept this
explanation particularly as the question also requests the relevant company
names and ACN numbers.
is also difficult to accept, given his representation by experienced solicitors,
that the Applicant did not ask or was not advised
as to the repercussions of
entering into the PIN.
harder to understand is why the Applicant did not include his directorship of
Willoughby in the relevant list of companies when
that directorship and the
associated personal guarantee were the very reason that he required the PIN.
even if all of the Applicant's explanations with respect to those matters were
to be accepted, there still remains the question
as to whether he is a fit and
proper person to hold a real estate agent's certificate.
was put for the Applicant that the standard of 'fit and proper' does not require
the standard of perfect conduct. He submitted
that the Applicant was merely
mistaken, that conduct does not have to be perfect for an applicant to fulfil
the standard of fit and
proper and that as it was a real estate certificate of
registration not a licence that was being applied for, the standard required
the former should be less.
2003 Property Stock and Business Agents Regulation
expectations of licensees and registered persons. Section 37 makes clear these
apply to those exercising functions under
a licence and a certificate of
registration. There is nothing in the legislative scheme to suggest that a lower
standard of conduct
applies to a certificate holder as compared to a licence
1 in setting out the rules of conduct is relevant to fitness and propriety as it
provides the context for the assessment
within the particular licensed activity.
Relevantly, it is required that the agent has knowledge of relevant laws and
regulations
and that the agent exercises reasonable skill, care and
Applicant's explanation for his incorrect answers on the various licence renewal
application forms suggests that he may not have
the necessary knowledge or care
to be regarded as a fit and proper person to hold a certificate of
registration.
the very least the Applicant failed to exercise reasonable skill, care or
diligence when providing information to the Respondent.
submitted incomplete forms, inaccurate information, including about matters he
should reasonably have been aware (for example whether
or not he had the role of
general manager), and failed to take care to ensure information was accurate,
for instance in relation
to the list of companies provided.
oversight and lack of care was not an isolated incident and points to a pattern
of conduct.
these reasons, the decision to refuse the Applicant a certificate of
registration should be affirmed as the correct and preferable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (157 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter