URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2017/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Cristobal [2017] NSWNMPSC 3 (21 December 2017)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted
Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Ms Vilma Arcangel
NMW0001157507
Date of Inquiry:
22 November 2017
Committee Members:
Ms Diane Robinson (Chairperson)
Ms Deborah Beaumont (Professional
Ms Maureen McGovern (Professional Member)
Ms Leanne Wrightson (Lay
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Emma Bayley, Solicitor
Appearance for Ms Vilma Arcangel Cristobal:
Mr Matthew Byrne, Legal Officer, NSW Nurses and Midwives Association
Decision date:
21 December 2017
The Committee finds Ms Cristobal guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and determines to reprimand her and impose conditions
registration.
Publication of decision:
Refer to paragraph 65 of this decision for details of non-publication
directions.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE COMPLAINTS
Vilma Cristobal is a Registered Nurse (RN) employed at Nepean Hospital in the
Intensive Care Unit.
complaints, dated 23 June 2017, have been made by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the Commission) alleging that Ms Cristobal
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Those Complaints are now being prosecuted
before this Professional Standards Committee.
summary, the first Complaint alleges that Ms Cristobal failed to provide
appropriate post-operative care for Patient A by recommencing
infusion without medical authorisation and without consulting medical or senior
nursing staff.
second Complaint alleges that Ms Cristobal failed to maintain patient
confidentiality by emailing the medical records of Patient
B to the Commission
without authorisation or the patient’s consent.
Complaints and their Particulars are set out in full in Annexure A to this
LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law NSW (the National
Law). Section 139B (1) relevantly
defines unsatisfactory professional conduct to include:
Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the practitioner in the practice
of practitioner’s profession is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training or experience.
Other improper
or unethical conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
139B of the National Law (NSW) and other relevant legislative provisions are set
out in Annexure B to this decision.
STANDARD OF PROOF
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Ms Cristobal is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaints is the civil standard so
the Committee must be reasonably satisfied on
the balance of probabilities of
the matters alleged against Ms Cristobal. Given the seriousness of the
allegations and the nature
of their consequences, the Committee needs to be
comfortably satisfied that the Complaints have been established on the
principles (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
Committee considered the documents provided by the parties. The Commission
provided one volume of documents tabbed 1 to 43. The
Commission also provided a
chronology for the assistance of the Committee. Ms Cristobal provided documents
tabbed 1 to 5.
Cristobal admitted the Particulars of both Complaints.
Non-publication
non-publication direction, in relation to the patients referred to as Patient A
and Patient B in the Complaints, was made preventing
the publication of the
name, address and any information which might identify these patients.
following witnesses gave evidence to the Committee:
Cristobal, the Respondent
Ms Maureen Winn,
RN and expert witness for the Commission, gave evidence by conference
Cristobal graduated Bachelor of Nursing from the University of Western Sydney in
2009. She worked at St George Hospital (Orthopaedic
and Medical Assessment Unit)
and Blacktown Hospital Intensive Care Unit (ICU) before commencing full time
employment at Nepean Hospital
ICU in May 2012. She has worked exclusively in
Intensive Care Units since January 2011. Ms Cristobal stated she has also
completed a Masters in Nursing – Clinical Teaching at the
University of Western Sydney.
Cristobal was first registered to practice in New South Wales on 3 February
2010. At present she has general registration without
conditions.
issues to be determined by this Committee are:
if any, of the Particulars of the Complaints are proven to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Committee.
the proven conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
such a finding is made the Committee must decide whether orders or directions
made pursuant to the National Law are appropriate.
any, of the Particulars of the Complaints are proven to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Committee?
Cristobal admitted all the Particulars in relation to both Complaints.
Complaint 1
A was an 85 year old woman who had had emergency surgery for a ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm. On the evening of 4 September
2015 at around 8 pm she
was admitted to Nepean Hospital ICU where Ms Cristobal was responsible for her
post-operative care.
arrival she was intubated and receiving intravenous Propofol. At around 11 pm
the Propofol was ceased in preparation for extubation,
which occurred around
midnight. Ms Cristobal admits that between 2 am and 2.45 am on 5 September 2015
she recommenced the Propofol
without a medical order to do so. She also concedes
that she failed to consult a medical officer or the Clinical Nurse Unit Manager
after recommencing the Propofol. She also failed to make a contemporaneous
record in Patient A’s progress notes about the recommencement
of Propofol
and the patient’s condition.
Complaint 2
December 2015 the Commission informed Ms Cristobal that a complaint in relation
to her care of Patient A was being investigated.
In preparing a response to the
Commission, Ms Cristobal accessed Patient B’s medical records at Nepean
Hospital and saved them
onto a personal USB so as to transfer the contents to
her home computer.
17 July 2016 Ms Cristobal sent an email to the Commission that identified
Patient B and attached her medical records, without authorisation
from Nepean
Hospital or the consent of the patient.
the basis of the evidence before the Committee and Ms Cristobal’s
admissions, the Committee is comfortably satisfied that
the Particulars of both
Complaints are proven.
Does the proven conduct amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct?
Complaint 1
Cristobal’s evidence
Cristobal explained her conduct on the basis that Patient A was agitated and
confused. She said she was attempting to climb out
of bed and also pull out her
arterial line. Patient A was required to lie flat after surgery and Ms Cristobal
told the Committee
that she was concerned for Patient A’s safety.
his Incident Report, Dr Sean Nicolson, the ICU Registrar who was caring for
Patient A, stated that she was not confused or disoriented.
The expert witness
for the Commission, Ms Maureen Winn, noted that both accounts could be accurate
as post-operative confusion can
be transient.
Lane, the Clinical Nurse Unit Manager for the ICU at Nepean Hospital noted, in
an email dated 6 September 2015, that Ms Cristobal
felt the patient was
agitated. Ms Lane asked why the Propofol had been turned back on and Ms
said the patient was “restless” and “pulling at
things” so she turned it back on. I told her that the Propofol
intended to be used post extubation, and I explained the danger of administering
an anaesthetic agent to a non-ventilated
patient, and asked if she knew this
already. Vilma said “I know, I know”, but I feel she was not taking
the situation
Cristobal also said she was tired, hungry and feeling dizzy having worked since
7 pm without a break. In her interview with senior
staff at Nepean Hospital on
25 September 2015, Ms Cristobal said,
“Vilma: ......I was clouded, my mind was clouded with hunger,
heaviness and dizziness and all that. I, at the time thought the
Propofol was
the best option for me to take at that time. I wasn’t really thinking
Zena: So that was a good option for you
Vilma: That was the easiest option, yes
Cristobal also stated that she was not able to locate a medical officer in ICU
at the time she recommenced the Propofol. In addition,
she explained that she
had been assigned the care of another patient who was suffering from serious
sepsis and she had difficulty
managing two patients simultaneously. She stated
that her ability to make contemporaneous notes was compromised by the demands of
caring for two difficult patients.
Other evidence
Winn considered that Ms Cristobal’s action in recommencing Propofol was
significantly below the appropriate standard. She
stated that administering IV
Propofol without a prescription contravenes the National Competency Standards
for the Registered Nurse
(Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia, 2006), the
NSW Health Code of Conduct and the Medication Handling in NSW Public Health
Facilities policy.
Winn stated that even if an emergency measure was required, urgent assistance
would need to be immediately obtained. She is strongly
critical of Ms
Cristobal’s failure to seek immediate support from either nursing or
medical colleagues.
“She failed to obtain appropriate review of the
patient after commencing the Propofol and left this patient at considerable
in a single room to take her late break.”
Winn acknowledged that Ms Cristobal had worked for an extremely long time (eight
hours) without a break on a night shift, but stated
that she would still expect
Ms Cristobal to request help in this situation.
“Regardless of the need
for a food/water break so late in the shift, (she) should have acted as a
patient advocate and realised
that a Propofol infusion in a non-ventilated
patient is dangerous.”
Lane agreed
“it was a busy shift and Vilma did have two patients, one
of them had just been extubated, but none of this excuses recommencing
Propofol infusion especially without consulting a medical officer. I was not
aware that she had concerns for the patient’s
safety and I don’t
think she expressed any concerns to Dr Sean
Nicholson.”
The Committee’s decision
Committee accepts that Patient A may have exhibited some signs of agitation and
that Ms Cristobal’s actions reflected an
effort to calm the patient,
however she instituted an inappropriate treatment without medical authority and
in doing so placed the
patient at considerable risk. The risks are explained in
the statement of Dr Nicolson,
“Propofol is an anaesthetic and should not be administered to anyone
without a controlled airway (intubated) other than under
the direct supervision
of a doctor capable of managing an airway emergency and skilled in
resuscitation. Propofol may result in relaxation
to the level of airway
obstruction and may stop the patient from breathing necessitating intubation and
ventilation. It is also a
potent vasodilator and can drastically drop blood
pressure. These risks are amplified when other sedative agents are still in the
patients system, as in Patient A’s case.”
if Patient A was very agitated, the Committee cannot accept that her safety was
promoted by recommencing Propofol. Ms Cristobal
has acknowledged she was aware
of the risks associated with the use of Propofol and in these circumstances it
is difficult to accept
that her primary motivation in restarting the Propofol
infusion was patient safety. Indeed, there is some evidence to indicate there
was an element of expediency in her actions.
Cristobal may have been tired and hungry but her professional responsibilities
require her to manage such issues and to ask for
is also difficult to accept that there was no medical officer available in the
ICU or that the Clinical Nurse Unit Manager was
unable to be contacted. Taking
no action to initiate contact with senior clinical staff, after recommencing the
Propofol, was a significant
failure on Ms Cristobal’s
Cristobal also failed to make adequate clinical notes. Even if the demands of
her workload meant that notes had to be written at
the end of the shift, she
failed to make notes in relation to the recommencement of Propofol, her
reasoning in restarting the infusion,
Patient A’s condition or the dosage
given. This also placed Patient A at risk.
Cristobal is an experienced ICU nurse and her conduct should be assessed in
relation to her training and experience. The Committee
concurs with the opinion
expressed by Ms Winn that Ms Cristobal’s conduct was significantly below
the appropriate standard.
The Committee finds in relation to Complaint 1 that Ms
Cristobal’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional
Complaint 2
Ms Cristobal’s
Cristobal told the Committee that she sent the email to respond to the
Commission. She said at the time she thought that in writing
to the Commission,
as an investigative body, she didn’t need to de-identify information. In
her statement, dated 6 November
2017, she says,
“It was my understanding that I was allowed to access patient
records for the purpose of responding to the Health Care Complaints
enquiries. I accessed the patient’s records at work and saved them onto a
USB where I could review them at home.
I then responded to the HCCC
Investigators request for information and I attached these medical records as
part of my response to
the request.
It was not my intention to breach patient confidentiality. I was concerned
that I needed to provide the HCCC with a response that
was able to be verified
by the inclusion of the patient’s medical records. I accept now that this
was a mistake.”
providing this information Ms Cristobal wished to demonstrate that other
mistakes had been made by other RNs and that they had
been treated in a more
lenient manner. She believed that management’s treatment of her case was
“heavy-handed and discriminatory”
as compared to these other
her report, RN Winn states,
As a professional, despite fears regarding the outcome of this, RN
Cristobal must have been aware that she should under no circumstances,
and copy a patient’s file for the purpose of either defending herself or
demonstrating that other incidents have occurred.....
Using nurse names and
citing incidents demonstrates a lack of understanding of privacy.”
oral evidence to the Committee, Ms Winn explained that from an ethical
perspective, it was not proper for Ms Cristobal to use Patient
B’s private
health information in an attempt to prove a point for herself. Even if Ms
Cristobal was naïve about how to
communicate with the Commission, it would
nevertheless be expected that a registered nurse would understand that her
ethical obligations
prevented her using patient information that was not
de-identified.
The Committee’s decision
Cristobal has stated that she was ignorant of the policies governing the privacy
of patient information. The Committee is incredulous
that such a serious gap in
knowledge could exist for a RN who has completed both undergraduate and
postgraduate training in nursing
and who has had considerable experience in the
any event, Ms Cristobal’s actions in deliberately copying, reviewing and
emailing Patient B’s personal medical details
to the Commission
constitutes conduct which is both improper and unethical in the practice of her
profession. The Committee finds
in relation to Complaint 2 that Ms
Cristobal’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional
Are orders or directions pursuant to the National
Law appropriate?
General considerations
is well established that the jurisdiction exercised by a Professional Standards
Committee is protective, not punitive. Disciplinary
proceedings against members
of a profession are intended to maintain proper professional standards,
primarily for the protection
of the public.
Committee also has a role in maintaining public confidence in the profession,
and maintaining the reputation of the profession
and orders of the Committee may
operate to have a general deterrent effect for other members of the profession.
relation to the relevant protective orders to be made, the Committee notes that
the powers available to it in this regard are set
out in section146B of the
National Law which provides as follows:
A Committee may do
one or more of the following:
or reprimand the practitioner;
that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising of the
practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling;
that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the Committee;
that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the times,
in the way and to the persons specified by the
that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the
practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by the
Ms Cristobal’s evidence
Cristobal told the Committee that since the incident involving Patient A she has
changed her practice. She says she is now always
conscious to only administer
medications where there is a valid medical order. She says she has made changes
in relation to how she
manages fatigue. If she is tired or hungry she goes to
the Team Leader to ask for a break. She no longer gets to a level where she
extremely stressed or fatigued.
has also undertaken training. She states that she has undertaken a number of
courses to improve medication administration, knowledge
and safety. Specifically
Patient Controlled Analgesic - Adult Pain Management (13 August 2016); eMeds
Admission Reconciliation (1
October 2017); eMeds Medication History (1 October
2017); Medication Management (1 October 2017); and eMeds Medication Orders (1
October 2017).
asked what she had learned from these courses she mentioned observing the
patient and any changes in the patient’s condition
as well as the need to
have a proper medical order before administering
medication.
relation to Complaint 2, Ms Cristobal stated that she is now fully aware of her
obligations in relation to handling patient health
information and records. She
has reviewed a number of policy directives from NSW Health in relation to
and she has also taken courses to improve her
knowledge of patient privacy and confidentiality. These courses were Privacy
1 - Know Your Boundaries (20 July 2017) and Privacy Module 2 - Handling
Personal Information and Personal Health Information (20
asked what she had learned from the privacy courses, Ms Cristobal stated she had
been taught how to manage patient information
when dealing with telephone
enquiries and also in relation to patient transfers between
Cristobal admits that her actions were wrong. She stated that she made errors of
judgment. Ms Cristobal told the Committee that
she had reflected on her conduct
and was very sorry and regretful about what had occurred. She said she felt she
had learned from
her mistakes. Ms Cristobal said that she now had greater
insight into the importance of adhering to policies.
Cristobal discussed her future plans. She told the Committee that being a nurse
had been a passion for her since an early age.
She hopes to use her Masters
degree to undertake an educational role to assist junior nurses. She said a
clinical facilitator position
would enable her to undertake both a clinical and
educational role.
SUBMISSIONS
Commission submits that Ms Cristobal should be reprimanded and Ms Cristobal
accepts this is appropriate.
Committee considers that the nature and seriousness of Ms Cristobal’s
unsatisfactory professional conduct warrants a reprimand
rather than a caution.
This is fitting both as a specific deterrent for Ms Cristobal and as a general
deterrent in relation to other
members of the
profession.
Further training
Commission proposes that Ms Cristobal undertake further education and training.
Specifically a clinical training program such
as the Post-anaesthetic Recovery
Unit Nurse training program conducted by the Australian College of Nursing and
an ethical training
program such as the Professional Practice Part one - Ethics
and Code of Professional Conduct training conducted by the Nurses for
Cristobal told the delegates that she accepts that further training would be
beneficial.
Committee notes that while it is commendable that Ms Cristobal has undertaken
some training to date, the courses she has completed
were, in the main, short
online training modules that take up to approximately 30 minutes to complete.
The Committee is also of the
view that Ms Cristobal should be required to
complete additional education.
Committee discussed the imposition of a mentoring condition and neither the
Commission nor Ms Cristobal opposed such an arrangement.
The Committee considers
that Ms Cristobal should have a mentor who is an experienced RN with a
background in ICU nursing to both
support her and assist her to further
understand her ethical and clinical
obligations.
Recommendation
Committee also recommends to Ms Cristobal that she continue to receive ongoing
support from the clinical nurse educator at Nepean
DETERMINATION
Committee finds the Particulars of Complaints 1 and 2 proven and finds that Ms
Vilma Cristobal’s proven conduct amounts
to unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of section139B of the National Law
Ms Vilma Cristobal is hereby
reprimanded.
The following conditions are imposed on Ms Vilma
Cristobal’s registration:
registrant is to successfully complete the “Post-anaesthetic Recovery Unit
Nursing training program” conducted by
the Australian College of Nursing
or an equivalent course that has been approved by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South
commencement date should be no later than three months from 21 December 2017 or
otherwise at a date determined by the Council;
completion date must be no later than six months from 21 December 2017 or
otherwise at a date determined by the Council;
course must be taken in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional
Development required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia’s
Registration Standard.
registrant is to successfully complete the “Professional Practice Part one
– Ethics and Code of Professional Conduct
training program”
conducted by the Nurses for Nurses network or an equivalent course that has been
approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of New South
commencement date should be no later than three months from 21 December 2017 or
otherwise at a date determined by the Council;
completion date must be no later than six months from 21 December 2017 or
otherwise at a date determined by the Council;
course must be taken in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional
Development required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia’s
Registration Standard.
The registrant is to provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New
South Wales evidence of successful completion of these courses
signed by an
individual authorised by the educational institution within 14 days of
completion of each course.
registrant must engage in a mentoring relationship. The mentoring relationship
must occur when the nurse is practising as a nurse,
for a minimum cumulative
period of 12 months full time equivalent, commencing from the date the mentor is
approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of New South Wales. The mentor
registered nurse (division I) with experience in Intensive Care nursing and who
meets the criteria specified in the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South
Wales Mentor Policy; and
by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales
registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with the name, contact
details and resume of the registered nurse who
has agreed to act as mentor and
act as specified in the conditions, no later than 6 weeks from 21 December 2017.
the approved mentor to notify the Council of any breach of conditions including
repeated failure to attend mentoring meetings
and to exchange information with
the Council in relation to the registrant’s compliance with the
conditions.
to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
within 4 weeks of the mentor being approved, a mentoring plan that is developed
in consultation with the mentor which meets
the standards required by the
Council’s mentoring policy.
a mentoring report to the Council every month for the first three months and
then every two months thereafter, until the Council
advises the registrant
otherwise in writing. The mentoring report is to be co-signed by the approved
mentor and must meet the standards
required by the Council’s mentoring
registrant is responsible for the costs associated with complying with the
conditions unless otherwise specified.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales is the appropriate review body
for the purposes of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 are to apply
should the registrant’s principal place
of practice be anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so that the appropriate review body in
those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
APPEAL AND REVIEW RIGHTS
Vilma Arcangel Cristobal has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil
and Administrative Tribunal.
appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Vilma Arcangel Cristobal also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW of the Committee’s
order to impose conditions.
Should Ms Vilma Arcangel Cristobal’s principal place of practice be
anywhere other than NSW at
the time of seeking a review of conditions, Ms Vilma
Arcangel Cristobal may make an application for review to the National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
non-publication order was made on 22 November 2017 in respect of Patient A and
Patient B so that the names, addresses and any information
identifying those
persons in this written statement of decision are not to be
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
copy of this written statement of decision will be provided to:
Vilma Arcangel Cristobal,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board,
complainant.
mentor approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South
_________________________
Chairperson
Date: 21 December 2017
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, New South Wales, 2000 having consulted with the
Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales pursuant to
sections 39(2)
and 908(3) of the
Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) ("the National Law'');
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT:
Ms Vilma Cristobal, being a nurse registered under the National Law ("the
practitioner''),
COMPLAINT ONE
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a) of
the National Law in that the practitioner has engaged
in conduct that
demonstrates the care exercised by the practitioner in the practice of nursing
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Each particular in itself justifies a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct. In the alternative, when two or more of the
particulars are taken
together, a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct is justified.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times, the practitioner was a registered nurse at Nepean
At approximately 20:00 on 4 September 2015, Patient A arrived at the
Intensive Care Unit ("ICU") intubated and sedated with intravenous
Propofol at
5mls per hour for post operative care following emergency endoluminal repair of
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm.
At approximately 23:00 on 4 September 2015, the Registrar ceased Propofol.
At approximately 00:30 on 5 September 2015, the Registrar extubated Patient
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. Between approximately 02:00 and 02:45 on 5 September 2015, the
practitioner failed to provide appropriate care for Patient A in
practitioner recommenced the Propofol infusion in circumstances where:
had been ceased by that time;
was no medical order to recommence Propofol.
approximately 02:05 and 03:30 on 5 September 2015, the practitioner failed to
provide appropriate care for Patient A in
that, after recommencing the Propofol
infusion, the practitioner failed to:
with a medical officer;
with the Clinical Nurse Unit Manager;
a contemporaneous record in Patient A's progress notes of recommencing the
Propofol infusion and the patient's condition.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(i) of
the National Law in that the practitioner engaged in
improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of nursing.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT TWO
At all relevant times, the practitioner was a registered nurse at Nepean
Hospital. On 14 December 2015, the Health Care Complaints
Commission informed
the practitioner that it had received a complaint regarding the practitioner's
care of Patient A and that it
had been referred for investigation under
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1. At approximately 22:47 on 17 July 2016, the practitioner failed to
maintain patient confidentiality in that the practitioner sent
an email to
investigators at the Health Care Complaints Commission, in circumstances where:
email included the name of Patient B;
email attached medical records for Patient B;
practitioner had not obtained authorisation from Nepean Hospital to release
Patient B's name or medical records;
practitioner had not obtained consent from Patient B to release Patient B's name
or medical records;
email was sent from the practitioner's personal email address.
Dated 23 June 2017
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of registered
health practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory
professional conduct"
of a registered health practitioner includes each of
the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject;
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or
reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in over servicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with
the practitioner’s professional practice) who is
not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular
(4) In this section-
means money,
property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product
includes supply or prescribe the health product.
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution, reprimand,
counsel etc [NSW]
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following
in relation to a relevant health practitioner the subject of a complaint
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (425 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter