URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Police Association of NSW v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force [2025] NSWIC 2 (3 March 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Police Association of NSW v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 2
Hearing Date(s):
15 October 2024
Date of Orders:
3 March 2025
Decision Date:
3 March 2025
Chin J, Vice President
The Court declares that by operation of clause 64.9 of the Crown Employees
(Police Officers – 2021) Award, police officers who
are confirmed on a
date after the first anniversary of the date of their first appointment as a
police officer of the rank of constable
in the position of Probationary
Constable (Level 1) (their “original attestation date”) are entitled
to progress to the
salary and grade of Constable (Level 3) on the next
anniversary of their original attestation date following confirmation as a
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Awards and enterprise agreements
– Interpretation – Rights of police officers to
incremental
progression through hierarchy of ranks, grades and salaries – where
applicant union seeks a declaration that, where
confirmation of the appointment
of a probationary constable is delayed beyond 12 months, those officers are
entitled to progress
to the higher rank and salary increment on the next
anniversary of the date of their appointment as probationary constables –
where awards to be given practical operation consistent with the objective
meaning of its language – where awards should be
reasonably capable of
being understood by the participants in the industries to which they apply
– where past industrial practices
cannot be substituted for the terms of
the award − applicant entitled to declaratory relief
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Police Regulation 2015
(NSW) cl 5, 7, 13
Cases Cited:
Amcor Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2005) 222 CLR
[2005] HCA 10
Australian Communication Exchange Ltd v Deputy Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(2003) 77 ALJR 1806
[2003] HCA 55
Australian Rail,
Tram and Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd t/as Yarra Trams
Bryce v Apperley
(1998) 82 IR 448
City of Wanneroo v Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
(2006) 153 IR 426
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
(1989) 30 IR 362
[1989] FCA 553
A Bond & Company Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
University v Ridd
(2020) 278 FCR 566
[2020] FCAFC 123
King v Melbourne
Vicentre Swimming Club Inc
[2020] FCA 1173
Kingmill Australia Pty Ltd (t/a
Thrifty Car Rental) v Federated Clerks’ Union of Australia
(2001) 106 IR
[2001] NSWIRComm 141
Kucks v CSR Ltd (1996) 66 IR 182;
[1996] IRCA
New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association v New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 636
New South Wales v Stockwell
[2017] NSWCA 30
Perisher Blue
Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union
(1999) 91 IR 274
Public Service
Association and Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of New
South Wales v Secretary of the Treasury
(2014) 87 NSWLR 41
[2014] NSWIRComm
Shop Distributive and Allied Employees' Association v Woolworths Ltd
(2006) 151 FCR 513
[2006] FCA 616
State of New South Wales v Briggs
[2016] NSWCA 344
95 NSWLR 467
State of New South Wales v Stockwell
[2017] NSWCA 30
Australia Pty Ltd v Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association
(2023) 324 IR 304
[2023] FCAFC 66
Tasmanian Water and Sewerage Corporation v
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
Services Union of Australia
[2025] FCA 39
Transport Workers' Union
(NSW Branch) v Walker Civil Engineering
(1999) 91 IR 153
Transport Workers
Union of Australia v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
(2014) 245 IR 449
[2014] FCAFC 148
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
(2018) 264 FCR 536
[2018] FCAFC
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Police Association of NSW (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
Force (Respondent)
Representation:
P Lowson (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Police Association of NSW
(Applicant)
Kingston Reid (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/280375
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
matter concerns the rights of persons who are first appointed on probation as a
police officer of the rank of constable (“Probationary
Constable”)
to progress through the scale of rank, grade and salary increments under the
Crown Employees (Police Officers –
2021) Award (“the Award”)
after a delay in the confirmation of their appointment to that rank.
initial appointment of a constable on probation is commonly referred to as an
“attestation”. The period for which
newly appointed or
“attested” constables are on probation is ordinarily 12 months. At
the end of the 12-month probationary
period, successful Probationary Constables
are confirmed in the rank of constable and thereupon progress to the next salary
under the Award – from “Probationary Constable (Level
1)” to “Constable Level 2”. The anniversary date
attestation and confirmation will ordinarily be the same date. After their
confirmation, this anniversary date serves as
the date on which they progress
annually through each of the subsequent salary increments, starting with
“Constable Level 3”.
issue in dispute arises in circumstances where, for whatever reason, the
confirmation of the appointment of a Probationary Constable
is delayed after a
period of 12 months from their attestation. The applicant, the Police
Association of NSW, contends that such a
Probationary Constable progresses to
the “Constable Level 3” salary increment on the next anniversary of
their original
attestation date. The respondent, the Commissioner of Police
(“the Commissioner”), contends that the constable progresses
annually through each of the subsequent salary increments at a later time, that
is, on the date of their actual, delayed confirmation.
resolution of this controversy turns on the construction of cl 64.9 of the
Award. This clause provides:
64.9 Effect of Any Deferral of Incremental Progression
64.9.1 The period of deferral of an increment will be determined by the period
of time taken to achieve the appropriate competency
and/or performance standards
in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
64.9.2 Where an increment is deferred:
(a) within the first 3 years of employment as a
Non-Commissioned Officer, the original increment date is to be retained for
increments;
(b) after the first 3 years of employment as a Non-Commissioned
Officer, all future incremental dates are to be varied by the period
parties differ as to whether Probationary Constables are entitled to progress to
the next incremental level in the manner contemplated
for junior police officers
by cl 64.9.2(a), or whether, by reason of their probationary status, these
constables are
sui generis
or unique among police officers and do not
have this entitlement. The determinative issue boils down to whether a
Probationary Constable
is “a Non-Commissioned Officer” engaged
“within the first 3 years of employment” for the purposes of
cl 64.9.2(a).
If so, as the Police Association contends, in circumstances
where a Probationary Constable’s confirmation of appointment and
incremental progression to Constable Level 2 is delayed or
“deferred”, the Award provides that their subsequent progression
“Constable Level 3” and higher is to take place on the
anniversary of their attestation date or “original increment
the other side, the Commissioner contends that cl 64.9 has no application
to Probationary Constables. Although the Commissioner
accepts that Probationary
Constables fall within the Award definition of “Non-Commissioned
Officer”, she contends that
a delay in the confirmation of their
appointment to the rank of constable at the grade of Constable Level 2 is
separate and distinct
from the concept of a “deferral of incremental
progression” to which cl 64.9 is directed. Instead, the Commissioner
that cl 64.9.2(a) is confined to the deferral of an increment only
for Non-Commissioned Officers within the first three years after
their confirmed
appointment.
the reasons that follow, I agree with the Police Association’s
construction of cl 64.9 and reject the Commissioner’s
construction.
Procedural background and relief sought
22 April 2024, the applicant notified an industrial dispute under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) (“the Act”)
concerning the incremental salary progression entitlements of four police
officers whose confirmation
as Probationary Constables had been delayed,
together with a related application for recovery of remuneration under
of the Act. This dispute and underpayment claim was the subject of
attempted conciliation involving six compulsory conferences before
Commission over the period from 30 April to 4 July 2024. This process has been
exhausted, with the Commission issuing a certificate
of attempted conciliation
on 5 July 2024.
party has sought to vary the terms of the Award in the context of their
industrial dispute. Instead, after the re-establishment
of the Industrial Court
of NSW on 1 July 2024, the Police Association filed an application on
30 July 2024 seeking declaratory relief
from this Court under
the Act. The prior dispute and underpayment proceedings before the Commission
was stayed pending the outcome of this application
for declaratory relief.
its application filed on 30 July 2024, the Police Association seeks a
declaration of right in the following terms:
“Police officers who are confirmed on a date after the first anniversary
of their original attestation date are entitled to
progress to the salary at
Constable (Level 3) on the next anniversary of their original attestation date
following confirmation as
a Constable.”
declaratory relief sought by the Police Association, which the Commissioner
opposes, is intended to resolve the underlying industrial
dispute about how the
Award provisions dealing with incremental salary progression should apply to
Probationary Constables.
Accordingly,
this Court must construe the relevant terms of the Award − in particular
cl 64.9.2(a) − in accordance with
well-established
principles.
Principles of award interpretation
interpretation of an award begins with a consideration of the natural and
ordinary meaning of the words used, with the aim of
discerning their objective
are practical and beneficial instruments. They are “to be construed as
‘practical’ instruments that will
apply to the working conditions
known to employers and
employees”.
They should be
given a broad or generous construction, being careful to avoid a too literal
adherence to the strict technical meaning
of words or a narrow or overly
pedantic construction, and endeavouring to give it a meaning consistent with the
award’s purpose
and the general intention of the parties to be gathered
from the whole award and its
relevant context includes the whole of the text of the award, the award’s
industrial context and purpose as well as the
legislative background in which it
was made and intended to operate
Relevant context can
include a consideration of the history and subject matter of the award, as well
as the circumstances in which
it was made. The statutory context in which awards
are made includes the requirement on the Industrial Relations Commission of New
South Wales in
of the Act to set “fair and reasonable conditions
of employment for
employees.”
subjective intention of the parties to the award are not relevant. Instead,
“the process of construction must direct attention
to the words that are
actually used. Expressed intention is to be gathered from the text of the
instrument in light of context and
purpose. There are limits on the extent to
which the resolution of questions of construction may be driven by reference to
and context”.
context is significant, the construction of an award must ultimately be
consistent with the objective meaning of its
As stated by
Wheelahan J in
King v Melbourne Vicentre Swimming Club
“[t]he inquiry is
directed to the proper construction of what the instrument says, and not what it
was meant to say”;
and “[t]here is much to be said for the notion
that instruments such as awards should be reasonably capable of being understood
and implemented by the participants in the industries to which they apply by
reference to the language employed in the instrument
itself, without having to
investigate and ascertain the pedigree of the instrument in order to identify
some latent meaning to be
discerned by an analysis of the mental states or
purposes of others”.
Accordingly,
great care must be taken in relying on past industrial practices as the basis of
a “common understanding”
as an aid to construction. Past practices
cannot be substituted for the terms of the instrument. They are no more than
part of the
context in which the text of the instrument is to be
For this approach to be
taken, “there must be clear evidence that the parties have acted upon a
common understanding as to
the meaning of the relevant provision and not for
other reasons, such as common inadvertence as to its true
position of Probationary Constable
considering the relevant terms of the Award, it is necessary to understand the
nature of the position of Probationary Constable.
position of Probationary Constable can be distinguished from that of a Student
or Student Police Officer. A candidate to join
the NSW Police Force commences a
program of study in the Associate Degree in Policing Practice conducted by
Charles Sturt University,
together with the NSW Police Force Academy.
Confirmation of an officer’s appointment in the rank of constable depends
officer completing this Associate Degree. However, a candidate undertakes
the first two of five components of the degree course other
than in the capacity
of Probationary Constable. This initial part of the course involves undertaking
a one-week online course focusing
on the theory of policing as a
“Student”, and then commencing temporary fixed-term employment with
the NSW Police Force
in an administrative position known as “Student
Police Officer” to undertake a 16-week residential course at the Police
Academy in Goulburn.
Police Officers “attest” and commence as Probationary Constables
when they successfully complete the Police Academy
course in Goulburn.
Probationary Constables are then posted to an operational Police Area Command or
Police District where they complete
the remaining components of their Associate
Degree while also performing the duties of a police officer under the
supervision of
senior officers.
engagement of police officers in NSW is governed by the
Police Act 1990
(NSW) and the
Police Regulation 2015
Subsections 80(2)
provide that when a person is first appointed as a police
officer of the rank of constable, they are to be so appointed on probation,
are subsequently promoted within the rank of constable in accordance with the
Police Regulation
. These officers are referred to as Probationary
Constables.
Police Regulation
stipulates that when first appointed as a police officer of
the rank of constable, a person is to be appointed on probation for a
one year or “for such longer or shorter period (being not less than 6
months) as the Commissioner may direct”:
reg 13(1). The Commissioner
may direct that the period of probation be less than six months, or may waive
the period of probation
completely, if the person has previously served as a
police officer in the NSW Police Force or in any other police service or police
force: reg 13(2).
probation period ends when the officer’s appointment in the rank of
constable is “confirmed”.
Regulation 14
provides that this
confirmation is subject to the officer successfully completing initial basic
training, completing the period of
probation, obtained a satisfactory fitness
report, and otherwise satisfying the other requirements of Div 2 to
Police Regulation
standard or usual probationary period for police officers is 12 months. Only a
small proportion of Probationary Officers are
not confirmed at the end of that
period. This is illustrated by the fact that, according to the evidence of
Assistant Commissioner
Greentree relied upon by the Commissioner in these
proceedings, only several out of about two to three hundred Probationary
who attested in the previous 12 months have not been confirmed at the
end of their initial 12-month probationary period, including
some who resigned
or were dismissed from the Police Force without having been confirmed.
status of constables who are appointed on probation means that, during their
probationary period, the Commissioner of Police may
dismiss them from the NSW
Police Force at any time and without giving any reason:
. Despite this, and in contrast to Students and Student Police Officers,
Probationary Constables nevertheless occupy the rank and
grade of constable
identified in
and reg 5(1) of the
Police Regulation
. The attestation of a Probationary Constable involves them
taking the oath or making the affirmation of office as a police officer
accordance with
and reg 7 of the
. This oath or affirmation is required before a person is able to
exercise any of the functions of a police officer. Probationary
proceed to exercise those functions under supervision while they complete their
Associate Degree. As such, it is uncontroversial
that, upon their initial
appointment as a police officer of the rank of constable, a Probationary
Constable whose appointment to
that rank is yet to be confirmed nevertheless
becomes a member of the NSW Police Force within the meaning of
Incremental progression through ranks, grades
and salary levels under the Award
parties agreed that a competency based incremental progression clause has
appeared in industrial awards covering police officers
in New South Wales since
the Crown Employees (Police Officers – 2001) Award (cl 18); and has
existed in industrial instruments
in some form before this award.
evidence of Mr Richardson, an Industrial Officer employed by the Police
Association, established that the progenitor of cl 64.9
in the Award is a
provision (cl 18.8) that was initially included in an enterprise agreement
between the Police Association and the
Commissioner of Police registered on
2 December 1994 known as the Police Service of New South Wales
Non-Commissioned Police Officers’
Enterprise Agreement (“the 1994
Police Officers’ Enterprise Agreement”). This clause was itself
based on a provision
in similar terms contained in the NSW Public Service
“Personnel Handbook” in December 1994, which set out conditions
employment for public sector workers generally. I will return to the
original clause in the 1994 Police Officers’ Enterprise
present controversy centres on the meaning of cl 64.9 of the Award (the
text of which is reproduced in [4] above) as informed
by the context of the
other components of cl 64 and the text of the Award generally, with
particular attention directed to the Award
provisions relating to the
incremental progression of police officers through the various ranks, grades and
salary levels regulated
by the Award.
Award applies to all persons appointed to be a police officer and member of the
NSW Police Force under the
, both commissioned (of or above the
rank of Inspector) and non-commissioned (under the rank of Inspector):
cll 3.1, 95.1. This includes
Probationary Constables both for the reasons
outlined in the preceding section and because Probationary Constables are
acknowledged in cl 3.1 of the Award. As a police officer under
the rank of Inspector, Probationary Constables clearly fall within
definition of “Non-Commissioned Officer”: cl 3.2.
37.1 provides that, subject to the
Police Regulation
to the Award provisions regulating competency based incremental progression,
Non-Commissioned Officers (other than Detectives
and Police Prosecutors)
“will, according to the rank held and incremental level achieved, be paid
a base salary of not less
than the amounts prescribed in Table 1 –
Non-Commissioned Officers’ (Other than Detectives and Police Prosecutors)
of PART B, Monetary Rates”.
referred to in cl 37.1, the Award provides for competency based pathways
for Non-Commissioned (and Commissioned) police officers
to gain promotion and
progress through the hierarchy of various ranks and grades and commensurate
salary levels, which forms the
context in which cl 64.9 of the Award
64.1 relevantly provides that “incremental progression for
Non-Commissioned Officers will be based on”:
64.1.1 a minimum period of twelve (12) months service on each incremental level
or step as defined in Table 1 – Non-Commissioned
Officers’ (Other
than Detectives and Police Prosecutors) Salaries, Table 2 –
Detectives’ Salaries or Table 3 –
Police Prosecutors Salaries all of
PART B, Monetary Rates; and
64.1.2 compliance with the competency requirements specified in this clause.
some significance (to which I will return later) cl 64.2 imposes
responsibility directly on individual Non-Commissioned Officers
they are familiar with the contents of this clause and to make all reasonable
efforts to comply with the requirements
contained within clause 64 of this
Award”. There is no suggestion that Probationary Constables are relieved
from this responsibility.
referred to in cll 37.1 and 64.1.1 sets out each “Rank/Incremental
Level” through which Non-Commissioned Officers
may progress. The first
such “Rank/Incremental Level” is “Probationary Constable
(Level 1)”. The second “Rank/Incremental
“Constable Level 2”, thereafter progressing up to
“Constable Level 5”, then ascending through
various grades
within the ranks of “Senior Constable”, “Leading Senior
Constable”, “Sergeant”
and “Senior Sergeant”.
competency requirements referred to in cl 64.1.2 are set out in
cl 64.5. The first competency requirement is identified as
64.5.1 Constable’s Education Program
For confirmation as a constable of police, Non-Commissioned Officers must
successfully complete the Constable’s Education Program
and/or meet any
other requirements or attain any other qualifications necessary for confirmation
as determined by the Commissioner
from time to time.
I infer that the education program referred to in cl 64.5.1 must include
all the components of the Associate Degree in Policing Practice
referred to
Sub-clauses
64.5.2 to 64.5.5 stipulate various other competency requirements which are
(a) assessed on an annual basis such as Defensive Tactics (Including Firearms)
and CPR/First Aid Training (cl 64.5.2(a)), a Mandatory
Continuing Police
Education (MCPE) program (cl 64.5.3), and a computer-based objective test
of policing knowledge (cl 65.5.4); or
(b) contingent on some demonstrated failure or incident such as a remedial
program of improving physical fitness in the event that
an officer’s
physical fitness was a contributing factor to a particular incident
(cl 64.5.2(b)), a driver development program
in the event that an officer
loses their status to drive NSW Police vehicles (cl 64.5.2(c)), a remedial
program on using the Computerised
Operational Policing (COPS) System where an
officer demonstrates a deficiency in the use of this system (cl 64.5.2(d)),
and the requirements
of a performance management scheme that is imposed on
officers who fail to perform to an agreed level (cl 64.5.5).
particular significance on the Commissioner’s case is the fact that
references to “deferred” increments or a
“deferral” of
an officer’s incremental progression appear in the context of the
competency requirements outlined
in cll 64.5.2 to 64.5.5, but those terms
are not used in cl 64.5.1 which deals specifically with the confirmation of
Probationary
Constables.
64.6 provides:
64.6 Effect on Incremental Progression Where Multiple
Competencies Not Satisfied
Should any Non-Commissioned Officer fail to satisfy more than one competency
required for incremental progression then the period
of loss of incremental
progression will be concurrent not cumulative. That is, the competency taking
the longest period to satisfy,
of any competencies will be the period of
deferral of incremental progression.
64.7 provides:
6.47 Increments Falling Due During a Period of Initial Remedial
In the event of a Non-Commissioned Officer’s increment falling due during
a period of initial remedial training or participation
in a performance
management scheme, it will not be deferred. However, if such training is not
satisfied, progression to the next
increment will be deferred by the period of
time taken after such training or participation until such time as the
Non-Commissioned
Officer has reached the required competency standard.
64.8 stipulates the requirements for an officer to progress through the various
ranks and grades as follows:
64.8.1 Progression to Constable Level 2 (Confirmation)
Progression to Constable Level 2 increment will be contingent upon:
(a) Achievement of 12 months service as a Probationary
Constable or any other period as the Commissioner may direct in accordance
clause 13 of the
Police Regulation, 2015
(b) Successful completion of the Constable’s Education
Program and/or the attainment of any other qualifications or requirements
determined by the Commissioner from time to time.
(c) Confirmation as a constable.
64.8.2 Progression to Constable Levels 3, 4 and 5:
Progression to Constable Levels 3, 4, and 5 will be contingent upon:
(a) 12 months service on each previous increment.
(b) Maintenance of the Base Generic Competencies during the
training year prior to the increment falling due. Should the Base Generic
Competencies not be satisfied, incremental progression will be deferred in
accordance with the provisions of this clause.
64.8.3 Progression Beyond Constable Level 5 (Promotion to
Senior Constable)
Progression beyond Constable Level 5 and for promotion to Senior Constable will
be contingent upon:
(a) Successful completion of the Constable’s Education
Program (or equivalent qualification);
(b) Maintenance of the Base Generic Competencies in accordance
with the provisions of this clause.
(c) Passing the Objective Test of Policing Knowledge in
accordance with the provisions of this clause.
(d) Meeting the requirements for promotion to Senior Constable
as prescribed by
Regulations 16
Police Regulation 2015
64.8.4 Progression to each subsequent incremental level
(including progression within the Sergeant and Senior Sergeant ranks)
progression
within the ranks of Senior Constable, Sergeant and Senior Sergeant
will be contingent upon:
(a) 12 months service on each previous increment (both level
(b) Maintenance of the Base Generic Competencies in accordance
with the provisions of this clause.
(c) Completion of the Mandatory Continuing Police Education
(MCPE) requirements in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
(d) Passing the Objective Test of Policing Knowledge in
accordance with the provisions of this clause (for progression to each
(e) Satisfactory performance under the appropriate Performance
Management Scheme.
Recognition
of the potentially variable period of probation in cl 64.8.1(a) and its
bearing upon the operation of cl 64.1, which in
part provides rather
incongruously for a minimum period of twelve (12) months service on each
incremental level, is also a matter
of some significance to which I will return
64.10 exempts Non-Commissioned Officers who are medically excused from
demonstrating a particular competency from having “normal
incremental
progression deferred”; and refers to deferral of incremental progression
“in accordance with the provisions
of this clause” only if the
officer remains unable to meet the competency requirements after appropriate
remedial training
after they return to full duty. A similar provision applies to
officers who fail to meet requirements after remedial training provided
long term absences on secondment, full time leave without pay, special leave
without pay, extended sick leave and Workers Compensation/Hurt
on Duty absences:
64.13 deals with the incremental progression of Non-Commissioned Officers who
relevantly as follows:
64.13 Effect of suspension
64.13.4 Where a Non-Commissioned Officer ceases to be suspended and continues as
a Police Officer, the officer has six months in
which to comply with the
requirements of this clause to achieve increment progression for which the
officer would have been eligible
if not suspended. Where the requirements are
met, the officer will be paid increment entitlements effective from the
officer's incremental
date, or, dates and the officer will be eligible for the
next increment on the officer's next increment date.
64.13.5 Where an officer does not achieve incremental progression in accordance
with subclause 64.13.4, the officer will remain at
the officer's then level
until they achieve the requirements for incremental progression. On achieving
the requirements for incremental
progression the officer will move to the next
level and the date of that change will become the officer's new incremental date
all future progression. An officer progressing in accordance with this
subclause will not be entitled to any incremental back pay.
of the remaining components of cl 64 impose additional competency
requirements on specific ranks above Probationary Constables,
namely, Leading
Senior Constables (cl 64.16), Sergeants/Senior Sergeants (cl 64.17),
Detectives (cl 64.18) and Police Prosecutors
(cl 64.19).
it is relevant to note that cl 64.9 stands in contrast to the provision
dealing with the deferral of incremental progression
for more senior
“Commissioned Officers” at or above the rank of Inspector.
Clause 73.6.2 provides that where an increment
is deferred for these senior
officers “all future incremental dates are to be varied by the period of
deferment” without
exception for any such officers based on length of
The ordinary meaning of the words used in cl 64.9 in the
context of the Award
starting point is to consider the natural and ordinary meaning of the words used
in cl 64.9 and, as counsel for the Commissioner,
Mr Watts, frankly
conceded, the “hardest part” of the Commissioner’s argument is
the reference to “within
3 years of employment as a Non-Commissioned
Officer” in cl 64.9.2(a). On its face, this provision extends to
Probationary Constables
who are unambiguously included within the definition of
“Non-Commissioned Officer” for the purposes of the Award. As
this clause appears to provide that where progression to the “Constable
Level 2” increment on the salary scale
in Table 1 of Part B is
deferred “within the first 3 years of employment” as a Probationary
Constable, the original increment
date is to be retained for the
constable’s future increments instead of being varied by the period of
deferment. Thus, the
plain language of cl 64.9.2(a) is consistent with the
construction advanced by the Police Association.
Commissioner’s argument
Commissioner nevertheless contends that when viewed in the context of the
statutory framework and cl 64 as a whole, cl 64.9.2(a)
should be read
as applying only to the deferral of increments within the first three years
of the confirmed appointment of a Non-Commissioned Officer
words, the Commissioner contends that this provision applies only during the
first three years from the point at which
a Probationary Constable advances to
and attains the incremental level constituted by the grade of Constable
Commissioner’s construction rests on the proposition that
cl 64.9.2(a) is enlivened only “where an increment is deferred”
as contemplated in cl 64.9.1, and any delay in the transition from
Probationary Constable (Level 1) to Constable Level 2 under the
Award does not
amount to a deferral of an increment within the meaning of cl 64. Instead,
on the Commissioner’s case, this
amounts to a delay in the confirmation of
their appointment as a constable for the purposes of the
Police Regulation
Commissioner essentially relies on two principal contentions or limbs to support
this proposition, which Mr Watts carefully distilled
and developed in his
closing submissions. Firstly, the Commissioner submits that the position of
Probationary Constable (Level 1)
on the salary scale in Table 1 of
Part B does not constitute an incremental level or incremental step for the
purposes of “incremental
progression” within the meaning of
cl 64. Although the Commissioner accepts that cl 64.1 applies to
Probationary Constables
(because it refers to Non-Commissioned Officers), she
submits that they nevertheless do not occupy an incremental level or step within
the meaning of cl 64.1.1. The reason given for this is that incremental
progression contemplated in cl 64.1.1 requires a minimum
of 12 months
service on each increment level, whereas the
Police Regulation
stipulates that
the period of probation on the first level may be shorter or longer or may be
waived altogether. The Commissioner
accepts that Probationary Constables
commence “incremental progression” under cl 64 upon their
confirmation and progression
to the grade of Constable Level 2, but argues
that − at any stage before their confirmation − Probationary
are not on an incremental level and are not “incrementally
progressing” along the salary scale for the purposes of the
the concept of a “deferral of an increment” or a “deferral of
incremental progression” in cl 64.9
does not apply to Probationary
Constables because those terms are used in the Award exclusively in connection
with confirmed police
officers in cll 64.5.2 to 64.5.5 and 64.8.2(b), are
not otherwise associated with Probationary Constables in any other Award
provisions.
The reference in cl 64.9.1 to the period of deferral of an
increment reflecting the time taken to achieve “the appropriate
and/or performance standards in accordance with the provisions of this
clause” is a reference to the annual competency
standards set out in cl
64.5.2 to 64.5.5 and 64.8.2(b) which do not apply to Probationary Constables and
in which the term “deferral”
(and its derivatives) is expressly used
in connection with incremental progression. In contrast, the Commissioner
submits that the
competency standards for Probationary Constables referred to in
cll 64.5.1 and 64.8.1 accords with the relevant statutory framework
probationary period and do not speak of increments or incremental progression
being “deferred”.
Is Probationary Constable (Level 1)
an incremental step?
fundamental difficulty with the first limb of the Commissioner’s
construction is that the Award plainly treats the progression
of Probationary
Constables to the grade of Constable Level 2 as being functionally synonymous or
coextensive with the confirmation
of their appointments in accordance with the
relevant statutory scheme. Clause 64.8 stipulates “requirements for
progression
through the various ranks and grades”. Sub-clause 64.8.1
provides for the first such progression from Probationary Constable
Constable Level 2 (Confirmation)” which is expressly contingent upon
their “confirmation as a constable”
and achievement of 12 months
service on probation or any probationary period as the Commissioner may direct
under cl 13 of the
Police Regulation
complementary coexistence between incremental salary progression under the Award
and the statutory requirements for promotion
of police officers is further
exemplified in the context of promotion to Senior Constable in
cl 64.8.3(d).
concept of incremental progression under the Award clearly encompasses progress
through each of the incremental levels or steps
set out in Table 1 of the
Award. The rank and grade of “Probationary Constable (Level 1)” is
identified as the first
“Rank/Incremental Level” identified in
Table 1. Accordingly, incremental progress under the Award begins with the
and grade of Probationary Constable. It does not start at Constable Level
2. There is no reason to exclude the rank of Probationary
Constable from
constituting one of the incremental steps or levels. Excluding Probationary
Constables from a place on the incremental
scale does too much violence to the
plain terms of the Award.
reference to a “minimum period of (12) months service on each incremental
level or step as defined in Table 1” in
cl 64.1.1 must be read
together with the requirement in cl 64.1.2 to comply with “the
competency requirements specified in
this clause” which include the
competency requirements for the confirmation of Probationary Constables
stipulated in cll 64.5.1
and 64.8.1. These competency requirements
recognise that, although the probationary period usually involves 12 months
service, this
may vary as directed by the Commissioner. This is recognised
explicitly in cl 64.8.1(a). To make sense of the Award’s provisions
dealing with incremental progression which clearly begins with the first
incremental step of appointment as a Probationary Constable
(Level 1), the
reference to a “minimum period of (12) months service” in
cl 64.1.1 must be read as qualified by the possibility
of a different
period for Probationary Constables, which is explicitly recognised in
cl 64.8.1(a).
is instructive to note that the incremental progression clause introduced in the
predecessor Award made in 2001 (cl 18) also provided
for incremental
progression based on a minimum of 12 months service on each level of the salary
scale. However, at that time, it
did so in the context of a provision
stipulating that progression to Constable Level 2 was contingent on achieving
12 months service
as a Probationary Constable without recognising the
possibility of any variation in that probationary period: see cl 18(xii) of
2001 award. In the next iteration of the Award made in 2003, cl 52 was
inserted which referred to the variability of the probationary
period for the
first time (cl 52(viii)(a)(1)) while retaining the general requirement for
incremental progression to be based on
of 12 months service (cl
52(i)(a)). It is not suggested that the resulting infelicity in drafting −
reproduced in the Award
as observed in [42] above and relied on by the
Commissioner as set out in [50] above − heralded a substantial change in
Probationary Constable (Level 1) as an incremental
level or step for the purposes of incremental progression, as it had been in
18 of the 2001 award.
conclusion is reinforced by the terms of the progenitor of cl 64.9 in the
1994 Police Officers’ Enterprise Agreement. Clause
18.8.2(a) of this
agreement retained the original increment date where the deferral occurred
“within the first 3 years of employment
as an officer”, in
circumstances where “officer” was defined to include “all
persons employed by the Police
Service of New South Wales as a Non-Commissioned
Police Officer, including Probationary Constables,
but excluding Student
Police Officers
, who as at the date of registration of this Agreement were
employed as such” (emphasis added).
the genesis of the benefit afforded to junior police officers by
cl 64.9.2(a) of the Award expressly took up the distinction
(addressed in
[20]-[21] above) between Student Police Officers, who were excluded from the
benefit, and all non-commissioned police
officers, including Probationary
Constables, who were included. Absent any suggestion of a substantial amendment
to the relevant
award in 2003 (or at any other point since 1994) to exclude
Probationary Constable (Level 1) as an incremental level, there is no
think that Probationary Constables have not continue to be so included in the
addition to the plain terms of the Award referred to above, the
Commissioner’s contention that Probationary Constables may
“incrementally progressing” to the level of Constable Level 2
without themselves occupying any incremental level recognised
in the Award
cannot be accepted. This submission is conceptually and linguistically
untenable. If a Probationary Constable does not
occupy any step on the
Award’s incremental scale, then their passage to Constable Level 2 is more
naturally characterised as
commencement in
the position on the
first rung of the scale
they may, thereafter, incrementally
progress. It is inapt to characterise the transition from Probationary
Constable to Constable
Level 2 as itself an instance of incremental progression,
unless this progression is from one incremental level to another. The
Commissioner’s
distinction between incremental level and incremental
progression is illusory.
Does the concept of a “deferral of
an increment” apply to Probationary Constables?
with this analysis, the second limb of the Commissioner’s construction
also yields to scrutiny. I am not persuaded
that the concept of a
“deferral of an increment” in cl 64.9 is used exclusively in
connection with confirmed police officers.
For the reasons given above, I do not
accept that the Award treats the concepts of incremental progression to
Constable Level 2 and
the confirmation of an officer’s appointment as
a constable as being mutually exclusive. Under the Award, the first incremental
progression and confirmation of an appointment as constable are, in fact,
substantially coextensive. This is because the Award explicitly
renders the
former contingent upon the latter (cl 64.8.1(c)). This means that the
language of “deferral”, when used in
connection with the first
incremental progression from Probationary Constable to Constable Level 2,
is apt to encompass any delay
in the confirmation of the constable’s
appointment. This is evident in two aspects of the Award.
even if cll 64.5.2 to 64.5.5 and 64.8.2(b) operate only with respect to
confirmed officers, the nomenclature of “deferral”
of incremental
progression is nevertheless used in connection with Probationary Constables in
other contexts. For example, cl 64.7
provides for an increment to be
“deferred” by the time taken to satisfy a period of “remedial
training” such
that “the Non-Commissioned Officer has reached the
required competency standard”. Mr Watts accepted that Probationary
Constables may undergo remedial training but disavowed the application of this
provision to Probationary Constables and contended
that the reference to
“Non-Commissioned Officer” in cl 64.7 must be read down to
exclude them, contrary to the express
definition of that term in the Award. He
did so essentially in reliance on the contention that the reference to
“deferral of
an increment” in cl 64.7 is not apt to apply to
Probationary Constables for the reasons advanced under the first limb of the
Commissioner’s construction. Following my rejection of the
Commissioner’s argument in this regard, and taking into account
concession that Probationary Constables may be required to undertake remedial
training, I am not satisfied that cl 64.7 does
not utilise the language of
“deferral of an increment” in connection with Probationary
Constables.
the terms “deferral” and “deferred” are used in
connection with the incremental progression of
Non-Commissioned Officers at
large, including Probationary Constables, who are medically excused from
demonstrating certain competencies
(cl 64.10) or who are absent for long
periods in circumstances including extended sick leave (cl 64.12).
even if I am wrong about the application of cll 64.7, 64.10 and 64.12, when
read as a whole, the Award discloses no intention
to divorce the substance of
the concept of “deferred increments” from officers who are
classified as Probationary Constables.
On the contrary, cl 39 provides for
Non-Commissioned Officers (including Probationary Constables) transitioning to
the position of
Police Prosecutor; and cl 39.3 provides that certain
Non-Commissioned Officers, including Probationary Constables, will be entitled
to their next increment 12 months from the date of their transition to the
Police Prosecutors’ salary scale whereas all other
officers who are
appointed as a Police Prosecutor retain their existing increment date. This
provision effectively “defers”
or delays the transitioning
Probationary Constable’s “increment date” by 12 months
from the date of transition,
in a manner equivalent or comparable to the
deferral of increment dates for other Non-Commissioned Officers within the same
scale by operation of cl 64.9.2(b).
Mr Watts properly conceded that this characterisation of cl 39.3 might
be correct “in substance” he contended
that, instead, decisive
weight should be given to the use of the term “deferral” or its
derivatives to distinguish cl
64.9 from cl 39.3 (and cl 38.3).
However, I prefer to give weight to the substance of the operation of provisions
such as cl 39.3,
consistent with the need to give the beneficial provisions
of the Award a broad or generous construction, and being careful to avoid
narrow or overly pedantic construction of the notion “deferred”
increments.
without using the nomenclature of “deferral”, the effect of
cl 64.13.5 is to defer the increment date for Non-Commissioned
Officers at
large, including Probationary Constables, who fail to achieve relevant
competency requirements within six months after
a period of suspension. The NSW
Police Force’s “Probationary Constable Progression Policy” (at
[10.2.2]) makes
it clear that these officers may be suspended because of a
Conclusion on the ordinary meaning of the words in cl
these reasons, I find that the achievement of the appropriate competency for
progression to the grade of Constable Level 2 in
accordance with cl 64
is commensurate with being confirmed as a constable (cl 64.8.1(c)).
Accordingly, the references to “deferral
of an increment” in
cl 64.9, properly construed, extend to the deferral of a Probationary
Constable achieving the competency
requirement for progression to Constable
Level 2 by reason of a delay in their confirmation as a constable.
do not accept the foundational propositions on which the Commissioner’s
construction of cl 64.9 is erected. The first rung
on the incremental rank,
grade and salary scale in the Award is appointment as a Probationary Constable
(Level 1). Unlike Student
Police Officers, Probationary Constables are
members of the NSW Police Force who are covered by the Award salary scale.
accept the submission of counsel for the Police Association, Ms Lowson,
that “attestation as a probationary police officer
launches an officer
into the salary scale, progress through which is, aptly enough, by incremental
progression”.
Other textual issues
Commissioner also submits that the reference to the first “3 years of
employment” in cl 64.9.2 is “problematic”
because police
officers are not “employees” as such (citing
State of New South
Wales v Briggs
[2016] NSWCA 344
(2016) 95 NSWLR 467
). This contention,
however, does not justify distinguishing Probationary Constables from other
grades of constables to whom the clause
applies. The Commissioner ultimately
contended that “employment” in this context refers to the
appointment
of police officers or, more particularly, that cl 64.9.2
hinges on the first three years of the
confirmed appointment
Non-Commissioned Officers.
accept that the term “employment” is used loosely in the Award to
refer the statutory “appointment” of persons
to the office of a
police officer. However, persons are initially appointed as a police officer of
the rank of constable, and are
so appointed on probation:
. The first “3 years of employment” in
cl 64.9.2 is more likely to refer to the initial period of engagement of a
officer as a member of the NSW Police Force, which encompasses the period
commencing from their initial appointment on probation
and attestation.
reject the Commissioner’s contention that, even if cl 64.9.2 applied
to Probationary Constables, the “original increment
date” must be
the date of their confirmation and advancement to the grade of Constable
Level 2. The Award distinguishes between,
on the one hand, an
officer’s “original” or “existing increment date”
or simply their “incremental
date” and, on the other hand, their
“new incremental date” or a date on which future incremental
progression takes
place that has been adjusted by reason of a delay in or
deferral of their incremental progression or by some other event such as
transition to a different salary scale (see for example cll 38.3, 39.3,
64.13.4, 64.13.5 and 73.6.2). Where a Probationary Constable’s
progression
is deferred beyond 12 months, the Commissioner’s submission
erroneously conflates the officer’s original
or existing increment date
(ie. the anniversary date of their appointment as a police officer) with the
concept of a new incremental
date referred to in cl 64.9.2(b) (ie. the
original increment date as varied by the period of deferment).
also raised the hypothetical scenario of an officer being appointed on a period
of probation less than 12 months. He suggested
that, on the Police
Association’s construction, it is unclear whether the officer’s
increment date remains the anniversary
of their appointment notwithstanding the
fact that they may be confirmed (and thus be entitled to progress to Constable
accordance with cl 64.8.1) prior to that anniversary.
is some force to this apparent anomaly. If the appointment or attestation date
is to remain the increment date, how is the next
incremental progression to
Constable Level 3 on the anniversary of the officer’s appointment to
be reconciled with the requirement
for a minimum 12 months’ service
on the previous increment (cl 64.8.2(a))?
first observation is that the operation of cl 64.9 which is at issue in
these proceedings is not engaged in this hypothetical
circumstance. Clause 64.9
is engaged only when incremental progression is relevantly deferred.
A notional Probationary Constable
who progresses to Constable Level 2 upon
confirmation on the expiration of a shorter than usual probationary period has
not had their
incremental progression deferred for the purposes of cl 64.9.
The question at issue is the nature of the “original increment
in the context of a deferral of incremental progression (ie. beyond the usual 12
month period of probation). Ms Lowson
clarified that the relief sought in
this proceeding is intended to be confined to this issue, and does not address
the hypothetical
scenario of a shorter probationary period.
Furthermore,
it is doubtful if the question of whether the increment date for such a notional
Probationary Constable becomes the confirmation
date or remains their date of
appointment arises in practice. It is clear that the standard probationary
period for newly appointed
police officers with no prior experience and who must
commence and complete the Associate Degree in Policing Practice is
However, Ms Lowson pointed out that the policy documents of
the NSW Police Force tendered into evidence appear to have historically
that, for police officers from another jurisdiction who are appointed to the NSW
Police Force on a shorter probationary
period, or former NSW police officers who
are “re-employed” on this basis, their “increment date will
also reflect the anniversary of the attestation date” (at
[12.1]). The current (July 2024) “Police Officer Professional
Guidelines” at [9.1] and [11.1] also confirms that officers with prior
experience may be engaged for a period of six
months on probation (or longer)
and on the footing that their “next increment date will be due 12 months
after appointment”
(and not their confirmation). As Ms Lowson
submitted, the difficulty to which Mr Watts’ hypothetical scenario is
directed is
unlikely to arise under this policy because, upon their appointment
on a shortened probationary period, their years of prior service
as a police
officer are converted to the incremental level in the Award that would have
applied if their service was performed in
the NSW Police Force. For example, if
the officer had completed two years’ service in another jurisdiction, they
would be appointed
at the increment level of “Constable
Year 3”. Their early confirmation of appointment (say) six months
into their first
year of engagement would not coincide with any incremental
progression in the same way as a Probationary Constable progresses to
Level 2. Instead, the anniversary of their date of appointment is preserved
as the increment date for their next progression
to Constable Level 4.
any case, I do not consider that any ambiguity in the way the award treats the
incremental progression of Probationary Constables
who may be appointed on
probation for periods of less than 12 months is sufficient to detract from the
proper analysis of cl 64.9
in the context of the Award. I emphasise that
the relief I propose to grant is confined to the operation of that clause in
of deferred (not early) incremental progression.
purpose of cl 64.9
purpose and effect of cl 64.9.2, as the Police Association submits, is to
give some flexibility or leeway to the most junior officers
in meeting the
relevant competency requirements during their initial few years in the job,
without penalising them for a delay in
their incremental progression at this
early stage of their careers. The Award does so by preserving their original
increment date
and ensuring their more timely progress to a higher salary rate
despite such a delay. The fact that cl 73.6.2 of the Award withholds
such leeway from more senior Commissioned Officers is telling. The benefit is
restricted to relatively junior and inexperienced
officers. The evident purpose
of cl 64.9.2 is served by extending this leeway to the most junior and
least experienced officers on
the Award salary scale, viz. Probationary
Constables.
am mindful of the need for the construction of the Award to be ultimately
consistent with the objective meaning of its language;
and of the value in the
Award being reasonably capable of being understood and implemented by the
participants in the policing industry
in New South Wales by reference to the
language employed in the instrument itself.
significance of this consideration is reinforced in circumstances where
cl 64.2 of the Award imposes upon individual Non-Commissioned
Officers an
obligation to ensure they are familiar with the contents of cl 64. The
Commissioner’s case effectively requires
an individual Probationary
Constable to understand that the benefit conferred by cl 64.9.2(a) on the
least experienced “Non-Commissioned
Officers” – which
unambiguously and explicitly includes Probationary Constables − does not
apply to them by reason
of an arcane process of construction that alters the
meaning of “Non-Commissioned Officer” in this context. For the
I have given, this result cannot be justified having regard to the
objective meaning of language used in cl 64.9, the evident purpose
provision, the terms of cl 64 generally and of the whole Award, and the
relevant statutory scheme. Such a result diminishes
the character of the Award
as a practical instrument applying to working conditions known by employees as
industrial practice
Commissioner calls in aid of her interpretation of the Award the past practice
of the NSW Police Force in applying the incremental
progression provisions of
the Award to Probationary Constables. The Commissioner submits that there is a
longstanding practice of
using the date that a Probationary Constable is
confirmed as their incremental progression date (where their confirmation has
delayed for whatever reason beyond the probationary period of
12 months); and that this practice reflects a common understanding
the parties covered by the Award as to the operation of cl 64.9 when it was
made by consent in November 2021.
this regard, the Commissioner relies on the evidence of Assistant Commissioner
Greentree, who has been a police officer since 1995
and has occupied his current
role more recently as Assistant Commissioner in the human resources and
industrial relations department
of the NSW Police Force since March 2024.
Assistant Commissioner Greentree has only assumed delegated responsibility for
the appointment and progression of police
officers on probation relatively
recently, his understanding was that Probationary Constables have progressed
incrementally according
to the practice referred to in [80] above since at least
2001. I admitted this evidence over objection on the basis of the
Commissioner’s
concession that it does not establish that this practice
applied to all police officers in New South Wales for the past 25 years,
that it is an expression of the witnesses’ own understanding informed by
his own experience as a police officer who, I
observe, for most of that period
did not have human resources responsibility for Probationary Constables.
Accordingly,
whilst I accept that this has been the practice generally adopted by the NSW
Police Force, the evidence does not establish
clearly that the parties acted on
an objective common understanding as to the meaning of cl 64.9 in making of
the Award by consent
in 2021. The second fact does not necessarily flow from the
I am unable to find that,
in consenting to the making of the Award, the parties objectively can be taken
to have agreed that cl 64.9
should have a commonly understood meaning and
that this common understanding should form part of the context in which the text
the Award is to be construed. For the following three reasons, I find that
Assistant Commissioner Greentree’s understanding
of the past practice is
insufficient to justify any particular construction of cl 64.9.
there is no evidence before the Court as to any relevant communications between
the parties to the making of the Award by
consent in 2021, contemporaneous or
otherwise, that might shed light on whether the parties’ representatives
had knowledge
of the general practice, or that this practice had been or was at
that time being uniformly or invariably applied. There is no evidence
consensus, agreement or admission among the parties’ representatives
involved in the making of the Award about the non-application
of cl 64.9 to
Probationary Constables. Notwithstanding the subjective understanding of
Assistant Commissioner Greentree who, in any
event, does not appear to have had
any involvement in the making of the Award, there is insufficient evidence to
establish that the
Commissioner’s interpretation or the Police
Force’s general practice rose to the level of matters that would be
“notorious”
to those intended to be bound by the Award.
what evidence there is of an exchange of views between the parties as to the
meaning of cl 64.9 or its predecessors comprises
a request from the Police
Association on 11 June 2009 for the attestation date to be retained as the
increment date for one of its
members, Mr Warchow, which had been extended
by a delay in his confirmation because of an injury sustained during his
In this request, the Association relied on its construction of the
former cl 56(ix) of the Crown Employees (Police Officers –
Award which reflects its approach to cl 64.9 in these proceedings. NSW
Police acceded to this request, at least in part owing
to the nature of the
injury sustained by Mr Warchow whilst on duty. However, the response did
not in terms repudiate the Association’s
reliance on the operation of the
predecessor to cl 64.9, and there is no further evidence shedding light on
the reasoning behind
this concession. On one view, far from a common
understanding, this exchange manifests a difference in views between the parties
as to the operation of cl 56(ix). In any case, on the available evidence, I
am unable to find that since this exchange in 2009, the
parties thereafter
developed a common understanding as to the meaning of cl 64.9 and acted
upon it in making the consent award in
to the extent that there is a general practice, it does not appear to be applied
consistently across all Probationary Constables.
The NSW Police Force’s
own past and present policies dealing with former police officers or officers
from another jurisdiction
who are appointed on probation referred to in [75]
above expressly provide that their “increment date” will generally
reflect the anniversary of the date of attestation or appointment, and not
necessarily their confirmation date. They do so precisely
in circumstances where
the attestation and confirmation dates may not coincide. This is consistent with
the Police Association’s
construction of
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, I find that the Applicant is entitled to declaratory relief. I
intend to make a declaration that accords in substance
with the declaration
sought by the Police Association.
I agree with Mr Watts’ observation that the terms of the declaration
sought by the Police Association should be expressly
confined by reference to
the operation of the relevant provisions of cl 64 of the Award. In
particular, it should be clear that the
declaration is restricted to the
application of cl 64.9 in circumstances where the confirmation of a
Probationary Constable is delayed
and their incremental progression to Constable
Level 2 is deferred beyond a period of 12 months.
Accordingly,
it should be declared that by operation of clause 64.9 of the Crown Employees
(Police Officers – 2021) Award, police
officers who are confirmed on a
date after the first anniversary of the date of their first appointment as a
police officer of the
rank of constable in the position of Probationary
Constable (Level 1) (their “original attestation date”) are entitled
to progress to the salary of Constable (Level 3) on the next anniversary of
their original attestation date following confirmation
as a constable.
view of the agreement between the parties that each side should bear their own
costs, I make no order as to costs.
03 March 2025 - Cross reference in paragraph 82 amended.
Amcor Ltd v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2005) 222 CLR 241
[2005] HCA 10
Transport Workers Union of Australia v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
(2014) 245 IR 449
[2014] FCAFC 148
; WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
; City of Wanneroo v Holmes
(1989) 30 IR 362
[1989] FCA 553
at 378; City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative,
Clerical and Services Union
(2006) 153 IR 426
[2006] FCA 813
(1998) 82 IR 448
at 452; Transport Workers' Union (NSW Branch) v Walker
Civil Engineering
(1999) 91 IR 153
at 166 and Kingmill Australia Pty Ltd (t/a
Thrifty Car Rental) v Federated Clerks’ Union of Australia
(2001) 106 IR
[2001] NSWIRComm 141
Tasmanian Water and
Sewerage Corporation v Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy,
Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied
Services Union of Australia
, citing WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
(2018) 264 FCR 536
[2018] FCAFC 131
at 580 [197] and James Cook University v Ridd
(2020) 278 FCR 566
[2020] FCAFC
; at 580–581 [65]. See also: Amcor Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining
and Energy Union
(2005) 222 CLR 241
[2005] HCA 10
citing Kucks v CSR
Ltd (1996) 66 IR 182;
[1996] IRCA 166
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
(1989) 30 IR 362
[1989] FCA 553
at 378; City of Wanneroo v Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
(2006) 153 IR 426
; Kingmill Australia Pty Ltd (t/a Thrifty Car Rental) v Federated
Clerks’ Union of Australia
(2001) 106 IR 217
[2001] NSWIRComm 141
and George A Bond & Company Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
at 503-504.
v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2005) 222 CLR 241
; State of New South Wales v Stockwell
[2017] NSWCA 30
Perisher Blue Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union
(1999) 91 IR 274
George A Bond & Company Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association v New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 636
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association v New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 636
citing: King v Melbourne Vicentre Swimming Club Inc
[2020] FCA 1173
[128]-[130] and Public Service Association and Professional Officers'
Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales v Secretary
of the Treasury
(2014) 87 NSWLR 41
[2014] NSWIRComm 23
[127]-[128].
Communication Exchange Ltd v Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2003] HCA 55
; New South Wales v Stockwell
[2017] NSWCA 30
; New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association v New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 636
and City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
(2006) 153 IR 426
[2006] FCA 813
[2020] FCA 1173
Australian Rail, Tram
and Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd t/as Yarra Trams
[2021] FCA 1377
, cited with approval in Target Australia Pty Ltd v Shop, Distributive
and Allied Employees’ Association
(2023) 324 IR 304
[2023] FCAFC 66
Shop Distributive and
Allied Employees' Association v Woolworths Ltd
(2006) 151 FCR 513
cited with approval in Target Australia Pty Ltd v Shop, Distributive
and Allied Employees’ Association
(2023) 324 IR 304
[2023] FCAFC 66
(see also at [71]-[78] and the authorities cited
Cf. Tasmanian
Water and Sewerage Corporation Pty Ltd v Communications, Electrical, Electronic,
Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia
[2025] FCA 39
Target Australia Pty Ltd v Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’
Association
(2023) 324 IR 304
[2023] FCAFC 66
. See also [66]-[77].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (349 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter