URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zlata Rous v Sheridian Property Group Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 68 (26 May 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Respondent:
Sheridian Property Group Pty Ltd
Case Number:
Hearing Dates:
13 February 2005, 14 March
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Magistrate:
Representation:
Agent for the Applicant
: Mr I James
Agent for the Respondent:
Mr J Tripodi
Reasons for Decision
1. The applicant brings a claim pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Act
, utilising the small claims procedure, seeking an order of the court to the
effect that the respondent pay to her the sum of $7,900.00
claimed by the
applicant to be owed to her by way of sales commissions earned by the applicant
in her capacity as an employed real
estate sales person. The applicant claims
that her employer was, at all relevant times, the first respondent herein.
2. The respondent denies that it was at any time the employer of the
applicant. The respondent asserts that at relevant times it entered
business arrangements with the applicant, or with a company owned and controlled
by the applicant and that these business arrangements
did result in various
sales commission payments being made to the applicants company from time to
time. Further, the respondent acknowledged
that further sales commissions may
become payable in the future to the applicant’s company, subject to
certain real estate
transactions in Queensland being the subject of final
settlement. However, the respondent denies that any payments, including sales
commission payments, have in the past or could in the future, accrue to the
applicant in the context of an employer-employee relationship
because any such
relationship is denied.
3. When the applicant first sought relief in this
court, the application for recover of monies described the applicant as
Properties Pty Ltd”. This was the name of the company owned and
controlled by the applicant, Ms Zlata Rous. Subsequently, by
way of amended
application, the documentation described RC Properties Pty Ltd as the first
applicant and Zlata Rous as the second
applicant. When the application was
presented to the court, as presently constituted, a direction was made that the
matter could
proceed with Ms Rous as the applicant, and the name RC Property Pty
Ltd removed from the proceeding. The ruling made by the court
at that time was
that an incorporated entity could not be an employee for the purposes the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
, and that the relief sought could only be awarded
to a real person and not to an incorporated entity.
4. At the hearing of
this matter, the court was provided with an extremely large number of documents,
mostly by the applicant’s
representative. However, the vast majority of
the documents provided do not assist the court in relation to the fundamental
before the court, namely whether or not an employment relationship
existed between the applicant and the respondent company. Given
the lack of
relevant documentation, it is necessary for the court to give consideration to
the background history of the matter,
at least to the extent that it may provide
some indirect assistance in the task of establishing the legal relationship
between the
5. Over a period prior to April 2003, the applicant had
attended a number of courses, relating to the real estate and investment
industries.
She states that she had expended some $80,000.00 or so on such
courses and had apparently formed the view that she would be able
to establish
herself as a successful business person in the field of real estate sales and
marketing. Apart from her views as to
her own skills and aptitudes, she had also
established a database of persons she had met at, or through these courses and
she regarded
these contacts as a valuable database of potential investors to
whom she would be able to market real estate investment opportunities
future. However, the applicant did not hold a licence which would permit her set
up her own business as a real estate sales
person, and in those circumstances,
she was interested in finding an opportunity to become part of an established
organisation which
would enable her to learn more about the real estate industry
and obtain experience whilst working under the umbrella of a real estate
held by an established licensee.
6. In about April or May 2003, the
applicant saw an advertisement in the Sydney Morning Herald which invited
expression of interest
from persons interested in becoming a partner in a real
estate business. The business in question was a company registered as Sheridian
Property Group (City West) Pty Ltd. The applicant and her husband then had
negotiations with existing owners and directors of that
company, namely a Mr Ben
Teoh and Mr Joe Tripodi. The court notes that whilst the accountants of the
company played some part in
these negotiations, they were essentially between
laypersons without solicitors being invited to assist. It appears that the
took part in the negotiations without the benefit of legal advice. The
documents available to the court blur, rather than define,
the nature of the
agreement which was ultimately reached. Some of the documentation suggests that
the applicant accepted an invitation
to pay the sum of $60,000.00 into the
company’s funds in exchange for a 1/3 share in the partnership within
which Mr Teoh and
Mr Tripodi each held a further 1/3 share of the partnership.
However, other documentation would suggest that the entity was not a
partnership, but a company and that the applicant had accepted the offer to buy
1/3 of the shares in the company. In that regard,
the evidence indicates that
whilst the applicant claimed that she was informed that she would be provided
with the shares in due
course, this never eventuated.
7. Thereafter, the
applicant worked in the business of Sheridian Property Group (City West) Pty
Ltd, for a period of between 12 and
14 months before the company ceased
operations. The evidence before the court would suggest that both Mr Teoh and Mr
Tripodi took
monies out the business but the business achieved very little by
way of income. The applicant claims that she worked in the business
person and achieved sales whilst Mr Teoh, who was meant to be a working partner
in the business failed to achieve any
sales and ran the rental management side
of the business at a loss. Further, Mr Tripodi was apparently a non-active
partner in the
business, although the applicant alleges that the intended role
for Mr Tripodi was to direct marketing opportunities to the business
failed to do so.
8. In any event, the business failed and the applicant and
her husband lost the $60,000.00 they had invested for the purpose of making
applicant a part owner in the business, irrespective of whether that was a
partnership or an incorporated entity. Further, the
applicant complained that
although she had become an owner in the business, it had been part of the
arrangement that she receive
the full time wages of a sales person, pursuant to
the relevant real estate award, and that this had not been paid to her. The
had not earned sufficient income to pay her such a wage, not
withstanding the fact that she was working full time. On the other hand,
majority shareholders, Mr Tripodi and Mr Teoh had apparently permitted Mr Teoh
to draw wages from the business, notwithstanding
the applicant’s
allegation that he did not make a positive contribution to the cash flow of the
9. The applicant states, and it is not contested, that during this
period, Mr Teoh held a valid licence under the Property Stock and
Agents Act. The applicant claims that throughout the relevant period, she was a
certificate holder under the supervision
of Mr Teoh, employed in the registered
office of Sheridian Property Group (City West) Pty Ltd. The evidence before the
court is that
between 18 August 2003 and 14 November 2003, the applicant was the
holder of a provisional certificate under the supervision of Mr
Teoh, but there
is no documentary evidence to support the claim that the provisional certificate
was replaced with a full certificate
following 14 November 2003.
applicants involvement with Sheridian Property Group (City West) Pty Ltd did not
result in her receiving either wages or drawings.
If the true nature of the
relationship which was established was that of a partnership any wages said to
be payable to the applicant,
would have in fact been part of the drawings, even
if the method of calculation took into account the provisions of the relevant
award concerning the minium wage payable to a employee together with
commissions. Within a partnership, and subject always to the
decisions made by
the partners, a partner may make drawings either against the profit of the
business or against monies borrowed
by the business although such borrowings may
be repayable at a later date if the business fails. On the other hand, if the
was both a shareholder in the incorporated business, as well as an
employee of that business, she would have been entitled to receive
pursuant to the award, irrespective of the profitability or otherwise of the
business itself.
11. The evidence before the court fails to clarify these
matters sufficiently for the court to make any specific findings. The applicant
makes a number of claims concerning her experience within this particular
business including allegations or misleading and deceptive
conduct and fraud. It
is not the role of this court to make findings as to the failure of that
particular business and the application
before the court does not relate to any
specific claim for wages or other entitlements against Sheridian Property Group
(City West)
Pty Ltd. It is clear to the court however, that the applicant
embarked on this enterprise with considerable naivety and without obtaining
formal legal advice and that the applicant and her $60,000.00 were soon parted.
12. Notwithstanding the applicants extremely bitter experience between
mid-2003 and mid-2004 with the “City West business”,
it is clear
that she remained confident in the integrity of Mr Joe Tripodi, notwithstanding
her extreme disillusionment with Mr Ben
Teoh. In circumstances where the
Sheridian Property Group (City West) Pty Ltd was winding up with outstanding
debts to be paid, the
applicant was still enthusiastic about her career
prospects as a real estate sales person and marketer. Prior to the City West
folding up, the applicant had entered into arrangement with Mr Tripodi
and the respondent company herein, Sheridian Property Group
Pty Ltd to market
various building projects in Queensland. The evidence before the court suggests
that Mr Tripodi had a number of
were building residential developments along the Queensland coast. These
would enter into arrangements from time to time with the respondent
company, whereby the respondent company would endeavour to market
these projects
to targeted groups of potential investors in NSW by means of investment seminars
and other marketing activities. Successful
sales would result in a commission to
the respondent. The applicant, with her database of potential investors, saw a
role for herself,
by entry into an argument with the respondent for the
marketing of these properties. The applicant would organise a seminar for a
selected target group of approximately 10 people, and Mr Tripodi of Sheridian
Property Group Pty Ltd would attend and be the main
speaker at such seminars.
The potential investors would all be selected and invited by the applicant,
utilising her own database
and not any database owned by the respondent.
Thereafter, any successful sale would result in the commission being shared
the applicant and the respondent company.
13. In addition to these
activities, similar arrangements were entered into at a later date in
circumstances where the developer in
Queensland was a company in which Mr
Tripodi had a direct interest. The evidence suggests that Mr Tripodi was also a
developer in
his own right and understandably utilised Sheridian Property Group
Pty Ltd to market such developments in which he had an equity
interest, and in
relation to those developments, the applicant was also a participant in the
fashion referred to above.
14. On 12 May 2004, whilst the applicant was
still involved in the “City West” business, the applicant sent an
email communication
to Mr Tripodi in relation to the subject of
“Tonight’s Presentation”. The email communication was in the
“Hi Joe, Just to clarify what we discussed and to
put in writing, all sales will be split 50/50 for profit both ways from Tuesday
night’s presentation.
Also this may be obvious, but still needs to be
clarified, these are my clients and as such, no marketing directly to them will
from your office or placed on a database for marketing purposes for any
properties from your office without my input.”
15. Following the
winding up the City West business, the applicant was no longer in a position
where she could assert that any real
estate selling work which was done by her
was under the protective umbrella of Mr Teoh’s real estate licence. The
claims that she was invited by Mr Tripodi to move to the Leichhardt
office of Sheridian Property Group Pty Ltd and to work there
on a full time
basis as a real estate sales person. Her claim is that from May 2004 to August
2005 she worked as a full time employee
of the respondent without receiving any
wages. The applicant’s claim is that she made continued requests to be
paid wages but
was always fobbed off. In addition, she claims that
superannuation payments were not made on her behalf that she was not paid car
allowance or phone allowance money, but that such payments are owed to her. They
do not form part of the claim presently before the
court. The only relief sought
by the applicant in these proceedings are payments of commissions which are said
to be outstanding
and which the applicant claims form part of her contract of
employment with the respondent. The applicant’s evidence is that
desk at the Leichhardt office of the respondent which she used on daily basis,
although she also performed substantial
periods of work from her home office
where she had a computer which contained the information concerning her
potential investor database.
The applicant claims that the respondent failed to
pay her wages and other allowances and failed to provide any payslips or group
certificates or any other documentation evidencing her employment relationship
with the respondent. Further, when sales were achieved
through the actions of
the applicant and commissions were paid, the applicant complied with a direction
from Mr Tripodi to provide
invoices in the name of the applicant’s company
RC Property Pty Ltd, and not in her own name. She had complied with this
Further, the invoices in question did not make reference to
commission but used language which was also dictated by Mr Tripodi so
invoices had the appearance of being invoices from a consultancy business that
had provided specific marketing services,
rather than appearing as an invoice
for a 50% share of commission monies. The applicant’s case relies heavily
on the fact that
on 7 January 2005, the NSW Office of Fair Trading Issued a
certificate that the stated that applicant was the holder of a certificate
work as a real estate sales person under the licence of Mr Joe Tripodi and that
the applicant would work under his supervision
at the Leichhardt office of
Sheridian Property Group Pty Ltd. The applicant’s argument was that she
could not by law conduct
her own real estate business without being the holder
of a licence. In those circumstances she could only legally perform that work
under the protective banner of someone else’s licence. The applicant said
that Mr Teoh had not renewed her certificate under
his licence and this had been
out of date since 14 November 2003. Consequently, from November 2003 until
January 2005, the applicant
had in fact been engaged in selling real estate
without the protection of any licence. The applicant said that this was the
firstly of Mr Teoh who failed to renew her certificate in November 2003
and from about May 2004, it had been the fault of Mr Tripodi
as she had raised
the matter with him on a number of occasions and he had fobbed her off. The
applicant states that it was only through
her persisting with the issue, that Mr
Tripodi attended to this task. The applicant claimed that it was Mr
Tripodi’s responsibility
to deal with this issue at an early stage as he
was her employer.
16. The applicant relies on a Office of Fair Trading
document to establish that the applicant was in fact an employee of Mr Tripodi,
at least from January 2005, and that his action in putting her under his licence
also supports her contention that she had been his
employee from about May 2004,
notwithstanding his delay on taking her under his licence.
respondent denies that the Office of Fair Trading Certificate established that
the applicant was an employee of the respondent.
The respondent claims that
following the demise of the city west operation, the applicant informed Mr
Tripodi that she intended to
go into business for herself and that she intended
to find a person that she could engage as a licensee. The respondent’s
is that it was prepared to continue the arrangements whereby the applicant
would provide target groups of potential investors and
that Mr Tripodi would
attend the seminars and endeavour to sell the Queensland properties to the
potential customers provided by
Ms Rous. This was not an employment agreement
but a co-operative venture between two separate businesses. As part of the
co-operation
Ms Rous was allowed to use a desk at the Leichhardt office of the
respondent and she did so on a reasonably regular basis but worked
no set hours
at the office and was free to come and go as she pleased. She would perform most
of her work from her home and the respondent
exercised no supervision over her
work. She was not directed to perform any of the duties of an employee but if
she organised a seminar
of her customers Mr Tripodi was happy to address such
seminars on the agreed basis which involved a sharing of the
commission.
18. The respondent asserts that Ms Rous had various stories from
time to time concerning persons who were thought by her to be agreeable
taking up the position of licensee within her business but these arrangements
always fell through. Eventually, the applicant had
prevailed upon Mr Tripodi to
agree to arrange the certificate under his license as a temporary measure only
and strictly on the basis
that Ms Rous would regularise the situation without
undue delay. In essence, the respondent was claiming that the Office of Fair
Trading had been given false information concerning the relationship between the
respondent and applicant and that Mr Tripodi did
not in fact provide any
supervision in respect of the real estate selling work performed by the
applicant but he had falsely provided
such information because he had felt sorry
for the applicant and was prepared to assist her in this fashion notwithstanding
to himself. However, notwithstanding the information provided to the
Office of Fair Trading the truth of the matter was that he did
not supervise the
applicant and she was not at any stage an employee of the respondent.
relation to this issue the Court is invited by the applicant to find that the
information provided to the Office of Fair Trading
was truthful and that the
applicant was at all material times an employee of the respondent or
alternatively the Court is invited
by the respondent to find that no employment
relationship existed and both the applicant and the respondent conducted
in a fashion which was in breach of the relevant legislation whereby
the respondent, or its Director Mr Tripodi, provided false information
Office of Fair Trading whilst the applicant was in breach by conducting a real
estate business without holding a license.
20. I am not satisfied that the
certificate of the Office of Fair Trading dated 7 January 2005 is conclusive of
the issue in circumstances
where there is an allegation that false information
was supplied to the Office of Fair Trading. I have endeavoured to find in the
evidence before the Court relevant documentation which would be of assistance in
determining the true nature of the relationship
between the applicant and the
respondent herein. At tab 4 of the annexure document attached to the
applicant’s statement in
this matter there are two documents which deal
with agreements between the respondent and “Zlata Rous, Sheridian Property
City West”. The first is a two page document dated 21 June 2004
which appears to have been executed by the applicant and by
Mr Tripodi on 27
July 2004. The second document is undated but is also executed on 27 July 2004.
These documents are clearly not
agreements made between the applicant as an
employee and the respondent as an employer. The language clearly points to a
arrangement for co-operation between Sheridian Property Group City
West and Sheridian Property Group Leichhardt concerning the manner
sales projects will be conducted, who will be responsible for certain aspects of
the marketing process and how commissions
will be split between Sheridian
Property Group City West and Sheridian Property Group Leichhardt. The Court
notes that both of these
documents were brought into existence or were executed
some three months following the date on which the applicant asserts she
as a fulltime employee of the respondent. The Court takes note of the
following provisions found in the second document executed
“No office rental to be paid for the duration of this business
agreement between Zlata Rous and Joe Tripodi at the Leichhardt
office. This
arrangement is purely to reduce costs, build a powerful team and business and
then expand offices. Strong foundations
need to be established early for both
the business and the team.
Either party has the right to terminate this
business agreement in writing. Any commissions owed to either party must be paid
termination.”
21. The applicant executed that document as
“Director Sheridian Property Group City West” whilst Mr Tripodi
executed the
document on behalf of Sheridian Property Group
Leichhardt.
22. The Court notes that the applicant claims, following her
unhappy experience in the City West project where she lost her investment
capital and received no wages then put herself into a situation where she worked
as a fulltime employee from May 2004 to August 2005
without receiving any wages
and without making any written demand for payment of such wages. The Court was
provided with a number
of email messages from the applicant to the office of the
respondent enquiring as to outstanding commissions but there is no record
contemporaneous claim for the payment of wages.
23. The applicant relies upon
a statement made by an investor who claimed that he had observed the manner in
which the seminars were
conducted and that it was evident to him that the
applicant was working under the supervision and direction of Mr Tripodi at such
seminars and that in his view this meant that the applicant was an employee of
the respondent. I am not satisfied that such observations
can form the basis of
such a conclusion. It is clear from the materials before the Court that the
applicant was for a considerable
period of time quite deferential in her manner
towards Mr Tripodi. However, that cannot of itself, result in a conclusion that
applicant was an employee of the respondent. It is clear that the applicant
saw herself as having a big career in real estate and
all she needed was to work
for a period of time in the industry gaining experience from observing how
successful experts in the field
achieved their results. It is clear that the
applicant regarded Mr Tripodi as a successful expert. All of that is consistent
the applicant seeking to be part of a business arrangement with Mr
Tripodi’s company. It does not establish that there was
an employment
relationship.
24. In circumstances where the applicant has failed to satisfy
the Court on the balance of probabilities that she was employed by
respondent the Court does not have the necessary jurisdiction to determine
whether the respondent owes any commissions to the
applicant in relation to the
four specific transactions in Queensland which are the subject matter of the
applicant’s claim.
If such monies are owed they are owed as a consequence
of a commercial contract entered into between the applicant and the respondent
or between the applicant and other companies in which Mr Tripodi has an
involvement. However, on the material before the Court such
arrangements do not
constitute part of an employment contract which is the foundation stone of the
Court’s jurisdiction.
25. For the above reasons I find that the
applicant’s claim is not made out and the application for the recovery of
dismissed. Given that the application was brought under s.379 of the
legislation no issue arises as to the question of costs and
no order for costs
26. I publish my reasons for decision.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
26 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (78 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter