URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/239.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
El-Ahmad v Westpac Banking Corporation [2025] NSWCA 239 (30 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
El-Ahmad v Westpac Banking Corporation
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 239
Hearing Date(s):
2 July 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Payne JA at [1]
Mitchelmore JA at [2]
McHugh JA at [72]
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal.
Catchwords:
APPEAL — appeal against liability in the tort of deceit —
whether primary judge erred in concluding that the appellant
had knowledge of,
or was reckless as to, falsity — where primary judge’s conclusion
was based on inferences — inferences
not to be disaggregated —
appellate review of witness evidence — whether primary judge’s
findings were glaringly
improbable or contrary to compelling inferences —
advantage of primary judge in seeing and hearing the witnesses give
Legislation Cited:
Evidence Act 1995
Cases Cited:
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
J and E Vella Pty Ltd v
[2023] NSWCA 234
(2019) 266 CLR 129
[2019] HCA 28
(2006) 226 CLR 551
[2006] HCA 51
Vagg v McPhee
(2013) 85 NSWLR 154
[2013] NSWCA 29
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Sahar El-Ahmad (Appellant)
Westpac Banking Corporation
(Respondent)
Representation:
F Corsaro SC and Dr S B Levi (Appellant)
T Mehigan SC and J
Foley (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Avondale Lawyers (Appellant)
Australia Limited (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00474142
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court
Equity – Commercial List
[2024] NSWSC 783
[2024] NSWSC 1578
Date of Decision:
27 June 2024
File Number(s):
2021/0062247
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The respondent, Westpac Banking Corporation (the
Bank), advanced funds
to Sentox Pty Ltd (in liq) (Sentox), the first defendant in the court below,
pursuant to an Invoice Discounting
Facility (the IDF). Sentox carried on
business as a fruit and vegetable wholesaler. Under the IDF, the Bank purchased
current and future debts at 80% of their face value. Sentox
uploaded invoices to the Bank’s web-based portal, Cashflow Connect,
basis of which the Bank made funds available under the IDF. At all
relevant times, the appellant was employed by Sentox.
Her role involved
uploading invoices to Cashflow Connect.
The Bank commenced proceedings against parties including Sentox, its sole
director and shareholder, Mrs Musumeci, her husband, Mr
Musumeci, and the
appellant, including in the tort of deceit.
The primary judge found that Sentox perpetrated a fraud on the Bank in
relation to the IDF which had four main elements:
(1) Sentox maintained two sets of financial information: one
in MYOB that was entirely fictitious, and one in Wizard that represented
true financial position.
(2) Sentox generated false records relating to its supply of
goods, including false invoices, and uploading these to MYOB.
(3) From the information it kept in MYOB, Sentox
generated false financial statements and tax returns, which it provided to the
(4) Sentox uploaded the false information from MYOB to
Cashflow Connect, on the basis of which the Bank made funds available under
IDF, which Sentox drew down on. Sentox used most of the funds to make
payments into the nominated account under the IDF, giving
the appearance that
the invoices were being paid by genuine debtors. Some of the funds were used for
other business ventures, necessitating
increases in the IDF over
During the hearing below, each of the defendants other than the appellant
accepted that Mr Musumeci had engaged in the fraud and that
the Bank had
suffered loss as a consequence.
In concluding that the appellant was liable to the
Bank in the tort of
deceit, the primary judge found that the appellant knew that the invoices that
she uploaded to Cashflow Connect
were false. That conclusion rested upon a
number of factual findings as to her role in the business and his negative
assessment of
her credibility.
On appeal, the appellant contended:
(1) The primary judge erred in admitting a report that
contained firsthand hearsay under
Evidence Act
(NSW), which his Honour relied upon in finding that the fraud as alleged by the
Bank occurred (Grounds 5 and 6).
(2) The primary judge’s ultimate inference as to the
appellant's knowledge of the falsity of the invoices was based on subsidiary
findings as to her role in the business which were not available on the
evidence. In the alternative, his Honour was not entitled
to be satisfied to the
requisite standard on the basis of inferences rather than direct evidence
(Ground 1 to 4).
(Mitchelmore JA, Payne and McHugh JJA
dismissing the appeal,
As to the evidentiary challenge (Grounds 5 and 6):
(1) Contrary to the complaint advanced by the appellant,
there is no separate requirement for an application for evidence to be
Evidence Act
having regard to the notice
requirement in
(2) As to the complaint that his Honour did not have
evidence before him that went to undue expense, undue delay and reasonable
practicability (being the matters in
Evidence Act
open to his Honour to rely on what he knew of the whole of the case, as it was
appearing and evolving in front of him. As
much was conceded in the course of
the appeal: [
As to the knowledge challenge (Grounds 1 to 4):
(3) There was no material shift in the Bank’s case
during the trial. The Bank’s case, as pleaded and opened, included
allegation that the appellant submitted false information through Cashflow
(4) None of the matters relied upon by the appellant to
disturb his Honour’s subsidiary findings were such as to render those
findings glaringly improbable or contrary to compelling inferences: [
appellant’s argument sought to disaggregate the primary judge’s
findings and downplay the significance of his Honour’s
adverse assessment
of her credibility, which was an artificial way to assess his Honour’s
conclusion: [
(5) Viewed as a whole, there was ample evidence to ground
the ultimate inference his Honour drew as to the appellant’s knowledge,
which was supported by his Honour’s adverse view of her credibility: [
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
266 CLR 129
[2019] HCA 28
Vagg v McPhee
(2013) 85 NSWLR 154
(6) As the Bank’s case did not require it to
demonstrate that the appellant was involved in creating the false invoices or
profited from the fraud, the balance of the issues on the appeal fell away: [
: I agree with Mitchelmore JA.
MITCHELMORE
: This is an appeal from a decision of Ball J finding the appellant, Sahar
El-Ahmad, liable to the respondent, Westpac Banking Corporation
Bank), in the tort of deceit:
Westpac Banking Corporation v Sentox Pty
[2024] NSWSC 783
(the liability judgment). On 11 December
2024, his Honour ordered judgment for the Bank against the appellant in the
amount of $10,782,116.44:
Westpac Banking Corporation v Sentox Pty Ltd (No
[2024] NSWSC 1578.
Bank commenced the proceedings in the court below against a number of
defendants, including Sentox Pty Ltd (in liq) (Sentox),
Kathie Musumeci, the
sole director and shareholder of Sentox, Kathie’s husband, Andrew
Musumeci, a number of other companies
related to Mr and Mrs Musumeci, and the
appellant, who was an employee of Sentox. The Bank advanced funds to Sentox
pursuant to an
Invoice Discounting Facility (IDF). In the liability judgment,
his Honour found that Sentox perpetrated a fraud on the Bank in relation
IDF, which had four main elements (at [56]):
(1) Sentox kept two sets of financial information, one set using MYOB accounting
software (MYOB) and one set using Wizard accounting
software (Wizard). The
information that Sentox provided to the Bank was generated from MYOB and was
entirely fictitious, while the
information that Sentox maintained on Wizard
represented its true financial position.
(2) Sentox generated false records relating to its supply of goods, including
false invoices, and uploading those records to MYOB.
(3) From the information it kept on MYOB, Sentox generated false financial
statements and tax returns, which it provided to the Bank.
From the accurate
information it kept in Wizard Sentox generated equivalent documents, which it
provided to the tax office.
(4) Sentox uploaded false information from MYOB to the Bank’s web-based
portal, Cashflow Connect, on the basis of which the
Bank made funds available
under the IDF which Sentox drew down. Sentox paid a large proportion of those
funds to accounts it controlled
and then used the funds to make payments into
the nominated account under the IDF, giving the appearance that the invoices
paid by debtors whose debts had been sold to the Bank. However, some
of the funds that Sentox drew down from the IDF were syphoned
off for other
purposes, which required increases in the IDF over time.
the penultimate day of the hearing, each of the defendants other than the
appellant accepted that Mr Musumeci engaged in the fraud,
Mrs Musumeci accepted his Honour’s description of it. These
defendants (to whom his Honour referred collectively
as the Musumeci defendants)
also accepted that the Bank relied on the fraud and suffered loss as a
consequence, and that it was entitled
to judgment in its favour against
Mr Musumeci in the tort of deceit for the amount claimed ($16,166,628.63):
Notwithstanding
the capitulation of the Musumeci defendants on this issue, the appellant
maintained in the court below that the Bank
had not made out the fraud: at [56].
Grounds 5 and 6 of the appellant’s notice of appeal maintained that
challenge on the limited
basis that the primary judge erred in admitting into
evidence a report prepared by the receiver whom the Bank appointed to Sentox,
which the Bank relied to establish the falsity of information recorded in MYOB.
The utility of these grounds was at best limited
in the face of
Mr Musumeci’s concession that he perpetrated the fraud. In the
course of the hearing of the appeal, the scope
of these grounds reduced to a
complaint that no evidence was adduced or considered as to whether the
requirements of
Evidence Act 1995
For reasons I outline below, that complaint is without
counsel who appeared for the appellant at the hearing of the appeal submitted
that apart from the admissibility of the receiver’s
report, he would not
be heard against his Honour’s findings of fraud. However, the appellant
submitted in writing, and at certain
points in the hearing, that the primary
judge had misconceived the fraud in so far as his Honour found it to involve
preparing a
higher set of financial statements and tax returns from MYOB and a
lower set of financial statements and tax returns from Wizard,
when both sets
derived from MYOB alone. As was raised in the course of the hearing, the
appellant did not identify where this submission
was put below. In any event,
the alleged misconception was not material to the basis on which the primary
judge found the appellant
liable in deceit.
central issue on the appeal, and the focus of the remaining grounds (grounds 1
to 4), was the primary judge’s satisfaction
to the requisite standard that
the appellant knew, from at least 2014, that details of invoices that she
uploaded from MYOB to the
Bank’s Cashflow Connect system were false and
did not record details of actual sales that Sentox had made and that the Bank
had agreed to fund: at [116]. The appellant submitted that this conclusion
rested on inferences that were not open on the evidence.
Instead, the evidence
demonstrated that the appellant played a limited, administrative role in the
business, and she was not shown
to have understood or interrogated the
information that she provided to the Bank.
The appellant further
submitted that even if the findings the primary judge made were available on the
evidence, his Honour’s
ultimate finding regarding the appellant’s
knowledge of the falsity was not available.
appellant’s arguments involved disaggregating the bases of the primary
judge’s conclusion rather than understanding
his Honour’s reasons in
context. Her arguments also sought to downplay the significance of his
Honour’s findings being
based, in no small part, on not accepting the
appellant as a credible witness, with his Honour describing her evidence on
of significance as evasive and implausible. The high bar set for a
challenge of this nature reflects the advantages of a trial judge
reason of having seen the witnesses and having been immersed in the milieu of
the trial”:
J and E Vella Pty Ltd v Hobson
[2023] NSWCA 234
(Stern JA). Ultimately, none of the appellant’s contentions met,
still less overcame, that high bar. It follows that the appeal
Background to the appeal
I refer to paragraphs of the primary judge’s reasons below, those
references are to the liability judgment unless otherwise
2011, Sentox carried on business as a fruit and vegetable wholesaler under the
name “Fresh Xpress”, operating out
of a trading space at Flemington
Markets in Sydney (the Stand): at [1]. The Fresh Xpress business was originally
owned by Fresh Express
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Fresh Express), which was controlled
by Mr Musumeci.
appellant started working for Fresh Express in approximately 2003, in a quality
assurance role. Over time, her responsibilities
expanded “to include
administrative tasks such as recording the receipt of stock, entry of sales
information and bills into
Fresh Express’s computer system and counting
the till”: at [13].
the business was transferred to Sentox in 2011, Mrs Musumeci’s
nephew, Carl-Anthony Ortato, was the sole director and shareholder
of Sentox. Mr
Ortato was also the sole director and shareholder of CAO Holdings Pty Ltd (CAO),
which, jointly with Sentox, held the
shares that conferred the right to occupy
order to acquire the Fresh Xpress business, Sentox obtained finance from St
George Bank (as this was a division of the Bank, I
will continue to refer to the
Bank alone): at [15]. On or about 28 March 2011, the Bank made available to
Sentox an invoice discounting
facility with a limit of $4,000,000 (the Initial
IDF). Under the terms of the Initial IDF, the Bank agreed to purchase
from Sentox at 80% of their face value (as adjusted in
accordance with the General Standard Terms): at [17]. Sentox provided a
registered fixed and floating charge over its assets and Mr Ortato
gave a guarantee to secure Sentox’s obligations under the
at [17]. In obtaining that financing, Mr and Mrs Musumeci and the
appellant provided financial information as to profits
of the business, the
number of debtors, and the details of debts: at [15], [18].
or around 1 April 2011, on the basis of representations that the business was
owed debts in the amount of $3,955,729.85, Sentox
became entitled to draw down
80% of that amount under the Initial IDF: at [18]. Following the sale of the
business to Sentox, the
appellant was employed by Sentox.
22 January 2014, Mrs Musumeci became the sole director and shareholder of Sentox
and of COA, replacing Mr Ortato: at [1].
In March 2014, the shares
in both businesses were transferred to her: at [23]. However, it was common
ground that Mr Musumeci controlled
the business at all relevant times: at
or around August 2014 and partly by reason of the transfer to Mrs Musumeci, the
Initial IDF was replaced by the IDF, with a limit
of $5,000,000: at [25]. The
IDF, which was guaranteed by Mrs Musumeci, was contained in a facility offer
letter dated 5 August 2014,
an invoice discounting agreement (IDA) and general
standard terms: at [25]. The primary judge noted at [27] that under the IDA, the
Bank purchased the debts of the business (and committed to purchasing future
debts) for 80% of their value. The terms of the IDA
included the following:
(1) Sentox assigned all of its debts (current and future) to the Bank, title to
which automatically vested in the Bank either at
the commencement of the IDF or
when the debt arose: cl 2.1.
(2) The Bank agreed to pay the “purchase price” of each approved
debt at 80% of its value: cl 4.1.
(3) Each debt was an “approved debt” unless it was a debt classified
as a “disapproved debt”: cl 4.1, cl
(4) Sentox could request payment under the IDF using, relevantly, the
Bank’s Cashflow Connect system: cl 11.
(5) Sentox agreed to administer the accounts of debtors and collect the debts as
agent for the Bank: cl 12.1. All payments were to
be deposited into a
nominated account, and details for each payment deposited and the debt to which
it related were to be provided:
cl 12.4. The Bank was exclusively entitled
to all amounts in the nominated account: cl 12.4.
(6) Sentox was also required to provide various other information to the Bank,
including a “month end reconciliation”
containing a statement
setting out the balance brought forward from the previous month, the value of
invoices issued, the amount
of any debit and credit notes issued, and the amount
of payments received and any dishonoured cheques or refunds paid:
cl 15.1(a).
The primary judge noted at [31] that if the Bank could
reconcile the information with the amount funded for that month, the facility
was closed out for the month and Sentox could arrange for the next month of
invoices to be funded.
(7) Clause 14.1 of the IDA was headed “Declarations relating to
debts” and provided:
“You declare, in relation to each
(a) the details given to us of the
related documents
goods or services
are complete and
(d) it is valid and binding and enforceable in accordance with the terms of the
and for the full face value less only any allowance, discount,
credit or rebate shown on the
is liable to pay the
by the earlier of the
payment date specified on the
recourse date
(h) it has arisen as a result of a bona fide and arm’s length transaction
in the ordinary course of your business
(k) you are not aware of any reason why it will not be paid in accordance with
the terms of the
has an established place of business; ...”
(8) Sentox was required to tell the Bank “whenever anything happens
which would mean you could not truthfully repeat all the
declarations in this
agreement”: cl 14.3.
(9) The Bank was entitled to terminate the IDF immediately and without notice
if Sentox was in default of the IDA, with the total
amount owing becoming
payable at that point: cl 17.2.
Bank’s Cashflow Connect system, which permitted borrowers under invoice
discounting facilities to submit information and
request drawdowns, was the
principal means by which Sentox made drawdowns under the IDF. The primary judge
summarised the operation
of the system at [28]:
“In order to make a drawdown, Sentox was required to upload debtor invoice
information (in batches). The system requires the
person uploading the
information to tick a box certifying that the goods the subject of the invoices
have been delivered, that the
debts arising under the invoices are transferred
and that the original invoices containing the same details have been provided to
the customer before the information can be uploaded. After the certification is
given and the information in relation to each invoice
is entered, the Bank was
notified that an invoice batch had been submitted. The bank then either approved
or disapproved the invoice
batch (it could disapprove individual invoices). Most
often, it disapproved individual invoices because payment was outstanding for
more than 90 days. Once the Bank had given its approval, Sentox was notified
through Cashflow Connect of the total amount available
under the facility for
drawdown and could make a drawdown using the Funding Screen. The amount of the
drawdown was transferred to
Sentox’s trading account.”
I noted above, the primary judge found that Sentox uploaded documents and
information to Cashflow Connect that attested to non-existent
significantly overstated the size and profitability of its business, in order to
obtain advances under the IDF. In some
cases, the funds obtained were used to
repay the Bank. However, the funds were also used for other, unrelated,
ventures (including
a mango farming business in the Northern Territory (at [46])
and to make payments on personal assets of Mrs Musumeci (at [89])).
Bank conducted periodic audits which were held at Sentox’s office at the
Stand, initially twice a year before moving to
three times a year. The Bank
would obtain a number of documents from Sentox in this context, including a
debtor ageing summary (for
comparison with the information retained on Cashflow
Connect), sample debtor confirmations (for debts that the Bank selected in
which were either emails or were obtained orally in the presence of the
auditor, sample invoices and delivery dockets (again, for
debts that the Bank
selected in advance) and sample remittance advices and bank statements. Both
Mrs Musumeci and the appellant were
present at the audits, and the auditor
would go through the Bank’s audit template with them: at [32].
limit of the IDF was increased on six occasions between August 2016 and August
2019, to a total of $15,000,000: at [43], [52].
As the primary judge stated,
the need for these increases over time “arose from the fact that some of
the funds drawn down
on the IDF were syphoned off for other purposes”:
a number of debtor inquiries that the Bank made in August 2020, and an audit in
October 2020, on 11 December 2020 the Bank
issued a default notice under
the IDF: at [53]. On 15 December 2020, the Bank appointed Barry Kogan,
of McGrathNicol, as an investigative
accountant. On the morning of
16 December 2020, Sentox provided a copy of its aged receivables.
Mr Kogan’s staff were unable
to verify any of the debtors in that
document. Later that day, in a telephone conversation between Mr Kogan and
Mr and Mrs Musumeci
and their then solicitors, Mr and Mrs Musumeci
told Mr Kogan that Sentox’s annual turnover was between $4,000,000
and $5,000,000
and that its debtor balance was “about $50,000 -
$100,000”: at [53]. Mr Kogan reported this information to the Bank on
same day as that telephone conversation; and on 21 December 2020 the Bank
appointed him as Receiver and Manager of Sentox: at
appellant’s evidentiary challenge regarding the finding of fraud (grounds
the primary judge recorded at [57], the appellant submitted below that
“the Bank had not established that all the debtor
information contained in
the MYOB system was false (or that all the information contained in the Wizard
system was accurate)”:
at [57]. His Honour considered it doubtful that
much turned on the correctness or otherwise of that submission: at [57]. That
was self-evidently correct in circumstances where the Musumeci
defendants, including Mr Musumeci, accepted on the second-last day
hearing that Sentox, which was controlled by Mr Musumeci, perpetrated the
fraud that the Bank alleged.
Honour was nonetheless “satisfied that at least the records contained in
the MYOB system relating to invoices were all false”,
“The evidence of Mr Kogan is that the debtor verification exercise carried
out by his staff on 16 December 2020, which occurred
by reference to a debtor
list generated from the MYOB system, revealed that of those debtors that
Mr Kogan’s staff were able
to contact, none acknowledged any
substantial debt owing to Sentox, whereas the list of debtors provided to Mr
Kogan by Mrs Musumeci
showed that the total amount owing was
$20,940,138.20. The evidence given by Mr Kogan is consistent with the admission
and Mrs Musumeci (I say ‘Mr and Mrs Musumeci’ because Mr
Kogan’s evidence is that the admission was made by one
in the presence of
the other without objection) during the telephone call on 18 December 2020 that
the debtor balance was about $50,000
- $100,000.”
the hearing, his Honour admitted Mr Kogan’s evidence about the debtor
verification exercise, and the accompanying records
of McGrathNicol, over the
appellant’s objection that “it was hearsay evidence of
representations made by the individual
debtors”. His Honour recorded at
[58] that he considered the evidence was admissible under
Evidence Act
, which permits the Court to admit first-hand hearsay
“if it would cause undue expense or undue delay, or would not be
practicable, to call the person who made the representation to give
There was, his Honour said, no reason to think the
evidence was unreliable and “it would have caused undue expense and delay
to require each person contacted by McGrathNicol to attend court simply for the
purpose of denying that they owed Sentox money”:
at [58]. Those
reasons reflected what his Honour said when ruling on the objection during the
5 of the notice of appeal raised four complaints regarding this ruling. The
first two complaints related to the Bank’s
non-compliance with the notice
requirement in
Evidence Act
and the absence of any
application to dispense with that requirement. However, when the primary judge
raised that the evidence regarding
the individual debtors would be admissible
, counsel for the appellant submitted that the Bank had not
applied to admit it under that section but did not rely on the absence
In those circumstances, the appellant’s senior counsel
on the appeal did not press the sub-grounds that raised those complaints
(grounds 5(a) and (b)).
appellant did maintain that his Honour erred in admitting the evidence under
because the Bank had not applied to admit it on that basis (ground
5(c)). However, the section does not refer to an application being
which is not surprising given the provision that is made for notice in
That left the challenge to his Honour’s ruling on the basis
that no evidence was adduced or considered on the question of
whether the
requirements of
were satisfied (ground 5(d)). Counsel for the
appellant submitted below that there was a limited list of debtors, and given
of witnesses in the matter the “crux” of the Bank’s
case should be proved by direct admissible evidence, noting
there was no
evidence before the Court as to any difficulty putting forward affidavit
evidence. That submission did not squarely
answer the inquiry posed by
, which is concerned with questions of undue expense, undue delay
and what is reasonably practicable. When McHugh JA asked the appellant’s
senior counsel during the hearing why the primary judge needed more than what he
knew of the whole of the case, as it was appearing
and evolving in front of him,
to make an informed assessment of those matters, senior counsel replied,
“He probably doesn’t,
to be frank”.
was thus no substance in what remained of ground 5. It should be dismissed.
Ground 6 was premised upon error being found on
ground 5, contending that his
Honour erred “in failing to find, accordingly, that there was insufficient
evidence of fraud
(by any party)”. It should also be
The primary judge’s findings on the
appellant’s liability in deceit
his Honour observed at [91], it was not necessary for the Bank to establish that
the appellant was aware of precisely how the fraud
worked. The central issue for
the Bank on its case against the appellant was whether it could prove that she
“made representations
to the Bank which she knew to be false (or was
reckless as to whether they were false or not)”. The representations on
the Bank ultimately relied were those that the appellant made by uploading
the details of fictitious invoices to the Bank’s
Cashflow Connect system.
The Bank alleged that the appellant knew or was reckless as to the fact that the
invoices that she uploaded
were false: at [91]. It sought to prove that
allegation as a matter of inference from what she knew: at [95].
appellant advanced a preliminary submission to the effect that the way the Bank
put its case against her in closing was the product
of a material shift during
the course of the hearing. The introductory section of the appellant’s
written submissions on the
appeal focused on this issue. The appellant submitted
that the Bank’s case as pleaded and opened concentrated on her involvement
in creating and providing to the Bank debtor ledgers, management accounts,
month-end reconciliations and aged debtor lists; and when
“collapsed”, the Bank reframed its case to one that focused on her
providing false invoice information to the
counsel confirmed at the hearing that the appellant’s grounds of appeal
did not include a pleading point or a procedural
fairness point arising from the
alleged shift.
He ultimately submitted that the shift exposed the
weakness of the evidentiary basis for the key findings that the primary judge
do not accept the premise that the Bank’s case materially shifted from the
way it pleaded and opened its case. As the primary
judge stated at [92], in
rejecting the appellant’s submission in this regard (from which no appeal
is brought), the Bank’s
Amended Commercial List Statement included an
allegation that the appellant “provided or caused to be provided Financial
Information
and Documents to the [Bank]”, and the particulars to that
allegation referred to the appellant’s provision of information
Cashflow Connect (at [C78]). Although there was no express pleading that the
appellant uploaded the details of invoices to
Cashflow Connect, his Honour
considered that this allegation nonetheless fell within the pleading and was
consistent with the way
the Bank opened its case: at [93]. As his Honour
observed at [94]:
“...Paragraph 111 of the Bank’s opening submissions alleges that
Mrs El-Ahmad made false representations in a number
of ways including (in
para (b)) by ‘uploading invoice information to Cashflow Connect, the first
step in obtaining funding
for invoices under the IDF. This invoice information
was not, and could not have been, true’. It was not suggested that this
allegation went beyond the pleaded case.”
to the key findings that the primary judge made on liability, his Honour had
earlier noted the elements of deceit enumerated in
Magill v Magill
226 CLR 551
[2006] HCA 51
(Gummow, Kirby and Crennan JJ) (citations
“The modern tort of deceit will be established where a plaintiff can show
five elements: first, that the defendant made a false
representation; secondly,
that the defendant made the representation with the knowledge that it was false,
or that the defendant
was reckless or careless as to whether the representation
was false or not; thirdly, that the defendant made the representation with
intention that it be relied upon by the plaintiff; fourthly, that the plaintiff
acted in reliance on the false representation;
and fifthly, that the plaintiff
suffered damage which was caused by reliance on the false representation.
Generally, the elements
of the tort have been found to exist in cases which
concern pecuniary loss flowing from a false inducement and the need to satisfy
each element has always been strictly enforced, because fraud is such a serious
allegation.”
appellant’s first line of defence to the claim was that she did not make
any representations to the Bank. Rather, and seeking
to borrow from the consumer
law context, she submitted that she was acting as a mere conduit. His Honour did
not consider the mere
conduit principle, which was developed in the context of
strict liability provisions, to have any application to the tort of deceit:
[97]. His Honour considered there was “no doubt” that the appellant
made representations to the Bank when she uploaded
details of invoices to
Cashflow Connect: at [98]. Consistently with the terms of the IDF, that process
required her to “tick
a box certifying that the goods the subject of the
invoices had been delivered, that the debts arising under the invoices were
transferred
and that the original invoices containing the same details had been
provided to the customer”. The appellant accepted that
she had done this
hundreds of times. The fact that she did not, on her evidence, read what she was
certifying did not affect that
she made a representation in terms of the
certification: at [98].
Honour also found that the appellant “must have understood, at least in a
general sense, that the process of uploading details
of invoices to Cashflow
Connect was the first step by which the Bank lent money against those
invoices”: at [99]. In making
that finding, his Honour referred to the
appellant’s evidence that “every morning two piles of invoices were
her desk, one to be entered into the MYOB system, which she understood
were the invoices to be funded by the Bank, and the other
to be entered into the
Wizard system, which she understood to be unfunded invoices”: at [99]. In
circumstances where the Bank
had trained the appellant to operate the Cashflow
Connect system, including how to upload invoice details from MYOB, the appellant
understood that in uploading invoices “she was representing that the
invoices accurately recorded the debts owing to Sentox”:
I noted above, the Bank relied on inferences from what the appellant knew to
make out that the appellant knew that the details
of the invoices that she
uploaded were false: at [95]. In concluding that the Bank had discharged its
burden, his Honour relied on
the following seven matters, each of which I will
address in more detail below:
(1) From the time Sentox entered into the Initial IDF, the appellant “knew
that Sentox kept two sets of accounts”: at
[101]. His Honour did not
accept the appellant’s evidence that on her understanding, the unfunded
invoices were recorded in
Wizard and invoices funded under the IDF were recorded
(2) The appellant was involved in collecting debts owed by customers recorded in
the Wizard system, with emails she sent indicating
that “she must have
gained some knowledge of the business and its customers from her interactions
with them”. Her evidence
that she was not involved in chasing payments was
“at best misleading and reflect[ed] poorly on her credibility”: at
(3) One of the customers the appellant chased for payment was Woolworths. On the
appellant’s evidence as to the distinction
between customers entered into
MYOB and Wizard, Woolworths was an “unfunded” customer, but his
Honour considered that
she “could not possibly have believed that
Woolworths had failed to meet the Bank’s ‘due
diligence’”:
(4) One of the customers included in MYOB was “M & N Abbas”,
being the appellant’s parents, who according to
the information provided
to the Bank were large customers of Sentox (as at December 2020 they owed Sentox
$698,859). The appellant
accepted that she saw the name multiple times but said
that she had not spoken to her parents since 1997 and sought to give the
that she knew nothing about their business. Her evidence changed upon
being confronted with phone records showing that she had rung
her mother 48
times during a one-month period. His Honour found her ultimate position, that
she had made up with her parents in the
past two or three years and yet had
never discussed with them the amount they were said to owe Sentox, to be
“completely implausible”:
(5) There was some evidence that the appellant was involved in reconciling
account payments “at least on some occasions”,
which supported that
she “knew more about Sentox’s business and had a greater involvement
in it than she suggests”:
at [109]. Two particular emails that she sent
suggested that the appellant had a clear understanding of the size of the
“which was quite different from the impression that would be
gained from the information supplied to the Bank”: at [111].
(6) There was other evidence to suggest that the appellant’s role in the
business “was much greater than she suggests
it was”. The matters to
which his Honour referred in that context included: the close working
relationship between the appellant
and Mr Musumeci, which was continuing;
the appellant’s involvement in sending monthly reconciliation reports to
the Bank; her
presence when the Bank conducted audits; and a home loan
application from May 2016 which recorded her salary as $171,000, about which
gave what his Honour described as “a series of evasive answers”: at
[112]. His Honour also noted the small size of
the Sentox business in terms of
employees (no more than six or seven) was at odds with the scale of the business
on the information
the appellant supplied to the Bank: at [113].
(7) On one occasion, Sentox paid a large sum of money to the appellant, which
she disbursed in accordance with Mr Musumeci’s
instructions. The
primary judge rejected as “implausible” the appellant’s
evidence that the payment had been made
to her by mistake and she had returned
it as soon as the mistake was discovered: at [114]. His Honour also relied on
another 2011
payment that Sentox made into an account in the name of Gem Fruitz
Pty Ltd (Gem Fruitz) (of which the appellant was one of two authorised
signatories), which was then paid into the nominated account. His Honour found
that Gem Fruitz was established as a fictitious customer
of Sentox and payments
were made out of its account into the nominated account to create the false
impression that the payments were
for produce: at [115].
Honour concluded at [116]:
“Taking these matters together, I am satisfied to the requisite standard
that Mrs El-Ahmad knew from at least 2014 (to choose
a date that
corresponds to the pleaded case) that the invoice details she uploaded to
Cashflow Connect were false. The invoice details
did not record details of
actual sales made by Sentox which the Bank had agreed to fund, and Mrs El-Ahmad
must have known that. Mrs
El-Ahmad’s evasive and implausible answers
together with the objective facts demonstrate that Mrs El-Ahmad must have known
the true position.”
Challenge to the primary judge’s conclusion on knowledge (grounds 1
appellant challenged each of the matters on which the primary judge relied in
reaching the conclusion in [116] of the liability
judgment. The essence of the
appellant’s challenge was captured in ground 4, which took issue with the
factual findings that
his Honour made and his rejection of parts of her
the Bank submitted at the outset of its written submissions on these grounds,
disaggregating the matters his Honour relied upon
in combination with the
appellant’s “evasive and implausible answers”, was an
artificial approach to assessing
his Honour’s conclusion. Viewed as a
whole, there was ample evidence to ground the inference that the appellant had
the requisite
knowledge of the falsity of the invoice information she uploaded
to Cashflow Connect, which was supported by his Honour’s adverse
the appellant’s credibility.
evaluating this aspect of the appeal, consistently with
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
[2019] HCA 28
it is necessary to be mindful of the advantages
that his Honour enjoyed. The appellant submitted that his Honour’s
description
of her evidence as “evasive and implausible” was not a
finding or observation in relation to demeanour, but, rather,
to the substance
of her answers, which this Court is able to assess. Even if his Honour’s
description at [116] could be read
in that limited way – which I do not
accept when one reads it with the preceding paragraphs – where findings of
are in issue “it is unlikely that ... presentation in the witness
box was not keenly observed and taken into account”:
Vagg v McPhee
(2013) 85 NSWLR 154
[2013] NSWCA 29
The two accounting systems: entry into MYOB and
order to contextualise the issues that the appellant raises with his
Honour’s finding about her knowledge of Sentox’s
two sets of
accounts, it is necessary to consider how his Honour reasoned to that finding.
As I noted above, his Honour rejected
the distinction that the appellant drew in
her evidence between unfunded invoices, which were recorded in Wizard, and
invoices funded
under the Initial IDF and IDF, which were recorded in MYOB, for
the following reasons:
(1) The appellant gave evidence that the Bank indicated, in advance, which
invoices it would fund and which invoices it would not
fund. She confirmed her
understanding that the Bank gave that advance indication by reference to each
debtor. It followed, then,
on her evidence, that a debtor was either funded or
unfunded. The appellant also gave evidence that the Bank did not approve the
unfunded debtors because they did not pass the Bank’s due diligence: at
(2) When the appellant was taken to a number of examples generated from Wizard
and MYOB in the same periods which (contrary to her
evidence) listed amounts
from the same debtors
and with comparatively much higher invoice
amounts in MYOB, she was, in his Honour’s words, “unwilling to
concede that,
even though the names of the debtors were the same, they were the
same debtors”: at [105]. Pointing out that the reference
numbers for the
debtors were different for the two systems, the appellant said that they must be
different customers. After being
taken to further examples, her final position
was that it “appeared to be that she just focussed on the customer numbers
that it did not occur to her [that] customers with the same name were the
same customers”: at [105].
Honour considered that the appellant’s evidence on this topic was
“completely implausible”: at [105]. The appellant
submitted that far
from being implausible, her evidence showed that she was mistaken as to her
understanding of the IDF. His Honour
had earlier noted that the IDF permitted
the Bank to approve or disapprove batches of invoices, or individual invoices:
The appellant relied on this as demonstrating that she did not have a
clear or accurate understanding of how the IDF operated. Given
that lack of
understanding, his Honour was wrong to conclude that she must have appreciated
that the presence of the same debtor
across both systems necessarily indicated
that the invoices she was uploading to Cashflow Connect were false.
appellant placed some emphasis in this respect on an email exchange between the
appellant and Mr Odlum of the Bank in July 2013.
In response to a query
from Mr Odlum as to whether there was “anything that you have issue
with or anything that causes you
hassles in using the invoice discount finance
product”, the appellant replied, on 17 July 2013:
“Only two issues come to mind:
1. We are unhappy with the customer balance limit for example anything over 300k
per debtor is not funded and this is restricting
some of our sales.
2. At the moment our submission day for invoices is Thursday and Andrew wants to
be able to submit any day of the week and have funds
available the next day.
Other than that we are all happy.”
appellant relied on this document as demonstrating that a customer could be
partly funded (up to the balance limit) and partly
unfunded. However, as was
pointed out in the course of the hearing, the email exchange, which was not put
to any witness, dated
to a time when the Initial IDF was in place, and the limit
of the facility was $5 million, and no equivalent limit was pointed to
relation to the IDF. The content of the email also suggested a level of
understanding of how the facility worked, contrary to
the impression that the
appellant sought to convey on the appeal.
fundamentally, however, the appellant’s submissions missed the key point
of his Honour’s reasoning. The appellant
accepted that she entered
invoices, for the same business, across two accounting software platforms. Her
evidence was that she did
so because of the status of particular debtors, on the
basis of a determination that the Bank had made after doing its due diligence.
When confronted in cross-examination with a number of examples, from
Sentox’s own records, of the same (or very similar) debtor
names being
entered in both MYOB and Wizard, in relation to vastly differing amounts, the
appellant’s evidence was not that
she must have misunderstood the basis of
entering invoices across the two systems. Rather, it was that when uploading the
she did not focus on names, but only the customer numbers, and because
they had different customer numbers they were, to her, different
primary judge, who viewed the appellant as she gave this evidence, found her
responses to be implausible. The appellant’s
response in the written
submissions on the appeal was to refer to what was described as “ordinary
commercial practice”,
whereby account management systems record and
distinguish between different customers (or accounts) by reference to allocated
numbers, rather than by customer names alone. Such a practice, assuming
for present purposes that it exists, did not render his Honour’s
conclusion regarding this aspect of the appellant’s evidence glaringly
improbable or contrary to compelling inferences.
appellant also devoted attention both in writing and orally to establishing that
the debtor numbers and accompanying names were
not the same as between the two
systems (for example: “Tony Lahood” and “Tony Lahoods”
had different customer
numbers, as did “Top Fruit” and “Top
Fruit & Veg P/L”, and “Losurdo’s Fresh” and
Investments Pty Ltd”). Some debtors also had multiple
customer numbers for different locations or sub accounts.
were differences is unsurprising, given the invoices uploaded to MYOB were
fictitious. The more fundamental point was
that when confronted with this
evidence, the appellant’s evidence was that the examples she was shown
looked like they were
the same names, but to her they were different people, on
the basis of the “funded” and “unfunded” distinction.
The force of this point was strengthened by the other findings that his Honour
made about the appellant’s involvement in the
business over many
The appellant’s involvement in chasing
her affidavit, the appellant stated that she did not directly communicate with
customers and never communicated with them about
outstanding payments. Instead,
she would pass information about overdue invoices to the sales representatives.
Early in the cross-examination, she confirmed this evidence.
His Honour found this evidence “misleading”, on the basis of emails
the appellant sent to customers recorded in the Wizard
system, including
following up outstanding invoices. His Honour considered that the tone and
content of those emails suggested that
she had some knowledge of the business
and the customers: at [106].
taking issue with this finding, the appellant submitted that her evidence was
not misleading because the emails that were put to
her were not inconsistent
with what she said in cross-examination, namely, that the emails she sent were
at the direction of Mr Musumeci.
His Honour’s focus,
however, was on the appellant’s change in position in cross-examination
after being confronted with
emails that squarely contradicted her affidavit and
initial oral evidence. As the respondent submitted, the appellant initially
cross-examination said that while she chased debtors for payment, she did
so on behalf of Mr Musumeci.
Ultimately, however, she accepted
that the evidence demonstrated that she had a relationship with customers and
chased payment of
The appellant’s submission that there
was no relevant inconsistency in her evidence on which his Honour could draw to
adverse finding as to her credibility cannot be sustained.
Woolworths being an “unfunded” customer
Honour observed that his finding in relation to Woolworths was “related to
the second point”: at [107]. The relatedness
arose from the
cross-examination of the appellant about her evidence that she did not chase
customers for payment of outstanding
invoices. The Bank’s senior counsel
cross-examined the appellant in that context about an email that she sent to
Woolworths,
dated 7 March 2014, setting out a series of outstanding
invoices and asking Woolworths to review them. Senior counsel for the Bank
questioned the appellant about an email, dated 2 June 2014, that she received
from “Reddy”, in the Accounts Department
of Sentox, asking her to
confirm sales for the week ending 31 May 2014. This email included a reference
to Woolworths for an amount
of $11,448 (the primary judge extracted this email
appellant complained that the primary judge’s finding in relation to
Woolworths was without evidentiary foundation because
she did not give evidence
that she considered Woolworths to be unfunded. Further, and in any event, it
was not inherently implausible
that Woolworths might be unfunded to a certain
extent, given how the IDF operated and having regard to evidence that referred
limits on aggregate funding.
to the first of those complaints, senior counsel for the Bank accepted on the
appeal that he did not question the appellant further
in relation to Woolworths.
However, the inference that the primary judge drew from this
correspondence was, as his Honour observed at the beginning of [107],
extrapolation of the previous matter, as well as the first matter (the
appellant’s evidence that debtors entered into Wizard
were unfunded
because they had failed to meet the Bank’s due diligence). Putting the
appellant’s evidence on these matters
together, she was following up
Woolworths, being one of the customers entered into Wizard; and the customers
entered into Wizard
were “unfunded” in the sense that they did not
pass the Bank’s due diligence. His Honour considered that the scale
Woolworths’ business rendered it implausible that it could be
“unfunded” in the manner the appellant explained,
from which it
followed that the appellant could not have believed it.
to the second of the appellant’s complaints, the appellant’s
reliance on how the IDF in fact worked on appeal is misconceived
for the reasons
I have set out in relation to the first matter.
appellant’s evidence regarding her parents as customers
appellant’s challenge to how the primary judge dealt with her evidence in
relation to her parents focused on what she contended
was a failure on his
Honour’s part to identify specifically what he considered to be completely
implausible. The appellant
submitted that his Honour’s finding lacked any
evidentiary foundation and, in any event, had no bearing on any material issue.
appellant’s evidence in relation to her parents’ appearance in the
MYOB records highlighted the implausibility of
the appellant having no knowledge
of the falsity of invoices that she entered into that system and uploaded to
Cashflow Connect.
It is worth setting out his Honour’s finding at [108] in
“Fourth, one of the customers included in the MYOB system was M & N
Abbas, who are Mrs El-Ahmad’s parents. Mrs El-Ahmad
accepts that she saw
the customer name ‘multiple times’. The information provided to the
Bank suggests that they were
large customers of Sentox. The MYOB records
indicated that as at December 2020, they owed Sentox $698,859. Mrs
El‑Ahmad gave
evidence that her parents were growers who also had a shed
at Flemington Markets. When she was questioned about the apparently large
purchases that they were making from Sentox, Mrs El-Ahmad said that she had not
spoken to her parents since 1997 and she sought to
give the impression that she
knew nothing about their business. When confronted with telephone records which
indicated that she had
rung her mother on 48 occasions during a one-month
period, she said that she rang her mother’s number to speak to her sister
who did not have her own telephone (although her evidence concerning the fact
that her sister did not own a telephone is not recorded
in the transcript). In
addition, she gave evidence that she had made up with her parents in the past
two or three years, although
she said that she had never discussed with them the
amount that they are said to owe Sentox. Again, this evidence is completely
implausible,
and I do not accept it.”
paragraph captured, with his Honour’s customary succinctness, the
implausibility of the appellant’s evidence on this
subject. As the Bank
submitted, she was taken to MYOB records that gave the impression that her
parents were purchasing vast amounts
of produce from Sentox, such that as at
December 2020 they owed Sentox $698,859.
The appellant acknowledged that
she saw her parents’ names “multiple times” on records which
indicated that they
were purchasing produce from Sentox, when to her knowledge
her parents were
, meaning they
the appellant reiterated that she had not spoken to her parents since she was
17, she was taken to the phone records to which
the primary judge referred.
More critically, however, the appellant accepted that she saw their names on
invoices “all the
time”, and on her evidence these transactions were
genuine, yet even after reconciling with them two or three years ago
had never had any discussion with her parents about the (very large) amount
owing to Sentox.
see no error in his Honour’s conclusion, having seen the appellant give
this evidence, that it was “completely implausible”.
Contrary to the
appellant’s submission, it was not necessary for his Honour to have direct
evidence that contradicted it.
The appellant’s involvement
in reconciling the payment of accounts
appellant complained that the three examples of emails involving the appellant
reconciling invoices, over a period of four years,
did not ground the inference
the primary judge drew from them. It is important not to overstate that
inference. At the outset of
his Honour’s discussion of this matter, he
referred to there being evidence that “at least on some occasions”,
the appellant was involved in reconciling the payment of accounts: at [109].
His Honour then summarised the three emails, being:
(1) an email from Reddy in Accounts to the appellant dated 20 May 2014, which
attached a debtor list showing total debtors of $192,401.80
and requested the
appellant to “go through it with debtors movement and workout with Kathie
[Musumeci]”;
(2) the email from Reddy to the appellant dated 2 June 2014 to which I have
referred at [
above, which included the reference to Woolworths and sought confirmation of
“the Sale for the week ending 31/5/2014”
in the total amount of
$64,459; and
(3) an email dated 20 June 2018 that the appellant sent to a customer,
Lou’s Produce, chasing payment of several invoices on
which the appellant
made handwritten notes as to amounts that had been paid.
the Bank submitted, there were further examples of emails of this nature that
the appellant sent to other customers, including
an email she sent on
4 September 2019 to a customer recorded in the accounts as “A
Fresh”, and an email exchange with
Lo Surdos in April and May 2018.
The inference that his Honour drew from these examples was that they
“supported” the conclusion that the appellant knew
Sentox’s business and had a greater involvement than she suggested. What
was of particular significance to his Honour,
which the appellant does not
grapple with, was that the first two emails respectively gave debtor amounts
(from Wizard) and sales
figures (for one week) which were much lower than the
information supplied to the Bank. In circumstances where the appellant
give no explanation for why she was sent the first two
emails”, his Honour relied on her receipt of them, and what she was
to do in respect of them, as suggesting that she “had a clear
understanding of the size of the business, which was quite
different from the
impression that would be gained from the information supplied to the
Bank”: at [111]. The appellant’s
complaint about his Honour’s
reliance on this evidence in support of the (limited) inference that his Honour
drew is without
The appellant’s role in the
with the appellant’s general approach to the seven matters from which his
Honour drew the ultimate inference of the appellant’s
knowledge of the
falsity of the invoice information she uploaded to Cashflow Connect, the
appellant’s submission on this, the
sixth matter, disaggregated the
component evidence that his Honour relied upon and submitted that none of it
supported his conclusion
that she occupied “a trusted and senior role in
Sentox”: at [112]. The appellant placed particular reliance in the
submissions and at the hearing on what his Honour made of a loan
application document that indicated her salary was $171,000, her
evidence as to
which was that it was filled in by a mortgage broker and that the figure
represented a promised salary.
do not accept the appellant’s submissions in this regard. It is apparent
from [112] and [113] of his Honour’s reasons
that in reaching a conclusion
as to the appellant’s role in Sentox, his Honour had regard to a number of
matters of which the
salary indicated on the loan application (which she signed)
was but one. As I have already noted, his Honour relied on the appellant
worked in the business for an extended period of time, her close working
relationship with Mr Musumeci (with whom she continued
to work at the time
she gave her evidence), her involvement in sending monthly reconciliation
reports to the Bank, her presence when
the Bank conducted audits, and the small
size of the Sentox business (being only about six or seven employees).
it was not the amount of the salary alone but rather the amount together with
what his Honour described as the “evasive
and implausible” evidence
that the appellant gave in respect of it, which his Honour summarised
“...According to a home loan application Mrs El-Ahmad completed in May
2016, her salary from Sentox was $171,000. When questioned
she gave a series of evasive answers. She said that she did not know what her
salary was in 2016 (or, indeed,
what it is now). She also said that the $171,000
was her ‘promised salary’, without conceding that she ever received
it. She denied that the amount of $171,000 suggested that she held a position of
seniority. She gave this evidence:
A. I, I just explained it. In that industry my husband doesn’t hold a
position of senior and he is - on that I, I could pull
up one of his payslips in
30 seconds and, and show you that and he’s not in any way - he does not
have a senior role. So I
know you didn’t ask me that but he’s my
husband and I can compare myself to him directly because he did not have a
role at all. In fact, he’s, just works on the floor like as nothing
special in any way, shape or form, no education required,
nothing, just works
there as a labourer.
This evidence is evasive and implausible. Her salary coupled with her evasive
evidence suggests that she occupied a trusted and senior
role in Sentox.”
is apparent from the last sentence, read with the balance of the paragraph in
which his Honour catalogued the other matters to
which I have referred in the
previous paragraph, that the appellant’s submission that the primary judge
drew a critical factual
inference from perceived evasiveness alone cannot be
sustained. The submission also fails to bring to account what his Honour said
“It is also noteworthy that Sentox was a small business with no more than
the number of employees in
the business, Mrs El-Ahmad gave evasive answers saying that ‘I don’t
have access to payroll
at all’. Mrs El-Ahmad had worked in the business
for an extended period of time. She occupied a position of some seniority
trust. The information supplied to the Bank by Mrs El-Ahmad suggested that the
scale of the business was far greater than it
was. It is not plausible given the
size of the business and Mrs El-Ahmad’s role in it that she was unaware of
the true scale
of the business.”
the focus of the appellant’s submissions on this paragraph was his
Honour’s characterisation of her oral evidence
as evasive and implausible
highlighted, once again, the critical difficulties this appeal encountered in
terms of his Honour’s
adverse assessment of the appellant’s
credibility, having seen her give evidence.
The appellant’s
involvement in the circulation of funds
final matter that the primary judge relied on was:
(1) the appellant’s receipt, on one occasion (3 May 2014), of a large
amount of money from Sentox, and how she disbursed those
(2) her status as an authorised signatory of Gem Fruitz, into which Sentox paid
money on one occasion in 2011 which was then paid
into the nominated account.
relation to the first of those matters, the appellant submitted that there was
no evidence to support the inference that she
the transaction was
part of a fraud.
I do not accept that submission. As the primary judge
noted in [114], and as the Bank submitted on the appeal, the manner in which
appellant transferred the funds out of her account was critical:
“Mrs El-Ahmad made one payment from a branch at Flemington markets to
Sentox’s account with the Bank. On the same day
she transferred the
balance of the amount to Sentox’s ANZ account from which four payments
were then made to the nominated
account purportedly from different debtors. Mrs
El-Ahmad could give no explanation for her conduct other than that she was
the directions of Mr Musumeci.”
the face of this detail, the appellant’s evidence that the money was paid
into her account by mistake seemed implausible,
as his Honour observed at [114].
When asked to explain the detail of the transaction, the appellant could only
say that she was following
the directions of Mr Musumeci. True it is, as the
appellant submitted, that in inferring her knowledge of the true purpose of this
payment his Honour expressly referred only to her close relationship with
Mr Musumeci and her role in reconciling payments into the
accounts with invoices (which she accepted). However, those matters,
particularly when read with his Honour’s earlier
findings about her role
and her knowledge of Sentox’s systems, as well as his rejection of her
evidence as implausible, amply
supported the inference of knowledge that his
Honour drew.
same must be said of the primary judge’s finding about the Gem Fruitz
transactions, with money being paid from Sentox, into
Gem Fruitz’s
account, and from there into the nominated account under the IDF. The
significance of this from his Honour’s
perspective was that while the
appellant was a signatory on the Gem Fruitz account, Mr and Mrs Musumeci were
not. In the face of
the appellant disclaiming any knowledge of Gem Fruitz, there
was evidence that on at least one occasion she had authorised a transfer
$30,000 from that account: at [115]. His Honour was careful to note that the
transfer she had authorised was not into the nominated
appellant was unable to explain her status as a signatory of the account or the
individual payment she had authorised. If the
primary judge had otherwise
accepted the appellant as a credible witness, his Honour might have addressed
the absence of an explanation
differently. At this point of the reasons,
however, his Honour had roundly rejected the appellant’s evidence on a
significant matters. In that context, his Honour formed the view that
the only reasonable inference that could be drawn from Sentox
paying money to
Gem Fruitz, which then made payments to the nominated account, was that Gem
Fruitz was established as a fictitious
customer and that the appellant’s
knowledge of this could be inferred from the matters on which the Bank relied.
Conclusion as to the matters on which his Honour relied
appellant has not demonstrated any error in his Honour’s conclusion
at [116] that the appellant knew, from at least 2014,
of the falsity of the
invoice details she uploaded to Cashflow Connect.
ground 3 of the notice of appeal, the appellant contended that the primary judge
should have made a number of different findings
in relation to the appellant and
her role within Sentox, including that she did not have knowledge of the falsity
of information
she supplied to the Bank (grounds 3(a), (c) and (d)). In view of
my conclusions upholding the findings his Honour did make, it is
unnecessary
separately to address those grounds. In so far as the appellant further
contended that the primary judge should have
found that she was not involved in
the creation of false documents provided to the Bank (ground 3(b)), the
Bank’s case against
the appellant did not require that finding. Nor was
the Bank’s case contingent upon the appellant having any interest in, or
obtaining any profit or gain from, the fraud, such that a finding that she had
no such interest would be material to the outcome
propose the following orders:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
(2) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal.
I agree with Mitchelmore JA.
10 November 2025 - Court book reference removed at [24].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (370 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter