URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAI Limited t/as AAMI v Elias [2025] NSWPICMR 31; (8 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
AAI Limited t/as AAMI v Elias
[2025] NSWPICMR 31
Nicholas Sam Akl Elias
AAI limited t/as AAMI
MERIT REVIEWER:
Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
8 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
dispute under
section 6.24
; whether a request for unredacted bank statements,
notices of assessment, and superannuation statements is reasonable and whether
the claimant has a reasonable excuse for failing to comply; inconsistencies in
the evidence; incomplete evidence; unreliable evidence;
credit issues; insurer
seeks further documents to determine the claimant’s pre-accident weekly
earnings (PAWE) (Schedule 1,
clause 4(1)), the claimant’s post-accident
loss of earnings for the purpose of payment of weekly benefits under Division
and to determine the validity of the claim and whether any part of the
claim may be fraudulent;
– the insurer’s request for
further information and documents is reasonable and the claimant does not have a
excuse for their failure to comply.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
The reviewable decision is about the duty of the claimant to co-operate
with the insurer pursuant to s 6.24 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(the MAI Act) and is therefore a merit review matter under Schedule
2(1)(x) of the MAI Act.
The following determination is made:
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
, a request
for the claimant to provide the following documents to the insurer is
reasonable:
(a) unredacted personal bank statements for all accounts to which he is
signatory for the period 26 November 2023 to date in PDF
(b) notice of assessment for the financial year ending 30 June 2024, and
(c) the claimant’s BT Superannuation Statement for the period 26 November
2023 to date in PDF format.
the purposes of Schedule 2(1)(x) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
the claimant does not have a reasonable excuse for failing to comply with the
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Nicholas Sam Akl Elias (the claimant) and the insurer about
the duty of the claimant to co-operate with
the insurer pursuant to s 6.24 of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
claimant was involved in a motor accident on 26 November 2024.
claimant lodged an application for personal injury benefits on 28 November 2024
in which he stated he was employed by Sam and
Nic’s IGA Bellambi (the
store) as a full-time manager earning $1,500 per week.
3 December 2024 the insurer requested proof of income from the claimant.
4 January 2025 the claimant sent a limited number of payslips dated in the
months of October and November 2024 to the insurer.
7 January 2025 the insurer accepted the claimant was an earner for the purpose
of the MAI Act and determined the claimant’s
pre-accident weekly earnings
(PAWE) in the sum of $2,011 based on the limited documents provided by the
insurer subsequently detected discrepancies in the payslips and has since
requested further documents and information from the
claimant so as
(a) verify the claimant’s earnings for the purpose of PAWE;
(b) verify the claimant’s contentions regarding post-accident loss of
earnings, and
(c) determine the validity of the claim and whether any part of it may be
fraudulent.
claimant refused to provide all of the requested documents. The insurer seeks a
merit review as to whether the documents are reasonably
required by the insurer
and whether the claimant has a reasonable explanation for failing to comply with
the request.
insurer calculated PAWE based on limited documents, being payslips for the
discreet period October and November 2024. The insurer
subsequently detected
discrepancies in the payslips, which caused the insurer to question the
reliability of these documents.
20 January 2025 the insurer sought clarification from the claimant and in a
telephone call the claimant advised the insurer, among
other things
(a) he had not left the house at all in two months;
(b) he had not yet made a return to work;
(c) his employer is a family run business; owned by his father Sam Elias;
(d) he was not an owner of the store;
(e) he does not normally receive payslips, and
(f) payslips were created by his accountant post-accident in support of wage
Accordingly,
the payslips are not contemporaneous documents, as first thought by the insurer.
20 January 2025 the insurer requested bank statements from the claimant to
ensure PAWE had been correctly calculated. On this date
the insurer also wrote
to “Jess in payroll” care of the email address forwarded by the
claimant with the attached payslips.
To date, the insurer has not had any
3 February 2025 the claimant advised the insurer by email that he remained
“100%” unfit for work.
4 February 2025 the insurer requested that the claimant provide tax returns and
bank statements.
6 February 2024 the claimant advised he was struggling to focus on this request
due to pain and difficulty figuring out how to
download and send the
7 February 2025 the insurer again requested the claimant provide his bank
statements.
13 February 2025 the insurer again wrote to ‘Jess in payroll’
seeking a contact number to confirm the employment details
provided by the
claimant. No response has been received.
14 February 2025 the insurer advised the claimant there was insufficient
evidence to calculate PAWE and he would be paid the interim
rate during the
first 13 weeks, pending provision of further information and documents.
14 February 2025 the claimant provided redacted bank statements for account
number ending 366 for the following periods:
(a) 15 November 2023 to 15 December 2023;
(b) 15 October 2024 to 15 November 2024;
(c) 15 November 2024 to 13 December 2024, and
(d) 13 December 2024 to 15 January 2025.
3 March 2025 via a certificate of fitness, the claimant declared he had not
engaged in any paid employment since the accident.
6 March 2025 the insurer requested a copy of the claimant’s notice of
assessment for the financial year ending 30 June 2024.
7 March 2025 the claimant advised a functional capacity evaluation arranged by
the insurer would need to take place at his parent’s
back into his parent’s house due to psychological distress.
or about 11 March 2025 the insurer received an Allied health treatment request
from The Psychology Spot which indicated the claimant
was unable to drive, was
isolated from others and spent most of his time in his bedroom. The request
stated the claimant needed to
move into his family home to be cared for due to
reduced capacity to complete activities of daily living (ADLs).
14 March 2025 the claimant accepted the insurer’s offer to assist in
locating a chiropractor in his area and in doing so,
represented he was still
unable to drive by stating to the insurer: “If you can secure an
appointment for me in the Corrimal/Wollongong
area (Wollongong is preferable),
that would be appreciated. I am becoming more familiar with the bus route, thank
17 March 2025 a treatment provider noted the claimant had developed
‘severe phobia of driving.’ A functional capacity
evaluation was
completed on 17 March 2025 which observed:
“The claimant
reported very high pain levels throughout the assessment and reported they did
not subside following rest or task
rotation. The claimant was unable to complete
the three-minute step test, ceasing at 1 minutes due to an aggravation of groin
and being unable to continue. The claimant reported he was able to sit in a
parked car however was not comfortable.”
an email to the insurer dated 25 March 2025 the claimant said he was in
significant pain.
Qamar issued a certificate of fitness dated 3 April 2025 certifying the claimant
fit for work for two hours a day, three days a
week from 3 April 2025 to 3 May
2025. He noted the claimant was still struggling with a driving phobia after the
accident. The claimant
declared in this certificate (despite attending work
before the certificate was issued) that he had not engaged in any paid
since the last certificate provided.
an email dated 15 April 2025 the claimant advised the insurer he had suffered a
significant setback in his mental health and asked
the insurer the
“I wanted to check something with you regarding
work. My main role previously involved a significant amount of driving, which
I’m still unable to do due to my current mental state. While someone else
has been covering my position during my absence,
I’ve been thinking about
whether there’s a way for me to trial a return in an unpaid capacity? Just
to see if I can manage
the management and light duties side of things. I’m
still struggling with anxiety, especially in crowds or speaking with people,
I’d like the opportunity to assess if I’m realistically able to
return before my employer considers removing the person
currently filling my
role. This would help avoid unnecessary disruption to the business if it turns
out I’m still not ready.”
16 April 2025 the insurer received a surveillance report which recorded
observations as follows:
(a) 24 March 2025: the claimant attended the store and was observed for 30
minutes walking around the store pointing and instructing
workers in the store,
putting signs on boxes, organising display cabinets and lifting and carrying a
box of produce. On the same
day he also drove himself, alone, to his parent's
address in Berkeley and attended his psychologist appointment (a distance of
approximately
(b) 25 March 2025: the claimant appeared to commence work in the store at 7.30am
and continued to work for six hours. The claimant
was observed engaged in
various employment activities, including talking to customers, instructing staff
and conversing with salespeople.
He was observed pulling and pushing large
display cabinets, using a handheld forklift, packing produce, including 5kg bags
of potatoes
onto shelves, carrying large trays of produce, organising display
cabinets, carrying a wooden pallet with another male and lifting
large signs to
another position. On the same day, after working six hours, the claimant was
observed driving from the South Coast
area to St Leonards and back (a distance
of around 90km each way/180km round trip);
(c) 26 March 2025: the claimant appeared to commence work in the store at
7.30am, working until 6.30pm (11 hours). The claimant was
observed engaging in
various employment activities, including unloading boxes of stock from pallets
and loading them onto trolleys,
pushing trolleys into the store, lifting large
tiles or pieces of concrete and throwing them into a skip bin and walking around
store conversing with staff and customers;
(d) 3 April 2025: the claimant was observed working in the store from 8.52am
until at least 3.14pm, other than a period of about
one hour between 9.08am and
10.30am when he left the store briefly, drove himself to a private residence in
Corrimal and visited
that residence before returning to the store, and
(e) 8 April 2025: the claimant was observed working in the store. He was
observed engaging in a range of employment activities, including
directing other
staff, taking phone calls, stocking fruit, taking deliveries and pushing a large
amount of Easter stock on a trolley
into the store. On the same day, the
claimant drove himself to St Leonards and return (180km approximately).
Surveillance
took place at a time when the claimant had stated he had not returned to work,
remained in pain, had moved in with his
parents as he was unable to cope with
ADLs and was struggling with a driving phobia. At all material times during
surveillance the
claimant was observed residing in his own residence in
Bellambi, not at his parents’ home in Berkeley.
insurer provided the claimant with a copy of the surveillance on 17 April 2025
and requested an explanation for the inconsistencies
between the surveillance
observations and the certificate of fitness dated 3 April 2025.
17 April 2025 the insurer also requested the claimant provide unredacted copies
of statements from all bank accounts to which he
is a signatory from the date of
the accident to date and his notice of assessment and individual tax return for
the financial year
30 June 2024.
17 April 2025 the claimant requested an extension to 1 May 2025 to respond and
24 April 2025 the claimant requested a further extension to 9 May 2025.
28 April 2025 Dr Qamar issued a certificate of fitness certifying the claimant
fit for work for four hours, five days a week from
28 April 2025 to 28 May 2025.
He noted the claimant still had a driving phobia which was getting better
although he still could not
drive a work truck and the van. The claimant
declared in the certificate that he had not engaged in any form of paid
employment since
the last certificate provided.
6 May 2025, after becoming aware of the surveillance observations, the claimant
wrote to the insurer as follows:
“I wish to draw your
attention to an ongoing issue with page 3 of the certificate, which I have
attempted to rectify by contacting
the clinic on three separate occasions.
Despite these efforts, the form continues to incorrectly state that I have not
participated
in paid employment. While I have been making genuine efforts to
gradually re-engage in some limited duties, I have not yet been paid
still awaiting payslips. Regarding the certificate, I note that my treating
doctor has increased my work capacity slightly
to reflect these efforts.
However, the section on page 3 remains inconsistent with both the doctor's
narrative and my actual situation.
This discrepancy is beyond my control, but I
am doing my best to have it corrected.”
response to the surveillance the claimant provided a statement dated 13 May
2025, in which he states:
(a) he resides in the property directly behind IGA Bellambi which is a family
owned business;
(b) he did not engage in any paid employment from the date of the accident until
3 April 2025 when he was certified fit to return to work;
(c) on the certificate of fitness dated 3 April 2025 the claimant’s
treating doctor incorrectly ticked the box regarding paid
employment due to an
administrative error, as he had returned to work that day;
(d) he notified the insurer of his intention to attempt a gradual return to work
(e) he was awaiting payslips and payment information to forward once available;
(f) nothing he did was hidden or in breach of his legal obligations, he has
acted in good faith and inconsistencies in his certificates
had been identified.
claimant detailed the following in his statement in respect of specific
(a) 24 March 2025: the claimant states:
“Entered the store briefly in casual clothing; no duties performed.
Fencing contractor attended regarding residence-not the
store. Travelled
directly to a psychologist appointment in Wollongong. I did not attend Berkely.
No takeaway was purchased from a
pizza store”;
(b) 25 March 2025: the claimant states:
“Not working, not in uniform, not rostered. Attempted to lift pallet
briefly but stopped due to pain. I was visibly distressed,
showing signs of
psychological symptoms including disorientation, freezing, emotional breakdown,
pacing and self-directed speech
– none of which are reflected in the
surveillance summary”;
(c) 26 March 2025: the claimant states:
“I did not lift concrete, bricks, or 5kg potato bag. Movements were
hesitant, brief and ceased when discomfort occurred”,
(d) 3 and 8 April 2025: the claimant states:
“I returned to work on 3 April 2025 in accordance with my Certificate
of Capacity. My presence at the IGA Store was part of
a gradual return to work
process. I had already notified the insurer of my intention to return to work in
April and was waiting to
forward payslips. My return to work was lawful,
medically supported and fully transparent.”
claimant’s solicitors indicated the claimant was in the process of
obtaining the following:
(a) unredacted copies of bank statements from all bank accounts from the date of
the accident to date;
(b) notice of assessment 2024; and
(c) tax return 2024.
14 May 2025 the claimant’s solicitors provided a OneDrive link for access
to the claimant’s bank statements, however,
the insurer was unable to view
16 May 2025 a list of selected credit transactions for accounts ending 366
(Westpac Choice) and 933 (Westpac Life) for the period
26 November 2024 to 17
April 2025 was emailed to the insurer.
19 May 2025 the insurer wrote to the claimant’s solicitors noting the
claimant had not supplied all of the information requested
and that it was
evident from the transactions provided that the claimant was signatory to at
least three bank accounts.
22 May 2025 the claimant’s solicitors advised the insurer by email as
“[the claimant] does not wish to provide his bank
statements, as he is uncomfortable with the insurer having access to his
spending information. He has also confirmed that he only holds two bank
accounts. The number ending in ***685, as referred to in
your email, appears to
be a BSB rather than an account number.”
25 June 2025 the claimant’s solicitors provided the claimant’s draft
2024 individual tax return, which had been prepared
post-accident on 5 June
24 July 2025 the claimant’s solicitors provided a list of credit
transactions for account ending 366 for the period 23 Aril
2025 to 22 July
30 July 2025 the insurer wrote to the claimant outlining inconsistencies in the
evidence and requested further information and
documents again.
6 August 2025 the claimant declined to provide unredacted bank statements and
indicated he had already provided the 2024 notice
of assessment (although he had
not). The claimant indicated he would provide his superannuation statement upon
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s submissions
insurer submits their request for further documents is reasonable in the
circumstances of this matter and that by failing to provide
the requested
information the claimant has failed to comply with his duty to co-operate under
s 6.24 of the MAI Act.
insurer submits s 6.24 is clear in that the claimant must comply with any
reasonable request by the insurer to furnish specified
information, including to
enable the insurer to assess whether all or any part of the claim may be
fraudulent.
insurer highlights various inconsistencies and non-disclosures in the evidence,
(a) the claimant maintained he had a fear associated with driving and was using
public transport, yet surveillance shows the claimant
driving on multiple
occasions, including long distances. The claimant has not provided any
explanation for this inconsistency;
(b) the claimant states he had not engaged in employment prior to 3 April 2025
yet surveillance footage shows him engaging in work
related activities on
March 2025 and 26 March 2025 as well as 3 April 2025;
(c) contrary to the claimant’s contention he was upfront with the insurer
and had notified his insurer about his intended return
to work on 3 April 2025
there was no such notification to the insurer. The claimant only disclosed his
provided with the surveillance;
(d) the claimant had only advised the insurer he was considering trialling a
15 April 2025, almost two
weeks after he had in fact returned to work on 3 April 2025, a matter the
claimant failed to disclose in
his 15 April 2025 email;
(e) the claimant states his treating doctor incorrectly ticked the box in the
3 April 2025 certificate of capacity that he had not engaged in any paid
employment due to an administrative error. The insurer notes,
however, that the
claimant signed the declaration and provided a copy of the certificate directly
to the insurer and in doing so,
did not highlight the contended doctor error;
(f) it was only after the claimant was provided with the surveillance that he
disclosed he had returned to work; and
(g) the claimant did not disclose he was appointed as
director/secretary/shareholder of N Elias Enterprises Pty Ltd and Prime Grocers
Pty Ltd (with registered business name of Sam, Nic’s & Chris’
IGA Local Grocer) as of 7 March 2025 and director/secretary
Investments Pty Ltd as of 7 March 2025.
insurer submits there are significant inconsistencies and concerns around the
claimant’s employment and driving capacity
not adequately explained by the
claimant after provision of the surveillance to him. The insurer submits this
raises issues of reliability
and credit in connection with the claimant’s
insurer submits further information is required to calculate PAWE and
(a) the claimant has only provided payslips for a period of approximately one
month from 21 October 2024 to 24 November 2024;
(b) the claimant conceded the payslips are not contemporaneous documents, and
(c) the claimant provided a selection of redacted bank statements but has not
provided bank statements for the whole of the 12 month
period before the day of
the motor accident.
insurer submits in light of the issues raised above, including the credit issue
their request for the claimant to provide the
following is reasonable for the
purpose of calculating PAWE:
(a) unredacted personal bank statements for all
accounts to which he is signatory for the period 26 November 2023 to 25 November
in PDF format;
(b) notice of assessment for the financial year ending 30 June 2024, and
(c) BT superannuation statement for the period 26 November 2023 to
November 2024 in PDF format.
light of the issues the insurer submits their request for the following is
reasonable for the purpose of verifying whether the
claimant has suffered any
loss of earnings post-accident so as to determine whether the claimant is
entitled to payment of weekly
(a) unredacted personal and business bank statements for all accounts to which
he is a signatory for the period 26 November 2024
to date in PDF format, and
(b) BT superannuation statement for the period 26 November 2024 to date in PDF
insurer submits their requests are also reasonable when considering the objects
of the MAI Act to deter fraud in connection with
compulsory third-party
insurance (s 1.3(2)(f)) and that their requests for further documents in
relation to PAWE and post-accident
loss of earnings is also reasonable for the
purpose of the insurer determining the validity of the claim and whether any
the claim may be fraudulent.
insurer submits the claimant does not have a reasonable excuse for failing to
comply with their request for further information
and documents.
insurer seeks a merit review as to whether, for the purposes of s
(a) their request for further documents is reasonable, and
(b) the claimant has a reasonable excuse for failing to comply.
Claimant’s submissions
claimant submits he has provided the following, which ought to be sufficient for
the insurer’s purposes:
(a) a letter from his accountant dated 12 September 2025 stating his employer is
in the process of arranging its business affairs
to make superannuation
guarantee payments due to cashflow issues;
(b) income statements showing payment of wages over the last four years; and
(c) a letter from his employer’s accountant stating he has been in receipt
of gross regular wage payments of $2,012 per week
since around 2021.
claimant objects to providing unredacted bank statements on the basis of
protecting his privacy. The claimant submits the redacted
sections pertain to
his personal spending which is unrelated to determining earnings paid by his
employer (the claimant has also
redacted all credit transactions other than
those he says are wage payments but has provided no explanation for this
additional redaction).
claimant makes submissions about s 6.25 of the MAI Act, which pertains to
provision of particulars in connection with a claim
for damages and
(a) the insurer is not permitted to engage in “fishing
expeditions”;
(b) the insurer’s right to request information is not unlimited and must
be justified by the needs of the claim;
(c) before making a request for further information, the insurer must take into
account all relevant information already available,
including any information
from a related statutory benefits claim;
(d) the claimant may lawfully decline to provide documents or information if it
is not relevant to the claim and irrelevance is a
reasonable excuse;
(e) legal professional privilege, privacy concerns, or where the request is
unduly onerous or oppressive is also a reasonable excuse,
(f) the necessity of the documents is to be assessed in light of the issues in
dispute, the material already available, and whether
the documents will
materially assist in determining liability, quantum, causation or other
contested matters.
claimant does not make any submissions specific to the section of the MAI Act
under consideration in this merit review, which
is s 6.24 noting the matter
concerns a claim for statutory benefits and not a claim for damages. However,
whilst s 6.25 applies to
a claim for damages only the principles are, to an
extent, not dissimilar to those applicable to s 6.24.
Legislation
Relevantly,
the claimant has a duty under s 6.3(2) of the MAI Act to
“act honestly, not to mislead and to disclose all
information in a timely manner”.
addition, s 6.24 of the MAI Act provides:
Duty of claimant
to co-operate with other party
6.24 Duty of claimant to co-operate with other party
(1) A claimant must co-operate fully in respect of the claim with the other
party to the claim (being the insurer on the claim or,
if there is no insurer,
the person against whom the claim is made) for the purpose of giving the other
party sufficient information--
(a) to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim and, in particular, to
assess whether the claim or any part of the claim, may
be fraudulent, and
(b) to be able to make an early assessment of liability, and
(c) to be able to make an informed offer of settlement in the case of a claim
for damages.
(2) In particular, the claimant must comply with any reasonable request by
the other party--
(a) to furnish specified information (in addition to the information
furnished in the claim) or to produce specified documents or
records, or
(b) to provide a photograph of and evidence as to the identity of the
(3) The reasonableness of a request may be assessed having regard to criteria
including the following--
(a) the amount of time the claimant needs to comply with the request,
(b) whether the information sought is cogent and relevant to a determination
of liability or quantum of loss, having regard to the
nature of the claim,
(c) the amount of information which has already been supplied to or is
available to an insurer to enable liability and quantum of
loss to be assessed
and an offer of settlement made,
(d) how onerous it will be for the claimant to comply with the request,
(e) whether the information is privileged,
(f) whether the information sought is sufficiently specified,
(g) the time of the request and whether the claimant will be delayed in
commencing proceedings for damages by complying with the request.
(4) A duty under this section in respect of a claim for damages applies
only until court proceedings are commenced in respect of
the claim but if the
claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with this section, court
proceedings cannot be commenced
in respect of the claim while the failure
continues.”
Consideration
task is not to make any determination as to any of the underlying issues in
dispute, namely the amount of the claimant’s
PAWE, whether he has
undisclosed post-accident earnings or whether any part of the claim may be
fraudulent.
role is to assess whether the insurer’s request for further documents for
the purpose of the insurer considering these underlying
issues is reasonable (s
6.24(2) of the MAI Act) having regard to the particular circumstances of this
matter and the criteria in
s 6.24(3). The criteria for consideration set out in
s 6.24(3) is not, in my view, exhaustive noting the word
“including”.
I am of the view I may also consider any other matter I
consider to be relevant.
insurer is under an obligation to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim.
Pursuant to s 6.24 a claimant is under a mandatory
obligation to
“co-operate fully” with the insurer for such purpose.
a claimant fails to provide sufficient documents and/or fails to provide
relevant documents requested by the insurer they potentially
do so at their own
peril given they bear the onus of establishing a valid claim for statutory
insurer seeks further documents from the claimant for the following
(a) verifying pre-accident earnings for the purpose of calculation of PAWE;
(b) verifying post-accident loss of earnings for the purpose of determining the
claimant’s entitlement to payment of weekly
(c) verifying the validity of the claim, and
(d) assessing whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent.
above purposes are all permitted by s 6.24.
present, the documents provided by the claimant are scant and there is a lack of
contemporaneous documents. Further, the claimant’s
evidence is riddled
with inconsistencies which are not explained or not adequately explained by the
claimant despite the insurer
giving him ample opportunity to do so.
Documents in relation to PAWE
current evidence is clearly insufficient for the purpose of PAWE. In this
(a) the payslips cannot be relied upon because they are both incomplete and are
not contemporaneous documents (they were created
post-accident for the sole
purpose of the claim for weekly benefits). The payslips also relate to a family
business in circumstances
where the insurer has been unable to verify the
claimant’s role in the business or his earnings with a third party that
someone other than the claimant (the email address for the covering email to
the claimant attaching payslips appears to potentially
be an email address
controlled by the claimant rather than a third person – see
insurer’s Online Investigation Report);
(b) the 2024 tax return is also not a contemporaneous document, appears to be a
draft (an Australian Tax Office issued notice of
assessment is not provided) and
does not cover the 12 month period in question which is from 26 November 2023 to
25 November 2024;
(c) the accountant’s letter is unverified hearsay in circumstances where
there is a lack of source documents to verify the
(d) income statements only evidence intended payments (not payments actually
“received” by the claimant in the relevant
period). Given the
questions arising about other documents the income statements should also be
questioned. The income statements
also do not allow calculation of PAWE over the
precise 12 month period required by schedule 1, cl 4(1); and
(e) the bank statements provided are incomplete for the purpose of PAWE as they
do not extend for the whole of the 12 month pre-accident
period in question.
at the date of the accident (and prior to the accident) the registered business
name of the store appeared to Sam and Nics IGA
Xpress, held by the trustee for F
& S Elias Trust with Sam Elias (understood to be the claimant’s
father) as the trustee.
The claimant has conceded he is to take over the family
business at some point in 2025. It seems probable on the available evidence
(including ongoing deposits into the claimant’s bank account
post-accident) that the clamant might already be receiving some
of the proceeds
of the business (as a beneficiary of the trust for example). The
claimant’s 2022 and 2023 tax returns and corresponding
assessment may assist to shed light on this.
superannuation statement requested is also likely to assist to verify issues
concerning pre-accident earnings, having regard to
the inconsistencies in the
claimant’s evidence. As the claimant’s credit is in issue, it is
justifiable for the insurer
to carefully scrutinise the claim for weekly
benefits and the evidence provided in support. Requiring documents that go
documents that might ordinarily be required is not unreasonable in
this circumstance.
the reasons set out above, I conclude the insurer’s request for further
documents in relation to PAWE is reasonable.
Documents in
relation to post-accident earnings/loss of earnings
claimant contends he had no income post-accident, at least until he attempted a
all material times before 13 May
2025 the claimant says he suffered a total loss of earnings. The
claimant’s 13 May 2025 statement
infers there have been post-accident
earnings from 3 April 2025 not yet disclosed because the claimant is waiting on
payslips. This
is not a reasonable explanation for any non-disclosure about pre
13 May 2025 earnings, particularly given payslips are not ordinarily
and were only prepared at the claimant’s direction.
claimant was provided with the surveillance and given an opportunity to explain
inconsistencies between surveillance observations
and the claimant’s
self-reported symptoms, limitations and impediments to driving and returning to
work. The claimant’s
explanations in my view are inadequate and raise
further concerns about the claim.
claimant contends he made the insurer aware of his intention to trial a return
to work on or about 3 April 2025. However, there
is no evidence to support this
contention. Rather, the evidence establishes the claimant gave no prior
notification to the insurer
April 2025. Tellingly, even when the claimant raised the issue of a possible
(a) did not do so until 15 April 2025, 12 days after he had returned to work;
(b) failed to disclose in this email that he had in fact already returned to
claimant’s email of 15 April 2025 querying whether there was a way for him
to trial a return to work in an unpaid capacity
is inconsistent with his 13 May
2025 statement that he had returned to work on 3 April 2025 and also represents
non-disclosure of
matters the claimant is required to disclose under the MAI
Act. In my view, this email is clearly misleading in the circumstances.
claimant’s statement on 13 May 2025 that he had returned to work on 3
April 2025 in accordance with the certificate of capacity
dated 3 April 2025 is
inconsistent with:
(a) surveillance which, in my view, clearly establishes the claimant had
returned to work by at least 25 March 2025 (given the claimant’s
in issue the question arises as to whether the return to work occurred earlier
than this); and
(b) the certificate of capacity itself, as on 25 March 2025, 26 March 2025 and
3 April 2025 the claimant was observed working hours (6, 11 and at least 5
hours respectively) that far exceeded his certified capacity
of only two hours
per day (the hours worked also exceed the capacity limit of four hours per day
specified in the subsequent, 28
April 2025 certificate).
claimant has offered no explanation for the inconsistency between surveillance
showing he continued to live at his own residence
in Bellambi and his reports to
the insurer that at all material times he was living with his parents in
Berkeley due to an inability
to manage ADLs (including that the claimant
insisted the functional capacity assessment arranged by the insurer take place
parents’ home in Berkeley because that was where he was living).
claimant states that following his return to work on 3 April 2025 he was
“waiting to forward payslips” yet he continued
to receive payment of
weekly benefits in March and April 2025 understood as calculated based on total
loss of earnings. An absence
of payslips is not a reasonable explanation for the
claimant’s failure to disclose his return to work to the insurer until
claimant has offered no explanation for the inconsistency between his ongoing
self-reports to the insurer and treatment providers
that he was unable to
drive/had a driving phobia and surveillance observations made of the claimant
driving. On 17 March 2025 for
example, the claimant contended he could only sit
in a parked vehicle and even this made him uncomfortable and on 3 April 2025 he
told his general practitioner that he still struggled with a driving phobia. Yet
in the same period (24 and 25 March 2025 and 3 and
7 April 2025) the claimant
was seen driving on several occasions, including long distances.
(a) the claimant denies engaging in any employment duties on 24 March 2025 but
offers no explanation as to why surveillance shows
the claimant engaging in
employment type activities on this date (instructing other workers, putting
signs on boxes, organising display
cabinets and lifting a box of lettuce);
(b) the claimant denies working on 25 March 2025 but offers no alternative
explanation for his presence at the store for six hours
on this date,
particularly in circumstances where he contends he suffered serious
psychological symptoms – it seems implausible
that the claimant would
remain in the store for six hours talking to customers, instructing staff,
conversing with salespeople and
carrying out physical employment duties after
suffering such psychological symptoms;
(c) it also seems implausible that the claimant would be able to drive 180km
(Bellambi to St Leonards and return) after working in
the store for six hours
and after suffering such severe psychological symptoms including disorientation,
freezing and an emotional
breakdown on 25 March 2025, particularly given his
alleged inability to drive is said to arise from psychological injury;
(d) the claimant denies lifting concrete bricks on 26 March 2025 but does not
offer any alternative explanation for footage showing
him lifting and throwing
objects into a skip on this date that appear to be tiles, bricks or blocks of
concrete; and
(e) the claimant does not address the fact surveillance appears to show him
working many hours on 25 and 26 March 2025, despite his
contention he did not
to the claimant’s contention there is an administrative error made by the
doctor in the certificate of capacity dated 3 April
2025 (the claimant says the
doctor inadvertently ticked the box that the claimant had not engaged in any
paid employment since the
last certificate):
(a) this does not explain how the claimant came to declare that he had not
engaged in any paid employment by signing the declaration
on 3 April 2025
thereby declaring that this was true and correct, despite having engaged in
employment earlier that day;
(b) this does not explain why the claimant provided an apparently false
declaration to the insurer or why the claimant did not flag
the contended
administrative error to the insurer at the time of providing the certificate to
the insurer and/or at any time before
6 May 2025 (which was after he became
aware of the surveillance). There is no evidence to support the claimant’s
he had made the insurer aware of the alleged doctor error prior to 6
May 2025, and
(c) the contended doctor error in the 3 April 2025 certificate does not explain
how the claimant came to again declare on 28 April
2025 in a subsequent
certificate that he had not engaged in any paid employment.
the evidence before me there is clearly a question of whether the claimant has
received undisclosed post-accident earnings and
questions about the
claimant’s credit generally, which put the validity of the claim in issue.
Accordingly, the insurer’s
desire to further investigate the claim is
reasonable in the circumstances.
also arise from various versions of bank statements submitted by the claimant.
The claimant has not provided complete, consecutive,
unredacted bank statements
for the 12 months before the accident (relevant to PAWE) or from the date of the
accident to date (relevant
to the insurer’s assessment of post-accident
loss of earnings).
claimant has disclosed two bank accounts – a Westpac Life account ending
933 and a Westpac Choice account ending 366. The
claimant has denied being a
signatory to any other account, however, the bank records indicate the claimant
is likely a signatory
to at least one other account being a Westpac Flexi First
claimant has provided bank statements for the periods 15 November 2023 to
December 2023 (statement number 129) and 15 October 2024 to 15 January 2024
(statement numbers 140, 141 and 142) for his Westpac
Choice account. However,
they are heavily redacted both in relation to debit and credit entries.
Statement 141 mostly covers a post-accident
period and shows $28,215 deposited
into this account in this period, which is not accounted for by the single
unredacted deposit
entry of $1,500 on
28 November 2025.
Choice statement 142 shows $49,710 deposited in the post-accident period
December 2024 to 15 January 2025 (when the claimant says he had no income) which
is not accounted for by payment of weekly benefits
(paid into the Westpac Life
account). A transaction summary redacted by the claimant using refined search
terms shows significant
sums paid regularly into the Westpac Choice account
post-accident, including multiple transfers from what appears to be an
undisclosed
Flexi First account held or controlled by the claimant.
transaction summaries provided in lieu of bank statements are not formal bank
statements and appear to be a limited list of transactions
for the Westpac
Choice and Westpac Life accounts, generated by the claimant using refined search
criteria such as only search for
“credits” and in some cases, only
for credit transactions in the specific amount of “$1,500”.
the transaction summaries are inconsistent with the heavily redacted but formal
numbered bank statements for the Westpac
Choice account and for this reason, I
consider the transaction summaries to be unreliable. For example, statement
number 129 is for
the period 15 November 2023 to 15 December 2023 and has been
redacted by the claimant to show that he only received two payments
contended to be wages in this period (on 5 and 12 December 2023) yet the
transaction summaries suggest the claimant received
four such payments in this
same period (two additional payments on 21 and 28 November 2023 which do not
appear in the redacted bank
statements).
current evidence establishes a probability exists that the claimant has received
undisclosed post-accident earnings, including
that he may be receiving a share
of the profits of the business (potentially via trust distributions as a
beneficiary of the trust
controlled by his father and/or shareholder
distributions from the companies in which the claimant became a shareholder in
2025). As this probability arises it is reasonable for the insurer to
require complete, unredacted bank statements for all accounts
(including the
Westpac Choice, Life and Flexi First accounts and any other account to which the
claimant is a signatory) of the claimant
from the date of the accident to date
to determine the extent of any post-accident loss of earnings (in so far as the
Westpac Choice
account is concerned this would require the claimant to provide
unredacted, consecutive statement numbers 141 to 151 inclusive).
the reasons set out above I conclude the insurer’s request for unredacted
personal and business bank statements (not transaction
summaries) for all
accounts to which the claimant is a signatory for the period 26 November 2024 to
date together with a copy of
the claimant’s superannuation account
statement for the same period to be reasonable.
relevant to determining the validity of the claim and whether any part of the
claim may be fraudulent
insurer also seeks further documents for the purpose of considering the validity
of the claim and whether any part of the claim
may be fraudulent.
agree with the insurer that the state of the claimant’s evidence is such
that the veracity of his evidence is in question
in particular, in relation to
post-accident loss of earnings. The reasons for reaching this conclusion are set
out above. As a result,
it is reasonable for the insurer to require the
requested further documents.
bank statements so as to show all transactions that is, credit and debit
(deposits, transfers and withdrawals) may relevantly
assist the insurer to test
the validity of the claim, including that withdrawal activity may establish a
pattern of activity by the
claimant post-accident that is inconsistent with his
reported symptoms, including the claimant’s contention he had not left
house (other than occasionally walking to the front gate) in the first two
months post-accident. Deposits and transfers may assist
the insurer to test the
validity of the claimant’s post-accident loss of earnings contentions,
including whether the claimant
has been receiving any of the proceeds of the
business in addition to any undisclosed wages.
all the circumstances I conclude the insurer’s request for further
information and documents in connection with assessing
the validity of the claim
and whether any part of the claim may be fraudulent is reasonable.
Summary of criteria considered under s 6.24(3)
claimant has had ample time to comply with the insurer’s request (s
6.24(3)(a)).
have set out reasons above as to why I consider the information sought to be
cogent and relevant to a determination of quantum of
loss (PAWE and
post-accident loss of earnings), having regard to the nature of the claim (s
6.24(3)(b)).
amount of information already supplied or available to the insurer is scant
and/or incomplete and/or unreliable for reasons set
out above and therefore not
sufficient to enable the insurer to assess quantum of loss (s 6.24(3)(c)).
should not be onerous for the claimant to comply with the insurer’s
request for further documents (s 6,24(3)(d)). All of
the requested documents
should be readily available to the claimant. The claimant has to hand some bank
statements and ought to be
in a position to immediately provide the insurer with
unredacted versions of these statements. Any statements not to hand can be
requested by the claimant from his bank. Tax returns and notices of assessment
will be available to the claimant via his MyGov account,
and his superannuation
statement should be available for download by logging into his online
superannuation account. It is unclear
why the claimant would be waiting on
receipt of the superannuation statement (as contended) when this should be
immediately available
to him online by logging into his superannuation
of the documents requested by the insurer could be the subject of a valid claim
of privilege (s 6.24(3)(e)) and no claim of privilege
is made in any event.
information sought by the insurer is sufficiently specified (s 6.24(3)(f)) and
claimant has had ample time to comply with the request and compliance with the
request would not delay commencement of any proceedings
for damages (s
6.24(3)(g)).
claimant objects to provision of unredacted bank statements showing his
withdrawal/debit transactions due to privacy concerns
in relation to his
spending habits. However, I consider this privacy concern does not outweigh the
claimant’s disclosure obligations
in connection with his motor accident
claim or the insurer’s obligation to consider the validity of the claim
and whether any
part of the claim may be fraudulent. I have given reasons above
as to how complete, unredacted bank statements may be relevant to
under consideration by the insurer. It is not unusual for bank statements,
including withdrawals/debits, to have relevance
to a claim for personal injury
compensation.
I acknowledge and appreciate the claimant’s privacy concerns, I do not
consider the privacy concern to be a reasonable
excuse in the circumstances of
this matter for the claimant’s failure to comply with the insurer’s
request for further
information and documents.
my view, the claimant has not provided any reasonable excuse for failing to
provide the documents requested by the insurer and
the claimant is in breach of
s 6.24 of the MAI Act.
the reasons set out above I consider the request for the claimant to provide the
following documents is reasonable:
(a) unredacted personal bank statements for all
accounts to which he is signatory for the period 26 November 2023 to date in PDF
(b) notice of assessment for the financial year ending 30 June 2024, and
(c) superannuation statement for the period 26 November 2023 to date in PDF
conclude the claimant does not have a reasonable excuse for failing to provide
these documents.
LEGISLATION AND GUIDELINES
making this decision, I have considered the following:
the Application,
Reply and supporting documentation;
Motor Accident
Guidelines, and
Regulation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (532 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter