URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/666.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rippon v Coastal Pole Homes Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 666 (31 December 2013)
Rippon v Coastal Pole Homes Pty Ltd (Home Building)
NSWCTTT 666
(31 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY TRIBUNAL
APPLICATION NO:
HB 11/34115
APPLICANTS:
Greg Rippon
Maria Rippon
RESPONDENT:
Coastal Pole Homes Pty Limited
APPEARANCES:
Ms McMahon of Counsel appeared for the applicants
Mr Bland of Counsel
appeared for the respondent
25 and 26July 2013 at Newcastle
Applicants submissions to be
provided by 12 August 2013
Respondent’s written submissions to be
provided by 13
September 2013
No submissions in reply received
from applicants as at 4
October 2013
APPLICATION:
LEGISLATION:
for provision of a Home Owners Warranty Insurance Policy
(2005) NSWCA 303
Hollingsworth and Anor v Big Country Developments Pty
(2000) NSW CA 313
Sacher Investments Pty Limited v Forma
Stereo Consultants Pty Limited
Lataudis v Casey (1990) 170CLR 534 at 542
Slacks v Richmond
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Squires v Gosford Timber Flooring and
(2006) NSWCTTT 363
Redden v Appalachian
Log Constructions
(2007) NSWCTTT 185
respondent Coastal Pole Homes Pty Ltd is to pay the applicants Greg Rippon and
Maria Rippon the sum of $29,083.00 on or before
2. The respondent is to pay the applicants costs limited
to the costs of
July 2013 as
agreed or assessed in accordance with
Division 11
Legal Profession Act 2004
REASONS FOR DECISION
June 2009 the respondent provided the applicants with a quotation
for certain renovation works at the applicants’ property known
[...]Ave, Terrigal. The total cost of the works was to be $138,175.00 and it
involved, what was described as a major refit and
rebuild of the middle area of
the house and renovations to an upstairs bathroom. The works included the laying
of a new timber floor.
commenced in June 2009 and was completed in about October 2009. The applicants
made a final payment to the respondent on the
applicants claim that cracks appeared in the ceiling below the newly renovated
floor by December 2009. The respondent attended
the site on 1
2010 but it is alleged that the cracking became worse through to June 2010. A
dispute arose between experts engaged on behalf
of the applicants and the
respondent and the matter was referred to the Department of Fair Trading. The
work was inspected on 24
February 2011 and the inspector determined that the
builder was responsible for rectification of the defects and issued a
rectification
order with which the builder failed to comply.
October 2010, March of 2011 and May of 2011 the applicants made a request to the
respondents for the issue of the Home Owners Warranty
Certificate. Despite
assurances that a certificate in respect of the policy would issue in May 2011
no certificate had issued by
APPLICATION
an application filed on 11
July 2011 the applicant sought an order
requiring the respondent to undertake works to the value of $24,000.00 and a
further order
that the Home Warranty Insurance which had been paid for under the
contract be provided.
in support of the application indicated that despite a number of requests the
been provided and referred to what
was claimed to be a failure on behalf of the respondent to address the issue of
problems with
the flooring for a considerable time. Reference was made to
reports obtained on behalf of Coastal Pole Homes in March of 2010, June
and to the fact that the dispute between the parties continued to October 2010
and until it was ultimately referred initially
to NSW Fair
the application was filed the solicitors for the respondent sought an order that
Boral Limited be permitted to inspect the flooring
and investigate the issues
which had arisen between the parties. The matter was adjourned on 24
August 2011 and the respondent was directed to provide a copy of the
experts report to the applicants before 21
next hearing listed for 28
September 2011 was adjourned on the basis
that the Directors from the respondent were overseas.
the matter was listed again on 19
October 2011 the applicants were
granted leave to amend their claim by 24
October 2011 and they were
directed to provide copies of all documents upon which they wished to rely
including experts reports, written
statements and a Scott Schedule by 9
November 2011. The respondent was directed to file documents in reply by
30 November 2011 and Mr Steven Brandley was removed as a
respondent.
15 December 2011 both parties were granted leave to have legal representation
and they were requested to provide available dates
for a two day hearing of the
matter in March and/or April 2012.
8 February 2012 the timetable of the parties was amended to enable the
applicants to file a further statement of evidence. The
time was extended
because it was claimed that Mr Rippon was unwell and that medical certificates
would be provided.
hearing initially listed for 26
of April 2012 was
adjourned owing to the unavailability of the applicant’s counsel. It was
also noted that Mr Greg Rippon was
suffering from medical problems and it was
proposed that the hearing be adjourned to a date after July or August. In June
medical certificate produced by the first applicants’ general
practitioner suggested that he was certified to be unfit to work
September 2012 and that he would be unfit to prepare affidavits or give
testimony or be cross-examined in any proceedings during that
matter was then listed for two days on 4
2012. The applicants again sought an adjournment on the basis that Mr Greg
Rippon was unable to attend work or the commitments
of the Tribunal hearing
until January 2013. A medical certificate from his treating general practitioner
was attached to that request.
The matter was again adjourned for further
directions hearings with a requirement that the first applicant provide regular
certificates.
matter was again listed on 5 December 2012 when the hearing date was adjourned
and the time for compliance with all directions
was extended to the 28 February
2013. Parties were required to provide available dates for hearing thereafter
and to give details
of witnesses who would be required for cross-examination.
The matter was again listed for a two day hearing to be held on the 11
April 2013. It was noted that the applicant was not available on that date and
the next hearing was again adjourned. The respondent’s
director had also
arranged to travel overseas at that time. The matter was then listed for hearing
before me on 25 and 26 July 2013.
The matter proceeded to a hearing and written
submissions were to be provided by legal representatives of both parties. The
submissions from the applicant and the respondent were received but the
applicants did not provide submissions in reply as required
by the directions
made on 26 July. The submissions in reply had not been received by mid
October 2013 and the matter was referred
for final determination in late October
APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
points of claim dated 14
October 2011 were filed in the Tribunal on
October 2011. That document noted that the final payment for works
was made around 9 November 2009 and that the home owners began
problems with the flooring in or around December 2009. They contacted Steven
Brandley of Coastal Pole Homes in February
2010 to advise him of problems they
had observed.
points of claim alleged breaches of
Section 18B
and a claim was made for cost of rectification and costs. The amended claim
noted that in contravention of
respondent did not provide home warranty insurance before or during the time the
works were carried out. It was however noted
that the Home Warranty Insurance
policy had recently been received and that part of the original claim was no
longer pressed.
applicants relied upon evidence of Mr Greg Rippon contained in statements dated
October 2011, 28
February 2013 and 19
2013 along with the reports of David Hayward and evidence of Mr
Donald van Keimpema, Senior Building Inspector for
New South Wales Fair Trading.
Each of the witnesses gave evidence and was cross-examined by Mr Bland of
Council for the respondent.
Objections were taken to various paragraphs of the
witness statements and the evidence considered for the purpose of the hearing
was the evidence which was not excluded as a result of objections.
applicants claimed that the cost of rectification had been increased to
$42,914.00 in accordance with an updated estimate attached
to the statement of
Mr Rippon dated 19 July 2013. The final Scott schedule which was admitted as
exhibit C in the proceedings claimed
a total rectification cost of $38,953.00
whilst the respondents denied liability for the works but estimated the
rectification costs
to be $29,083.00 on a ‘without prejudice’
his initial statement of 14 October 2011 Mr Greg Rippon noted that he and his
wife Maria were the registered owners of property
at [...] Avenue,
Terrigal and that in around June 2009 they received a hand written quotation
from the respondents for renovations
of their home at a total cost of
$133,595.00.
was commenced at the end of June 2009 although he was not provided with a
written contract for the work in the form required
by the Act. There were a
number of variations to the contract works including additional work to the
value of $8,651.00 and deductions
to the value of $4,074.00. In all a total sum
of $138,175.00 was paid. The works were completed in October 2009 and the final
was paid on 9 November 2009.
late February 2010 Mr Rippon contacted Steven Brandley from Coastal Pole Homes
to complain that there were problems with the floor
which appeared to be
sinking. He claimed that during the ensuing 10 months Mr Brandley commissioned a
number of reports including
reports from Mr John Worthington of the Australian
Timber Flooring Association which indicated that he was not responsible for the
problems with the flooring.
is claimed that an initial report was prepared by Mr David Hayward for the
applicants and a copy of that report was apparently
provided to Mr Brandley in
January 2011.
January 2011 a complaint was submitted to the New South Wales Fair
Trading and a rectification order was issued to Coastal Pole Homes
March 2011. A copy of that rectification Order was attached as GR3 to the
initial statement.
applicants relied on a further detailed statement of Greg Rippon dated 28
February 2013 in which it was noted that by the time
Mr Brandley
attended the site in early March 2010 the depth of the depression of the timber
floor was around 1cm and
there was a crack in the ceiling that was about 40cm
long on the level below the affected timber floor. Over the course of March,
April and May 2010 the depth of the depression was gradually increasing and the
area affected spread to cover the entire area of
the timber floor that was
previously tiled. It was noted that by this stage the depression would have
been around 2cm deep and that
cracks had begun appearing in the wall and ceiling
below the bench top and the kitchen island bench.
statement referred to the steepness of the block including the fall towards
Riviera Avenue and sought to address claims made by
Mr Brandley
(a) the pool table was too heavy.
(b) moisture in the rock wall below the affected floor was the cause of the
(c) the problem was caused by a leaking dishwasher.
(d) there was a lack of airflow under the floor in question.
(e) the problem may have been caused by leaking water tanks.
(f) the problem may have been caused by leaking pool equipment.
statement also sought to respond to a statement of Darren Camden dated 23
September 2011. The statement addressed issues raised
in the report of Mr John
Worthington where in particular Mr Rippon noted that damage could not
have been caused by the
in ground watering system as the sprinkler system had
not been used for many years due to drought restrictions in place. He noted
the watering system was not connected to the tap and that it would not have been
physically possible for the watering system
to spray the underside of the house
as described in Mr Worthington’s report.
a further statement dated 19
September 2013 Mr Rippon addressed an
issue raised in a supplementary statement of Steven Brandley dated 12
June 2013 in relation to the installation of a Zip hot water system. He
was criticised on this evidence and in cross-examination
it was suggested that
he had in fact been responsible for contacting the manufacturers when a leak
occurred to the hot water service.
It was claimed that the leak may have
affected the flooring.
applicants relied upon a report of Mr David Hayward dated 4 January
2011 which was filed with the initial application
along with a detailed further
report dated 20
September 2011 following an inspection undertaken on
September 2011. Mr Hayward gave evidence in the matter and was
cross-examined in some detail by Mr Bland of Counsel for the
respondent.
The reasons and observations of Mr Hayward will be addressed more fully at a
later stage.
applicants also relied on evidence from Mr van Keimpema who inspected the
property in February 2011 and issued a rectification
order to the builder. He
concluded that the moisture under the house and in the under floor area was the
cause of the problem with
the flooring. He asked Mr Brandley whether any
moisture content readings were taken before, during or after the installation of
floor and Mr Brandley agreed that he had not done so. Mr van Keimpema
confirmed that this was a significant consideration and the
reason for his
rectification order being issued against the respondent.
applicants relied upon an initial quote for the cost of rectification works
based on the report of Mr Hayward. That quote was
prepared by Mr Bruce Webb on
behalf of B & S Webb. The total cost of works was noted to be $37,908.00
inclusive of GST. That
cost was claimed in the Scott Schedule which was tendered
as exhibit C in the proceedings, although in his statement of the
September 2013 Mr Rippon refers to an updated quotation from Mr
Webb in a total sum of $42,914.00 inclusive of GST.
McMahon of Counsel for the applicants submitted that it was necessary for the
to enforce the statutory
warranties. She claimed that the timber boards laid were 130mm wide and that
boards in excess of 85mm need
to be top nailed or fixed in such other way as is
deemed to comply with AS1684. She submitted that secret fixing of wide boards
be achieved providing they are fixed in accordance with manufacturers
guidelines. On the assumption that these boards were provided
by Boral, the
steps necessary to ensure the boards are properly fixed were considered in
submissions.
McMahon noted that Mr van Keimpema asked Mr Brandley on behalf of the respondent
whether moisture content readings were taken before,
during and after the
installation of the floor and he conceded that this had not been done. He also
conceded that he had not used
the Boral recommended adhesive which was a Bostik
product but that he had instead used a Selley’s product.
with the report of Mr Hayward, the applicants submitted that the area affected
by the problem was an area which had been
previously tiled rather than carpeted.
Reference was made to Mr Hayward’s observation that there was
no or minimal
adhesion between the particle board and the joists upon which the
board had been laid in the areas where buckling was severe. Reference
in particular to the opinions expressed by Mr Hayward in paragraphs 5.1 to 5.3
of his report.
McMahon submitted that Mr Sykes had never been to the site and that he merely
provided answers to questions which had been put
to him by the builder. In
relation to the report of Mr Worthington it was pointed out that he had visited
the site only when defects
to the floor were commencing to appear and that at
that stage he had only observed one board which had started to buckle. He had
not visited the site since that time and had not responded to the opinions
expressed by Mr Hayward.
dealing with the costs of works Ms McMahon submitted that the scope of works has
been set out in detail in
of the report of Mr Hayward. A quote
from B & S Webb suggested that there was an estimated loss of $38,953.00 and
pointed out that the builder had merely set out his own estimate of the
loss in a sum of $29,083.00. She claimed that the estimate
failed to include the
cost of removal of a pool table during the rectification works at an additional
cost of $1,045.00.
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
respondent relied upon statements from Mr Brandley dated 9 June 2011 from the
November 2011, 12
June 2013 and 22 July 2013. Reliance
was also placed on a report from Mr John Worthington dated 25 November 2011
along with a report
of Mr Camden of the 29 November 2011 and
reports of Mr Sykes dated 23 February 2011 and 3
statement of Joshua Horton, Electrician, indicated that in July 2009 he carried
out electrical works at [...] Avenue, Terrigal which
included running of cables
through the sub floor area. He observed that the ground area under the sub floor
was dry. A report from
a Mr Mark Mathot dated 12 March 2010 concluded that the
problem with the flooring was a direct result of excessive moisture under
house coming from a sandstone retaining wall and water tank. This statement
appears to be in conflict with the observations of
the electrical contractor,
Joshua Horton.
report of Mr Darron Camden dated 23 September 2011 was annexed to his statement
dated 29 November 2011. Mr Camden concluded that
if a water leak beneath the
dwelling had occurred enough to cause moisture ingress into the flooring then
buckling would be a result
of that excessive moisture. He noted that his report
was prepared some 19 months after the problem was first reported and
conditions may have improved since that time.
Sykes, a Senior Timber Inspector, employed by Forests New South Wales provided
an affidavit sworn 28 November 2011 to which
he annexed a report dated 28
February 2011 signed both by himself and Mr R Forrester. He concluded that
peaking, doming or horizontal
expansion of tongue and groove floorboards would
occur irrespective of how strong the fasting method was between the floorboards
and the particle board and/or the fasting methods between the particle board
flooring and the joists. Unfortunately the report does
not provide reasoning
for that conclusion.
report of Daran Dickinson dated 23
March 2010 noted that he was
provided with the respondent’s material. Mr Dickinson concluded, following
an inspection which
was made prior to the 23 March 2010 that the section of the
floor affected was where the floor had been laid over a sub floor area
where it had been laid with room underneath. He suggested that the main cause of
the cupping and buckling would be conditions
in the sub-floor space causing high
moisture content which then affected the floor above as well as periods of
higher relative humidity
after installation.
report of Mr John Worthington was attached to his statement dated 25 November
2011. Mr Worthington gave evidence and was cross-examined
on his report. Mr
Worthington concluded that the cause of the defect in the timber was a high
level of moisture in the sub floor
caused by a combination of wetter weather in
the latter part of 2009 and the watering system, the sandstone wall holding
and the flooring timbers exposed to dampness as opposed to the
remainder of the floor areas which had living areas under them. He
that the builder had constructed the floor according to correct specifications
and methods.
his statement dated 29 November 2011 Mr Brandley noted that before commencing
the job he inspected the sub-floor area of the premises
and saw that the
sub-floor area was dry although he did not note that there were water tanks
located under the house and exposed
pipes in the sub-floor area. He stated that
prior to the commencement of works there was no dish drain or similar drain
house. The flooring was delivered on the 25 August 2009 and was lifted
onto the existing deck of the premises and carried into the
house where it was
stacked to allow for acclimatisation. It was stored on existing particle board
flooring which had been previously
carpeted. He noted that the tiling was
removed from areas of the kitchen and upon inspecting the particle board which
was laid underneath
the tiling he observed it to be in good condition and
securely fixed to the floor joists with 7mm glue tipped nails. He claimed that
the particle board showed no signs of being affected by moisture because he
would have expected to see swelling or mould.
the works were complete on 24 September 2009 his attention was drawn to ponding
around the base of the water tanks in the sub-floor
area. He advised Mr Rippon
that he should drain the water away by means of ag drains or another pipe.
Nothing further was said to
him about water accumulating under the
Brandley referred to reports which he had obtained in March of
also referred to the quotation for rectification works obtained from B &
S Webb dated 27 October 2011 and stated he disputed
that the costs were fair and
reasonable. He referred to each of the costing items and attached alternate
quotes for kitchen repairs,
cost of flooring and costs of painting works. Based
on these figures his estimated costs of carrying out the rectification work
removal of the pool table was a sum of $29,083.00 inclusive of
a supplementary statement dated 12 June 2013 Mr Brandley attached the picking
slip copy from the supplier of the timbers, noting
that the moisture content at
the time of delivery was within the appropriate tolerances. He also referred to
a leak in the Zip Hot
Water system which was attended to by his plumber, Paul
Goder but which was ultimately repaired under warranty by a representative
Zip Hot Water who had apparently been contacted by Mr or Mrs
Bland of Counsel provided written submissions on behalf of the respondent. He
submitted that the procedure adopted by the respondent
to glue and secret nail
the hardwood floor was in accordance with the standard AS1684 and he noted that
the construction was an extension
and that the area of floor which was buckled
had been laid over existing particle board floor which he had judged to be in
condition before the hardwood was laid. He observed that there was no
evidence of the floor being subject to moisture ingress before
the works were
undertaken.
Bland criticised Mr Rippons’ evidence suggesting that he had in some way
changed his statement to claim that he had become
aware of problems in the
flooring in December 2009 rather than February of 2010 when he first notified Mr
Brandley. He argued that
Mrs Rippon had allegedly noted the problem with the
flooring initially yet she had not given evidence or provided any statement.
submitted that an inference could be drawn from her failure to give evidence and
corroborate the matters raised by her husband.
Bland observed that each of the experts, including Mr Hayward, agreed that the
cause of cupping, swelling and the buckling, was
moisture. None of the experts
were able to identify the source of the moisture other than by what he described
as “speculation”.
He observed that Mr Hayward had formed the view
that the builder should have re-glued and screwed the particle board to the
in circumstances where the particle board was not detached or subject to
moisture buckling at the time of fixing the floorboards.
He claimed that there
was no evidence of the particle boards being detached and there was no evidence
of excessive moisture in the
building area.
Bland referred to speculation on the part of Mr van Keimpema that the damage
occurred as a result of moisture under the house,
yet his testing with a
moisture meter in February 2011 showed that the particle board had a higher
moisture content. His report was
limited to the underfloor area and accordingly
it was submitted that he was not able to give an opinion as to anything other
the underfloor area and in that respect he was clearly at odds with Mr
Bland conceded that the Boral document was the only document relevant to
establish that gluing and secret nailing was an acceptable
method of fixing a
board of 130mm in width. He argued that there was no requirement in the standard
to do more than acclimatise the
boards before fixing them to the sheets and that
it was not necessary to include the taking of moisture
Bland referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Constructions Pty Limited v McCauley
wherein McColl
“(b) the due diligence obligation appears in a list of warranties
section 18B
. The first found in cl
38.1(a) requires the “building works” to be performed in a proper
and workmanlike manner and
in accordance with the plans and specifications...the
owners have to demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that the builder
failed to perform work in a proper and workmanlike manner and/or also fails to
build in accordance with the plans and specifications.
The onus is on the
owners. The builder is not required to prove he built in accordance with the
plans and specifications as a defence,
he is required only to answer the
allegations and evidence of the owner that he failed to do so.”
Bland submitted that Mr Rippons’ evidence would not assist the Tribunal
and should be rejected as he had demonstrated a serious
lack of credit
particularly in relation to the issue arising from the leaking of a Zip water
Bland then addressed the evidence of Mr Hayward as against the evidence of Mr
Worthington and Mr Sykes and concluded that the applicants,
Mr and Mrs Rippon,
had failed to establish that the cupping and doming of the floor which is also
likely to be the cause of the lifting
of the particle board, was as a result of
the methodology and materials used by the builder, their evidence being the
the floor occurred some six to seven months after the laying of the
Bland went on to address the question of a failure on the part of the applicants
to mitigate their losses. He noted that whether
a plaintiff acted unreasonably
was a question of fact and it was possible that the plaintiff could be held to
have acted unreasonably
in failing to enter into a new contract. He submitted
that when the cupping and doming of the floor was first notified, Coastal Pole
responsible. To this end a quotation was provided as to
the costs of
rectification to Coastal Pole Homes. He submitted that the failure on the part
of the applicants to act promptly should
result in them being held to the costs
of rectifying the defects which were identified in 2010.
is noted that the respondents’ solicitors also provided a sealed envelope
containing information as to costs which is to
be opened after a decision had
been completed.
applicants are the registered proprietors of a property known as [...] Avenue,
Terrigal. On or around 29
June 2009 the respondent provided a
handwritten quote for renovations to the applicants’ home for a total
price of $133,595.00.
commenced around the end of June 2009 and variations to the quote included
additional work to the value of $8,651.00 with deductions
to the value of
works were completed in October 2009 and the final sum owing, namely a sum of
$138,175.00 was paid in full by the applicants on
amended points of claim which were filed state that the home owners began to
notice problems with the flooring in around December
2009 but they did not
respondent is critical of the time lapse
between the completion of the works and
the time when it is alleged that the problems were first noticed. Reference was
made to the
statement of Mr Greg Rippon suggesting that in January or early
February he noted that cracks appearing in the ceiling directly under
floor were getting larger and the floor appeared to be sinking and uneven. It
would appear that problems were first noticed
in about December 2009 or January
of 2010 but it is clear that the builder was not approached until
the builder was contacted it is clear that Mr Brandley, on behalf of the
respondent builder, engaged a number of experts in an
endeavour to identify the
cause of the problem. There is no doubt that although all of the experts blamed
the presence of additional
moisture as being the cause of the problem, none of
them were able to specifically identify the cause of the moisture. The parties
remained in dispute as to who was responsible for the rectification of the
flooring and Mr Greg Rippon obtained the first report
from Mr David Hayward on
January 2011. Mr Hayward summarised his view in the
following manner;
2.4 Summary
“It was considered that there has been a moderate increase in the
in-service moisture content of the flooring since installation
and that this has
resulted in similar expansion pressure and some unevenness at broad edges
throughout the floor. However the floor
has only buckled in the area where
ceramic tiles had been lifted. This existing particle board was also reported
to have been damaged
in the area where now buckled due to the lifting of the
previous floor tiles and the consideration did not appear to have been given
the need for strong fixing of sub-floor joists as outlined in industry
recommendations with the fixing method employed. As such
it cannot be
discounted that the fixing in the area where buckling occurred was not of
adequate strength and as such this would be
significant to the buckling that has
the respondent refused to accept the view expressed by Mr
Hayward, a complaint was submitted to New South Wales
Fair Trading on 25 January
2011. An inspector from the New South Wales Fair Trading attended the premises
and issued a rectification
order to Coastal Pole Homes on 10 March 2011. The
respondent declined to complete the rectification works and accordingly the
application was filed in the Tribunal in July 2011. The remaining issue
relates to one defect being the grey iron bark timber flooring
laid in the home
owner’s kitchen and living area. It is common ground that the boards laid
are 130mm wide and that AS1684 requires
the boards in excess of 85mm wide to be
top nailed. The parties agree that there can be “deemed compliance”
are installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines.
The relevant guidelines to which the Tribunal has been referred
are the Boral
guidelines for “secret fixing of wide boards”.
builder conceded in cross-examination that the extent of his preparation to
install the floor was a visual inspection of the particle
board sub-floor and
the sub-floor environment and that he failed to undertake any moisture content
readings before, during or after
the installation of the floor. He also conceded
that he had not used the Boral recommended adhesive being Bostik Ultraset but
he instead used a Selley’s product.
applicants rely on the opinion expressed by Mr Hayward that the builder had
failed to ensure that there was sufficient adhesive
between the particle board
and the joists in the area where buckling of the flooring was severe. It was
pointed out that lack of
adhesive fell foul of the guidelines as set out in the
particle board flooring structural design guide referred to again in the Hayward
report. It was noted that the existing particle board upon which the flooring
was placed was in the order of ten years old and the
fixing integrity was not
adequately considered, particularly in the areas where tiling for the kitchen
area had been removed. The
summary and conclusions contained in Mr
Hayward’s report provides as follows;
“5.1 - When laying timber floors over sheet sub-floors the layer
has a number of important aspects to consider. These relate
to the inherent
strength of the timber species being installed, the local and site conditions
that will influence future movement
in the floor, the method of fixing the floor
and the integrity of the sub-floor over which the flooring will be laid.
5.2 - In a pre-existing dwelling undergoing alteration, a builder should
ensure that all factors referred to above have been assessed
prior to laying a
new floor. A full assessment of the sub-floor and sub-floor conditions should
be carried out. The moisture content
of the new flooring should be sufficiently
close to its expected average in-service moisture content before laying and that
the particle
board is fixed to the joists in accordance with the current
industry recommendation when timber flooring is overlaid. If these practices
are observed then the floor would not, in my view exhibit buckling of the
particle board sub-floor nor peaking that we see in this
5.3 - It is therefore my opinion that the defects to this floor have been
caused by the inadequate preparation and installation practices
McMahon of counsel for the applicants, criticised the evidence of the
respondents experts noting that Mr Sykes had not been provided
with photos,
plans or other details of the site on which the flooring was installed and he
had never attended the site. He had merely
provided answers to questions put to
him by the builder.
relation to the substantive report of Mr Worthington, it was pointed out that Mr
Worthington visited the site when the defects
to the floor were only beginning
to appear. It was his evidence that he only witnessed one board starting to
buckle. He had not visited
the site since the entire floor had exhibited
defects, nor had he responded to Mr Hayward’s report. It was claimed
Mr Worthington’s report contained no assumptions that he was unaware
as to how the floor had been laid and as to manners of
preparation including (a)
whether the floor covering had previously been a combination of carpet and tiles
or (b) whether the tiles
had been jackhammered off and (c) any history of the
underlying particle board. It was said that he restricted his findings to a
small area of the affected floor and suggested that a garden watering system was
part of the cause of the defect but he had
not taken steps to turn the watering
system on to satisfy himself that it had any bearing on the problem at all. It
was submitted
that, to the extent there was an inconsistency between the
opinions expressed by Mr Worthington and those of Mr Hayward, the Tribunal
should accept the evidence of Mr Hayward.
respondent relies on the findings of Mr Sykes concerning the moisture level of
the timber and the moisture level of the particle
board on the assumption that
the boards had remained free from doming or peaking for a period of months. Mr
Sykes had concluded that
the floor and the particle board were performing
normally (including a normal moisture content) and that something unusual must
occurred early in 2010 to cause the cupping and doming.
of the experts, including Mr Hayward agreed that the cause of the cupping and
swelling and the buckling was related to moisture.
What followed was speculation
by each of the experts in an endeavour to identify the source of the moisture or
some defect in the
construction process that was the cause of the moisture. Mr
Bland of Counsel for the respondent observed that Mr Hayward would seem
formed the view that the builder should have re-glued and screwed the particle
boards to the joists in circumstances where
the particle board was not detached
or subject to moisture buckling at the time of fixing the floor
his report dated 20
September 2011 Mr Hayward
“4.5 ...it has been indicated that in the area where there is
substantial buckling of particle board, it had previously
been tiled and that
the tiles were jackhammered off. The owner reporting that the particle board
was damaged in the process of which
evidence was also found during the
inspection to the point where the particle board had been fully pierced. It is
not possible to
say what overall effect this has had other than to say that the
floors applied to a damaged service and some of the fixings to the
have been damaged. When viewing photos 8 and 10, the particle board has buckled
and there is no evidence of damage to
the particle board in this area.
However, also observed during the inspection was no or minimal adhesive
between the particle board and joists where buckling was severe.
When viewing
industry guidelines (Engineering Wood Panel Association Australia) regarding the
fixing of particle board to joists
in their publication “particle board
flooring structural design” it states that;
particle floor boards should be fixed with construction grade adhesives
and mechanical fasteners. A bead of adhesive is applied from
the cartridge
applicator to joists before positioning particle board sheets. The beads should
be 5-6mm across and must not be laid
too far ahead as it may cure quickly. The
time available for laying sheets before adhesive bead becomes too hard and dry
will depend
on temperature and ventilation. These conditions may restrict
advance adhesive application to the amount required for one sheet
The guide is therefore quite specific regarding the use of adhesive and
the adhesive, along with mechanical fixing is necessary to
provide robust
fixing. With the lack of adhesive observed, as shown in photographs 8 and 9,
this is considered to be a significant
factor that has contributed to the
buckling in this area. Note that adhesive was observed, squeezed from joists
between particle
board and joist in some areas but not in the area assessed.
The existing particle board floor was in the order of ten years old
appears that the fixing integrity was inadequately considered.”
is made to the statement by Mr Worthington that the builder had constructed the
floor to the correct specifications and
method and it is noted that this issue
was not further addressed in cross-examination however it would appear that Mr
Worthington
failed to properly investigate his theory that the cupping was
caused as a result of water wetting the area from an irrigation
the principles enunciated by
McColl JA in
Limited v McCauley
(2005) NSWCA 303
the Tribunal is satisfied that the
owners have demonstrated on the balance of probabilities that the builder failed
to perform the
work in a proper and workmanlike manner in that he failed to have
due regard for the adequacy of fixing of the particle board base
upon which he
proposed to lay the floorboards particularly in the area where a tiled floor had
been removed from the particle board
with the use of a form of
jackhammer.
applicants claim an amended sum of $42,914.00 together with an additional sum of
$1,045.00 being the cost of removal of the pool
table during rectification
works. The initial claim in accordance with a quote obtained from Mr Webb was a
sum of $38,953.00 together
with the costs of removal of the pool table. That
claim was based upon a quotation provided in October 2011.
respondent has replied to the applicants claim conceding (without admission of
liability) that the appropriate rectification costs
should be $29,083.00
inclusive of GST. Although the costing represented, in part, assessments made
by the representative of the
respondent, it is appropriate to note that the
major costing relating to the kitchen, the flooring and the painting were the
of independent quotes obtained in 2011.
Bland, on behalf of the respondent has referred to a decision of the Court of
Appeal in a number of matters including
Hollingsworth and Anor v Big Country
Developments Pty Limited and Ors
(2000) NSW CA 313
which is authority for
the proposition that a plaintiff who acts unreasonably in failing to minimise
his loss from the defendants
breach of contract will have his damages reduced to
the extent to which, had be acted reasonably, his loss would have been less.
plaintiff will not be held to an act unreasonably simply because the defendant
can suggest other and more beneficial conduct if
it was reasonable for the
plaintiff to do what he did. (
Sacher Investments Pty Limited v Forma Stereo
Consultants Pty Limited
(1976) 1NSWLR 5).
Bland submitted that when the cupping and doming of the floor was first
notified, Coastal Pole Homes was and has remained willing
to undertake repairs
for which it was responsible. To this end he submitted that the applicants
should be held to the quoted amounts
for rectification provided through Coastal
Pole Homes, particularly as the applicants had determined that they are
unwilling to have
the company do the rectification work. It is to be noted that
this submission should be considered in the light of the history of
up to the time when proceedings were commenced in the Tribunal and for a period
thereafter until at least the end of 2011.
Proceedings
which were filed in July of 2011 were initially listed for a two day hearing on
the 26 and 27 April 2012. The hearing
was adjourned initially at the request of
the applicants’ counsel on 29 February 2012. By 16 March 2012
the applicants
provided a medical certificate suggesting that Mr Rippon was
unable to prepare material in response to the respondent’s evidence
attend cross-examination as a result of a soft tissue neck injury which he
suffered on the 25 December 2011. On 22 March 2012
the applicants counsel
requested an extension of time for filing of evidence by Mr Rippon. As a result
at which the timetable was
extended to May of 2012. A further extension of time
was sought on the 14
May on the basis that Mr Rippon was ill and at
that stage no reasonable estimate could be given as to when he would be in a
to prepare material other than to suggest it would be by the end of
June 2012. A timetable was again amended and extended up to the
29 June 2012 at
the applicant’s request.
June 2012 a medical certificate from Dr Harrison was provided
certifying that Mr Rippon would be unfit for work until 1 September
to write affidavits or give testimony including cross-examination in court
proceedings. The certificate then went on to
suggest that he may at the time may
well be extended because no guarantee could be given that he would be available
by September.
The time was again extended owing to the absence of the applicants
overseas until 5 July 2012 and the hearing was noted as being
adjourned to a
date not before 1
October 2012. The matter was then adjourned in
March of 2013 on the basis that the respondent would be outside of the
at the time provided for hearing and it was ultimately listed for
hearing before me in July.
would appear that all but one of the proposed adjournments were granted at the
request of the applicants and in the face of opposition
respondent’s solicitors. There appears to be merit in the
respondent’s submission that the cost of rectification
should be ordered
at the time when the matter would have been heard, but for the ongoing
adjournment applications namely as at April
2012. The amount claimed by the
applicants at that stage was $38,953.00 and the response provided on behalf of
Coastal Pole Homes
Pty Limited, suggested that the cost of rectification would
be $29,083.00 including the cost of relocation of the pool
costing provided on behalf of the respondent has been supported in respect of
the kitchen, the flooring and the painting by quotes
which were obtained
independent of the assessment made by Mr Brandley. The remaining items relate
to gyprocking where both parties
have agreed that the cost would be $165.00
together with preliminary costings and carpenters costs. Having reviewed the
of the figures provided by Mr Brandley, I am satisfied that his
costing of $29,083.00 inclusive of GST and inclusive of the cost
of moving and
relocating the pool table represents a reasonable cost for the works to be
undertaken at the time when the initial
hearing was proposed in 2012. I am not
satisfied that the applicants should benefit from inflated costs as a result of
adjournments of the matter which arose substantially because it was
claimed that one of the applicants who had suffered a neck injury
was incapable
of preparing detailed statements or attending the tribunal to be cross-examined.
I note the contents of the medical
reports which have been produced to the
Tribunal but I also note that the adjournments have always been in the face of
on the part of the respondent and I am satisfied that the applicant
should not benefit in any way as a result of the delay.
upon the findings I have made, I order the respondent to pay the applicants the
sum of $29,083.00 on or before 31 January 2014.
parties have been invited to provide documents and submissions in relation to
the issue of costs so that the question of costs
can be dealt with in
conjunction with the principle relief. The resultant compensation order is
marginally less than the sum of $30,000.00
and regard must be had to the
provisions relating to the issue of costs.
Consumer, Trader
and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
provides that subject to that section and the
regulations, the parties in any proceedings are to pay their own costs. The
is empowered to award costs in any proceedings in accordance with the
regulations and if costs are awarded, the Tribunal, in accordance
regulations may determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid and
whether costs are to be assessed under Division
Profession Act 1987
or on any other basis.
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Regulation 2009
provides that in
any proceedings in respect of which the amount claimed or in dispute is more
than $10,000.00 but not more than $30,000.00
the Tribunal may award costs in
relation to the proceedings only if;
(a) the Tribunal is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that
warrant the awarding of costs or
(b) the Tribunal makes an order under
section 30(2)
of the Act in relation to
the proceedings.
Sub-regulation ( 4) provides that in any proceedings in respect of which
the amount claimed or in dispute is more than $30,000.00
the Tribunal may award
costs in relation to the proceedings in such circumstances as it deems fit.
for the applicants has referred to a number of decisions of the Supreme Court
and Court of Appeal in relation to costs starting
from the proposition that a
plaintiff having been successful is entitled to its costs and it is for the
defendant to establish a
basis of departure from that rule.
Lataudis v Casey (1990) 170CLR 534 at 542
Chief Justice Mason
“When exercising its discretion to award costs, or refuse costs a
court should look at the matter primarily from the perspective
of the defendant.
To do so conforms to a fundamental principle. If one thing is clear in the
realm of costs it is that, in criminal
as well as civil proceedings, costs are
not awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party, they are
compensatory in the
sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful
party against the expense to which he or she has been put by reason of legal
proceedings.”
Slacks v Richmond River Council
(1998) 193CLR 72 McHugh J (with whom
Brennan CJ agreed) at 96-97 explained the traditional principles governing the
“By far the most important factor which courts have viewed as
guiding the exercise of costs discretions is the result of the
litigation. A
successful litigant is generally entitled to an order for costs...the expression
“the usual order as to costs”
embodies the important principles
that, subject to certain limited exceptions, a successful party in litigation is
entitled to an
award of costs in its favour. The principle is grounded in
reasons of fairness and policy and operates when the successful party
plaintiff or the defendant. Costs are not awarded to punish an unsuccessful
party. The primary purpose of an award of costs
is to indemnify the successful
general principle is substantially varied by
Consumer, Trader
and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
if the requirements of
regulation 20
are satisfied
then it is appropriate to make an order for costs in accordance with these
common law principles.
Squires v Gosford Timber Flooring and Supplies
(2006) NSWCTTT 363
Carpentieri considered the relevant principles in relation to a Home Building
Division case and observed in relation to that
case that both parties were
supported by expert reports and they were both legally represented. Member
Carpentieri observed that
in this jurisdiction in respect of the amount claimed,
legal costs were not normally granted. He noted further it was not normal
experts were required to give evidence in person at the hearing and indeed it
was normally parties that would represent themselves
where matters in issue were
less than $30,000.00 and where issues were not complicated by conflicting or
expert opinions. He observed
in Squires that both parties wished to be legally
represented and they were permitted to do so. He observed that both parties
and anticipated that an award of costs may be sought and possibly
made. As a result of these findings he was satisfied that it represented
exceptional circumstance in that case justifying an award of costs. It is noted
that although the sum recovered by the applicants
is marginally less than
$30,000.00 it is appropriate to consider an award for costs and particularly in
the light of the documents
which have been submitted by both parties in sealed
envelopes pending the determination of the principle issue.
is now noted that under cover of a letter dated 27 March 2012 the applicants
made what purported to be a Calderbank offer of settlement
for payment of a sum
of $35,000.00 inclusive of costs. The costs were not nominated but were
estimated to be in the order of $8,000.00
as at that time. The offer was
expressed to be open for a period of 28 days from the date of that
cover of a letter dated 16 April 2012 the solicitors for the respondent wrote to
the applicants (who were not at that time represented
by solicitors but who may
have retained counsel) offering to settle the matter by a payment to the
applicants of a sum of $5000.00
inclusive of costs. The offer was expressed to
be made as a Calderbank offer which was open to be accepted within 28 days from
date of the offer. Neither party accepted the offers made by the other party
and the matter finally proceeded to a hearing in July
offer made by the applicants incorporated an allowance for costs to which they
may not have been entitled when the offer was
made and I am not satisfied that
either party derive any cost’s benefit from the offers
compensation recovered by the applicants does not exceed $30,000.00 but I am
satisfied that I should follow the principles referred
to member Carpentieri in
Squires v Gosford Timber Flooring and Supplies (supra)
and by other
Redden v Appalachian Log Constructions
(2007) NSWCTTT
Owners Strata Plan 61212 v Fair Trading Administration
Corporation
(2007) NSWCTTT 652.
must also have regard to the fact that the proceedings were initially listed for
hearing in April 2012 and that they were thereafter
delayed for over 12 months
as a result of the settled inability of Mr Rippon to complete his evidence and
then be available to attend
a hearing. Although medical certificates were
produced the solicitors for the respondent objected to the delays and, no doubt,
respondent incurred costs when the matter was prepared for hearing in April
2012 and thereafter adjourned at the applicants’
request until July 2013
(although I note that both parties sought to have the matter adjourned in May
into account all of these matters and noting that the applicants were
represented by counsel without an instructing solicitor
and that Mr Rippon
was apparently required to prepare his own evidence, it is in my view
appropriate to order that the respondent
pay the applicants’ costs of the
hearing days namely 25
and 26 July 2013. Such costs may be agreed
between the parties or assessed in accordance with Division 11
Legal Profession Act 2004
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy
31 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter