URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
De NAVI v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia [2013] NSWNMT 24 (21 November 2013)
Matter No: 030/2013
DE NAVI V Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT
APPEAL AGAINST DECISION OF NATIONAL
Mary-Anne De NAVI
Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Nick O’Neill (Deputy
Chairperson)
Helen Stirling (Nurse Member)
Scott Hillsley (Nurse
John Davies (Lay Member)
Date and Place of
15, 16, 17 and 25 October 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
and Reasons for Decision
21 November
Representation
Appellant Rodney Smith SC, barrister
Respondent Ashley Stafford, barrister instructed by Christopher
Fesel, solicitor, New South Wales Crown Solicitor
Appeal against refusal of National Board to renew the
registration of a nurse or midwife –
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
3, 3A, 52, 82, 112, 175, 175A, 175B, 175C;
Procedure Act 2005
Cases Cited
v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT 4
Comacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST 1
Smith v Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT 10
REASONS FOR DECISION
In this matter, Mary-Anne De Navi appealed to the Tribunal against the
decision of the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (the
National Board) to
refuse to re-register her as a nurse.
Key issues in this case
De Navi qualified to be a nurse in 1979. She was first registered as a nurse in
Victoria on 5 September 1979 and in New South
Wales on 31 December 1981. Since
then she has been registered as a nurse for substantial periods of time, as will
be seen below.
(Mrs De Navi was first registered, by the then NSW Nurses
Registration Board, as a midwife on 11 November 1983.) From 2004 to the
she has job-shared the position of Co-ordinator of Water Activities for Vitality
Eastern Suburbs (WAVES). She has been paid
by the NSW Department of Health under
the Health Education Officers Determination.
evidence before the Tribunal was that this position was established with the
intention that it would be filled by either a registered
nurse or an
occupational therapist or a physiotherapist. Since Mrs De Navi was appointed,
there have been six holders of this position.
Three or four of them have been
nurses; one has been a psychologist and one a social worker. Currently the
position is shared by
three people; a registered nurse on Mondays and Tuesdays,
a social worker on Wednesdays and Mrs De Navi on Thursdays and Fridays.
first question for decision was whether or not Mrs De Navi was practising
nursing when working in this position. If the Tribunal
found that she was
practising as a nurse in this position, the next question would be whether her
application to be re-registered
as a nurse should be refused because she was in
breach of conditions imposed on her registration as both a nurse and midwife
on 2 September 2004. Those conditions were added to over the
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal confirmed the decision of the National Board, made on 4 April 2013, to
refuse to renew the general registration of Mary-Anne
De Navi as a Registered
Nurse on the National Register of Nurses on the grounds that Mrs De Navi did not
meet the National Board’s
Recency of Practice Registration Standard.
Tribunal ordered that Mrs De Navi pay the costs of the National Board in this
matter on the ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
the Tribunal confirmed the decision of the National Board to refuse to renew Mrs
De Navi’s registration as a nurse, it did
not consider it either necessary
or appropriate to consider any issues arising from the conditions that had been
imposed on Mrs De
Navi’s registration as a
Background to this appeal
Mrs De Navi was not seeking to be registered as a midwife, from now on these
reasons for decision will refer only to the issue
of her registration as a
nurse. The documentary material before the Tribunal stated that, other than the
first registrations already
referred to, there were no records held by the NSW
Nurses and Midwives Board confirming Mrs De Navi’s periods of registration
prior to 1994. However, that material does show that Mrs De Navi was registered
from 31 May 1994 until 31 May 1996. Her registration
was renewed on 2 September
2004 and continued until 30 September 2006. The NSW Nurses and Midwives Board
imposed conditions on Mrs
De Navi’s renewed registration as a nurse. Those
conditions have been added to in recent years. The conditions imposed on 2
September 2004 were as follows; that Mrs De Navi:
only practice in employment by a public or private hospital and only if a person
at the level of nurse manager indicates preparedness
to make a written report to
the Board within three months regarding [Mrs De Navi’s] competence and
safety in practice at the
level of registered nurse/midwife;
inform the Board in writing of the name of each employer immediately on
commencement of employment; and
the nurse manager at the employing organisation to provide reports to the
was a gap in her registration from 30 September 2006 until 9 August 2007, a
period of more than 10 months. Mrs De Navi told
the Tribunal she was unaware of
this gap and was unable to explain it. Mrs De Navi was registered again until 31
August 2008. After
a further gap of just over three weeks, she was registered
again on 24 September 2008. This registration continued until all NSW
registrations of nurses were transferred to national registration on 1 July
2010. Mrs De Navi’s national registration was continued
until her name was
removed from the national register relating to registered nurses on 9 April 2013
as a result of a decision of
the New South Wales Board of the Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia (the NSW Board), acting under delegation from the
and Midwifery Board of Australia (the National Board), to refuse to
renew Mrs De Navi’s registration. Mrs De Navi lodged an
appeal against
that decision which was received on behalf of the NSW Board on 2 May 2013.
The conduct of the hearing
9. At the commencement of the hearing, the Deputy Chairperson advised that, as
this was an appeal under section 175 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
), the Tribunal intended to follow
Mahon v Nursing and Midwifery Council of Australia
and conduct this appeal
as a hearing de novo in which both parties could introduce new evidence if
appropriate and the Tribunal could
made a new decision on Mrs De Navi’s
application for renewal of her
registration.
After hearing such an
appeal, the Tribunal may confirm the decision appealed from, amend it or
substitute a new decision for the
decision appealed from. When substituting a
new decision, the Tribunal has the same powers as the National
Deputy Chairperson also informed those present that the Tribunal had concerns
that some of the evidence proposed to be given by
a senior officer of the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) who prepared the agenda
papers relating to Mrs De
Navi’s application for renewal of her
registration for consideration by the NSW Board, was to be given by that officer
expert witness. While the Tribunal did not doubt the experience and the
expertise of the officer in question, it considered that
that officer was too
involved in the decision the subject of this appeal to be able to give evidence
as an independent expert. The
purpose of this advice was to give the
representatives of the National Board the opportunity to seek relevant expert
advice from
a neutral source. The Tribunal notes that, as a result, a number of
paragraphs of the officer’s first affidavit in this matter
were not read.
Mr Smith SC indicated that he wished to present his client’s case first as
she was the appellant, the Tribunal requested
the representatives of both
parties to tender the documents that they intended to rely on to the Tribunal
before any case was opened
and any oral evidence was taken from witnesses. The
documents then tendered, together with any other documents tendered during the
course of the hearing were marked Appellant’s Exhibits A – D and
Respondent’s Exhibits 1 – 8. They are listed
in the appendix to
these reasons for decision. During the course of the hearing, the following gave
evidence to the Tribunal; Anne-Marie
Collings, Mary-Anne De Navi and Anne
The evidence and some comments on it by the
already noted under the heading “background to this appeal”, Mrs De
Navi’s registration as a nurse was subject
to a condition that she only
practice nursing as an employee in either a public or a private hospital and
only if a person at the
level of nurse manager indicated their preparedness to
make a written report to the NSW Nurses and Midwives Board within three months
regarding Mrs De Navi’s competence and safety in practice at the level of
registered nurse.
condition was imposed on Ms De Navi’s registration when she returned to
nursing after being unregistered for eight years
and three months. While this
condition was imposed on Mrs DeNavi’s registration as from 2 September
2004, she did not commence
as a WAVES co-ordinator until 4 November 2004. There
was no evidence before the Tribunal that she had employment as a nurse in the
intervening two months.
Ms De Navi’s cross-examination the following exchange took
Q. Do you accept that that condition [condition 1 on her
registration] was on your registration from September 2004?
A. I accept the condition was on that registration and I showed
that that condition on the registration when I was employed and
assured by my line manager that her line manager was aware of that condition and
that it would be sorted.
Q. Were you aware also then that the second condition on your registration
was that you must inform the Board in writing of the name
of each employer
immediately on commencement of employment?
A. No, I had I was not aware that no, I was not aware.
I I believed I personally believed that it was part of
that process with
the nurse manager being involved.
These two answers represent Mrs De Navi’s position on this matter during
the whole of her evidence. She herself didn’t
comply with the first
condition on her registration because of her view that she had been assured by
her line manager that that person’s
line manager was aware of that
condition and that it would be “sorted”. This was also her
explanation as to why she did
not contact the then NSW Nurses and Midwives Board
to inform them of the name of her employer. She also stated that she thought
the NSW Nurses and Midwives Board was satisfied because they renewed her
registration each year. The Tribunal notes that it was only
when she applied for
renewal of her registration in 2012 that questions began to be asked about her
compliance with the conditions
on her registration.
a letter dated 4 April 2012, Mrs De Navi was advised by AHPRA, as the agency
providing administrative support to the National Board,
to provide material
showing that she had recency of practice.
On 24 May 2012, Mrs De Navi signed her application for renewal of her
registration as a nurse. In it she stated that she had been
practising as a
general nurse for the last nine years. This application was received by AHPRA on
7 June 2012. By an email dated 10
July 2012, Mrs De Navi was asked to provide
AHPRA with a written competency report from her manager/supervisor addressing
the Australian
Nursing and Midwifery Council (ANMC) Competency Standards for a
registered nurse, a recent copy of her CV and demonstration of her
practice. Mrs De Navi did not provide those documents even though asked again by
an email dated 13 September 2012.
its meeting on 4 October 2012, the NSW Board, acting under delegation from the
National Board, resolved that it proposed to refuse
to renew the general
registration of a number of nurses including Mrs De Navi, because they were in
breach of the conditions imposed
on their registration. This set in motion
processes which allowed Mrs De Navi to make further submissions as provided for
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
9 November 2012, AHPRA received a covering letter signed by Mrs De Navi and
dated 8 November 2012. Together with that letter were
Mrs De Navi’s then
current CV with referees, her statement of service and a document headed 10
Competency Standards for the
registered nurse.
its 7 February 2013 meeting the NSW Board resolved that it proposed to refuse to
renew Mrs De Navi’s registration as a registered
nurse on the grounds that
she did not meet the National Board’s Recency of Practice Registration
Standard. Again, this set
in motion processes which allowed Mrs De Navi to make
further submissions as provided for under the
its 4 April 2013 meeting the NSW Board resolved to refuse to renew Mrs De
Navi’s registration as a registered nurse on the
grounds that she did not
meet the National Board’s Recency of Practice Registration
a letter dated 9 May 2013, AHPRA advised Mrs De Navi of that decision. As
already noted, she appealed to the Tribunal against that
Mrs De Navi’s employment as a co-ordinator of Water Activities for
Vitality in the Eastern Suburbs (WAVES) began as temporary
employment for 16
hours a week in November 2004, it lost its temporary nature on 31 July 2006, but
continued at 16 hours per week.
This is the only relevant position that Mrs De
Navi has held since she regained her registration as a nurse in 2004. At the
of the hearing, Ms De Navi remained the WAVES co-ordinator for Thursdays
and Fridays at the Zetland Pool. As such, she is currently
employed by the South
Eastern Sydney Local Health District of NSW Health.
her documentary evidence, Mrs De Navi provided the Tribunal with a position
description for the position of WAVES co-ordinator
dated February 2011. That
position description provided the following summary of the
To improve the health of older men and women of the
five local government areas of the northern network of South East Sydney
Area Health by coordinating the WAVES Program; and
To assist frail and well older people, people with disabilities and
culturally and linguistically diverse people to participate in
ongoing water
activities specific to their requirements by recruitment, placement and support
of participants, leaders and volunteers;
and undertake community networking for
smooth running of the program.
first of the essential criteria for the position required holders of the
position to have relevant tertiary qualifications in
a health-related
discipline. As already noted, the evidence before the Tribunal was that when
this position was created, it was envisaged
that its holders would be either
registered nurses or occupational therapists or physiotherapists. Two essential
criteria were a
demonstrated understanding of, and interest in, and commitment
to the promotion of health of older men and women and people with
disabilities
and an understanding of evidence based health promotion practice. Nevertheless
there is, as Mr Stafford submitted, nothing
in the WAVES co-ordinator’s
position description that requires the holder to carry out specific nursing
the Tribunal notes that there are functions in the position description that it
would be appropriate for nurses to carry
out associated with practising nursing,
but that the position description, of itself, does not lead to the conclusion
that a holder
of the position who was registered as a nurse would necessarily be
practising as a nurse when carrying out the functions of the position.
his questioning of her, Mr Stafford gave Mrs De Navi the opportunity to explain
what parts of the position description related
to the practice of nursing. Mrs
De Navi was unable to do this in a direct way. Nevertheless, Mrs De Navi’s
evidence showed
that the way that the WAVES program was conducted and the issues
that were emphasised had evolved over the time the program had been
operation. A clear example of this was in her examination by Mr Smith when she
was asked to describe what was involved in the
Falls Risk Management assessment
that she did as a WAVES co-ordinator. Mrs De Navi noted that those assessments
were important because
one in four people over the age of 65 have a fall and
that it was “frontline health policy” now to prevent falls and
from falls. She stated that now, “every clinician will be doing a falls
risk assessment”, that falls were everyone's
business, that the issue was
covered by Number 10 National Health and Safety Standard and that it was now
embedded in clinical practice.
example arose from the question asked by Mr Stafford and Mrs De Navi’s
response as follows:
Q. Can I suggest to you that a person in
your role who is not a nurse would also be required to meet the duty set out in
description to respond to inquiries about clinical issues or matters
relating to the lay service from other organisations and clients
and to have
oversight of enrolments and referrals to the program?
A. My response is that the way the program has been moving to a more
clinical framework and with the frontline health [policy] of
complex chronic
disease management, that a generalist nurse is important within the team and as
we've moved through and you've seen
the assessment tools and everything that
we've created, the person that is the social worker refers to us for anything of
nature that she doesn't understand.
the Tribunal accepts that the role of WAVES co-ordinator is conducted in the
context of a community health service which provides
health related services to
improve the health of clients through the use of multi-disciplinary teams, and
that the role does not
have to be carried out by a registered nurse, it is
possible for the role to be carried out in different ways with different
by different co-ordinators. As a result it may be that a co-ordinator,
who is a registered nurse, could carry out the role in such
a way that their
fulfilling of the responsibilities of the position may qualify as the practice
of nursing as defined in the National
Board’s Recency of Practice
Registration Standard (the Standard). In the Standard “practice” is
defined as meaning:
Any role, whether remunerated or not, in
which the individual uses their skills and knowledge as a nurse or midwife. For
the purposes
of this registration standard, practice is not restricted to the
provision of direct clinical care. It also includes working in a
non-clinical relationship with clients, working in management, administration,
education, research, advisory, regulatory or
policy development roles, and any
other roles that impact on safe, effective delivery of services in the
profession and/or use of
their professional skills.
matter will be returned to below.
Smith took Mrs De Navi to various parts of her affidavit evidence. First she was
asked how she attended to intake assessment and
the enrolment of clients. She
responded that typically she went to the community health information management
have the potential client’s intake application and
enrolment form called “Water Exercise Admission Assessment”
with their doctor's clearance letter stating that their patient was fit to
attend the WAVES program. Mrs De Navi told the
Tribunal that this letter meant
that the client has been to the doctor and the doctor had cleared the client as
suitable to take
part safely in a water exercise program and were able to
tolerate water exercise with whatever medical issues they had. Where people
outreach programs or mental health teams had referred clients to the program,
she would contact them.
De Navi then described what actions she took in relation to the application form
referred to in the last paragraph. She told the
Tribunal that she would look at
the community health database to see if the client had had any other involvement
with community health.
If other clinicians had been involved, she would contact
them and would ask them whether they saw anything that would impede their
from entering the program. Mrs De Navi stated that she would ring the
applicant’s general practitioner if necessary.
She would speak to the
generalist nurse from the primary care team. Depending on who was the clinician
recorded in the database,
she would speak to a dementia nurse and someone from
the Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) or the community health assessment therapy
team, an occupational therapist or physiotherapist.
De Navi said she would use those communications to assess the medical condition
of the applicant. However, the Tribunal notes
that it is the role of doctors to
assess medical conditions. When asked if there were other steps she took to
assess an applicant’s
suitability to be admitted to the program, she
stated that she would ring and talk to the client and go through the health
assessment form to find out more information to help with her
assessment. During this contact with the applicant, she would listen
cognitive state, their level of mobility. She stated that, just through talking
and conversations with applicants about
their activities of daily living, she
had another “assessment tool” to inform her decision about admission
to the program.
De Navi told the Tribunal that she made the decision about who gained admission
to the program. She said that there were occasions
when she rejected an
applicant and gave two examples. In one case the applicant was referred to a
land-based as different from a
water-based exercise program. In the other
example the applicant had had many episodes of epilepsy. Mrs De Navi stated;
is a rejection”.
De Navi told the Tribunal that she did a falls assessment of each applicant. A
history is obtained from each applicant because
it is part of the “Water
Exercise Admission Assessment” document. She said that she looked on CHIME
[Community Health
Information Management Enterprise] to see if any assessment
had been done previously. In this assessment she gives each applicant
out of five and then does a care plan which is documented on CHIME. Mrs De Navi
said that, as part of the assessment and
prior to deciding which class to assign
the client to, she would go through an applicant’s medications with them,
look up MIMS to confirm what the drugs the applicant was taking were.
She said she would use her knowledge of pharmacology from her
interpret the information she got from applicants and then she would use that
knowledge but only within the scope of her
practice at WAVES.
her affidavit, Mrs De Navi stated that she provided nursing care according to
documented care and treatment plans. When she was
asked to describe in detail
what care plans she implemented for persons involved in the WAVES program, she
When someone is admitted to the program, and after
the assessment process, it's then analysed or interpreted the data is
and interpreted, and then the individual is placed in the most
appropriate class. Individuals can't just come in and just go, I
want to be in
Monday 2 o'clock, or I want to be in Thursday 3 o'clock; we have
different levels of classes for different levels of
frailty or health status,
and they then I then will place them in that class. I will then also
in part of that care plan take into
account whether their cultural
background, their level of mobility, their level of frailty and will place them
in a class that is
appropriate, and once they are placed in that class, and this
is documented on CHIME, in CHIME in the clinical notes. I then will
them I then will evaluate them once they're in the program,
especially when they're first started to then say, "How did it
go?", speak to
the leader, "How did you think they managed in the class?", and there's
continual evaluation of the client because
each client is treated individually
and their care plan will then be documented. So if there's any change in health
status, that
gets documented in CHIME, and whether they go out of the program
and then have to because a lot of these people will they
to stay in this program. They will leave the program and come back into
the program and so there is constant evaluation for these
clients as they
go stay at remain in the program, and the if
things and their care plan is then evaluated, put in CHIME and
evaluated throughout the whole of the program until they choose to leave
the program.
Tribunal did not consider that this evidence showed that Mrs De Navi either
implemented documented care plans or made care plans
for the clients of the
WAVES program. What seems to be being described is a brief process to assess
whether a client should stay
in the class assigned to them or placed in another
De Navi described the team meetings she attended as meetings for bringing best
practice to the WAVES program. The team’s
manager, a pharmacist, attended
those meetings where occupational health and safety issues were discussed along
with matters of business,
the latest hospital policies and updating of hospital
policies. The WAVES program was also discussed and Mrs De Navi would give a
falls committee report.
Case reviews were conducted for complex cases of
those who were at quite high risk of falling. She and her colleagues would have
meetings to discuss the suitability of a person for the program and what actions
need to be in place or what investigations needed
to be undertaken to ensure
whether a person was suitable for the WAVES program.
her affidavit Mrs De Navi stated that she attended the Falls Committee of the
Community Health Service. During her oral evidence
to the Tribunal, she was
asked what her role, as a health education officer at Prince of Wales Hospital,
was in relation to the falls
prevention committee. She told the Tribunal that
she had been asked by her manager to be the cochair of the Falls Committee. The
Committee’s role was to be the sector service resource, for all clinicians
and the whole of community health, for all falls
prevention information. At that
meeting they not only took the latest information on the Number 10 National
Health and Safety Standard,
falls, and harm from falls, they undertook audits
of, for example, the generalist team, the ACAT team and the Community Health
Team to see if they were doing their falls assessments, whether
they're completing them correctly and whether they're following up
on their use
of the tool. She said that the Committee had a promotion for falls and falls
prevention in April 2013.
her affidavit Mrs De Navi stated that she planned education and collaborated
with other clinicians. When asked to describe in detail
what she did by way of
planning education and collaboration with other clinicians, she said that the
education she did was health
promotion and that the collaboration she did was
with the many clinicians from different areas who were members of the falls
committee. She said that she had educated the public by doing falls
prevention in a community centre in a shopping centre, but also
by speaking
at a pain clinic and, recently by promoting
falls prevention to clinicians in
the context of patients with osteoporosis.
De Navi was then asked: “What would you say to the proposition that the
work you do at Zetland pool simply amounts to undertaking
first aid if clients
require assistance?” She replied:
I would say that I use
my nursing skills and knowledge to evaluate a client and their condition when
they're at the pool at Zetland
on Fridays and using my nursing skills and
knowledge in that evaluation, I would then escalate, give appropriate treatment
have within the scope of where my of the of where I
am in the sense that I don't have technology to use to give aid, to give medical
aid to someone who has whose clinical who has
deteriorated, and I would use what we have put in, what we have set in place in
program for off site, first emergency treatment to then escalate by giving
the immediate treatment using my skills and knowledge,
but also escalating to
bring in expert help by ringing an ambulance, which is the policy.
asked what would she actually do when someone had fallen, she
Okay. Someone has fallen. I would go to the client, I would look at the
client, use my and I would assess the colour, the conscious
the position of the client, the cognitive state. I would then, depending on
that situation, then my use my instincts to
know whether
this how serious the situation is and how rapid my response needs to
asked by one of the nurse members to clarify that statement, she gave a more
fulsome answer. She said:
I would take the pulse of the client,
I would look at the eyes of the client to see how the pupils were, I would look
at the respiratory
rate of the client, I would look at the lips of the client, I
would look at the position of the limbs, I would ask the client whether
would if I suspected something I would ask the client to squeeze my
hands, I would assess whether the client could talk, I
would yes, I
would take the client's pulse, I would look at the colour of the lips, I would
assess look at the client's eyes, and
I would ask them to squeeze my
hand and I would be checking the whole I would run my eyes over the
whole body to be assessing the
physical to be assessing the physical
appearance of the client, ie whether there is a limb that is out of place or
like that. I
would look for swelling of a particular if that client
was complaining of soreness in an area, I would look for swelling, I would
for bruising, I would look for bleeding, I would do you want me to do
treatment or just what I'm looking for.
part of his cross examination of Mrs De Navi, Mr Stafford took her to the
evidence she provided to AHPRA setting out the continuing
professional
development (CPD) she attended or engaged in. He asked her a question and she
gave her answer as set out below:
Q. You suggest, do you, that
over the last four CPD years you have engaged in continuing professional
development that was relevant
to practise as a nurse?
A. I believe the information that I have submitted, especially with regards
to falls and falls prevention, in [N]umber 10 National
Health and Safety
Standard which I have spent a whole body the last three years spent a
lot of time at my job doing, in bettering
my knowledge of a clinical practise
standard that is coming into play.... [In the rest of her answer, Mrs De Navi
dealt with her
efforts, since the new requirement of compulsory continuing
professional development was introduced in 2010 as part of the national
registration scheme, to use the internet information technology to do online
education.]
answer to Mr Stafford’s questions on this issue Mrs De Navi admitted that
she could not identify any continuing professional
development activity that she
engaged in that was not either mandatory hospital training for employees, or
falls related continuing
professional development. Similarly, in relation to
activities that were mandatory hospital training activities for employees she
could not identify any activity listed in her training transcript that was not
provided to both nurses and other employees. This
part of Mr Stafford’s
questioning continued with the following question and answer:
Q. So just to clarify, there was no activity here that was only for nurses,
other than the falls prevention matters?
A. That's identified on this, no. But this this is a new
learning process of it's only just come in and I am learning to get
at doing this.
this line of questioning continued, the Deputy Chairperson intervened to comment
that the nurse members of the Tribunal advised
that hospital mandated
training that is not specific to nurses but covers a number of other
employees is still required of nurses
to be done as part of their continuing
professional development.
Tribunal notes that NSW Health requires all of its employees who are members of
health related professions to do mandatory training
in matters that are not, on
a strict view, directly relevant to the practice of their particular profession,
but are relevant to
the context in which they are employed to carry out their
profession, for example hand hygiene and bullying and harassment. The Tribunal
notes also that NSW Health sees this as part of the CPD of those health
professionals and so far this mandatory training has been
accepted as part of
CPD for renewal of registration purposes. Also the Tribunal suggests that
concentrating CPD in areas of professional
practice in which the health
practitioner practises, particularly learning about new developments in that
area of practice, should
not be the subject of criticism either expressed or
the end of her examination by counsel, the Tribunal asked Mrs De Navi a series
of questions about the scope of her pool-side work
as a co-ordinator of the
WAVES program, particularly in relation to the health and welfare of the clients
and her role in the on-going
physical and cognitive assessment of them as they
present each week for the exercise classes.
purpose of the questions was to ascertain whether or not Mrs De Navi did or
would exercise the skills and knowledge of a nurse
in the way she carried out
the her role as a WAVES co-ordinator and so could be said to be practising
nursing when working in that
position. As it turned out the answers to those
questions also revealed that Mrs De Navi’s knowledge in some basic areas
nursing practice that she would be likely to encounter if she was practising
as a nurse when working as a WAVES co-ordinator was
both limited and not
De Navi gave candid answers to the questions put to her. She told the Tribunal
that she did not have “the mechanical means
of measuring anything”.
This, of itself, would make it hard to practise nursing when working as a WAVES
co-ordinator. She stated
that she did not take blood pressures as this was,
“not within the scope of the program”.
De Navi was taken to paragraph 18 of her affidavit where she stated that,
when considering applicants for admission, she would
review the information when
an applicant reported having high blood pressure, in the opinion of his or her
doctor and asked what
she meant by that. Her reply was:
at the information, I will ring the doctor I will look on CHIME, and like what
is high their high blood pressure, how stable
is their high blood
pressure, is this a thing that is something that is unstable and they visit the
doctor every two weeks, or this
is something that they're having their blood
pressure taken every day at home before, so it's really unstable.
asked what parameters she would be looking for in relation to the
patient’s blood pressure, the normal parameters and what
would concern
her, she was unable to give a clear answer which distinguished between systolic
and diastolic. Nor was she able to
remember the normal parameters of either.
asked about a client with congestive cardiac failure and shortness of breath if
she would palpate the pulse and she replied “That’s
not in the scope
of the program”. She also stated that she would only take a client’s
pulse in an emergency situation.
When asked about pulse rates, Mrs De
Navi’s memory of what appropriate rates were was faulty.
to events at the pool, Mrs De Navi stated at page 12 of her affidavit that;
“Clients may experience impairment of respiratory
function such as
shortness of breath, tachycardia and exertional deterioration. Clients are
advised to have asthma medication poolside
if required for their respiratory
condition”. A Tribunal member asked her if a patient was to become short
of breath and after
looking at their notes that she kept and assuming that they
had exacerbation of their asthma, and were on some medications, would
assist if they were unable to administer the medications themselves by
administering those medications?
answered that if the person was a severe asthmatic and was known to require
asthma medication, especially on exertion, one of
the policies was that the
person have their asthma puffer beside them at the pool so that it could be
administered to them. When
asked if she would administer the medication, she
replied; “No, we would get them out of the pool and then they would
it to themselves”. “But if they can't? Would she
administer?” The answer was; “No, no, I wouldn't
because...”
She then stopped to think about the situation and then
I would have to know what the dosage of
the asthma medication would be and I am not in a position as we
don't I'm not in a position
to give the medication because there's
not a medication chart for me to use to give the medication and I would ask the
give the medication themselves. I would have to find out from
them I would have to assess the situation.
next question asked was that if someone had a history of asthma, what sort of
medications could they be on to treat the asthma,
if they had an acute asthma
attack? Mrs De Navi gave the following answer:
Ventolin is just
to open up the airways and then they will be on a longterm I couldn't
identify a name right here now but they will
be on a longterm medication as well
but that's the medication part. For an emergency situation we use the Ventolin
just to open
up the airways.
De Navi was then asked to read paragraph 13 of her affidavit which states;
“Clients may experience impairment of metabolic
function and unstable
glucose levels due to diabetes”. After that, the following exchange took
Q. Do those conditions manifest themselves at the
A. We have clients that they could manifest them at the pool but we have
clients who are identified diabetic clients and this is
actually becoming more
and more increasing as we get these co-morbidities and morbid obesity but
they these clients are identified
and like there's some clients that
will have something to eat before they go in the pool and yeah.
Q. So if it does manifest itself, what do you do, at the pool?
A. At the pool, it depends. If it's an identified diabetic patient, I would
ask them do they have any, depending on whether it's
a hypo or hyper.
A. Hypo, they would have, do they have any sugar on them and we actually
keep a jar of glucose lollies there because a client has
asked us to keep them
there for her, in particular, but we wouldn't give them out unless the client
asked for them.
Q. What happens if they are hypoglycaemic to the point where they are
virtually unconscious, you know, and they couldn't acknowledge
were would you initiate it?
A. I would call an ambulance. Would I initiate it?
Q. Would you initiate a bit of cordial or some sugar to try and elevate the
A. Personally I would, in my own situation, I would do that. It's in a
health setting. I am unclear of the guidelines for that
as my role within the
Waves program. Certainly if I was working in a nursing well, as a
nurse, working in a nursing situation,
I would be able to act more but you have
got to understand this. I would have to think about that one.
Q. Has this issue arisen during your time there?
A. No because I would know the answer straight away.
Tribunal notes that Mrs De Navi knew that it was appropriate to respond
hypoglycaemia in a client in the way suggested to her,
when she was questioned
by a member of the Tribunal. However, as it was Mrs De Navi’s evidence
that this issue had not arisen
while she was working in the WAVES program, the
Tribunal considered it inappropriate to give the impression that this matter is
the scope of Mrs De Navi’s work at WAVES.
Tribunal also notes Mrs De Navi’s concession in the exchange set out above
that she was not working in “a nursing
situation” and the comment in
her letter dated 19 September 2008 that: “My work has principally been as
a health education
officer However I have also helped out with some community
De Navi was then referred to paragraph 14 of her affidavit which states;
“Many participants experience impairment causing
incontinence
problems.” When asked how she managed this “poolside”, Mrs De
Navi replied that incontinence was one
of the exclusion criteria from the
program. However, she went on to note that she and her colleagues found that a
lot of old people
did not admit to incontinence. Their practice was that if they
found that someone has been incontinent in the change room after the
they would identify the relevant client and speak to them and refer them to go
and see their doctor. Mrs De Navi did not
suggest any other course of action.
The Tribunal did not consider that this response showed Mrs De Navi using
nursing knowledge
and skills, it would have expected a person carrying out
nursing practice to ask a number of other questions in order to make a nursing
assessment in circumstances like these.
next issue raised related to skin integrity, wounds and dressings. Mrs De Navi
referred to this in paragraph 6.10 of her affidavit
when she stated: “If
necessary, skin wounds and ulcers are assessed and, based on my nursing
knowledge, I decide if the client
can enter the pool with a waterproof dressing
and advise the client to seek further medical advice from a wound management
or GP if needed”. At the hearing she was asked what she did if she
saw an ulcer or an exposed break in a client’s skin
integrity. This led to
the following exchange, starting with Mrs De Navi’s reply as
One of the conditions is that you can't go into the
pool with an exposed wound and there's been times where we have where
told clients that they cannot go into the pool because of their wounds,
especially if the appearance of the wound is seeping or suppurating.
will put a waterproof dressing on the wound, so that they can participate in the
program but I would identify the wound
and I would, by identifying the
appearance of the wound, if there's any redness or inflammation around the
wound, I would then advise
them that they need to seek further medical advice
and go and see their doctor because of the wound.
Q. So your intervention at that point would be simply to protect the pool
water and the other clients from exposure to the exigent
from the wound?
A. That's correct. Yes.
Q. Do you remove the dressing at the end of the class?
A. We look at the dressing. I will look at the dressing. Usually the
client will maybe remove the dressing and put but a lot of
will go home and remove the dressing at home. They want to a lot of
clients want to keep it on and remove the dressing.
Q. So this is hospital dressings that you apply?
Q. Not their own?
Q. So if you have applied the [occlusive] dressing, do you document anywhere
that you have applied this?
Q. So you're relying on the patient to remove the dressing. Is there any
follow up or if there's a 92 year old person with an ulcer
and you pop the
dressing on you'd
A. If I was concerned if I had if I had concerns, I
would then ring the client when they got home and I'd say, have you taken the
dressing off because it might be wet and you need to put your own dressing on
and then go and see your GP.
Q. But do you document anywhere in the notes?
Mrs De Navi to be seen to be practising nursing in these circumstances, she
would have had to have noted in the appropriate records
relating to that client
the fact that she put the occlusive dressing on the client and to have made
appropriate arrangements for
follow up to ensure that the dressing was removed.
in her questioning by Tribunal members, Mrs De Navi stated that she took a
client’s pulse in an emergency situation
and that it would be part of her
assessment. She was then asked, after she had have made her assessment and noted
the client’s
deterioration, what she did with that information. She
replied that she would describe the situation in which she had taken a patient
out of a pool as an incident and one which resulted in the client having a
changed health status. She would now document the matter
as an incident in
CHIME. She said that before CHIME it was, “more a verbal thing between the
coordinators. We would be talking
and emailing each other”. The Tribunal
did not see this kind of recording as helping to demonstrate the Mrs De Navi was
nursing when working as a WAVES co-ordinator. The documentation in
CHIME was as an incident report not as a recording of observations
purpose of them being available to other health professionals in their clinical
assessment of the client. The verbal or electronic
passing on of otherwise
unrecorded information prior to CHIME was further away from the sort of
documentation required for the practice
of nursing.
last “poolside” issue was in the form of an example as
A 90 year old person who is ambulating out of the
pool and slipped over and fractured their hip. What symptoms would you, if you
were there in front of them, be looking for to identify that they've actually
fractured their hip? These are basic things, I'm not
asking to answer like a
doctor, as from a nursing perspective?
A. The yelp the pain level and where they're experiencing the
pain. The any immediate localised swelling. The pallor that a
would get from going into partial shock from fracturing their hip,
especially if they're 90. The position of the leg when it's
Q. What would the position of the leg be?
A. Not in the normal anatomical position. It could be deflexed, or it could
be I don't know, it depends on well, no, the
it's a fracture, it could be a fractured head of femur, it
could have been just a fracture in the I'm see where
you're talking
A. You'd say hip. Okay. Okay. But I can without acute medical
examination by, you know, Xray, I wouldn't be game to say that
it's hip, but I
would think from the localised pain and the state of a 90 year old showing,
that would go into showing signs of shock
in those situation, yeah.
Tribunal considered that Mrs De Navi’s response was that of a lay person
rather than that of a nurse. A much more systematic,
analytical response would
have been expected of a nurse, particularly a registered nurse, practising
nursing while carrying out the
role of WAVES co-ordinator.
Tribunal asked Mrs De Navi about significant developments in nursing practice,
first the concept of “Between the Flags”.
While she was unable to
elaborate on it in terms of the WAVES program, the Tribunal accepted her point
that it was more an issue
for an acute care setting.
Tribunal referred Mrs De Navi to the statement in her affidavit that it was her
practice was to identify any untoward side effects
of medications and review the
client's health status. It asked her if a client told her they were on
amitriptyline (amitriptyline
hydrochloride, a treatment for major depression)
and they were not able to tell what the side effects of the amitriptyline were,
what would she explore? Her answer was that she would have to update her
pharmacology a little bit more, but that she would go to
online MIMS and
look it up. The Tribunal considered this as a reasonable
Mr Smith and Mr Stafford were given the opportunity to ask further questions of
Mrs De Navi arising from the questions asked
by members of the Tribunal. Neither
of them asked any questions.
The submissions and the
Tribunal’s findings
69. The Tribunal notes that it is directed by the
exercising function under NSW provisions of the
, its paramount
consideration must be protection of the health and safety of the
The function that the
Tribunal is exercising in this case is hearing and determining an appeal made
under a NSW provision, namely
s. 175 of the
. Consequently, s 3A of
, the terms of which are set out in the first sentence of this
paragraph, applies to the exercise of that jurisdiction as Mr Stafford
The Tribunal also notes
that the first of the objectives of the national registration and accreditation
scheme for health practitioners
set out in the
is to provide for the
protection of the public by ensuring that only health practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent and ethical manner are
registered.
also states that an individual is eligible for (initial) general
registration in a health profession if, in addition to other requirements,
meet the requirements for registration set out in an approved registration
standard for that health
profession.
The relevant National
Board (here the Nursing and Midwifery National Board of Australia) must refuse
to grant registration to an
applicant if they do not meet a requirement for
registration set out in an approved registration standard for that health
profession.
provides that the relevant National Board may refuse to renew an
applicant’s registration on any ground that it could
rely on to refuse to
grant initial registration.
his written submissions to the Tribunal, Mr Stafford submitted that the Tribunal
ought to confirm the National Board’s (delegated)
decision to refuse to
renew Mrs De Navi’s registration as a nurse because she does not meet the
National Board’s Recency
of Practice Registration Standard (for nurses and
midwives). This is because, in the chief element of Mr Stafford’s
submission,
Mrs De Navi has not practised nursing for 24 years. He further
submitted, and the evidence clearly shows, that she was not registered
nurse between 31 May 1996 and 2 September 2004 and her work as a part-time
co-ordinator of the WAVES program, which she commenced
in November 2004 and
continues to undertake, did not constitute the practice of nursing.
Consequently, she has not practised nursing
for at least three months (456
hours) in the last five years.
Stafford’s second submission was that if Mrs De Navi was found to be
practising nursing since November 2004, she should be
refused renewal of her
registration because she has been in breach of the conditions imposed on her
registration since November 2004.
Smith submitted that Mrs De Navi’s work as a part-time co-ordinator of the
WAVES program involved her in the practice of
nursing so that her registration
as a nurse should have been renewed rather than refused renewal.
the heading “Summary”, the Standard states:
and midwives must have undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate competence
in their professions within the proceeding
five years.
Nurses and midwives who are returning to practice after a
break of more than five years must satisfactorily complete
a program or assessment process that is approved by the Board.
The Standard makes it clear that it applies to nurses and midwives seeking
renewal of registration. Under the heading of “Requirements”
1. Nurses and midwives must demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Board, that they have undertaken
sufficient practice, as defined in (2) below, in their
professions within the preceding five years to maintain
competence.
2. Nurses and midwives will fulfil the requirements
relating to recency of practice if they can demonstrate
one, or more of the following:
a) practice in their profession within the past five
years for a period equivalent to a minimum of
three months full time
b) successful completion of a program or
assessment approved by the Board, or
c) successful completion of a supervised practice
experience approved by the Board.
3. Practice hours are recognised if evidence is provided to demonstrate:
b) the role involved the application of nursing and/or midwifery knowledge
already noted, under the heading “Definitions”,
“Practice” is stated to mean:
Any role, whether
remunerated or not, in which the individual uses their skills and knowledge as a
nurse or midwife. For the purposes
of this registration standard, practice is
not restricted to the provision of direct clinical care. It also includes
working in a
direct non-clinical relationship with clients, working in
management, administration, education, research, advisory, regulatory or
development roles, and any other roles that impact on safe, effective delivery
of services in the profession and/or use of
their professional skills.
the Tribunal understood Mr Stafford’s submission, it was to the effect
that, in order to be entitled to renewal of her registration
as a nurse, Mrs De
Navi had to have undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate competence in
nursing within the last five years.
Further that, given the facts in this case,
she could demonstrate that showing that, in the last five years, she had
practised nursing
for a period equivalent to a minimum of three months full time
(465 hours). Hours worked would be recognised as practice hours if
the evidence
provided demonstrated that the role involved the application of nursing
knowledge and skills. The nursing practice that
had to be shown was as widely
defined as in the definition section of the Standard.
thrust of Mr Smith’s submission was that Mrs De Navi could show that she
had undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate
competence in nursing within
the last five years simply by demonstrating that, in the last five years, she
had practised nursing
for a period equivalent to a minimum of three months full
time (465 hours). He accepted that for hours worked to be recognised as
hours, the evidence provided must demonstrate that the role carried out by the
person seeking renewal of their registration
involved the application of nursing
knowledge and skills. He also acceaspted that the nursing practice that had to
be shown was as
widely defined in the definition section of the
was the Tribunal’s understanding that it was Mr Smith’s submission
that when a nurse was doing the job of WAVES co-ordinator,
she or he would be
doing it as a nurse as she or he would be bringing the skills set of a nurse to
the position. When asked by the
Deputy Chairperson; “If the nurse and the
OT were doing exactly the same thing in the same job, would you be saying the OT
would be doing it as an occupational therapist and the nurse as a nurse?”
; Mr Smith answered; “Yes, that's right”.
He went on to add that
this was the case because a nurse would bring a different skills set to the
Tribunal does not accept that submission. However, Mr Smith made further
submissions on this matter. These are returned to below.
is practised in a number of different contexts, for example in a high technology
hospital, or as a community nurse or in a
multi-purpose service or as a remote
area nurse, and with different degrees of intensity, for example the intensity
of practice in
a busy operating theatre compared with night shift in a small
residential aged care facility or with different levels of exercise
technical skills of nursing or of the knowledge of nursing on the part of nurse
administrators in hospitals or in those nursing
positions relating to
registration and regulation of nurses.
practice of nursing has changed greatly in the last 50 years with significantly
different kinds of nursing now available to meet
perceived needs. There is no
reason not to believe that nursing will change and develop in the not too
distant future in ways in
ways that have not yet been foreseen.
these circumstances, it would be unwise to adopt a limiting approach to what
comprises the practice of nursing and the circumstances
in which it can be
practised. The definition of “practice” in the Standard recognises
and is broad in its scope.
noted previously, the Tribunal considers that nursing can be practised by the
holder of a position in the context of an organisation
that provides health
related services to improve the health of clients through the use of
multi-disciplinary teams, and that where
the role does not have to be carried
out by a registered nurse, and where it is possible for the role to be carried
out in different
ways with different emphases by different holders of the
position. What is key is that the holder of the position who is a nurse
out the role by practice that fits the definition of practice in the Standard.
In particular the person must carry out the
role in a way that uses their
knowledge and skills as a nurse.
is apparent from what the Tribunal has just stated in the last paragraph that it
agrees with Mr Smith’s further submission
that the role of WAVES
co-ordinator is carried out healthcare setting in which different skill sets can
be used and that this does
not disqualify a nurse from satisfying practice
requirements when they are using their skills in doing the task if they are
and knowledge of a nurse. In support of this submission, Mr Smith
submitted that part of the task was to monitor client's health
conditions when
they were at the pool and that involved a nurse bringing to bear nursing skills
of a particular character to that
Stafford submitted that that the definition of “practice” described
practice as a role in which the individual used
their skills and knowledge as a
nurse and that the role of a Health Education Officer, which was the formal
designation of a WAVES
co-ordinator was not a role in which an individual was to
use nursing skills. Because that role could be performed by a person who
have any practical professional health or medical knowledge and skill, it was
not to the point that that a particular individual
might bring nursing knowledge
and skill to bear in carrying out that role.
Tribunal did not consider that it was inconsistent with the way the term
“role” was used in the definition of “practice”
to extend to the way a particular holder of a Health Education Officer who
carried out the function of a WAVES co-ordinator
carried out that function. The
Tribunal did not consider either necessary or wise, in this case, to limit the
meaning of the term
“role” in the way submitted by Mr Stafford.
did the Tribunal consider that its approach in this case, given the facts of
this case, was inconsistent with either the
, two recent appeals
against refusal by the National Board to renew the registration of a nurse. In
neither of those cases did the
Tribunal find that the evidence showed that the
person seeking renewal of their registration as a nurse had done sufficient
hours of nursing to justify their claim for re-registration.
question for the Tribunal in this case is whether, when Mrs De Navi was working
as the co-ordinator of the WAVES program, she
was actually using her knowledge
and skills as a nurse in the way she carried out the functions of that position.
would be apparent from the evidence set out above and the Tribunal’s
comments on that evidence, that the Tribunal was not
satisfied that that
evidence showed Mrs De Navi using her background in nursing to such an extent
that it could be said that she
was using her knowledge and skills as a nurse to
a sufficient degree, when she worked as co-ordinator of the WAVES program, for
Tribunal to state that she was practising nursing when carrying out that
role. The evidence showed that Mrs De Navi’s knowledge
in some basic areas
of nursing practice that she would be likely to encounter if she was practising
as a nurse when working as a
WAVES co-ordinator was both limited and tentative.
As she said herself, she did not have “the mechanical means of measuring
anything” and common observations taken by nurses, taking blood pressures
or pulses were “not within the scope of the
program”. Her responses
to questions about situations that did or could arise when she was working as
co-ordinator of the
WAVES program showed limited use of nursing skill and
knowledge and limited ability to apply analytical skills expected of a nurse
those situations. There was little evidence that Mrs De Navi documented issues
consistent with nursing practice,
at least until the arrival of the CHIME recording system.
De Navi’s affidavit gave the impression of a greater number of nursing
issues arising in her work at the WAVES program than
closer questioning
indicated actually occurred. While Mrs De Navi made falls assessments of
clients, she was unable to show in her
evidence that she developed care and
treatment plans. In her oral evidence to the Tribunal and in a letter she wrote
in 2008, Mrs
De Navi gave acknowledgements that she was not working as a nurse.
these reasons, and in the light of the evidence and the submissions, the
Tribunal confirmed the decision of the National Board
in relation to Mrs De Navi
appealed against.
of this decision, the Tribunal did not consider it either necessary or
appropriate to deal with any issues raised by the conditions
Navi’s registration prior to the National Board’s decision appealed
Stafford submitted that Mrs De Navi should pay the National Board’s costs
in this matter. Mr Smith’s submission was
to the effect that if Mrs De
Navi succeeded in establishing errors on the part of the National Board, then he
would wish to make
submissions on costs when what the detail of the Tribunal
the Tribunal has confirmed the National Board’s decision and not made any
findings that could be construed as Mrs De Navi
having succeeded in establishing
errors on the part of the National Board, the Tribunal did not consider that it
was necessary to
seek submissions on costs from Mr Smith. Also, Mr Smith has
already confirmed that the Tribunal has the discretion to award costs,
Tribunal considered that it could proceed to make a costs order without any
unfairness to Mrs De Navi.
Tribunal ordered that Mrs De Navi pay the costs of the National Board in this
matter on the ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
Tribunal made its orders accordingly.
Dated: 21 November 2013
Nick O’Neill
Deputy Chairperson
Nurse Member
Scott Hillsley
Nurse Member
John Davies
[2013] NSWNMT 4.
Comacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST 1
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT
Section 175C of the
Section 3A of the
Note that section 175A setting
out who are the parties
section 175
appeals is a NSW provision while section
175B relating to costs and section 175C which sets out the order that a tribunal
after hearing such an appeal are not NSW
provisions.
Section 3(2)(a)
Section 82(1)(c)E
Section 112(2)(a)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT
Smith v Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT 10.
Matter No: 030/2013
APPEAL AGAINST DECISION OF NATIONAL
Mary-Anne De NAVI
Respondent:
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Helen Stirling (Nurse Member)
Hillsley (Nurse Member)
John Davies (Lay Member)
Date and Place of
15, 16, 17 and 25 October 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
and Reasons for Decision
21 November 2013
The Tribunal made the following orders in dismissing the appeal in this
Tribunal confirms the decision of the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
(the National Board), made on 4 April 2013, to
refuse to renew the general
registration of Mary-Anne De Navi as a Registered Nurse on the National Register
of Nurses on the grounds
that Mrs De Navi did not meet the National
Board’s Recency of Practice Registration Standard.
Tribunal orders that Mrs De Navi pay the costs of the National Board in this
matter on the ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
Dated: 21 November
Nick O’Neill
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter