URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1331.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Laing & Anor v Port Macquarie-Hastings Council & Ors [2025] NSWSC 1331 (11 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Laing & Anor v Port Macquarie-Hastings Council & Ors
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1331
Hearing Date(s):
24–26 June 2025
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Equity - Real Property List
1. The parties are to liaise with respect to the terms of final orders to
give effect to the judgment and to quell all aspects of
the controversy between
2. The proceedings be stood over to 9 December 2025.
Catchwords:
LAND LAW – Public roads – dedication and acceptance between
1892 and 1920 – whether parties instead intended private
rights of way
– whether mortgagor of Torrens land competent to dedicate public road
– whether Council’s statutory
title to public road defeated by
registered proprietor’s indefeasibility of title
Legislation Cited:
Lands Act 1869 (Vic)
Local Government Act 1906
(NSW) ss 73,
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW) ss 4, 222, 232, 237
Local Government
(Shires) Act 1905
Real Property Act 1862 (NSW) ss 43,
Real Property Act 1900
Real Property
(Amendment) Act 1970
Roads Act 1993
Cases Cited:
City of Canada Bay Council v Bonaccorso Pty Ltd
(2007) 71 NSWLR 424
Dabbs v Seaman
(1925) 36 CLR 538
[1925] HCA 26
Handevel Pty Ltd
v Comptroller of Stamps (Victoria)
(1985) 157 CLR 177
[1985] HCA 73
Macquarie City Council v Luka
[1999] NSWCA 447
Little v Dardier
[1891] NSWLawRp 41
NSWLR (Eq) 319
Newington v Windeyer
(1985) 3 NSWLR 555
Palmisano v Hawse
[2003] NSWSC 566
Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Limited v Campbelltown Municipal
(1960) 105 CLR 401
[1960] HCA 62
President of the Shire of Narracan
(1906) 3 CLR 846
[1906] HCA 34
Re Forrest Trust; Trustees,
Executors and Agency Co Ltd v Anson
[1952] VicLawRp 51
[1953] VLR 246
The Council of the City of
Shoalhaven v The Director-General National Parks & Wildlife Service &
[2004] NSWCA 163
Vickery v Municipality of Strathfield (1911) 11 SR (NSW)
Weber v Ankin
[2008] NSWSC 106
Principal judgment
Robert James Laing (First Plaintiff)
Tronmill Pty Limited (Second
Port Macquarie-Hastings Council (First Defendant)
Sean Bernard
McInherny (Second Defendant)
Peter Robert Bugden (Third Defendant)
Anne Bugden (Fourth Defendant)
Cathrowe Nominees Pty Ltd (Fifth
June Mary Freeman (Seventh Defendant)
Bernard Bede McInherny
(Eighth Defendant)
Michael James McInherny (Ninth Defendant)
Representation:
R S Lancaster SC / S Hanscomb (Plaintiffs)
J Doyle (Second
Solicitors:
HWL Ebsworth (Plaintiffs)
Specialists (Second Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/00207217
case is about a road which runs south from Telegraph Point Road near the Pacific
Highway inland from Port Macquarie. Made of
dirt and gravel, the road is about
2km long and passes through a State Forest to three rural holdings on a
peninsula formed by the
Hastings River. In order not to prejudge the issues in
the case, I will refer to the road as the Wharf Road Alignment. The Plaintiffs
are the owners of one of the rural holdings and claim that a public road runs
down the full length of the Wharf Road Alignment from
Telegraph Point Road to
the river reserve on the banks of the river. The Second Defendant owns one of
the other rural holdings. He
and his brothers are the registered proprietors of
the Wharf Road Alignment. He denies that there is a public road, although he
that the Plaintiffs have an implied right of way over part of the Wharf
Road Alignment. In 2022 he erected a fence and gate across
the Wharf Road
Alignment although the gate is generally left open.
resolution to the controversy lies in events which occurred between 1890 and
1920 when the rural holdings and the surrounding
land was brought under the
Torrens system as part of an aborted plan to subdivide a larger parcel of land
into 47 allotments serviced
by a network of twelve roads. The subdivision was
called the Irvine Estate.
stated above, the Wharf Road Alignment commences at Telegraph Point Road which
was previously named Kempsey Road. In these reasons
I will use the name which
best fits the context. In 1890, Kempsey Road was the nearest public road.
nature of the case makes it necessary to set out the details of the original
parcel of land and each of the changes of title from
1890 to the present. It is
a lengthy history. To enhance the readability of these reasons, the detailed
history is set out in Schedule
1. Pertinent aspects of the history are referred
to in the reasons as they progress.
Proceedings before the
Plaintiffs bring these proceedings to seek final adjudication of their
contention that the Wharf Road Alignment is a public road
for the purposes of
Roads Act 1993
ancillary issues also arise, specifically the identity of the owner of the strip
of land upon which the Wharf Road Alignment
is located, the state of the
Register maintained by the Registrar-General, whether the Plaintiffs have
alternative rights of way
and whether the Second Defendant ought to be ordered
to remove his gate. The answers to the ancillary issues will be informed by
question whether there is a public road, so that issue must be decided
criticising any party, the position of each remaining active party and some of
the other parties has changed since the litigation
commenced on 28 June 2023,
including on the first day of the trial. Some of the changes were significant,
such as the local council’s
transition from an active contradictor to a
submitting appearance. Other changes have been more nuanced. The changes
reflect, and
in some instances have been directly caused by, revelations about
the positions of those concerned with the Wharf Road Alignment
over the last 135
years. As the narrative of background facts and the reasons below show,
attitudes to the Wharf Road Alignment have
changed from time to time. Given the
changes, it is appropriate to determine the case by reference not just to the
pleadings but
also to the way the case was conducted at trial. Neither remaining
active party claimed to have suffered material prejudice from
the way the trial
was conducted by any other party.
Orientating the land
sufficient precision for current purposes, the following plan depicts the layout
of the land:
Wharf Road Alignment is the long vertical red line, terminating at the top at
Kempsey Road. Although the plan depicts the bottom
end of the Wharf Road
Alignment as terminating short of the Hastings River, it in fact runs all the
way down to the 100-foot river
bank reserve. The alignment for Hastings Road
runs to the right and the alignment for Marks Road runs up from the end of the
Road, again all the way to the edge of the coloured land despite what
is depicted in the plan. The other important road alignment
is for Freemans Road
which runs away from the left of the Wharf Road alignment just below the
“Freeman” label.
Plaintiffs’ land is the orange parcel on the left labelled
“Freeman”. It is comprised of a number of lots. Lot
12 is as the
bottom. The Second Defendant’s land is the pale green parcel labelled
“McInherny”. One of his brothers
owns the yellow parcel on the right
and the other brother owns the red parcel. The Budgen parcel is blue. The Bugden
parcel was previously
owned by Mr Downes whose name appears on many of the
The Plaintiffs’ case
Plaintiffs’ primary case is that in 1890 the National Building Land and
Investment Company was the registered proprietor
of a large parcel of land which
included all the land depicted in the plan at [8] above plus more land to the
north west. It is submitted
that in about 1890 or 1892 the
NBLI Company
dedicated the Wharf Road Alignment as a public road and the dedication was
accepted by the conduct of the general public in the years
which followed.
Acceptance of the dedication was complete by no later than 1 January 1920 when
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW) commenced. Thus, the Wharf Road
Alignment became a public road at common law. Upon commencement of the
Government Act 1919
the public road vested in fee simple in the local
council by virtue of s 232 and the local council became entitled to be
as the proprietor of the strip of land upon which the Wharf Road
Alignment is located. When the
Roads Act 1993
was subsequently enacted,
the Wharf Road Alignment was taken to be a public road for the purposes of the
new statute under cl 15 of
the transitional provisions. By virtue of
the statute it continued to be vested in fee simple in the local council. At no
time since the acceptance of the original dedication
has the public road been
closed. It follows that the Wharf Road Alignment continues as a public road
today. The Plaintiffs submit
that the Court should so find and grant such relief
as is necessary to quell the controversy between the parties.
as an alternative, if the Wharf Road Alignment is today privately owned by the
Second Defendant and his brothers, then the
Plaintiffs submit that rights of way
exist which benefit their land and burden the Wharf Road Alignment.
Plaintiffs’ case is directed to the Wharf Road Alignment for its full
length from today’s intersection with Telegraph
Point Road (and thence to
the Pacific Highway) all the way down to the 100-foot reserve on the banks of
the Hastings River. The Plaintiffs
make no claim in relation to the Hastings,
Marks and Freemans road alignments. The geography means that they have no
interest in
the other roads.
Mr McInherny’s case
contradictor is the Second Defendant who I will refer to as
Mr McInherny
I will refer to Mr McInherny and his two brothers collectively as the
McInherny brothers
. The McInherny brothers are the latest generation of a
family which has owned relevant land since 1892. It is not necessary to
distinguish
between the individual ancestors so I will refer to them
collectively as the
McInherny family
McInherny first filed a Defence on 19 September 2023. Without objection, his
most recent Defence was filed in Court on the first
day of the trial.
filing the new Defence so late, Mr McInherny’s case needs to be understood
by reference to the way it was conducted
over the subsequent days of the trial.
At some points there is a lack of clarity, but three essential contentions may
be distilled
from the submissions made in writing and orally.
Mr McInherny disputes the inferences to be drawn from the events prior to 1
January 1920, both as to the dedication of a public
road by the NBLI Company and
as to the acceptance of the dedication by the general public. Apart from
observations about the sparsity
and imprecision of the Plaintiffs’
evidence about events so long ago, the cornerstone of Mr McInherny’s first
is the positive contention that private rights of way over the Wharf
Road Alignment were created by operation of law each time an
otherwise isolated
parcel of land adjacent to the Wharf Road Alignment was subdivided from it. Mr
McInherny says that such a conclusion
is equally supported by the facts and
uniquely supported by notations on certificates of title which were subsequently
the Registrar-General. The creation of private rights of way is said
to be significant because they undermine the inference that
the NBLI Company
intended to dedicate a public road. If private rights of way were intended, a
public road would have been unnecessary.
Mr McInherny goes so far as to submit
that a public road cannot exist because it would be inconsistent with the
private rights of
McInherny’s
second argument
is that the NBLI Company was not
legally capable to dedicate a public road on any part of its land because the
land was encumbered
by a mortgage to a bank. Drawing on the reasoning of the
High Court in
President of the Shire of Narracan v Leviston
(1906) 3 CLR
[1906] HCA 34
, Mr McInherny submits that a mortgagor is not able to
dedicate a road over mortgaged land any more than a tenant is able to do so
land held under a lease.
McInherny’s
third argument
is that on 21 September 1942 the
Registrar-General issued Certificate of Title Volume 5345 Folio 227 in which the
McInherny family
was recorded as the registered proprietor of an estate in fee
simple of a parcel of land which included the Wharf Road Alignment.
Mr McInherny
submits that, by reason of
Real Property Act 1900
McInherny family thereafter held its estate in the Wharf Road Alignment
absolutely free from all other estates and interests
that were not recorded on
the Register. No estate or interest in a public road was recorded on the
Register for the local council.
Therefore the McInherny family took its interest
free of any public road. Further, on 20 July 2023 the Registrar-General
DP 1296248 by which land, including the Wharf Road Alignment, was
created as a separate parcel of land of which the McInherny brothers
are now the
registered proprietors of an estate in fee simple.
continues to
operate, with the result that the McInherny brothers hold their estate free of
any estate or interest in a public road
for the local council. Hence, if
previously there was a public road (which Mr McInherny denies) it did not
survive the McInherny
family obtaining indefeasibility of title by no later than
21 September 1942.
McInherny submits that the ultimate conclusion to be reached from these
arguments is that there is no public road on the land located
in the Wharf Road
McInherny accepts that the corollary of his ultimate conclusion is that the
Plaintiffs’ land has the benefit of private rights
of way over the Wharf
Road Alignment. Whilst Mr McInherny contends that a mortgagor is not competent
to dedicate a public road, he
submits that there is nothing to prevent a
mortgagor from granting a right of way. Mr McInherny further submits that
does not apply to a right of way because of the exception to
indefeasibility in
s 42(1)(a1).
Mr McInherny’s acceptance of rights of way
may go so far as to accept that the Plaintiffs are entitled to have them
on the Register.
matter emphasised by Mr McInherny is that on a number of occasions over the last
thirty years the local council has denied
that the Wharf Road Alignment is a
public road. Mr McInherny has not identified the legal significance of
Council’s attitude
after 1920 and it is not otherwise apparent. In any
event, the Council is a party to these proceedings and has now filed a
appearance (see below). The Council’s subjective view about the
legal status of the Wharf Road Alignment may be put to one
side, as may be the
conduct of Council after 1 January 1920.
Positions of the other
then to the other Defendants in these proceedings, the First Defendant is the
present local council. The local council for
the relevant land has changed over
the centuries with mergers and adjustment, but neither party attributed any
significance to the
precise identity of the local council at any particular
time. I will refer to it as the
. The Council initially played an
active role in these proceedings. On 20 September 2023 it filed a Defence in
which it did not admit
that the Wharf Road Alignment is a public road. In July
2024 the Council served an Affidavit which reported a search of its records
which turned up very little of relevance and nothing of sufficient antiquity to
inform the issues in the case. There are some relevant
Council papers, but they
were located by research undertaken on behalf of the Plaintiffs. On 19 February
2025 the Council changed
its position. It filed a submitting appearance and has
played no further role. The evidence does not explain why the Council changed
its position.
Third, Fourth and Fifth Defendants may collectively be referred to as the
Bugdens. They purchased Lots 9, 10 and 11 from Mr Downes
in 1992. The Bugdens
previously supported the Plaintiffs. However, on 6 March 2025 they struck out on
their own and filed a Cross-Claim
against the Council and the McInherny brothers
by which they asserted that the Wharf Road Alignment is burdened by a right of
which benefits their land. It is not clear whether the rights asserted in
the Cross-Claim were intended to be consistent with the
Plaintiffs’
assertion that there is a public road. In any event, shortly before the trial
commenced the Bugdens settled with
Mr McInherny. Pursuant to the settlement deed
Mr McInherny agreed to take steps to have recorded on the Register a right of
part of the Wharf Road Alignment which benefits the Bugdens’
land. Mr McInherny’s obligations included obtaining the
consent of his
brothers. The Bugdens then discontinued their Cross-Claim and filed a submitting
appearance.
Sixth and Seventh Defendants are the Freemans, from whom the Plaintiffs
purchased their land by a contract dated 24 June 2022.
As the registered
proprietors when the proceedings commenced, the Freemans were necessary parties.
The sale to the Plaintiffs subsequently
completed and the Plaintiffs are now the
registered proprietors. The Freemans were never active, although Mr Freeman and
his daughter,
Ms Barrie, gave evidence supportive of the Plaintiffs’ case.
Eighth and Ninth Defendants are Mr McInherny’s brothers who have submitted
to the orders of the Court. They were not called
to give evidence.
Registrar-General is not a party to the proceedings. Mr McInherny submitted that
the Registrar-General is a necessary party but
correspondence from the
Registrar-General suggests otherwise, at least as at the date of the trial.
Since the conclusion of the trial
Mr McInherny has sought to adduce evidence
that the Registrar-General has now acceded to his request (Request AV 148714) to
a right of way notified on the Register as burdening the Wharf Road
Alignment and benefitting the Bugden’s land. The Plaintiffs
do not oppose
this part of the further evidence being adduced. The Affidavit of Greg Stilianou
affirmed 31 July 2025 may be taken
as read in the proceedings and the exhibit to
it adduced into evidence and marked Exhibit GS-2.
is unclear whether the post-trial developments with the Register now necessitate
the Registrar-General being added as a party.
The liaison between the parties as
to the terms of the final orders ought to address that issue to the extent
Was a public road created at common law?
Legal principles
a public road exists along the Wharf Road Alignment it was created at the end of
the nineteenth century or at the beginning of
the twentieth century. There is no
dispute between the parties that prior to 1920 a public road could be dedicated
at common law
by the owner of the land having an intention to dedicate it as a
public road and the general public accepting the proffered dedication.
Newington v Windeyer
(1985) 3 NSWLR 555
at 558–559, McHugh JA, with
whom Kirby P and Hope JA agreed, summarised the principles as follows:
“At common law the making of a public road required the fulfilment of
two conditions: an intention to dedicate the land as
a public road and
acceptance by the public of the proffered dedication:
Trustee Co of New South Wales Ltd v Campbelltown Municipal
CLR 401 at 420; Pratt and McKenzie,
of Highways
, 21st ed (1967) at 16. The dedication could be made expressly or
be inferred from the conduct of the owner. The lodging of a plan
subdivision in a Land Titles Office, showing a road as an open street and
giving access to subdivided lots,
is evidence from which an inference of
dedication as a public road can be drawn:
Attorney-General v City
Bank of Sydney
(1920) 20 SR (NSW) 216
Permanent Trustee Co of New South Wales Ltd
v Campbelltown Municipal Council
(at 412, 415, 422). When a road
is left in a
subdivision and runs into a public road system, the inference
usually to be drawn is that it was dedicated as a public road unless
to the road is
prevented by fencing or other action:
Trustee Co of New South Wales Ltd v Campbelltown Municipal
(at 415) per Menzies J. In an
appropriate case, the contents
of leases, plans of subdivision, and maps, although not public documents,
may, nevertheless, allow
an inference of
dedication to be drawn. Dedication
to the public may also be presumed from uninterrupted user of the road by
the public:
Turner v Walsh
(1881) 6 App
Cas 636 at 639,
Folkestone Corporation v Brockman
[1914] UKLawRpAC 6
[1914] AC 338
352, 362. But care must be taken to distinguish evidence of user, from
dedication can properly be inferred, from mere evidence of continual use
even for a very long period. At common law, continual
trespassing could
create a public road. The evidence must raise the inference that, at
some point of time, the owner dedicated the road to the
Palmisano v Hawse
[2003] NSWSC 566
, Bryson J said at [7]:
“The law relating to the creation of public roads operated differently in
the 19th Century to the highly structured processes
under modern statutes, in
which public roads are created by unmistakably clear processes of dedication,
with registration of survey
plans, and only with the agreement of the local or
other public authority to which ownership of the land passes. At common law a
public road was created by dedication of land for that purpose by the owner of
the land, whether the Crown or a private owner, and
by acceptance by the public
of the dedication. Dedication was not usually a formal act, but was to be
understood from events such
as leaving ways open to the public when constructing
buildings or laying out subdivisions, referring to land as a road in a plan
published in some way such as exhibiting it when lands are offered for sale, or
even more usually simply by leaving the land open
for unobstructed public use
for a lengthy period. Acceptance of a dedication was to be understood from use
by the public for an extended
period. Title to the land over which the public
road ran was not altered by its dedication; the land remained the property of
dedicating owner, but became subject to public rights.”
intention to dedicate is to be determined objectively: the
at 858–859 (Griffith CJ). As the passage quoted above from McHugh
JA’s judgment in
Newington v Windeyer
states, an intention to
dedicate need not be express but may be inferred from conduct. An example of
such conduct may be lodging a
plan of subdivision with the Registrar-General
which depicts part of the land as an “open street” giving access to
lots. This is especially so where the road connects to the existing
public road system.
Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Limited v Campbelltown Municipal Council
(1960) 105 CLR 401
[1960] HCA 62
, Menzies J said at 415; [6]:
“...I regard it as an artificial and unreal conception that when roads are
left in subdivision they are left as private roads
merely for the use of those
who want to get to land in the subdivision. It seems more realistic to treat
such roads as shown as part
of the general roadway system and as open to all so
that unless access is prevented by fencing or otherwise, roads shown upon a plan
of subdivision are properly to be regarded as open to the public, with the
consequence that if there is use of such a road as a means
of passage by any
members of the public, whether owners of land in the subdivision or not, then it
is a public road.”
example of conduct from which an intention to dedicate may be inferred is where
the attributes of a subdivision suggest that
there is an expectation that
building work will occur at the subdivided lots necessitating access from the
public road network:
Newington v Windeyer
cases make clear that the conduct from which an intention to dedicate may be
inferred need not be constituted by physical action
in relation to the land. It
may be inferred from the creation and use of documents such as leases, plans and
maps. In an appropriate
case they need not be public documents:
Newington v
to acceptance of the dedication, it may also be inferred from conduct. The
conduct may include the public using the relevant
land as a road:
[2008] NSWSC 106
(White J). Use by the public includes
use both by people who have just purchased land in the subdivision and by people
who have not:
Campbelltown Municipal Council
at 415; [6].
addition to acceptance being inferred from the conduct of the general public it
may also be inferred from the conduct of the local
council. Such conduct is
sometimes described as being “on behalf of” the general public. It
may include the local council
recording the road in its register of roads:
Weber v Ankin
at [68]. It may include the local council spending public
money on the road, especially in the early twentieth century when, under
Local Government Act 1906
councils did not have control and
management of roads unless they were public roads:
Weber v Ankin
[71]–[72]. Evidence of a local council’s expenditure on a road at
that time is evidence from which it may be inferred
that the dedication had been
accepted by the public:
Weber v Ankin
to 1920 there was no requirement that the local council formally approve the
dedication of a new public road:
Weber v Anakin
at [51]. Prior to 1920
the dedication of a new public road did not, without more, change the title of
the land across which the public
road ran. Although the local council had
control of the public road and was entitled to carry out works on it, the local
did not have rights of ownership:
Weber v Ankin
New South Wales the creation of public roads became the subject of statutory
regulation when the
Local Government Act 1906
and then the
Government Act 1919
were enacted. Where a dedication of a public road had
been proffered before the commencement of the former statute, common law
of the dedication was still possible up to the commencement of the
latter statute on 1 January 1920:
Weber v Ankin
at [67]. In such a case
the conduct of the general public up until 1 January 1920 may be considered to
determine whether the dedication
was accepted.
conduct after 1 January 1920 is not directly relevant to whether the dedication
was accepted, it may support an inference about
conduct which occurred before
Weber v Ankin
1 January 1920 dedication of a new public road has been governed by the
Government Act 1919
Lake Macquarie City Council v Luka
[1999] NSWCA
(Handley JA with whom Sheller and Stein JJA agreed).
Application of the principles to the facts of this case –
dedication by the NBLI Company
primary facts set out in the Schedule show that the Wharf Road Alignment was
brought under the provisions of the
Real Property Act 1862
(NSW) on 7 or
8 October 1892 when DP 2837 was registered. The Plaintiffs submit that the NBLI
Company dedicated the Wharf Road Alignment
as a public road by registering DP
2837 depicted a subdivision of the NBLI Company’s entire parcel of land
into 47 lots of broadly consistent dimensions arranged
in a regular linear
pattern throughout the subdivision. Twelve road alignments were depicted amongst
the 47 lots running either parallel
or perpendicular to each other and arranged
in a way that ensured that each of the 47 lots could be accessed by a road. The
roads were all connected so it was possible to get from any road to any
other road. At three places the road network was depicted
as connected to
existing public roads, namely Kempsey Road and Rollands Plains Road. In this
way, each subdivided lot was depicted
as having road access to the outside
world. In DP 2837 each road was described as a “road” and allocated
a name. A central
road was named “Irving Road” in common with the
entire subdivision being named “Irving Estate”. In the words
Kitto J at 412; [7] in the
Campbellton Municipal Council
case, there was
nothing in DP 2837 to distinguish the twelve new roads from the two existing
public roads.
intention of the NBLI Company is to be considered in the context of the law
which applied at the time DP 2837 was lodged for registration.
At that time, s
Real Property Act 1862
100 Map of subdivided land
Any proprietor subdividing any land under the provisions of this Act for the
purpose of selling the same in allotments as a township
shall deposit with the
Registrar General a map of such township provided that such map shall exhibit
distinctly delineated all roads
streets passages thoroughfares squares or
reserves appropriated or set apart for public use and also all allotments into
said land may be divided marked with distinct numbers or symbols and
every such map shall be certified as accurate by declaration
of a licensed
surveyor before the Registrar General or a Justice of the Peace. Provided that
no person shall be permitted to practise
as a surveyor under the provisions of
this Act unless specially licensed for that purpose by the Surveyor General.
2837 was certified by “Mr Licensed Surveyor JH Laycock”.
lodgement of DP 2837 in conformity with s 100 strongly supports the inference
that the NBLI Company intended to dedicate the road
alignments depicted on it as
public roads, including the Wharf Road Alignment:
Campbelltown Municipal
at 422; [9].
Plaintiffs see further support for that inference from an advertising brochure
apparently used by the NBLI Company from 1890.
The brochure depicted the full
layout of the planned subdivision with each lot numbered from 1 to 47 in
accordance with DP 2837 as
subsequently registered. In addition to the other
eleven roads, the advertising brochure depicted the Wharf Road Alignment and
it “Wharf Rd”. The network of roads within the subdivision
was depicted in the advertising brochure as connected to Kempsey
Rollands Plains Road. The brochure includes the following text: “Note: All
Roads are 1 Chain Wide”. The evidence
does not address the significance of
a road being one chain wide, although at 363 in the
Griffiths CJ contrasted such a road with “a mere track”.
evidence does not address the dissemination of the advertising brochure. An
inference may be drawn from the fact that it was designed
and produced that the
NBLI Company promoted sales of the land in accordance with the brochure. The
brochure proclaimed an auction
to take place on 22 February 1890. There is
evidence of an advertisement in the Sydney Morning Herald on 22 February 1890
that the auction was postponed by rain. An auction on an “early
date” was again advertised in the Sydney Morning Herald
on 22 March 1890.
The lots were advertised in the Cumberland Mercury and Paramatta Gazette on 8
August 1891 and 19 September 1891
respectively. Use of the advertising brochure
and promotion of the subdivision in accordance with it may further be inferred
the fact that DP 2836 was subsequently registered and eighteen of the
depicted lots sold.
is a clear inference from these facts that, viewed objectively, the NBLI Company
intended to dedicate the Wharf Road Alignment
as a public road together with the
other eleven roads depicted on DP 2837. In the words of Menzies J, it would be
an artificial and
unreal conception to conclude otherwise.
this regard a number of features of the intended subdivision warrant emphasis.
The 47 lots are large by urban standards but not
by rural standards. The
newspaper advertisements proclaimed suitability for dairy farming and
fruitgrowing. Had all 47 lots been
sold to different purchasers, a rural
community of 49 households would have emerged, taking into account the separate
land already
owned in the neighbourhood by JT Hughes and the Freeman family.
were a number of roads depicted in DP 2837 as extending to the external boundary
of the intended subdivision even though access
to all 47 of the subdivided lots
could have been achieved more efficiently by shorter roads which ran to the
nearest point of each
lot and no further. In addition to the Wharf Road
Alignment itself, each of Marks Road, Hastings Road, Freemans Road, Hughes Road,
Rawson Road and Naret Road extended (unnecessarily) to the boundary of the
subdivision. The extension of three of these roads is
telling. Marks Road was
depicted as extending the full length of Lot 1 with the apparent purpose of
providing access to and from
external land beyond the eastern edge of the land
in DP 2837. Each of Freemans Road and Hughes Road appears to have had no purpose
other than to provide access to and from the land of JT Hughes and the Freeman
family even though that land was not part of the subdivision
by the NBLI
Company. People going to and from these external lands may have had nothing to
do with landholding within the subdivisions.
That includes JT Hughes. It also
includes the Freeman family. Although the Freeman family subsequently purchased
lots within the
subdivision, their original landholding was separate. In
relation to the subdivision, these outsiders are properly described as the
general public.
important matter is that it is wrong to view the Wharf Road Alignment as running
from existing public roads to an isolated
dead end bounded by a peninsula in a
bend of the Hastings River and otherwise cut off by bush. Such an image might be
conveyed by
subsequent events, especially the NBLI Company’s failure to
sell other lots to more people, the creation of the State Forest
between the
sold lots and the existing public roads and the invention and widespread
adoption of the motor car. However, the NBLI
Company’s intention is to be
ascertained as at 1892. When DP 2837 was registered, public roads for horse
drawn vehicles was
only one part of a broader transport framework. Another
important part was water-borne craft. The subdivision road network touched
Hastings River and its tributaries at four places, unnecessarily so for a
community which was intended to be accessed only by
road. The evidence proves
the prior existence of a wharf at the end of the Wharf Road Alignment, the
pillars of which are still standing.
The newspaper advertisements in 1890 and
1891 highlighted river access to the subdivision (and a planned railway to the
advertising brochure offered transport to the on-site auction by
1890 Port Macquarie was already located at the nearby estuary of the Hastings
River. It may well have been intended that the general
public might transport
people and goods from Port Macquarie to the interior not only by using Telegraph
Point Road but also by barge
to the wharf at the end of the Wharf Road Alignment
and thence up to Telegraph Point Road and beyond. From the (unknown) time when
dairy production began within the subdivision until 1961, a barge took the dairy
produce away and returned the empty cans. The evidence
proves that the barge
collected dairy produce not just from farms operated by the Freemans, the Downes
and the McInhernys but also
from other farms accessed from other wharfs. There
may have been dairy farms to the north of Telegraph Point Road which used the
wharf at the end of the Wharf Road Alignment to access the barge, although the
evidence does not address that possibility.
from dairy produce, there is plausible evidence that the Hastings River was
“pivotal to mercantile trade” which
included milling, sugar and
timber. There have always been forests to the north of the Freemans’ land
from which timber has
been harvested. The Wharf Road Alignment may have been
used to transport other goods to the wharf for on-shipment to Port Macquarie.
There is evidence that the Downes family owned land on both sides of the
Hastings River between which transport by boat would be
expected in the closing
decade of the nineteenth century and the opening decades of the twentieth
or not any particular use of the Wharf Road Alignment actually occurred is not
relevant for current purposes. The intention
of the NBLI Company when it
registered DP 2837 is to be considered in the context of the road network
depicted in the plan. The road
network included ten separate access points to
the outside world: three to existing public roads, three to adjacent lands which
not included in the subdivision and four to the Hastings River. Viewed
through 1890 eyes, it depicted a central hub for transport
throughout the
surrounding district.
fact that the NBLI Company’s original subdivision plan was not
subsequently achieved and lots were only ever sold in one
part of the
subdivision (and only to three families) does not negate the intention of the
NBLI Company when DP 2837 was registered.
Nor does the fact that roads have now
come to dominate transport in Australia, not river transport.
important aspect of the case is that the subdivision contemplated by DP 2837 was
clearly intended to dispose of the entire
parcel of land which the NBLI Company
owned. In other words, the NBLI Company intended to dispose of all 47 lots and
the twelve road
alignments depicted in DP 2837. As may be inferred from the name
of the company (“building land and investment”) and
from the plan of
subdivision which the company drew up, it was no part of the NBLI
Company’s plan to retain ownership of some
of the subdivided lots. The
NBLI Company operated from Pitt Street in Sydney and produced the advertising
brochure in which it offered
all 47 lots for sale. If, as it obviously intended,
the NBLI Company succeeded in selling all 47 lots, there would have been no
reason for it to retain ownership of the twelve road alignments. On the
contrary, permanent ownership of the road alignments without
any remaining
interest in the surrounding land would have subjected the NBLI Company to a
perpetual burden of road maintenance without
the inclination (let alone the
means) to discharge that burden. Such an outcome would have been uncommercial
and not something which
the NBLI Company should be taken to have intended.
with that commercial reality, counsel for Mr McInherny accepted at the trial
that “the developer had in mind that
at some point there would be public
roads”. It was further conceded that “it was anticipated that if the
subdivision
described in the Irvine estate completed, with its various road
connections, that these roads would become public roads”. The
concessions
seem inescapable.
evidence establishes that in 1892 the NBLI Company dedicated the road network
depicted in DP 2837 as public roads, including the
Wharf Road Alignment for its
full length from Kempsey Road to the Hastings River bank reserve.
Acceptance by the general public
Plaintiffs contend that acceptance of the dedication may be inferred from
conduct. The Plaintiffs rely on the following conduct
by purchasers of lots in
the subdivision:
(a) in 1892 the McInherny family purchased lots (Lots 7 and 8) which, although
not immediately adjacent to the Wharf Road Alignment,
were adjacent to Hastings
Road which had no access to the nearest public road other than via the Wharf
Road Alignment;
(b) in 1892 lots adjacent to, and only accessible by road from, the Wharf Road
Alignment were purchased by Mr Downes (Lots 9, 10
and 11) and Mr Garrett (Lot
(c) in 1899 the McInherny family purchased further lots (Lots 1, 2 and 3)
which were adjacent to Hastings Road and Marks Road and
had no access to the
nearest public road other than via those roads and thence the Wharf Road
(d) at some unknown date a road was physically formed along the Wharf Road
(e) the purchasers all subsequently used the Wharf Road Alignment to access
their land by road;
(f) the purchasers’ access included using the Wharf Road Alignment (either
from Kempsey Road or possibly from the wharf on
the Hastings River) to transport
materials and labour necessary to build houses to live in, including Mr Downes
in about 1899 or
(g) in about 1902 and 1904 the erstwhile mortgagee of the now failed NBLI
Company sold further lots to the Freeman family (Lots 13–18),
all of which
were adjacent to the Wharf Road Alignment – the Freeman family already
owned neighbouring land and by purchasing
Lots 13–18 the neighbouring land
became contiguous with the Wharf Road Alignment and thereby accessible to the
nearest public
(h) the Freeman family built a house on its land in about 1900 (and in any event
before 1920);
(i) in 1903 land was sold within the subdivision when Mr Garrett sold Lot 12 to
the Freeman family; and
(j) in 1905 the mortgagee sold to the McInherny family the entire residue of the
subdivision (including Lots 4, 5 and 6 which were
adjacent to the Wharf Road
Alignment).
is evidence that until recently the physical use of the road followed the Wharf
Road Alignment as a straight line except that
a minor deviation occurred just
north of the intersection with Hastings Road where the gradient of the natural
slope diverted cars
(and presumably before that carriages) slightly onto Mr
McInherny’s Lot 6. In the context of the Wharf Road Alignment as a
the deviation was de minimis. In any event, the aerial photographic evidence
shows that once the steep slope was passed the
line of traffic returned to the
Wharf Road Alignment. The interruption does not affect the outcome of the case.
Plaintiffs also rely on the conduct of the mortgagee in a broader sense. In
September 1892 the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney
(which I will refer to
) lent £18,000 to the NBLI Company on the security of a
registered mortgage. The mortgaged land was described as the land comprised
the NBLI Company’s “application to bring lands under the provisions
of the Real Property Act numbered 8395”.
DP 2837 was issued by the
Registrar-General as a result of Primary Application 8395. Thereafter the
Bank’s mortgage was reinstated
after each lot was sold by the NBLI
Company. The evident commercial purpose of the transaction was for the Bank to
finance the NBLI
Company‘s subdivision venture and to be repaid out of the
proceeds of sale of the 47 lots. The Bank’s willingness to
lend on the
security of the subdivision supports the inference that the general public (of
which the Bank was a part) accepted the
dedication of public roads proffered by
the NBLI Company. The saleability (and hence the value) of the lots within the
subdivision
presupposed access to each lot by public road (whether it be from
Kempsey Road, the wharf at the end of the Wharf Road Alignment
or one of the
other access points contemplated by the subdivision road network).
the conduct by the Bank was not physical use of the Wharf Road Alignment, it is
still relevant to inferring acceptance of
the dedication. As Menzies J said in
Campbelltown Municipal Council
case at 415; [6], the inference may be
drawn from documentation, including private transaction documents concerning the
Bank’s conduct from 1892 supports the Plaintiffs’ case on
acceptance of the dedication.
Plaintiffs further rely on conduct by the Council. On 5 February 1910 the
Council wrote to the Lands Department and enclosed a
lithographic map of the
County of Macquarie on which the Council had marked in red the roads over which
the Council “wishes
to assume control”. The attached map was small
in scale and by modern standards lacked precision. The parties agree that it
depicted in red a road running down the Wharf Road Alignment from the
intersection with Telegraph Road to a point which is approximately
the Hastings River. At that point there was another road depicted in red which
ran at a right angle away to the east.
It is unclear whether that perpendicular
road was Hastings Road as depicted in the original subdivision or whether it was
road (Swamp Road) which was further north near the northern boundary
between the McInherny Lots 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 and land outside
the subdivision.
The proportions and lengths depicted on the map and the broad geography of the
Hastings River suggest that the latter
is more likely. In any event, there is no
dispute that the map depicted the northern part of the Wharf Road Alignment as a
which the Council wished to assume control in 1910.
Council evidently got its wish. The Council’s minutes record that on 19
March 1912 the Council resolved that an engineer
be instructed to inspect and
report on “the road heading from the main road to M’Inheney and
others”. The Plaintiffs
submit that this is a reference to the Wharf Road
Alignment. That is plausible. The evidence shows that at some unknown but early
time a road was physically formed and used along the Wharf Road Alignment.
The road was described in the minutes as running not only
to the land owned by
the McInherny family but also to “others” which is consistent with
the pattern of land ownership
in 1912 which included the Freeman family, Mr
Downes and possibly JT Hughes (see further below). Mr McInherny submits that the
minutes could instead have been referring to a road coming to the land
owned by the McInherny family from the east and joining up
with the Hastings
Road Alignment (or further north with Swamp Road). There is no evidence of such
a road other than the perpendicular
red line depicted on the 1910 lithographic
map. If such a road existed, it would have been inapposite to describe it as
M’Inheney and others”. Without more, the existence
of this alternative road does not rise above speculation.
the balance of probabilities I accept the Plaintiffs’ submission that the
minutes show that in 1912 the Council sent an engineer
to inspect the Wharf Road
Alignment. It was described in the minutes as a “road”. It was
sufficient to warrant the Council’s
attention. The inspection must have
been required as least as far south as the intersection with Hastings Road
because by 1912 Mr
Downes had built a house on his land. Given the existence and
use of the wharf (actual or anticipated and subsequently carried out),
probability the inspection was required all the way to the banks of the Hastings
Council’s minutes further record that on 18 June 1912 the Council received
a report from the engineer that the “Road
to McInhernys” served
three settlers, which would most likely be the McInherny family, the Freeman
family and Mr Downes. The
“necessary work would cost about”
£3d. The amount was not provided for in “this years estimate and if
work is to be carried out it must be taken from the other Votes”. The
minutes record that this item was “Adopted”.
minutes further record that on 20 August 1912 the engineer reported that the
work on “McInherney’s Road” “as
approved by the
council” had been arranged and should be in progress by the end of the
22 October 1913 the Council again considered the “Road out from
McInherney’s near Blackman’s Point” and
resolved that the
balance of the amount voted (£4) be expended when “the Maintenance
Man is in the district”.
parties also drew attention to events after 1920. As set out above, conduct by
the general public or Council after 1 January
1920 is not directly relevant to
acceptance of the dedication of the Wharf Road Alignment as a public road.
However, subsequent events
may throw light on the inference to be drawn about
acceptance prior to 1 January 1920. The further removed from 1920, the less
the evidence will be.
is evidence from a number of sources that the minute books for meetings of the
Council are missing for the period between April
1922 and September 1947 and for
the period between May 1951 and 1959. Given the explanation, the absence of
evidence about the Council’s
attitude during those periods does not
support an inference either way.
their part, the Plaintiffs point to evidence of local landowners using the Wharf
Road Alignment and the Council’s maintenance
of a road down the Wharf Road
Alignment throughout the first half of the twentieth century. Specifically, the
evidence demonstrates
the following:
(1) until much more recent times, the only road access used by the McInherny
family and Mr Downes to their respective land has been
by the Wharf Road
(2) the Freemans only ever accessed their land via the Wharf Road Alignment,
both before and after the introduction of the motor
(3) the Freemans extended their house, most likely in the first half of the
twentieth century;
(4) the Freemans lived at and farmed their land. The farming activity included
dairy farming, an aspect of which was transportation
of dairy produce to the
wharf at the end of the Wharf Road Alignment from where it was taken away by
(5) aerial photographs from 1942 show the Wharf Road Alignment stark against the
surrounding countryside in a way which is consistent
with there being no other
roads in the neighbourhood;
(6) during World War II Mr Downes sold farming equipment from his property with
customer access via the Wharf Road Alignment;
(7) the Council’s minutes record that on 28 August 1950 the Council
resolved to compensate Mr Freeman for “work on McInherney’s
Road”, which can only be a reference to a road located on the Wharf Road
Alignment (given the location of the Freemans’
land there would be no
reason for Mr Freeman to have worked on any other road even if one existed);
(8) in the late 1950s the Department of Main Roads used the Wharf Road Alignment
to cart road material from a quarry located on the
McInherny land;
(9) a second house was built by the Freeman family in 1963 which, whilst not on
land originally acquired from the NBLI company, only
had road access via the
Wharf Road Alignment;
(10) the evidence of the Council’s earliest inactivity in terms of
maintenance of the Wharf Road Alignment is in the 1980s;
(11) the evidence of the Council’s earliest antipathy to a maintenance
obligation is in the 1990s.
Freeman gave evidence in these proceedings at the age of 90. He remembers riding
his bike on his way to school past workmen working
on the road on the Wharf Road
Alignment. The work was undertaken regularly using machinery which was
originally horse-drawn and "manual"
but which was modernised over time. Mr
Freeman said that the work was performed by the Council up until about 1980.
the balance of probabilities, Mr Freeman’s evidence ought to be accepted,
including his evidence that the workmen worked
for the Council. That is for the
following reasons:
(a) Mr Freeman’s evidence is consistent with the continuation of the work
contemplated by Council’s minutes in 1912 and
(b) Mr Freeman knew one of the workers personally and from time to time stopped
and chatted with him as an acquaintance. Mr Freeman
said that the acquaintance
knew his family and was employed by the Council;
(c) although he is elderly I found Mr Freeman to be a sharp and precise witness
who gave his evidence in a straightforward and matter-of-fact
way. His evidence
was sprinkled with occasional details of which he clearly had a genuine
recollection. One such detail was that
the family acquaintance worked for the
Council; and
(d) there is no plausible alternative to the conclusion that the road work was
undertaken by the Council. Mr Freeman’s evidence
is suggestive of
regularity, systemisation and growing mechanisation of the maintenance, which
seems inconsistent with work being
undertaken by a coalition of willing local
landowners. Neither Mr Freeman nor Mr McInherny (who is also elderly) gave
evidence about
any such an arrangement in the twentieth century, formal or
informal. In his submissions, Mr McInherny suggested that the Forestry
Commission, which regularly logged the nearby forests, might be an alternative
candidate for the provider of road maintenance but
there is no evidence to
support that suggestion. Mr Freeman’s daughter gave evidence of seeing
machinery which was Council
yellow, not Forestry Commission green. Mr McInherny
also referred to the Department of Main Roads, but the suggestion that the road
might have been maintained by the Department of Main Roads makes no sense in a
contest between a public road for which the Council
is the relevant road
authority and a private road over which locals have private rights of way.
removed in time, these matters lend some support to the inference that prior to
1920 the general public and the Council had
accepted the dedication of a public
road along the Wharf Road Alignment. They are consistent with a continuous
pattern of conduct
which commenced before 1920.
McInherny points out that even on the Plaintiffs’ case there is no
evidence of the Council maintaining the Wharf Road Alignment
after the 1970s. He
further emphasises that in the 1990s and 2000s the Council began actively to
deny that there was a public road.
As part of Mr McInherny’s effort to
have rights of way recorded on the Register in 2023 the Council informed the
Registrar-General
that it could locate no evidence that the Wharf Road Alignment
was a public road. Mr McInherny placed especial reliance on the Council’s
attitude in 2023. When these proceedings commenced the Council initially
participated as an active defendant, apparently to resist
the Plaintiffs’
claims. Even though the Council ultimately decided to file a submitting
appearance, the more recent conduct
by the Council is inconsistent with the
inference that the dedication of a public road was accepted prior to 1920.
little weight can be given to the attitude displayed by the Council since the
1960s, it being more removed from the time relevant
to acceptance of the
dedication. The Council’s more recent attitude has evidently been hampered
by the lost Council minutes.
In any event the acceptance of the public road
dedication turns on a finding of fact about events before 1920 which the Court
now required to make.
McInherny further points out that there is no evidence that the dedication of
other public roads was accepted within those parts
of the original subdivision
where no lots were ever sold. The lion’s share of the original subdivision
never sold and the evidence
indicates that it has physically remained
undisturbed bush throughout. No work was ever done physically to form any roads
along the Wharf Road Alignment, Hastings Road and possibly parts of
Marks Road. Mr McInherny submits that the Court ought therefore
find that the
dedication of the entire public road network proffered by the NBLI Company was
never accepted.
submission may be accepted at a factual level but it does not have the
significance for which Mr McInherny contends. Whilst the
NBLI Company dedicated
the whole of the road network, there is no reason to find that the dedication
was proffered as a single indivisible
whole. The public roads which were created
by the dedication are to be ascertained by the extent of the acceptance by the
public. In the
Campbelltown Municipal Council
case the Court
considered the status of one of the many road alignments left in a plan of
subdivision by reference to the general
public’s use of the particular
road in question. No issue is raised in these proceedings about any land other
than the Wharf
Road Alignment. All the conduct of acceptance set out above is
directed to that specific strip of land. The inference of acceptance
to be drawn
from the conduct in relation to the Wharf Road Alignment is not undermined by
the fact that the general public did not
accept other roads which were dedicated
at the same time.
inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole is that by 1 January 1920 the
dedication of a public road along the Wharf Road
Alignment had been accepted by
the general public, both directly and by the Council on the public’s
behalf. The inference of
acceptance applies to the entire length of the Wharf
Road Alignment. The evidence of acceptance is stronger for that part of the
Wharf Road Alignment which runs north from the intersection with Hastings Road.
The evidence about acceptance of the dedication south
of the intersection with
Hastings Road to the banks of the Hastings River is less strong. It is
nonetheless sufficient on the balance
of probabilities. It includes the fact
that the Hastings River lay to the south, there was a wharf physically
constructed at the
southern most part of the road, there is no suggestion that
use of the wharf was restricted to landowners within the subdivision,
balance of probabilities the wharf was used to transport dairy products before
1920 (given that the Freeman family, the McInherny
family and Mr Downes
evidently commenced dairy operation after their respective acquisitions of the
land, in each case well before
1920), the Freemans’ residence was located
well to the south of the intersection with Hastings Road and the Bank lent money
on the security of the land which was depicted in DP 2837. In this respect, the
dedication by the NBLI Company was constituted by
the registration of DP 2837,
which depicted the Wharf Road Alignment running down to the banks of the river.
For such a dedication,
no great amount of public use was necessary to make the
dedication complete: the
Campbelltown Municipal Council
423; [6]–[7].
follows that by 1920 a public road existed along the full length of the Wharf
Road Alignment from Telegraph Point Road to the river
bank reserve.
Subsequent statutory enactments
to Mr McInherny’s contrary arguments, the public road continues to exist
today. On 1 January 1907 the
Local Government Act 1906
commenced in which
public road was defined to mean a “road which the public are entitled to
use.” By s 75, control and
management of all public roads was given to the
local council. In this respect, the
Local Government Act 1906
essentially
repeated the provisions of the
Local Government (Shires) Act 1905
If the dedication of the Wharf Road Alignment had been accepted by 1906, control
and management was given to the Council at
1 January 1920 the
Local Government Act 1919
commenced. The term
“public road” was defined in s 4 as:
[R]oad which the public are entitled to use, and includes any road dedicated as
a public road by any person or notified proclaimed
or dedicated as a public road
under the authority of any Act, including this Act, or classified as a main road
in the Gazette of
the thirty-first day of December, one thousand nine hundred
Local Government Act 1919
made provisions for public roads.
Section 222 provided:
This Act shall apply to a public road notwithstanding that it may not at the
commencement of this Act have been approved, accepted,
and taken over by or been
placed or taken under the care, control, and management of a council under the
Local Government Act. 1906
, or any Act repealed by that Act.
232 provided:
(1) Except where otherwise expressly provided, every public
road, and the soil thereof, and all materials of which the road is
shall by virtue of this Act vest in fee-simple in the council, and the council,
if it so desire, shall by virtue of this
Act be entitled to be registered as the
proprietor of the road under the provisions of the
Real Property Act, 1900
(2) The vesting in fee-simple under this section shall be
deemed to be not merely as regards so much of the soil below and of the
above as may be necessary for the ordinary use of the road as a road, but so as
to confer on the council subject to the provisions
of this Act the same estate
and rights in and with respect to the site of the road as a private person would
have if he were entitled
to the site as private land held in fee-simple with
full rights both as to the soil below and to the air above.
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided nothing in this section
shall be deemed—
(a) to affect any express or implied dedication to the
(b) to affect any existing right of the Crown or of any person
in respect of any easement or under the provisions of any Act, except
as the council is authorised by or under this Act to control and regulate the
digging up of public roads;
(c) to affect any right of the Crown or of any person in
respect of any minerals below the surface of any road;
(d) to authorise the council to grant, demise, dispose of, or
alienate the road or the soil or materials thereof;
(e) to impose on the council any liability in respect of any
rate under any Act or in respect of any dividing fence under the
Dividing Fences
, or any liability in any case where the council would not be subject
to the liability if this Act conferred on the council the case,
control, and
management of the road and did not vest the road in fee-simple in the council;
(f) to prevent any land from being considered as adjoining
within the meaning of section one hundred and twenty-four of the
Public Works
(4) This section shall bind the Crown.
follows that on 1 January 1920 the Wharf Road Alignment vested in fee simple in
the Council whether or not the NBLI Company’s
dedication had been accepted
by 1 January 1907.
vesting, the Council became entitled, though not obliged, to be registered as
the proprietor of the road.
Roads Act 1993
commenced. Transitional provisions are contained
in Sch 2. Relevantly, cl 15 provides:
Any road that, immediately before the relevant commencement, was a public road
is taken to be a public road within the meaning of
7 relevantly provides that Council is the roads authority for a public road such
as that situated on the Wharf Road Alignment.
Section 145 provides that all
public roads within a local government area (other than freeways and Crown
roads) “are vested
in fee simple” in the Council.
reason of these statutes, the public road along the Wharf Road Alignment has
subsisted as a public road to the present day. The
question then is whether Mr
McInherny’s contrary arguments warrant a different conclusion.
Mr McInherny’s contrary arguments
Rights of way instead of a public road
first argument is the positive contention that the correct interpretation of the
events at the end of the nineteenth century and
the beginning of the twentieth
century is not the dedication and acceptance of a public road but the creation
of implied private
rights of way.
McInherny’s argument involves a path of reasoning which is comprised of
four propositions:
(a) an intention to dedicate a public road will not arise if there is an
alternative explanation for the landowner’s conduct;
(b) such an alternative explanation will exist where there is a scheme of
creating private rights of way which will provide the access
for which the
public road would otherwise be necessary;
(c) such a scheme appears on the Register in this case; and
(d) the existence of such private rights of way is inconsistent with a public
road over the same land.
McInherny’s first proposition is based on the judgment of Griffith CJ in
case. In that case the local shire initially had a right to
resume certain Crown land for a highway upon payment of compensation to
licensee, Mr Turner. An implied agreement was found to have been formed under
which Mr Turner would immediately permit the public
to use the land pending a
future resumption and compensation payment. Mr Turner’s interest in the
land subsequently changed
and was transferred to others and, ultimately, to Mr
Leviston, by which time the local shire had lost the right to resume the land
for a highway. The local shire then contended that the conduct of the successive
owners and the general public constituted a dedication
of a public road which
had been accepted. The contention was rejected. In his Honour’s judgment
at 859, Griffith CJ said:
“The doctrine, therefore, that dedication may be presumed from continuous
user must be qualified by adding the words "if unexplained,"
and it is always
permissible, as pointed out by Patteson J., to inquire under what circumstances
the piece of land came to be used
as a road. Was it under such circumstances as
showed an intention to dedicate? Or was it under such circumstances as to
such an intention? Or was it under such circumstances as not to point
in one direction rather than the other?”
flaw in Mr McInherny’s argument is that it takes two words from this
passage (“if unexplained”) and elevates
them to a principle of law
that there will be no public road unless the Plaintiffs eliminate all possible
alternatives.
case neither adds to nor detracts from the general principles
set out above. Both in relation to dedication by the landowner and acceptance
the general public, the task is to ascertain the parties’ objective
intentions having regard to all the circumstances of
the particular case. That
is the exercise undertaken in the preceding part of this judgment. The
case simply demonstrates that there may be cases where a
different conclusion is arrived at because the facts demonstrate that it
the intention of the landowner to dedicate a public road even though the
landowner permitted the general public to use the
land as a road over a lengthy
period of time. The facts in the
case are far removed from the
facts in the present case. Unlike the
case, the dedication in
this case is not inferred simply from the NBLI Company permitting continuous use
over a lengthy period but
from the matters referred to above, especially the
lodgement of DP 2837.
McInherny’s second proposition proceeds from the following passage in
The Council of the City of Shoalhaven v The Director-General National Parks
& Wildlife Service & Ors
[2004] NSWCA 163
, where Bryson JA (with the
agreement of Ipp JA and Cripps AJA) said at [26]:
“The project of subdividing land into allotments with a view to their sale
could not be achieved unless roads were created
and the allotments had road
frontage and access to the general road system. It is only on the basis that the
roads were public roads
that any address could be made to proposing purchasers;
nobody would be interested in buying allotments on any other basis. There
indication of any scheme of creating private rights of way; if there had been
any such scheme, the private rights of way would
have clearly appeared at many
places in the Torrens Register.”
McInherny emphasises the last sentence (albeit a negative proposition on the
facts in the
case) and submits that there was a scheme of
creating private rights of way in the NBLI Company’s subdivision. He
that no such scheme was expressed. He is right to make that concession.
The NBLI Company (and subsequently the Bank) transferred
the subdivided lots
variously to Mr Garrett, Mr Downes, the McInherny family and the Freeman family
by way of transfers registered
with the Registrar-General. None of the transfers
referred to, let alone purported to create, a right of way over the Wharf Road
Alignment. Had private rights of way been intended, the transfers would have
been the proper place to record that intention.
McInherny’s contention is that on the occasion of each transfer a right of
way implicitly arose in accordance with the principles
Dabbs v Seaman
(1925) 36 CLR 538
[1925] HCA 26.
Dabbs v Seaman
was a case where
land under the
Real Property Act 1900
was subdivided from a larger lot
and transferred ultimately to Ms Dabbs. The transfer document did not refer to a
right of way but
it described and depicted the transferred lot as being bordered
on one side by the residue lot, the immediately contiguous part of
marked “Lane 20ft wide”. The new certificate of title issued to Ms
Dabbs depicted the transferred lot and the
adjacent land in the same way. The
High Court accepted Ms Dabbs’ contention that her lot had the benefit of a
right of way
over the marked lane because it was implied from the depiction of
the land in the original transfer. At 541–542 Isaacs J held
the following
to be good law:
“Where A, a registered proprietor of land under the
Real Property
, transfers to B a part of his land described by a plan indicating that
the transferred land is bounded on one side by a 20 ft. lane
situated on the
other part of the transferor's land and the transfer is duly registered, then,
in the absence of either a provision
to the contrary on B's certificate of title
or some subsequent personal legal or equitable relation to the contrary between
the owner of the adjoining land, B, as long as he remains registered
proprietor of the land so transferred and described, is entitled
(1) to have the
land marked “twenty feet lane” preserved as such, and (2) to a right
of way over the lane.”
J did not state definitively the jurisprudential basis for the entitlement of
the transferee. Isaacs J addressed the proper
construction of the phrase
“land therein described” as it appears in
Property Act 1900
. At 546 his Honour held that the phrase means the parcel
delimited with all the inherent characteristics with which the terms of
delimitation invest it. Ms Dabbs’ lot was described by reference to a plan
which depicted it as contiguous with a 20-foot lane.
Isaacs J held that
contiguity to the lane was an inherent characteristic of the lot described. His
Honour referred to a number of
cases where a sale of land which was described as
“abutting” upon a road precluded the vendor subsequently from
the purchaser’s right to access the road. At 552, Isaacs J
considered that the existence of a right of way benefitting Ms Dabbs’
depended upon the natural import of the word “lane” as used by the
document which was before his Honour. His Honour
construed the word as denoting
a means of access to two or more lots which, in the absence of an alternative
candidate, meant the
vendor’s residue lot and Ms Dabbs’ lot. It
appears that Isaacs J considered that Ms Dabbs’ entitlement essentially
arose by way of an estoppel. His Honour referred both to conventional estoppel
and estoppel by deed.
a separate judgment Starke J agreed on the outcome of the case. Starke J said at
573–574 that Ms Dabbs’ lot was benefitted
by a right of way over the
lane depicted in the residue certificate of title either by reason of an
implication from the description
of the land in the transfer or by reason of an
the judgment in
Dabbs v Seaman
was not handed down by the High Court
until 1925 (after the intention of the NBLI Company is to be determined), Mr
McInherny submits
that the result was heralded in
Little v Dardier
[1891] NSWLawRp 41
12 NSWLR (Eq) 319.
Little v Dardier
Owen CJ in Eq held that where a
vendor conveys land described as “bounded” by a street or road, the
vendor is estopped
from disputing that there is a right of way granted to the
purchaser over the street or road.
the present case Mr McInherny approached this issue at a high level of
generality, contending for the existence of a “
Dabbs v Seaman
of way”. His submissions focussed on an abstract proposition of law and
not so much the facts. Neither
Dabbs v Seaman
Little v Dardier
lays down a principle of general application which is determinative of the
legal status of the Wharf Road Alignment. In any particular
case, whether a
right of way has arisen by implication from the terms of a transfer or by
estoppel is to be determined by the construction
of the words (and plans) in the
transfer and possibly also by reference to the conduct of the parties.
the present case, all the relevant transfers occurred under the
Real Property
Real Property Act 1900
. There is a degree of
standardisation in the transfer documents. The first transfer, registered
Transfer 202479, was the transfer
of Lots 9–11 to Mr Downes on 24 October
1892. That document was typical. The transferred land was described
“All [the NBLI Company’s] Estate and Interest, as such registered
proprietor, in ALL THAT piece of land containing one
hundred and seventeen acres
two roods and seven perches situate in Partish of Cairncross County of Macquarie
being part of the land
comprised in Certificate of Title dated the 28th
September 1892 registered volume No. 1070 folio 177 and being lots 9, 10 &
on Plan deposited in the Land Titles Office Numbered 2837.”
from the cross reference to DP 2837, Transfer 202479 did not include a plan.
Deposited Plan 2837 is described above. Although
“abutting” and “bounded” were not used, DP 2837 depicted
Lot 11 as immediately adjacent to the
Wharf Road Alignment, and also to Hastings
Road. Lots 9 and 10 were depicted as contiguous with Lot 11 and immediately
adjacent to
Hastings Road but not the Wharf Road Alignment.
words used to describe the land in Transfer 202479 were expansive. The
description expressly incorporated DP 2837. Properly construed,
accepted that Lot 11 (and possibly also Lots 9 & 10) was to be transferred
with all the inherent characteristics of
land immediately adjacent to a
“road” and that those characteristics included an entitlement to use
the road. If Mr Downes
had otherwise been without a right to enter upon and use
the Wharf Road Alignment as a way to access the nearest public road (and
possibly the wharf, even though Mr Downes’ land had its own river
frontage) a private right of way would have been necessary
to ensure that Mr
Downes did not receive land without road access to the outside world. Applying
the reasoning in
Dabbs v Seaman
, it would have been arguable that the
transfer included a private right of way. The original transferor (the NBLI
Company) and, as
addressed in
Dabbs v Seaman
, its successors to the title
of the residue lot may also have been estopped from asserting otherwise.
by expressly incorporating DP 2837, Transfer 202479 is to be construed in the
context of DP 2837 as a plan of subdivision.
Any question of estoppel would also
have be considered in that context. For the reasons given above, the intention
of the NBLI Company
which is objectively ascertained from DP 2837 is that the
Wharf Road Alignment would be dedicated as a public road. In particular,
NBLI Company registered DP 2837 when s 100 of the
Real Property Act 1862
provided for the deposit of a plan which depicted “all roads streets
passages thoroughfares square or reserves appropriated
or set apart for public
use”. I have underlined the word “public”. This is a material
difference to the transfers
Dabbs v Seaman
(where the plan relevantly
related to two lots only and the lane was depicted as being part of the
vendor’s residue lot) and
Little v Dardier
(where there was no
plan of subdivision). Were the dedication to be accepted, the purchaser of Lot
11 would by definition be entitled
to use the Wharf Road Alignment without the
need for a private right of way.
in that context, there is no room for the implication into Transfer 202479 of a
private right of way, and certainly not
one which would have operated to the
exclusion of a public road should the dedication be accepted. Nor is it apparent
why the NBLI
Company would have been estopped from denying that there was a
private right of way when it had dedicated a public road. The early
transfers to
Mr Garrett, Mr Downes and the McInherny family occurred in 1892 when the NBLI
Company’s subdivision was evidently
in progress. The transfers are to be
construed (and any estoppel considered) as at that date. Regard may not be had
to the subsequent
failure of the subdivision.
McInherny has not made good his second proposition.
is Mr McInherny correct with his third proposition that private rights of way
over the Wharf Road Alignment appeared on the Register.
At no time prior to the
conclusion of the trial in these proceedings did the Register contain a record
of or reference to any such
right of way. The first time such a record appeared
was 31 July 2025 when the Registrar-General acceded to Request AU148714 which
had been lodged by Mr McInherny to add a notification of private rights of way
over the current title for the Wharf Road Alignment.
stated above, none of the registered transfers by the NBLI Company (or the Bank)
referred to a right of way over the Wharf Road
Alignment. Nor was any such
right of way ever registered as a separate dealing.
rights of way come into existence, it was possible for them to be recorded on
the certificate of title for any parcel of land
which benefitted from them and
also for the land which was burdened by them. Section 43 of the
Property Act 1862
provided as follows:
Whenever any easement or any incorporeal right other than an annuity or rent
charge in or over any land under the provisions of this
Act is created for the
purpose of being annexed to or used and enjoyed together with other land under
the provisions of this Act
the Registrar General shall enter a memorial of the
instrument creating such easement or incorporeal right upon the folium of the
Register Book constituted by the existing grant or certificate of title of such
other land.
Real Property Act 1900
was in largely the same terms. Despite
these provisions, none of the new certificates of title issued to the purchasers
of lots recorded
the benefit of a right of way over the Wharf Road Alignment.
There is no dispute about that.
McInherny’s contention is that private rights of way over the Wharf Road
Alignment were referred to in the certificates of
title for the residue lot
which were issued successively to the NBLI Company, the Bank and ultimately the
McInherny family. None
of those certificates of title specifically referred to
rights of way over the Wharf Road Alignment but Mr McInherny submits that
were included in general notifications.
Chronologically,
the first certificate of title for the residue lot was Volume 1089 Folio 182
which was issued to the NBLI Company
on 8 April 1893 after the first sale of
lots to Mr Garrett, Mr Downes and the McInherny family. The details of that
Certificate of
Title are set out in the Schedule at paragraph [10]. That
Certificate of Title does not support Mr McInherny’s argument but
contradicts it. Despite the requirement of s 43 of the
Real Property Act
, the Certificate of Title did not make any reference (general or
specific) to rights of way over the Wharf Road Alignment. On Mr
McInherny’s case, at least three “
Dabbs v Seaman
rights of way had been created in 1892 when the NBLI Company sold the lots to
the earliest purchasers. On Mr McInherny’s
case, the omission of the
rights of way from Certificate of Title Volume 1089 Folio 182 in inexplicable.
If there was error, it occurred
in the documentation of three separate
transactions on at least two separate dates (the transfers to Mr Downes and the
family may have occurred on the same date).
next certificate of title for the residue lot was Volume 1291 Folio 77 which was
issued to the NBLI Company on 12 August 1899
after the sale of further lots to
the McInherny family. The details of that Certificate of Title are set out in
the Schedule at paragraph
[11]. It included the same two notifications as
Certificate of Title Volume 1087 Folio 182 plus a third notification which
to rights of way. All three notifications are set out here:
“Reservations of all mines of gold and silver.”
“Reserving thereout Kempsey Road and Rollands Plains Old Road each 1 chain
wide respectively coloured brown on plan hereon.”
“This Certificate of Title is issued subject to all rights of way over the
Roads shown on deposited plan No 2837 existing in
respect or by virtue of the
several transfers registered for the several lots shown by green edging on the
said deposited plan.”
is no dispute that the lots shown by green edging are the lots which had
previously been sold to Mr Garrett and Mr Downes and
all the lots which had been
sold to the McInherny family as at 12 August 1899.
McInherny submits that the third notification is evidence that a scheme of
creating private rights of way existed in accordance
with the reasoning of Owen
CJ in Eq in
Little v Dardier
and subsequently articulated by the High
Dabbs v Seaman
. He argues that there is no evidence of any other
rights of way so the third notification must have been a notification of
Dabbs v Seaman
rights of way”.
argument raises a question of the proper construction of the third notification.
To some extent the text of the notification was
specific. It referred to the
transfers which had already occurred for lots identified in DP 2837 and edged
green. The location and
route of the rights of way were specified as “over
the Roads shown on” DP 2837.
other ways the text of the notification was generic. The rights of way were not
enumerated (“all”). Nor were the transfers
of the lots edged green
(“several”). The description of the location and route of the rights
of way was also generic
in the sense that twelve “Roads” were shown
on DP 2837, many of which were entirely unrelated to the lots edged green
all of which were unrelated for their full length. Had some rights of way arisen
in accordance with the reasoning in
Dabbs v Seaman
, they would have been
different for each lot.
third notification gave two alternatives for the relationship between the
existence of the rights of way and the transfers (“in
respect of” or
“by virtue of”) although that may be explained by unconfident or
cautious drafting. Neither alternative
is particularly apposite as the
description of the relationship between the right of way and the transfer which
was addressed in
Little v Dardier
, an estoppel case. As at 1899
had not yet been decided.
subject matter of the notification informs the construction. A right of way not
expressed but arising by implication or by estoppel
is an inherently uncertain
thing, both as to its existence and as to its content. As
Dabbs v Seaman
would subsequently illustrate, the existence of such a right of way depends
upon the circumstances of the case, including the layout
and ownership of the
surrounding land. For example an implied right of way over the Wharf Road
Alignment might have extended to the
banks of the Hastings River for Lot 6, but
not for Lot 10 which had its own river frontage. That might depend upon the
or otherwise of the wharf infrastructure at any given time which in
turn might depend upon the attributes of the Hastings River which
serviced. An implied right of way might have arisen for Lot 3 if sold separately
but not if sold with Lots 4, 5 and 6.
The existence of a private right to way
would also depend on the alternative existence of public roads along the road
which in turn might depend upon acceptance by the general public
objectively ascertained from conduct over time. The potential for
uncertainty
1908 amendment to s 73 of the
Local Government Act 1906
mechanism was introduced for the District Court to determine disputes about
public roads.
existence of a right of way is not something the Registrar-General would be
expected to know or be capable of knowing when issuing
a certificate of title.
The Registrar-General would not even be capable of knowing whether rights of way
existed as contemplated
by those parts of the third notification which were
specific: “over the Roads shown on deposited plan No 2837 existing in
or by virtue of the several transfers registered for the several lots
shown by green edging”.
regard to the generic language and the subject matter, the third notification in
Certificate of Title Volume 1291 Folio 77
is to be construed not as a statement
that rights of way existed in 1899, but as a notification that the NBLI Company
was the proprietor
of the residue lot subject to all rights of way of the kind
described, should any such rights of way exist.
for this construction comes from the fact that no equivalent notification was
included in Certificate of Title Volume 1089
Folio 182. Certificate of Title
Volume 1291 Folio 77 expressly referred to the preceding certificate of title as
part of the opening
description of the circumstances in which the new
certificate of title came to be issued. The new certificate of title may be
having regard to the terms of (and omissions from) the preceding
certificate of title. It may be inferred from the omission of a
notification of
rights of way from the preceding certificate of title that the inclusion of the
third notification in the new certificate
of title was intended to be a
notification of a possibility rather than an established certainty.
support for this construction comes from the context of the other two
notifications recorded in Certificate of Title Volume
1291 Folio 77. The first
notification referred to “all mines of gold and silver”. The
Registrar-General had no way of
knowing whether there were any such mines on the
residue land. Without any violence to the language, the first notification was
a generic notification with the word “all” implicitly
qualified by “if any”. The same word (“all”)
was used to
specify the rights of way the subject of the third notification and ought to be
construed consistently. By contrast,
the second notification about Kempsey Road
and Rollands Plains Old Road was specific. Those two roads were depicted in the
certificate
of title and coloured brown to identify their precise location,
length and (in the text of the second notification) width. The three
notifications are to be read harmoniously by giving the third notification a
generic operation like the first rather than a specific
operation like the
McInherny also relies upon Certificate of Title Volume 1597 Folio 188 which was
issued to the McInherny family on 29 March 1905
upon its acquisition of the
residue from the Bank. The details of that Certificate of Title are set out in
the Schedule at paragraph
[15]. It contained three notifications which
correspond to those in Certificate of Title Volume 1291 Folio 77 but in slightly
words. The third notation referred to:
“all existing rights of way or other rights (if any) over the roads
respectively coloured brown in plan hereon and also shown
on deposited plan
The “plan hereon” depicted at least nine of the roads from the
original subdivision, including the Wharf Road Alignment.
is a question about whether the bracketed words (“if any”) qualified
both to the disjunctive alternatives which
precede them (“rights of
way” and “other rights”) or just to the immediately preceding
alternative (“other
rights”). This is a question of construction
which sometimes arises and may be decided either way depending on the context:
Doyle’s Farm Produce Pty Ltd v Murray-Darling Basin Authority
[2021] NSWCA 246
(2021) 106 NSWLR 41
[2021] NSWCA 246
. The former
construction is harmonious with a generic operation of the notification in line
with the reasons set out above for Certificate
of Title Volume 1291 Folio 77,
including the use of some generic language, the subject matter of the
notification, the terms of the
preceding certificates of title and the context
of the other two notifications. The former construction of “if any”
to be preferred. In short, the third notification in Certificate of Title
Volume 1597 Folio 188 stated explicitly what was implicit
in the third
notification in Certificate of Title Volume 1291 Folio 77. It was not a
statement that rights of way existed any more
than the first notification was a
statement that there were mines of gold and silver present on the residue lot.
fact that the notification of rights of way was expressly qualified by the words
“if any” undermines Mr McInherny’s
argument. It shows that in
1905 the Registrar-General did not know one way or the other whether rights of
way existed over the roads
depicted in DP 2837. The Registrar-General would not
have been in any better position in 1899, which further demonstrates that he
not intend anything more by the third notation in Certificate of Title Volume
1291 Folio 77.
last certificate of title relied upon by Mr McInherny was issued for the residue
lot on 21 September 1942. Certificate of Title
Volume 5345 Folio 227 was issued
to the McInherny family following the transfer to the State of the northern
forest part of the residue.
The details of that Certificate of Title are set out
in the Schedule at paragraph [19]. After the transfer of the forest, the residue
lot comprised Lots 4, 5 and 6 from the original subdivision plus the Wharf Road
Alignment, Freemans Road, Hastings Road and Marks
Road. Certificate of Title
Volume 5345 Folio 227 included a notation about rights of way which was
essentially the same as that included
in Certificate of Title Volume 1597 Folio
188. It included the words “if any” but not the brackets. For the
reasons just
given, Certificate of Title Volume 5345 Folio 227 does not assist
Mr McInherny’s argument.
completeness, by the time of the trial the residue lot was comprised in two
Computer Folios on the Register. On 1 May 2006 the
Registrar-General issued Auto
Consol 5345-227 for Lots 4, 5 and 6. On 20 July 2023 the Registrar-General
issued a computer folio
for the Wharf Road Alignment, Freemans Road and so much
of Hastings Road and Marks Road as was previously included in Certificate
Title Volume 5345 Folio 227 following the resumption of some small portions at
the extremities for the purposes of the Pacific
Highway. The computer folio is
for Lot 1 of DP 1296248. No relevant notifications were recorded on the Register
for the land in Lot
1 of DP 1296248, including the Wharf Road Alignment. If Mr
McInherny's argument is to be accepted, the absence of any such
notifications
even in generic terms is inexplicable.
stated above, after the conclusion of the trial a notation was added to the
Register for Lot 1 in DP 1296248 which records rights
of way for the benefit of
the Bugden’s Lots. The notification followed submissions by Mr McInherny
to the Registrar-General
particular, the implication of rights of way said to be in accordance with
Dabbs v Seaman
. For the reasons given above, the submissions were
incorrect. The fact that the Registrar-General accepted them in July 2025 has
probative value to the issues in this case.
regard to the proper construction of the certificates of title, Mr McInherny has
not made good his third proposition. A scheme
of private rights of way did not
appear on the Register at any time prior to July 2025. The absence of any such
appearance supports
the Plaintiffs’ case. As Bryson JA observed in the
case, if there was a scheme of creating private rights of way
which obviated the need for the dedication of a public road, such a
scheme would
have clearly appeared at many places in the Register.
McInherny’s fourth proposition is that a scheme of private rights of way
is inconsistent with the creation of a public road
at common law. In view of my
finding that there was no scheme of private rights of way it is not necessary to
decide this issue.
Suffice it to say for present purposes that the correctness
of the fourth proposition is to be doubted. In the
Campbelltown Municipal
case at 422; [8], Windeyer J held that a private right of way arose
for the private benefit of the purchasers of lots in the subdivision
the private rights did not preclude the dedication of public roads along the
same road alignments.
Dedication of a public road by a mortgagor
McInherny’s second argument is not pleaded but was raised orally on the
first day of the trial. The Plaintiffs’ objection
was faint and they
addressed the argument on its merits, so I will decide it.
29 September 1892 (the day after DP 2837 was registered), the Bank held a
registered mortgage over the NBLI Company’s land,
namely Registered
Mortgage 201481. The mortgage was evidently executed a week or so earlier. The
terms of the mortgage described
the NBLI Company as “registered as the
proprietor of an Estate in fee simple in the land hereafter described subject
to such encumbrances liens and interests as are notified by memorandum
underwritten or endorsed hereon.” The operative provision
provided that
the NBLI Company:
“hereby Mortgage to [the Bank] ALL our Estate and Interest as such
registered proprietors as aforesaid in ALL THAT piece of
land containing two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres or thereabouts situated in the Parish of
River Hastings County of Macquarie
being the whole of the land comprised in our
application to bring lands under the provision of the Real Property Act
numbered 8395.”
mortgage went on to record the parties’ agreement that in the event of a
default the Bank “shall immediately have
and be at liberty to exercise all
or any of the powers of a mortgagee under the Real Property Act” and that
it would be lawful
for the Bank “to enter into possession of the mortgaged
property and to make and lease thereof or any part thereof and to exercise
and every or any of the powers of sale entry and possession distress ejectment
and foreclosure and all and every other the powers
vested in Mortgagees under
and by virtue of the Real Property Act in respect of the property hereby
mortgaged”.
mortgage further provided that the Bank was to have sole custody of the
certificate of title.
McInherny submitted that the registered proprietor of land which is subject to a
mortgage cannot dedicate a public road over the
land, and certainly not without
the consent of the mortgagee. The authority given for the proposition is the
case. The facts of the
case are set out at [92].
Some further detail is necessary to understand this issue. Mr Turner’s
interest in the Crown land
arose first from a licence issued to him under the
Lands Act 1869
(Vic). The licence subsequently matured into a lease. Upon
fulfilment of certain conditions, including the payment of rent, in due
Mr Turner would be granted the freehold. Before the freehold was granted, Mr
Turner mortgaged the lease. The local shire’s
contention that Mr Turner
had dedicated the land as a public road required the Court to consider whether
Mr Turner’s conduct
after the mortgage was granted was capable of
evidencing an intention to dedicate a public road.
CJ said at 864:
“I may say at once that, in my opinion, a mortgagor cannot without the
consent of his mortgagee dedicate a road over the mortgaged
property. There is
no more reason why he should be able to do so than there is reason why a lessee
should be able to dedicate without
the consent of his lessor.”
J said at 875:
“where land is under a mortgage, the mortgagor can no more assent to the
dedication of a road by user than he can give an interest
in the land of any
other kind to a third person without the mortgagee’s consent express or
implied. Therefore, if it is desired
to prove dedication by user while the land
was subject to mortgage, it must be shown that there was knowledge of the user
part of the mortgagees, just as it would be necessary to show knowledge
on the part of a lessor of land under similar circumstances.”
first point to appreciate is that the
case concerned old system
land. A mortgage of old system land was effected by a conveyance to the
mortgagee so that thereafter the
mortgagee had title to the land subject to the
mortgagor’s right of redemption:
Handevel Pty Ltd v Comptroller of
Stamps (Victoria)
[1985] HCA 73
(1985) 157 CLR 177
[1985] HCA 73
(Mason, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ). The reason why the mortgagor of
old system land was not capable of dedicating a public road
is readily apparent.
For old system land, the analogy of a tenant being incapable of dedicating a
public road over the landlord’s
land is apt.
mortgage of land registered under the Torrens statute operates differently:
Re Forrest Trust; Trustees, Executors and Agency Co Ltd v Anson
[1952] VicLawRp 51
at 256 (Herring CJ, with whom Gavan, Duffy and Deane JJ agreed). As at
1892, s 55 of the
Real Property Act 1862
provided that a mortgage
“shall have effect as security but shall not operate as a transfer of the
land thereby charged”.
The mortgagor remains the registered proprietor of
the land throughout. The analogy between a mortgagor and a tenant does not
hold for land under the Torrens statute. There was no occasion in the
Narracan case
for the High Court to consider dedication by a mortgagor of
land under the Torrens statute and there is nothing in the judgments to
that it was considered.
McInherny was not able to point to a case where the dedication of a public road
over land under the Torrens system has been doubted
because the land was
Campbelltown Municipal Council
case was a case about land under the
Torrens statute but there was no mortgage. Nonetheless Windeyer J said at
“At common law a highway was created when a competent landowner manifested
an intention to dedicate land as a public road,
and there was an acceptance by
the public of the proffered dedication. With some exceptions, any landowner
absolutely entitled in
fee simple is, at common law, competent to dedicate land
as a road. The main exceptions are mortgagors, who require the consent of
mortgagees, and trustees and bodies corporate if they are not empowered to do
view of the fact that there was no mortgage, these remarks were not part of the
reasoning for Windeyer J’s conclusion (and
indeed Windeyer J joined in the
High Court’s conclusion that a public road had been dedicated). In any
event, the remarks of
Windeyer J specify the reason why mortgagors are not
competent to dedicate land as a public road, namely that they require the
of the mortgagee. That suggests that Windeyer J was referring to the
typical situation where the mortgage expressly prohibits the
mortgagor from
dealing with the land without the mortgagee’s consent. The relevant
provisions of Mortgage 201481 are set out
above. They did not oblige the NBLI
Company to obtain the consent of the Bank before it dealt with the land. The
fact that the NBLI
Company retained the ability lawfully to deal with its land
may be inferred from the Bank’s contractual entitlement to have
possession of the certificate of title by which it would be able to exercise de
facto control over the NBLI Company’s
future dealings with the land.
outer limits on the ability of a mortgagor to dedicate a public road over
Torrens land does not need to be decided in the present
case because it is
common ground that the NBLI Company could have dedicated a public road over the
Wharf Road Alignment if the Bank
consented. The consent may be expressed or
implied. Indeed, whilst both Griffith CJ and O’Connor J referred to the
of the mortgagee in the
approached the issue as one of acquiescence: at 864–866 and at
875–876. For acquiescence all that is necessary
is to show that the
mortgagee was aware that the mortgagor’s conduct constituted the
dedication of a public road. Beyond that,
it is not necessary to show further
conduct by the mortgagee to draw the inference that it consented to the
dedication. The same
approach was taken to the landlord’s acquiescence to
the tenant’s dedication of the public road in
Newington v Windeyer
at 560–561.
Plaintiffs submit that there is every reason to infer that the Bank consented to
the NBLI Company dedicating a public road along
each road alignment depicted in
DP 2837, including the Wharf Road Alignment. I accept that submission.
Ultimately there does not
appear to be in dispute about them although Mr
McInherny’s position was imprecise. The Bank was evidently lending
against the success of the subdivision. After the Bank enforced the
security in 1900 it initially sought to carry on by selling further
lots to the
Freeman family. Success of the subdivision depended upon road access to each of
the 47 lots for which the dedication
of public roads was by far the most obvious
that commercial context, it is inconceivable that the Bank was not fully aware
of the NBLI Company’s dedication of public
roads throughout the
subdivision. In 1891 the NBLI Company made a primary application to bring the
land under the provisions of the
Real Property Act 1862
. The application
referred to the Bank as a mortgagee, which makes clear that it was the NBLI
Company’s secured lender from
a time prior to the lodgement of the primary
application. The land could not have been brought under the Torrens statute
the Bank’s consent. On 28 September 1892 the Registrar-General
issued Certificate of Title Volume 1070 Folio 177 to the NBLI
Company. The next
day Mortgage 201481 was registered. As set out above the land was described in
Mortgage 201481 by reference to
the NBLI Company’s primary application.
The following week DP 2837 was registered. Having regard to s 100 of the
Property Act 1862
, of which the Bank would have been aware, the lodgement of
DP 2837 was the primary act of dedication of the public roads by the NBLI
Company. Assuming compliance with the terms of the mortgage under which the Bank
held the Certificate of Title, DP 2837 could not
have been registered without
the Bank’s knowledge and consent.
clear inference from the chronology, and that which I draw on the balance of
probabilities, is that the Bank lent money to the
NBLI Company specifically for
the purpose of undertaking the subdivision contemplated by DP 2837. Having
regard to the documentation
and the commercial reality revealed by the
documents, the Bank’s consent to the dedication of public roads in the
subdivision,
including one within the Wharf Road Alignment, is inescapable.
McInherny’s second argument is to be rejected.
Public road
does not survive Mr McInherny’s indefeasibility of title
McInherny’s third argument arises from the events in 1942, when the
majority of the land in the then residue lot was resumed
by the State for the
purposes of the Cairncross State Forest. Thereafter the McInherny family was the
registered proprietor of an
oddly-shaped parcel of land comprised of Lots 4, 5,
6 with the Wharf Road Alignment sticking to the top. The McInherny family had
first become the registered proprietor of land which included the Wharf Road
Alignment when it purchased the entire residue from
the Bank in 1905. This
argument may also be applicable to that transfer, but Mr McInherny’s
submissions focussed on his family’s
ongoing registered proprietorship of
the residue after the 1942 transfer.
Certificate of Title which was issued in 1942 was Volume 5345 Folio 227 which is
referred to above and which is set out in the
Schedule at paragraph [19]. Mr
McInherny submits that a public road over the Wharf Road Alignment is not
recorded on the Certificate
of Title so his family’s indefeasibility of
title prevailed against any claim that there is a public road.
McInherny further submits that, upon DP 1296248 being registered on 20 July
2023, the McInherny brothers have been the registered
proprietors of the Wharf
Road Alignment (Lot 1) and in the continuing absence of a record of a public
road on the Register their
indefeasibility of title continues today.
Real Property Act 1900
provides as follows:
(1) Notwithstanding the existence in any other person of any
estate or interest which but for this Act might be held to be paramount
have priority, the registered proprietor for the time being of any estate or
interest in land recorded in a folio of the Register
shall, except in case of
fraud, hold the same, subject to such other estates and interests and such
entries, if any, as are recorded
in that folio, but absolutely free from all
other estates and interests that are not so recorded except—
(a) the estate or interest recorded in a prior folio of the
Register by reason of which another proprietor claims the same land,
(a1) in the case of the omission or misdescription of an
easement subsisting immediately before the land was brought under the
of this Act or validly created at or after that time under this or any other Act
or a Commonwealth Act,
(b) in the case of the omission or misdescription of any profit
à prendre created in or existing upon any land,
(c) as to any portion of land that may by wrong description of
parcels or of boundaries be included in the folio of the Register
or registered
dealing evidencing the title of such registered proprietor, not being a
purchaser or mortgagee thereof for value, or
deriving from or through a
purchaser or mortgagee thereof for value, and
(d) a tenancy whereunder the tenant is in possession or
entitled to immediate possession, and an agreement or option for the acquisition
by such a tenant of a further term to commence at the expiration of such a
tenancy, of which in either case the registered proprietor
before he or she
became registered as proprietor had notice against which he or she was not
Provided that—
(i) The term for which the tenancy was created does not exceed
three years, and
(ii) in the case of such an agreement or option, the additional
term for which it provides would not, when added to the original
term, exceed
three years.
(2) In subsection (1), a reference to an estate or interest in
land recorded in a folio of the Register includes a reference to
an estate or
interest recorded in a registered mortgage, charge or lease that may be directly
or indirectly identified from a distinctive
reference in that folio.
(3) This section prevails over any inconsistent provision of
any other Act or law unless the inconsistent provision expressly provides
it is to have effect despite anything contained in this section.
far as Certificate of Title Volume 5345 Folio 227 is concerned, there is a
tension between Mr McInherny’s third argument
and his first argument. The
Certificate of Title was issued to the McInherny family subject to “all
existing rights of way
or other rights if any” over roads which included
the Wharf Road Alignment. The language is generic but it may be construed
extending to the public rights over the public road created before 1920 and
thereafter preserved by s 232 of the
Local Government Act 1919
the McInherny family’s estate or interest was subject to those rights
notwithstanding s 42 (“subject to such
other estates and interests and
such entries”).
in 2023 Certificate of Title Volume 5345 Folio 227 was cancelled when DP 1296248
was registered. Thereafter there has been
no record on the Register of a public
road over Lot 1, generic or otherwise. Nonetheless, Mr McInherny’s
contention that the
public road is now defeated by his indefeasibility of title
is contrary to authority and must be rejected.
set out above, under the old system a public road could be dedicated and
accepted over private land without a change to the title
in the affected land.
Palmisano v Hawse
Bryson J said at [7] “the land remained the
property of the dedicating owner but became subject to public rights”. See
case at [13].
land was subject to such public rights even when it was under the Torrens system
and the public road was not recorded in the Register.
Municipality of Strathfield
(1911) 11 SR (NSW) 354 at 362–363, Rich AJ
“It is clear, therefore, that a registered proprietor holds his land
absolutely free from all encumbrances, liens, estates,
or interests whatsoever
other than those notified on the grant or certificate of title, save in the
cases expressly mentioned. Is
this language sufficiently wide to cover public
rights of highway? I am of opinion that it is not. The language of s. 42 itself
that the interests referred to are such as are capable of existing in
an individual; this is inconsistent with its applicability
to public rights of
user. But, apart from this, public highways appear to lie wholly outside the
scope of the Act. In the case of
private easements, their registration is
contemplated and provided for by s. 47. No provision has been made for the
recording of
the dedication of land for a highway, and, indeed, it has been held
in New Zealand that such a dedication is unregistrable:
Howell v. The
District Land Registrar
(27 N.A. 1073).”
the statement by Rich AJ in
Vickery v Municipality of Strathfield
Local Government Act 1919
was enacted which for the first time prescribed
an exclusive statutory mechanism for creating public roads (s 237). It also
for public roads to vest in fee simple in the local council (s 232(1))
including public roads which already existed (definition of
road” in s 4). Upon the statutory vesting, the nature of the
council’s interest in a public road is apparent
from s 232(1) which
provided that the council had the entitlement (but not the obligation) to be
registered as the proprietor of
the land on which the public road was located.
The council’s interest is not dependent upon registration. In that sense,
continued to exist outside the scope of the Torrens system. At the same time,
it was an interest which was capable of being registered
if the council
“so desired”.
statutory title of the council continued after the enactment of the
used the same language to provide that all public roads
“are vested in fee simple” in the relevant council.
application of these principles in a case similar to the present case is the
Court of Appeal’s decision in the
case. In that case Mr
Halloran was the registered proprietor of a large parcel of land for which he
deposited a plan of subdivision
in 1915. The new subdivision was to be named
Pacific City. In accordance with s 113 of the
Real Property Act 1900
repealed but closely resembling s 100 of the
Real Property Act 1862
deposited plan of subdivision delineated a network of roads set apart for public
use. By depositing the plan Mr Halloran dedicated
the delineated roads as public
roads which was accepted by the general public before 1920. Over time Mr
Halloran sold numerous lots
in the subdivision and was successively issued with
new certificates of title for the residue. At no time was the local
statutory interest in the public roads recorded on the Register.
Apart from the formation of the roads and the construction of Pacific
guest house for prospective purchasers, Pacific City did not eventuate. In 1998
the State compulsorily acquired Mr Halloran’s
interest as the registered
proprietor of the residue lot where some of the roads were located, now
overgrown and difficult to distinguish
from the bush. For compensation purposes,
the question arose whether the local council’s interest under s 232 of the
Local Government Act 1919
still existed even though no such interest was
recorded on the Register. The Court of Appeal applied the principle stated by
Vickery v Municipality of Strathfield
and held that the local
council’s interest in the public roads had continued to exist up until the
compulsory acquisition.
same principles were affirmed by the Court of Appeal in
Canada Bay Council v
Bonaccorso Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 351
(2007) 71 NSWLR 424
at 437–438;
[2007] NSWCA 351
. Citing Rich AJ in
Vickery v Municipality of Strathfield
Court of Appeal said:
“However, apart from fraud and the exceptions set out in s
42(1)(a)–(d) of the
Real Property Act
, it is clear that rights in
land under the Torrens system might arise outside the
Real Property Act
and that in some circumstances those rights effectively supplant the rights
under that Act. Thus, before the enactment of legislation
such as the
, which vested the fee simple of public roads in a local council as
the relevant roads authority (see
, the common law right of
the public to use a dedicated highway could not be defeated by the registered
proprietor of the land on
which the highway was located.”
McInherny submitted that the statutory interest created by s 232(1) of the
Local Government Act 1919
and continued by
Roads Act 1993
entitled the Council to have its interest in the public road registered, and
also to restrain the registration of some other interest
Council’s interest would be defeated. Absent registration by the Council,
the registered proprietor for the time being
of the land over where the public
road is located held his or her interest absolutely free from the
Council’s interest in accordance
Real Property Act
. Mr McInherny has not explained how his submission is to be reconciled
Vickery v Municipality of Strathfield
Canada Bay Council v Bonaccorso
and it is not otherwise apparent. He
has not identified a principled basis for the Court now to depict from them.
McInherny further relies on
which was added to the
Real Property Act
Real Property (Amendment) Act 1970
(NSW), s 22).
Section 46C(1) provides:
Where, by the operation of a statute, either directly or by reason of anything
done in pursuance thereof—
(a) land under the provisions of this Act became, before the
commencement of the
Real Property (Amendment) Act 1970
, or becomes, after that
commencement, vested in a person (other than the registered proprietor of the
land) either alone or jointly
or in common with that registered proprietor,
(b) land that is the site of a closed road or part thereof so
became, or so becomes, vested in a person registered under this
proprietor of adjoining land,
the Registrar-General may, of the Registrar-General’s own motion, and
shall, at the written request (made in the approved form)
of a person in whom
there has been such a vesting on such evidence as appears to the
Registrar-General sufficient, and after such
notice (if any) to such person as
the Registrar-General deems proper, register the person in whom any such land is
vested as the
proprietor of such estate therein as the Registrar-General deems
to be appropriate, and for that purpose the Registrar-General may
recordings in the Register and create such folios of the Register, as appears to
the Registrar-General to be necessary
McInherny submits that s 46C now provides a mechanism for the registration of a
local council’s interest in a public road.
It is unclear how s 46C assists
Mr McInherny’s argument. On the contrary, s 46C(1)(a) contemplates that
the operation of a
statute may vest land in a person who is not the registered
proprietor. The word “land” includes any estate or interest
land. Where that occurs, the person in whom the estate or interest has vested is
entitled to have his or her estate or interest
recorded on the Register. To that
extent s 46C appears to be a mechanism of general application similar to the
road-specific mechanism
in s 232(1) of the
Local Council Act 1919
enactment of the general mechanism does not advance Mr McInherny’s
argument based on indefeasibility.
of the arguments put forward by Mr McInherny warrant a conclusion other than
that set out above, namely that a public road exists
along the full length of
the Wharf Road Alignment.
Ancillary issues
follows from the foregoing, and notwithstanding the current state of the
Register, the Wharf Road Alignment is vested in fee simple
in the Council. No
issue has been raised in these proceedings about any other road alignment
originally contemplated by the NBLI
Company’s subdivision and I have not
made any finding beyond the Wharf Road Alignment.
submissions were made at the trial about what if any measures might be necessary
or desirable to attend to the Register in
light of my findings. The submissions
were necessarily hypothetical and to some extent premature. The parties properly
reserved their
final position pending publication of these reasons. In any
event, the post-trial developments with the Register now need to be taken
case, the conclusion that a public road exists makes it
unnecessary to decide the Plaintiffs’ alternative case based on an implied
right of way.
relation to Mr McInherny’s gate and fence,
Roads Act 1993
A member of the public is entitled, as of right, to pass along a public road
(whether on foot, in a vehicle or otherwise) and to
drive stock or other animals
along the public road.
The owner of land adjoining a public road is entitled, as of right, to access
(whether on foot, in a vehicle or otherwise) across
the boundary between the
land and the public road.
the road authority, Council is authorised to regulate obstructions of public
roads and may direct their removal:
It is an offence for someone to erect
a structure on a public road without Council’s consent. Nothing has been
identified in
the evidence which would suggest that the gate and fence are
view of these ancillary matters and the post trial developments with the
Register, the most efficient way to proceed is first to
provide the parties with
an opportunity to consider these reasons and then to liaise with each other
to be granted to give effect to the judgment and
to quell all aspects of the controversy between them. In the first instance, the
proceedings will be stood over for four weeks with the view then to considering
an agreed form of final orders or, absent agreement,
directions for the
determination of the final orders by the Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter