URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/247.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies Pty Ltd as trustee for Tanwar Family Trust v Gordian Runoff Ltd [2025] NSWCA 247 (17 November 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies Pty Ltd as trustee for Tanwar
Family Trust v Gordian Runoff Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 247
Hearing Date(s):
29 October 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Payne JA at [1]
Kirk JA at [2]
Ball JA at [3]
(1) Appeal allowed;
aside the orders of Weber SC DCJ made on 13 December 2024 and in their place
(a) That there be judgment for the
plaintiff in the sum of $149,021;
(b) That the
defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the
proceedings;
(3) The respondent pay the
appellant’s costs of the appeal.
Catchwords:
INSURANCE – interpretation – standard business insurance policy
– insurance of petrol station – meaning of
within policy – whether underground pipes fall within definition of
INSURANCE – interpretation –
meaning of “contract value” – whether “contract
value” distinguishable
from “contract price”
Legislation Cited:
Insurance Act 1973
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
Protection of the Environment Operations (Clean Air) Regulation 2010
Cases Cited:
Beaufort Developments (NI) Ltd v Gilbert-Ash NI Ltd
[1998] UKHL 19
[1999] 1 AC
Obeid v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(2014) 226 FCR
[2014] FCAFC 155
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451
[2004] HCA 35
Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies v Gordian Runoff Ltd
[2024] NSWDC 586
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd (2004) 219 CLR 165;
[2004] HCA 52
Principal judgment
Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies Pty Ltd ATF Tanwar Family Trust
(ABN 81 137 118 597) (Appellant)
Gordian Runoff Ltd (ACN 052 179 647)
(Respondent)
Representation:
A Kaylinger (Appellant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Abad and Villanueva Solicitors Pty Ltd
(Appellant)
Lander and Rogers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/0011620
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of NSW
[2024] NSWDC 586
Date of Decision:
13 December 2024
Weber SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2022/00202445
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
In July 2015, the appellant, Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies Pty Ltd
as trustee for the Tanwar Family Trust (
), received a notice from
the New South Wales Environment Protection Authority (
) stating that
it needed to undertake certain upgrade work to its petrol station at Lewisham to
control vapour recovery and be compliant
with the relevant environmental
regulation. The petrol station was leased to and operated by Tanwar Enterprises
Tanwar Enterprises
). Mr Ramesh Tanwar, the sole director and
shareholder of Tanwar and Tanwar Enterprises, was a licensed builder who, with
the assistance
of subcontractors, commenced the necessary work himself. As part
of the works, it was necessary to remove a portion of the concrete
apron of the
petrol station and replace the underground pipes which connected the petrol
storage tanks to the bowsers.
On completion of the works, testing indicated that air was getting into the
pipes and the bowsers were not working properly. There
was some evidence that
indicated that the damage had been caused maliciously. Tanwar proceeded to make
a claim against the respondent
insurer, Gordian Runoff Ltd (
under a business insurance policy (
in respect of damage
done to the underground pipes. The Insurer investigated the claim and, in the
meantime, Mr Tanwar commenced remedial
work to repair the damaged pipes.
The Insurer denied liability on various grounds. Tanwar subsequently
commenced proceedings against the Insurer seeking $444,305, comprising
amounts for: the cost of identifying and rectifying the damage, business
interruption (loss of rent), and claim preparation. Tanwar
provided limited
evidence quantifying the amounts detailed under the first and third categories
claimed in the form of invoices and
cheque butts, but did not tender any
documents supporting the claim for lost rent other than the lease. The insurer
led expert evidence
from a quantity surveyor who expressed the opinion that the
value of the upgrade work was $312,402.47 and the value of the remedial
The primary judge, Weber SC DCJ, rejected Tanwar’s claim on several
bases. Relevantly, his Honour held that the pipes “due
to their location
within the ground do not fall within the definition of
’ within the meaning of the Policy”.
Additionally, his Honour found that the exclusion to the definition of
“Buildings”
applied. That was because, consistently with the
relevant exclusion clause, the damage to the pipes occurred during construction
work (the upgrade work) and the contract value of that work was more than
$100,000 (that is, more than 20% of the sum insured). His
Honour held that at
most Tanwar was entitled to recover $149,021 for the cost of the remedial work.
His Honour further rejected the
claims for lost rent and claim preparation
On appeal, Tanwar contended, relevantly, that the primary judge erred by: (1)
finding that the pipes did not fall within the definition
“Buildings”; (2) finding that the “contract value”
exclusion to the definition of “Building”
applied; and (3) by
failing to give proper consideration and weight to the evidence of Tanwar with
respect to the loss of rent claim.
It sought a rehearing in relation to its
claim for rectification costs. It did not appeal the primary judge’s
finding in relation
to claims preparation costs.
(Ball JA, Payne and Kirk JJA agreeing)
allowing the appeal and entering judgment for the appellant in the sum of
(1) Contrary to the conclusions of the primary judge, the ordinary meaning of
the word “building” included structures
below ground, such as a
basement. In the present case, the pipes fall within the extended definition of
“Buildings” in
the Policy. That was because “Buildings”
was defined to include storage tanks and “other structural improvements
pertaining to the Buildings”. The pipes fell within the latter description
because they were structural improvements pertaining
to the storage tanks:
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451
[2004] HCA 35
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
(2) The insurer bore the onus of proving that “the total contract value
of all work” that was carried out by Tanwar to
comply with the notice
received from the EPA exceeded $100,000, which it failed to do. “Contract
work” must mean the
value of work done under a contract, which must be the
amount payable under the contract for the work. The Insurer made no attempt
prove the existence of any contract under which work was done to comply with the
EPA notice, let alone the amount payable under
that contract or those contracts
for that work. To rely instead on the quantity surveying evidence led by the
Insurer to assess the
contract value would be to ignore the word
“contract” in the expression: [56]-[58].
(3) There was no basis for ordering a retrial on the question of quantum. The
issue had been determined at first instance. Tanwar
should not be given an
opportunity to re-litigate an issue on which it lost at first instance merely
because it had succeeded on
other issues on appeal. Tanwar was insured under the
Policy on a “Reinstatement or replacement” basis. Consequently,
Insurer was obliged either to rebuild the Buildings (which, in the context must
mean carry out the rectification work itself)
or pay the costs of
“rebuilding, repairing or replacing” the pipes. By denying
liability, it failed to do that. Accordingly,
Tanwar was entitled to recover as
damages the reasonable cost of undertaking that work, which on the evidence was
$149,021: [59];
(4) There was no evidence that Tanwar Enterprises was entitled to abatement
of rent. Accordingly, the primary judge was correct to
conclude that Tanwar had
failed to prove its claim for lost rent: [65]-[68].
I agree with Ball JA.
: I agree with Ball JA.
The appellant insured, Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies Pty Ltd
as trustee for the Tanwar Family Trust (
), appeals against a
decision of the primary judge (Weber SC DCJ) rejecting a claim by Tanwar against
the respondent insurer, Gordian
Runoff Ltd (
business insurance policy issued by Calliden Insurance Limited
) and initially underwritten by Great Lakes Insurance SE
trading as Great Lakes Australia (
Tanwar Institute of Professional Studies v Gordian Runoff Ltd
On 29 June 2020, Gordian acquired the runoff business of GLA pursuant
to a scheme approved by the Federal Court under
(Cth). It will be convenient in this judgment to refer to GLA and
Gordian together as
the Insurer
claim was made in respect of damage done to underground pipes that formed part
of a petrol station owned by Tanwar
on New Canterbury Road, Lewisham. The petrol
station was leased to and operated by Tanwar Enterprises Pty Ltd (
Enterprises
). The sole director and shareholder of Tanwar and Tanwar
Enterprises is Mr Ramesh Tanwar.
primary judge also rejected a claim by Tanwar under a business interruption
extension contained in the Policy for lost rent during
the period the pipes were
the reasons that follow, the appeal against the decision in respect of the
damage to the pipes must succeed in part, but the appeal
in respect of the claim
for lost rent must fail.
early July 2015, Tanwar received a notice dated 30 June 2015 from the New South
Wales Environment Protection Authority (
) stating that it
needed to undertake certain upgrade works to the petrol station to comply with
cl 69 of the
Protection of the Environment Operations (Clean Air)
Regulation 2010
(NSW), which required certain equipment to be fitted to petrol
storage tanks in order to control vapour recovery.
receipt of that notice, Mr Tanwar, who was a licensed builder, with the
assistance of subcontractors, commenced the necessary
work himself after Tanwar
had been unable to engage a tank company to do the work. The work was commenced
in about November 2015
and was completed in April 2016. As part of the work, it
was necessary to remove a portion of the concrete apron of the petrol station
and replace the pipes, which were about 300mm underground. The pipes connected
the petrol storage tanks to the bowsers.
completion of the work, testing indicated that air was getting into the pipes
and the bowsers were not working properly. Investigations
revealed that the
pipes had at least 24 small holes in them. There was some evidence in the form
of part of a drill bit embedded
in one of the pipes that indicated that the
damage had been caused maliciously.
insurance broker first notified the Insurer under the Policy of a potential
claim on 18 July 2016 by which time Tanwar
had discovered the holes in the pipes
after cutting through the newly laid concrete.
Insurer investigated the claim and, in the meantime, Mr Tanwar commenced
remedial work to repair the damaged pipes. That work
was completed in November
13 June 2017, the Insurer denied liability on various grounds, some of which
remain relevant and some of which do not. At that
stage, Tanwar had not
attempted to quantify its claim.
commenced proceedings against the Insurer on 11 July 2022 and by its further
amended statement of claim filed on 24 January
2024, it claimed a total
amount of $444,305 made up of the following
Cost of identifying and rectifying the damage
$379,680.00
Business Interruption (loss of rent)
Claim preparation
$444,305.00
No particulars were given of those figures.
evidence given at trial in support of the quantification of the claim was
limited. It was principally given by Mr Tanwar in two
affidavits, one affirmed
on 15 December 2023 and the other on 9 August 2024. In relation to the claims
for the costs of the rectification
work, the first affidavit affirmed by Mr
Tanwar exhibited what were described as three scopes of work and three tax
invoices. Two
of the scopes of work and two of the invoices were addressed to
“Calibre Insurance”, which presumably was intended to
be a reference
to Calliden. One of those invoices, dated 13 August 2016, was for $38,500
(including GST). The other dated 13 October
2016 was for $53,130 (including
GST). Mr Tanwar explained in his second affidavit that the first invoice
related to initial exploratory
work undertaken by Tanwar. The second invoice
related to additional exploratory work undertaken by it because “the
did not accept [Tanwar’s] position concerning the findings from
the Exploratory Works Part One”. The third scope of works
was from Tanwar
Enterprises and was addressed to Tanwar. It was dated 28 July 2016 and was for
an amount of $261,500 (excluding GST).
On 13 December 2016, Tanwar Enterprises
issued an invoice to Tanwar for “Work completed as per Quotation accepted
[sic] 07.10.2016” in the amount of $287,650 (inclusive of GST).
Tanwar also relied on cheque butts in respect of cheques drawn
by Tanwar in
favour of Tanwar Enterprises for $28,765 on 13 October 2016 and $258,885 on 9
February 2017 and a redacted account statement
showing withdrawals of those
amounts: J[87(g)].
response to that evidence, the Insurer served an expert report dated
9 April 2024 from a quantity surveyor, Mr Eugene Cloete. Mr
expressed the opinion that the estimated cost of undertaking the upgrade work
was $355,557.55 and the estimated cost of undertaking
the remedial work was
$163,923.70 (both figures included GST).
documents were tendered in support of the claim for lost rent other than the
lease. However, in support of that claim, Mr Tanwar
said at para 78 of his first
affidavit that “During that time [that is, the time when the repair work
was undertaken], the
Plaintiff was not in receipt of the rent that they would
have otherwise received from the tenant, with the rent being $12,500 a month.
The Plaintiff has been deprived of approximately $45,000 to $47,000 in
support of the claim for claim preparation costs, Tanwar tendered two invoices.
One was from Northcliff Claim Services dated 27
September 2016 for $5,619.84
(incl GST). The other was from Abhay Enterprises Pty Ltd dated 13 July 2017 for
$14,712.50 (incl GST)
for 53.5 hours at $250.00 per hour (plus GST):
Policy consists of a schedule and a standard form document setting out the
Policy wording (the
Policy Document
Policy Document is divided into a number of sections. The Property Damage
section contains the following insuring clause:
“Your insurance under this cover section
Provided the Property Damage cover section is shown as insured in the Policy
Schedule, then subject to the provisions of the Policy,
We will cover You for
physical loss of or damage to Your Property Insured at the Premises during the
Period of Insurance.”
Insured” is defined to mean “the property shown in the Policy
Schedule as specifically covered with a
Sum Insured in respect of each cover
section”. “Premises” is defined to mean “the places
listed in the Policy
Schedule as the situation at which and from which You
operate Your Business”, which was stated in the Schedule to be “281
New Canterbury Rd, Lewisham NSW 2049”.
Property Damage cover section of the schedule is in the following
Method of Settlement
Reinstatement or replacement
Sum Insured
Not Insured
Not Insured
Rewriting of records
Removal of debris
Specified Items
Not Insured
Extra costs of reinstatement
Standard Policy Benefit
Playing surfaces
Optional covers
Flood cover
Not Insured
Strata title mortgagee(s) interest
Not Insured
Applicable Excess
effect of these provisions is that Tanwar was insured in respect of physical
loss or damage to “Buildings” at the
Premises up to an amount of
general definitions section of the Policy Document contains the following
definition of “Buildings”:
“Buildings: means the Building(s) located at the Premises.
Buildings includes:
2) customised and modified shipping containers or
transportable buildings permanently located at the Premises used as workshops,
lunchrooms or storage and which are permanently fixed to the ground with
electrical or plumbing services, as necessary;
3) shipping containers in which the Stock Your Business
distributes is delivered to the Premises or from which merchandise is
being loaded into, unloaded from or stored in before dispatch, provided that the
container doors are secured when unattended
with padlocks and the padlocked
container is fully enclosed by a locked fenced area at the Premises after
4) shipping containers in which the Stock or Contents of Your
Business is stored, provided that the container doors are secured
unattended with padlocks and the padlocked container is fully enclosed by a
locked fenced area at the Premises after hours;
5) walls, foundations, storage tanks and sheds, awnings,
exterior lights, masts, antennae and aerials, fixed external signs, gates,
fencing, pavements, roads and other structural improvements pertaining to the
6) property owner’s fixtures and fittings, floor
coverings, plant, plumbing or wiring services that are within the Buildings;
7) carports, pergolas and canopies;
8) barns and outbuildings;
9) external fixed items including swimming pools, saunas and
spas, gangways between Buildings, lights and signs and air conditioning
10) bridges, wharves, piers and jetties.
Building(s) does not include:
1) plant and machinery;
3) Contents;
4) property undergoing erection, construction, alteration or
addition (including partial dismantlement of existing structures),
total contract value of all work to be carried out at any one Premises exceeds
$500,000 or 20% of the total Sum Insured
on Buildings and Contents, whichever is
the lesser, provided that this limit shall only apply to the portion of the
Property Insured
which is subject to any such work and not to any other portion
of the Property Insured;
5) land, unsealed driveways, unsealed paths, topsoil and fill,
dams, reservoirs, canals, tunnels and railway tracks (not at the
the heading “Reinstatement or replacement” in the Property Damage
cover section, the Policy Document relevantly
“Where the Policy Schedule shows that You are insured for
‘Reinstatement or replacement’ then, when:
a) Buildings, ... are lost or damaged We will, at Our
i) rebuild the Building at the Premises shown in the Policy
Schedule or at another site;
v) pay the cost of rebuilding, repairing or replacing the
Buildings ... provided that if You choose not to rebuild, repair or replace
Buildings ... We shall effect settlement on an indemnity value basis;”
General Policy Conditions section contains the following clause:
Claims preparation expenses
We will pay for costs necessarily and reasonably incurred for the preparation
and negotiation of a claim for which We agree to indemnify
You under the Policy.
The most We will pay is $25,000 in total for any one claim, unless a higher
amount is included in the particular
cover section of the Policy. This benefit
is in addition to any Sum Insured or limit of liability.
This benefit does not apply to the Tax Audit cover section.“
General Policy Conditions also contain the following clause:
Change to risk
If You become aware of any changes to Your Business or other circumstances
affecting the Premises during the Period of Insurance
that may result in an
increased risk of destruction, loss or damage to Your Property Insured under the
Policy or liability to any
third parties, You must notify Us of these changes in
writing as soon as possible.
If You are a property owner insuring Buildings under the Policy at Premises that
You lease to any third party(ies), You must inform
Us within 90 days from when
You first become aware of any:
a) changes of tenants; and/or
b) changes whether total or partial to the occupancy of the
at the Premises during the Period of Insurance.
If We agree to the alteration of risk or changes We will do so in writing and
You must pay Us any additional premium We may require.
Your failure to notify Us of the alteration of risk or changes could result in
Us declining a claim and/ or cancelling or avoiding
the Policy, except where We
expressly allow alterations in risk in the relevant cover sections of the
first paragraph of the Business Interruption cover section of the Policy wording
states that there are five types of cover available
under that section of the
Policy including “Loss of Rent Receivable basis” and that “The
Policy Schedule indicates
which cover has been selected by You”.
Business Interruption cover section of the Policy Schedule is in the following
Annual Revenue
Indemnity Period
Annual Revenue Amount
Not Insured
Annual Rental Amount
Sum Insured
Annual Revenue
Not Insured
Loss of Rent Receivable
Claim preparation and proving expenses
Additional increase in cost of working
Accounts receivable
Optional cover
insuring clause for Business Interruption insurance on a loss of rent receivable
basis is in the following terms:
“Loss of Rent Receivable basis
What You are covered for
If ‘Loss of Rent Receivable’ is shown as insured in the Policy
Schedule with a specific Sum Insured, in the event of
interruption of or
interference with Your Business in consequence of Damage to any Property Insured
or any part thereof used by You
at the Premises for the purpose of Your
Business, We will pay You in respect of each item the amount of the loss
resulting from such
interruption or interference.
Provided that:
a) the payment is in accordance with the ‘What We
pay’ provision for the item;
b) We have paid for or admitted liability in respect of such
Damage to Your Property Insured under the relevant cover section,
insurer has paid for or admitted liability in respect of such Damage;
c) We would have paid for or admitted liability in respect of
such Damage under the relevant cover section of the Policy, or another
would have paid for or admitted liability in respect of such Damage and it would
otherwise be covered under the relevant
cover section but for the application of
d) Our liability in no case will exceed in respect of each
item the Sum Insured shown in the Policy Schedule or the sub-limit
shown in this
cover section, for that item; and
e) cover for ‘Item 4. Claim preparation and proving
expenses’ is only provided if this item is shown as insured in
Schedule with a specific Sum Insured.
Insurance on a Loss of Rent Receivable basis provides protection with regard to
loss under:
Loss of Rent Receivable.
Additional increase in cost of working.
Accounts Receivable.
Claim preparation and proving expenses.”
amount payable in respect of Item 1 is relevantly stated to be:
“The amount payable under this item will be:
a) in respect of loss of Rent Receivable:
the amount by which the Rent Receivable during the Indemnity Period falls short
of the Standard Rent Receivable, in consequence of
the Damage; and
Receivable” is defined to mean “the amount of the rent received or
receivable (including base rental, Turnover
rental and contributions to
outgoings) from the letting of property at the Premises”. “Standard
Rent Receivable”
is relevantly defined to mean “the Rent Receivable
during that period in the 12 months immediately before the date of the Damage
which corresponds with the Indemnity Period ...”. “Damage” is
defined to mean “physical loss, destruction
or Damage occurring during the
Period of Insurance caused by an Event insured under the Property Damage cover
section, ...”.
following cover is provided in respect of claim preparation and proving
“In addition to the amount payable under General Condition ‘Claim
preparation expenses’ of the Policy, We will
pay You up to the amount
shown in the Policy Schedule for the costs of such reasonable professional fees
as may be payable by You
and other such reasonable expenses necessarily incurred
by You and not otherwise recoverable, for preparation and negotiation of
under this cover section. “
broad terms, the effect of these provisions is that if the Insurer has paid, or
admitted liability to pay, an amount in respect
of physical loss or damage to
the insured property and that physical loss or damage has interrupted or
interfered with Tanwar’s
business, Tanwar is entitled to claim loss of
rent “resulting from such interruption or interference” up to an
of $150,000.
The primary judgment
primary judge rejected Tanwar’s claim on several bases.
he held that the pipes “due to their location within the ground do not
fall within the definition of ‘
’ within the meaning
of the Policy”: J[61]. That was because the ordinary meaning of the word
“building” “does
not extend to items located within the
ground”. That conclusion was reinforced by the fact that
“‘plumbing’
(item 6) is only brought within the definition to
the extent ‘
that are within the Buildings
the primary judge held that the exclusion to the definition of
“Buildings” applied. That was because the damage
to the pipes
occurred during the construction work and the contract value of that
construction work was more than $100,000 (that
is, more than 20% of the sum
insured). In reaching that conclusion, his Honour rejected Tanwar’s
argument that the construction
work was complete at the time the damage
occurred. He also rejected Tanwar’s argument that because the work was
by Tanwar, the exclusion did not apply. In his Honour’s view, a
distinction needed to be drawn between “contract price”
“contract value”. The exclusion was directed at the latter, which
meant that what was relevant was the reasonable
market price for the work, and
not the price according to some contract. The unchallenged evidence of Mr Cloete
was that the value
of the work was $312,402.47: J[64]-[69].
his Honour concluded that the Insurer was entitled to refuse to pay the claim
because Tanwar had failed to comply with the
General Policy Condition relating
to a change to the risk. For reasons that will become apparent, it is
unnecessary to explain his
Honour’s reasons for that conclusion.
the primary judge was not satisfied that Tanwar had discharged its onus of
establishing its loss. On this issue, he said:
“88 I do not consider that the invoices issued by Tanwar
and Tanwar Enterprises discharge Tanwar’s onus to establish
its loss. I
take this view as the invoices were issued by the insured or a related entity to
another related entity. There was no
evidence adduced by Tanwar as to the
reasonableness of the invoices. In addition, the invoices are entirely
unparticularised and
unsubstantiated.
89 Tanwar has made no attempt to establish the labour costs,
materials charges and contractor costs incurred in undertaking the
repair works.
Nor was there any attempt made to justify any internal labour rates charged by
Tanwar and Tanwar Enterprises. There
was no evidence as to whether the relevant
internal rates are direct labour costs or include profit and indirect
90 I should also add in this regard that Mr Cloete gave
unchallenged evidence that the reasonable cost of undertaking the investigation
and remedial costs would not exceed $149,021 ...
91 If I had have [sic] otherwise found that the policy
responded to Tanwar’s claim, I would have concluded that the prejudice
the insurer for the purposes of
of the ICA [the
Insurance Contracts Act
(Cth)] was the difference between the sum which Tanwar agreed to pay to
Tanwar Enterprises less the amount asserted by Mr Cloete.”
the primary judge rejected the claim for lost rent. That was because Mr Tanwar
had failed to explain why Tanwar was not in
receipt of rent that it otherwise
would have received from the tenant as he alleged in his affidavit. According to
the primary judge,
“He [Mr Tanwar] did not, for example, establish that
the service station operated by Tanwar Enterprises was closed during this
period, or that rent was abated during this period”: J[95].
the primary judge rejected the claim for claim preparation costs. That was
because the Insurer was entitled to deny liability:
J[98]. In any event, Tanwar
had failed to establish that the costs it claimed were necessarily and
reasonably incurred. As an example,
Abhay Enterprises was an entity owned by Mr
Tanwar that operated an Indian restaurant and was not an insurance claim
specialist:
The grounds of appeal
amended notice of appeal identifies nine grounds of appeal. Grounds 1 and 3 were
not pressed. Ground 4 attacks the
primary judge’s interpretation of the
definition of “Buildings”. Grounds 5 and 6 attack the primary
conclusions in relation to the application of the exclusion to the
definition of “Building” and “contract value”
respectively. Grounds 2 and 2A (numbered 3 in the amended notice of appeal)
attack the primary judge’s conclusions in relation
to the change of risk
clause. Ground 8 attacks the primary judge’s conclusions in relation to
the business interruption element
of the claim because they failed “to
give proper consideration and weight to the evidence of the Plaintiff with
the loss of rent component of their claim”.
is also relevant to add that one of the orders sought in the amended notice of
“5 Order that judgment for Appellant against Respondent
for $425,305 or such other sum the Court determines on rehearing.”
the course of the hearing, the Insurer accepted that it was not entitled to rely
on the change in risk clause. Accordingly,
grounds 2 and 2A, which concern the
application of
Insurance Contracts Act 1984
) to the change of risk clause, do not arise, and the appeal
should be allowed to the extent that the denial of the claim depended
ground of appeal addressed the primary judge’s findings at J[88]-[89] that
Tanwar had failed to prove its loss. That issue
was raised directly by the
Insurer for the first time on the morning of the hearing, although the
Insurer’s written submissions
did refer to the findings of the primary
judge. Tanwar’s counsel, Mr Kaylinger, was asked whether in light of the
position he wished to make an application (inferentially to
amend the notice of appeal). He indicated that he did not. However, he
to order 5 of the orders sought in the amended notice of appeal and submitted
that it would be open to the Court to conclude
that judgment should be given in
the sum of $149,021, which was consistent with the primary judge’s
conclusion at J[90]-[91].
The position was left on the basis that each party was
given an opportunity to provide the Court with short written submissions after
the hearing addressing the issue. In those submissions, the Insurer maintained
its position that the appeal must fail because there
was no challenge to the
primary judge’s finding on quantum. In its submission, the opinion of Mr
Cloete on the reasonable costs
of undertaking the work was irrelevant. That was
because Tanwar had sought to establish its loss by reference to its legal
to pay a related party for the costs of remediation, not the
hypothetical reasonable cost that would have to be incurred to restore
property to its former usable condition. For its part, Tanwar submitted that if
it succeeded on the question of liability, the
matter should be remitted to the
District Court for a further hearing on quantum. Alternatively, it maintained
its position that
it was at least entitled to recover the $149,021.
the sake of completeness, it might be added that there was no appeal against the
primary judge’s conclusion in relation
to claims preparation
The definition of “Buildings” (ground
preliminary points should be made about the definition of
“Buildings”.
the definition adopts the structure of stating that the defined term
“includes” a list of items which are plainly
not intended to be
exhaustive (none of the included items, for example, describe the central notion
of a building as ordinarily understood).
In those circumstances, it would be
usual to treat the defined term as capturing buildings as ordinarily understood
together with
the other items listed (whether they would ordinarily be described
as “buildings” or not): see
Obeid v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
(2014) 226 FCR 471
[2014] FCAFC 155
it is a well-accepted principle of interpretation that the words of a contract
should be interpreted having regard to the
surrounding circumstances known to
the parties and the purpose and object of the transaction:
Pacific Carriers
Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451
[2004] HCA 35
Toll (FGCT)
Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
[2004] HCA 52
definition of “Buildings” in this case is contained in standard
policy terms that are intended to apply in a wide
range of circumstances. There
is a question whether in that case the relevant context is that of a policy that
insures a petrol station
or is that of a policy which on its face is intended to
apply to a wide range of circumstances. Little, however, turns on the answer
that question. If the relevant context is a policy that insures a service
station, then some of the words of the Policy are irrelevant,
but other words,
such as “tanks”, must be given a meaning that is apposite to a
service station. On the other hand, if
the relevant context is that the words
appear in a standard term policy that applies in a wide range of circumstances,
then the terms
of the Policy must be interpreted in a way that accommodates all
those circumstances, including insurance of a service station. In
either case,
the result is the same.
it is relevant to bear in mind that one of the functions of the definition is to
draw a distinction between buildings in the
sense of improvements on land and
the contents of buildings, which are usually insured separately. That can be
seen in the expansive
definition of “Buildings” which includes
various structures on land that would not usually be regarded as buildings (such
as masts, antennae and aerials, fixed external signs, gates, fencing and
pavement) and the exclusion of “Contents”, which
itself is defined
inclusively to cover a broad range of things. That is not to say that the words
of the definition should be given
a meaning that they do not bear. But they
should be given a broad meaning consistent with the fact that one reason for the
on the scope of cover arising from the definition of
“Buildings” is because it was expected that improvements or
to the land not covered by the Policy would be insured separately if
the insured wanted cover for them, not because they were thought
inappropriate subject-matter for insurance altogether.
it is plain that the numbered lists were not intended to be exclusive
categories. The clearest example are categories 1) and
5), which both cover
sheds. It follows that one category should not be used to read down
that background, it is possible to turn to the question whether the pipes
connecting the tanks to the bowsers fell within
the definition of
“Buildings”. In my opinion, they did. Contrary to the conclusions of
the primary judge, there is nothing
in the definition that suggests that it only
covers improvements above ground. The definition covers
“foundations” which
almost invariably are underground. It also
covers “swimming pools” and “storage tanks”, which are
underground. The ordinary meaning of “building” would cover
the basement of a building, which by its nature is underground.
my opinion, the pipes fall within the description “other structural
improvements pertaining to the Buildings”. “Structural”
this sense should be understood as an adjectival form of
“structure”. It means any improvement that is a structure.
pipes, or fuel lines as they are frequently referred to, fall within that
description. They obviously “pertain” to
the storage tanks for the
petrol because they connect the storage tanks to the bowsers. The storage tanks
fall within the defined
term “Buildings” because they are expressly
included by para 5).
follows that the appeal in relation to ground 4 must succeed.
exclusion (grounds 5 and 6)
my opinion, the exclusion contained in para 4) has no application in this
was common ground between the parties that the Insurer bore the onus of proving
the facts relevant to the application of the exclusion.
Consequently, it bore
the onus of proving that “the total contract value of all work” that
was carried out by Tanwar
to comply with the notice received from the EPA
exceeded $100,000. “Contract work” must mean the value of work done
a contract, which must be the amount payable under the contract for the
work. In the present case, the Insurer made no attempt to
prove the existence of
any contract under which work was done to comply with the EPA notice, let alone
the amount payable under that
contract or those contracts for that work.
Instead, the Insurer sought to prove through the evidence of Mr Cloete the
cost of doing that work. But they are not the same thing. Here, much
of the work was undertaken by Tanwar (that is, Mr Tanwar). It
appears that Mr
Tanwar did engage some subcontractors (such as electricians). However, there is
no evidence that the value of the
work performed by the subcontractors exceeded
the reasoning of the primary judge, the Insurer submitted that “contract
value” was not the same as the contract
price and that what was critical
was the value of the work, which plainly exceeded $100,000. That submission
cannot be accepted.
It involves ignoring the word “contract” in the
expression. This is not a case where it could be said that the word is
superfluous: cf
Beaufort Developments (NI) Ltd v Gilbert-Ash NI Ltd
[1998] UKHL 19
[1999] 1 AC 266
at 274 (Lord Hoffmann). The concepts of the value of work and
the value of the work under a contract are quite distinct. There may
good reason for choosing the latter concept in this case, since it is to be
expected that any contractor undertaking significant
work would have its own
insurance covering the contract works. In any event, it is plain that the Policy
Document refers to the latter
concept not the former one.
those reasons, the appeal in relation to grounds 5 and 6 must succeed.
The absence of a ground dealing with quantum
is convenient to deal next with the primary judge’s finding in relation to
proof of the claim for Property Damage. That finding
has two components. First,
his Honour found that Tanwar had not proved the loss that it claimed.
Unsurprisingly given the evidence,
there is no challenge to that finding. In its
supplementary written submissions, Tanwar submits that the matter should be
this Court upholds the grounds of appeal in relation to liability.
There is no
proper basis for such an order. The hearing before the District Court related to
both liability and damages. Tanwar should
not be given an opportunity to
re-litigate an issue on which it lost and has not appealed merely because it has
succeeded on other
second component of the primary judge’s finding contained in J[91] is that
if Tanwar had succeeded on liability, his Honour
would have reduced the claim
of the ICA by “the difference between the sum which Tanwar
agreed to pay to Tanwar Enterprises [and] the amount asserted by
Cloete”, with the result that Tanwar would have recovered the amount of
conclusion was not challenged by a notice of contention. However, it was
addressed in the supplementary submissions filed by
the Insurer and briefly by
Tanwar in oral submissions when it submitted that it was open to this Court on a
rehearing to find that
the amount of its damage was $149,021.
is unclear why the primary judge thought that
of the ICA was relevant. That
section is concerned with terms of an insurance policy that have the effect of
permitting an insurer
to refuse to pay a claim by reason of some act or omission
of the insured. It has no application to the failure by a plaintiff to
loss. The question is whether the reasonable value of the work necessary to
undertake the rectification work is a proper
measure of the amount that Tanwar
is entitled to recover for physical loss or damage to the pipes.
my opinion, it is. Tanwar was insured under the Policy on a “Reinstatement
or replacement” basis. Consequently, the
Insurer was obliged either to
rebuild the Buildings (which, in the context must mean carry out the
rectification work itself) or
pay the costs of “rebuilding, repairing or
replacing” the pipes. By denying liability, it failed to do that.
Consequently,
Tanwar was entitled to recover as damages the reasonable cost of
undertaking that work, which on the evidence of Mr Cloete was $149,021.
follows that Tanwar was entitled to judgment for at least that
The claim for lost rent (ground 8)
primary judge was correct to conclude that Tanwar had failed to prove its claim
for lost rent.
10 of the lease between Tanwar and Tanwar Enterprises relevantly
“(a) If during the currency of this lease the demised
premises or a substantial part thereof is destroyed so substantially
wholly unfit for occupation by the lessee then the rental hereby reserved shall
abate and this lease and the term hereby
created may if the lessor so elects and
of its election in writing notifies the lessee within one (1) month of the
destruction or
damage be terminated and brought to an end PROVIDED THAT if the
lessor does not give such notice and does not within a period of
months from such occurrence commence to restore the demised premises the lessee
may by notice in writing to the lessor
terminate this lease.
(b) In the event that the demised premises or any part thereof
shall at any time during the continuance of the lease be damaged
so as to render
part of the same unfit for occupation and use by the lessee then a proportionate
part of the rent hereby reserved
according to the nature and extent of the
damage sustained shall abate until the demised premises shall have been rebuilt
fit for the occupation and use of the lessee.
lease does not permit abatement of rent in other circumstances and no other
basis was suggested by Tanwar. There was no evidence
before the primary judge
that the requirements of cl 10 had been satisfied. Consequently, there was no
evidence that Tanwar Enterprises
was entitled to an abatement of rent.
follows that ground 8 must fail.
Conclusions, costs and
is entitled to recover $149,021 in respect of its claim. Under
of the ICA,
Tanwar is entitled to interest on that amount commencing “on the day as
from which it was unreasonable for the
insurer to have withheld payment of the
amount”. However, no claim for interest was made, and it is difficult to
see why Tanwar
would be entitled to interest when it never properly proved its
claim and the amount of the Insurer’s liability was not quantified
Insurer accepted that Tanwar would be entitled to the costs of the appeal if it
succeeded in establishing its claim to the $149,021,
as it has done. For the
same reason, it should be entitled to the costs at first instance.
Accordingly,
the orders I propose are:
(1) Appeal allowed;
(2) Set aside the orders of Weber SC DCJ made on 13 December 2024 and in their
place order:
(a) That there be judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $149,021;
(b) That the defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings;
(3) The respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter