URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/263.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARK v GIO (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 263 (13 December 2020)
v GIO (Claims Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 263
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Accident not wholly or mostly caused by the fault of the claimant -
photographic evidence – accident at a roundabout - neither
party saw the
other prior to impact – blocked vision left side – proper lookout -
legal costs-
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Cases Cited
ARK – Claimant
GIO – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(5)
Accident Injuries Act
and clause 7.441 of the
Motor Accident
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
AAI Limited t/as GIO
Date of Accident
27 September 2019
DRS Reference
DRS Claims Assessor
Sarah Warren
Date of Decision
13 December 2020
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
the purposes of section 3.11 the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of ARK.
the purposes of section 3.28 the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of ARK.
the purposes of section 3.38 the insurer is entitled to reduce statutory
benefits payable in respect of the motor accident for
contributory negligence of
ARK by 50%.
amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
is $1,826.18 inclusive of
A brief statement of my reasons for this determination
are attached to this certificate.
Sarah Warren
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
This determination relates to a Miscellaneous Claim, which is a reviewable
decision under Schedule 2(3)(e) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, about whether the Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault for the
is a dispute between ARK and the Insurer about whether ARK is entitled to be
paid statutory benefits beyond the first 26 weeks
after the subject accident.
The issue is whether ARK is wholly or mostly at fault in accordance with
sections 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(“the Act”).
subject accident occurred on 27 September 2019. The accident occurred in a
roundabout at the intersection of Flushcombe and Bungarribee
Roads, Blacktown.
Both vehicles entered the roundabout and there was subsequently a collision.
There is a dispute between the parties
as to which vehicle entered the
roundabout first and which vehicle had right of way. ARK was injured as a
result of the accident.
brought a claim for personal injury benefits on the basis that the insured
driver caused the accident.
Insurer issued a liability notice of 23 January 2020 stating that it was the
Insurer’s view that ARK was wholly at fault
for the accident.
sought an internal review. On 9 April 2020 the Insurer issued a certificate of
determination of the internal review and statement
of reasons. The Insurer
affirmed the decision of 23 January 2020. The Insurer remained of the view that
ARK was wholly at fault
for the accident.
has made an application to the DRS for determination of the dispute as whether
she was wholly at fault for the accident.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered all of the documents provided by the parties including
additional submissions and email correspondence.
LEGISLATION
making my decision/conducting my review I have considered the following
legislation and guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
Accident Guidelines 2017
Insurer has determined that ARK is wholly at fault for the motor vehicle
accident. The Insurer bears the onus of establishing
that ARK was either wholly
or mostly at fault for her injuries.
the liability notice dated 23 January 2020 [R7], the Insurer determined that ARK
was wholly at fault for the motor vehicle accident.
The Insurer determined that
ARK “entered the roundabout when it was not safe to do so”.
is not my role to assess the original decision made by the Insurer. Rather, it
is my role to make a fresh decision based upon
the materials provided by the
parties at the time of my decision. It was agreed by the parties during
teleconferences that this
matter ought to be determined on the papers. I
confirm that neither party sought to have the matter listed for an assessment
and neither party made any application to call any of the witnesses
for questioning. In that regard, neither party has required
either ARK, her
passenger, or the insured driver, for questioning. In that regard, neither
party has directly challenged the witness
versions nor put any alternative
versions to those witnesses.
3.11 and 3.28 provide that ARK is not entitled to statutory benefits
“income support and treatment and care” beyond
the first 26 weeks
after the accident:
(a) If her only injuries are minor injuries;
(b) If she was wholly at fault for causing the accident; or
(c) If she was mostly at fault for causing the accident.
is only one issue for my determination and that is whether ARK is wholly or
mostly at fault for the motor vehicle accident.
In order to do that, I need to
weigh the material available before me.
Hospital Emergency Department recorded in the patient health record [A3] that
ARK was “driving at approx. 40-50km/h
at a roundabout when another vehicle
rear ended her”. In the triage form recorded on 28 September 2019 at
7:44pm, it recorded:
“Slow MVA hit from behind whilst
entering roundabout.”
is no information before as to the source of this information as to whether it
was provided by ARK or someone else.
her statement of 15 July 2020, ARK stated that when she entered the roundabout
there was no other car entering the roundabout.
She explained the circumstances
of the accident as follows:
“...I was travelling straight
on Flushcombe Road. I was crossing the roundabout (crossroad Bungarribee Road)
straight (second
exit), and as I was about to leave the roundabout a car ran
into the right side of the back of my car. After the car hit me I felt
continue to speed up into me. As a result, I accelerated to get away from the
car and then I pulled over straight after
the roundabout onto the left side of
disagreed with DN and the details that he provided in his statement dated 16
December 2019 in that specifically she did give way
before entering the
roundabout and that in her recollection there were no cars entering the
roundabout. Further, she stated that
she entered the roundabout before DN or
any other car that was on her right. ARK outlined that she is “well
aware” that
she has the requirement to give way to vehicles on her right
when she is entering a roundabout. She stated that she did. ARK stated
did not agree that DN was travelling at 20km/h and maintained her position that
DN impacted “the back right side of
my vehicle with a lot of force”
which suggested to her that he was travelling in excess of 20km/h. ARK stated
that the damage
to her vehicle was sustained to the right back side which
supported that DN was traveling in excess of 20km/h in accordance with
damage demonstrated in the photographs, specifically photograph
(Photograph 3)
is no expert evidence in relation to the damage to the vehicles and the
estimated pre-collision speed of the vehicles.
police report dated 20 January 2020 [R3] did not provide any description or
narrative of the circumstances of the accident.
ARK’s passenger, provided a statement dated 23 September 2020. AAA is the
mother of ARK. AAA was the front seat passenger
in ARK’s vehicle at the
time of the accident. AAA indicated that there was a female passenger seated in
the front passenger
seat of the insured vehicle. AAA stated that they were
travelling northbound on Flushcombe Road in lane 2 of 2 and intended to go
straight across the roundabout with Bungarribee Road.
vehicle was travelling at about the speed limit, noting the speed limit in the
area was 60km/h according to AAA, before
slowing down on approach to the
roundabout. She stated that ARK’s vehicle came to a complete stop at the
give way line at
the roundabout. The car waited a few minutes letting some cars
pass through and once clear, with a “clear gap to enter the
roundabout” ARK “slowly proceeded out onto the roundabout at a
normal pace”.
“We drove about 3-4 metres out onto the roundabout
and then the collision occurred immediately out of nowhere. Abirami and
both looking forward when the collision occurred. We were almost halfway across
the roundabout when we got hit. We stayed
in lane 2 northbound when crossing
the roundabout.”
stated that the insured vehicle came from “our right side and from behind
us” and was travelling westbound on Bungarribee
Road. She did not recall
which lane the insured vehicle was in. From her recollection and observation,
the speed of ARK’s
vehicle was travelling 25-30km/h whereas the speed of
the insured vehicle was “a lost faster...about 60-70kph possibly”.
AAA explained that the impact between the vehicles was on the rear
driver’s side on the lower part of the rear door down on
the rear bumper
of ARK’s vehicle and that the rear bumper was “knocked off”.
AAA drew on a satellite image of
the roundabout detailing the position of the
vehicles at the time of the collision.
The insured driver, DN provided a statement dated 16 December 2019 [R4]. He
indicated that he was the driver of his vehicle and he
was alone in the vehicle.
DN stated there was one car on his direct left in lane 1 of 2 on Bungarribee
Road prior to the collision
and there were a few other cars driving around after
the collision but traffic was not “overly heavy or congested”. He
was unable to describe the colour, make or model of the car that was in the lane
on his left and did not know the details of the
occupants of that vehicle.
DN stated that he was in lane 2 of 2 heading in a westbound direction on
Bungarribee Road and had intended to continue straight across
the roundabout in
a westerly direction. He stated that he came to a stop at the give way line when
he reached the roundabout. As
did the car on his left. He indicated he stopped
for approximately five seconds and then “casually accelerated and entered
the roundabout”. The car on his left also entered the roundabout at the
same time and he was travelling parallel to that vehicle
as they drove across
the roundabout.
He estimated his speed to be “about 20kph” and he was
accelerating through the roundabout when he would almost exited
the roundabout,
approximately 5-10 metres into the roundabout, ARK’s vehicle appeared in
lane 2 of 2 of the northbound lane
of Flushcombe Road. He stated that he was
almost directly in line with ARK’s vehicle when her vehicle entered the
roundabout.
DN explained that the vehicle that was travelling on his left “blocked
my view of the claimant’s vehicle until it was
too late”. He stated
that the vehicle on his left came to a sudden stop before colliding with
ARK’s vehicle. There is
no mention of the other vehicle in the statement
from ARK or her passenger. There is no statement from the driver of the other
mentioned by DN. ARK makes a vague reference to DN’s comment about
the third vehicle at paragraph 7:
“Furthermore, I have read the insurers
submissions with
respect to same. I do not agree that DN was travelling at 20km/h. He states that
there was also a car travelling
on his left who managed to avoid impact. This is
because that car was not speeding, unlike DN.”
insurer submits that this should be taken as a concession by ARK that there was
a third vehicle as asserted by DN that came to
a stop to avoid a collision with
ARK. Rather, ARK seems to be attempting to address the insurer’s
submission rather than agreeing
that there was another vehicle and that the
other vehicle came to a stop beside her vehicle in the roundabout. Although it
indeed that it was not addressed in her evidence or the statement from
her passenger. However, I am only left with the documents
before me and the
limitations those documents have.
stated that he saw ARK’s vehicle only at the “very last
second” and it was too late to avoid a collision as ARK’s
was “only a metre or so from me”. He explained
“I saw the car on my left slam on the brakes and stop
within a metre or so of the claimant’s car but I didn’t get
to brake or react.”
explained that the front centre of his vehicle collided into the rear
driver’s side door of ARK’s vehicle. He submitted
that he was
travelling approximately 20km/h at the time of the collision and that
ARK’s vehicle was doing approximately the
same speed. He did not see her
vehicle prior to her entering the intersection and he was not aware as to
whether she stopped before
entering the intersection. He stated that he was
looking forward and paying attention to his driving when the collision occurred.
He admitted that he did not see ARK’s vehicle prior to the collision. He
asserted that he was “definitely on the roundabout
first” and that
he had “almost exited the roundabout when the collision occurred”.
that both ARK and DN both concede that neither saw the other vehicle prior to
impact, or at the very least immediately prior
to impact, the evidence each
provides as to the estimated speed of the other has very little weight. Neither
would be able to give
an accurate estimate of the speed of the other vehicle
when there was no prior observation of the vehicle. The assertions made by
is of little to no assistance to me and holds no weight.
though DN explains that the vehicle to his left was blocking his vision he goes
on at paragraph 64 to state:
“At the time of the
collision, there was nothing blocking my vision to the front or left and right
sides of my vehicle.
determining disputes for the operation of s3.11 and 3.38,
I do not need
to determine that someone was at fault. The question is whether ARK was,
firstly, wholly at fault, or in the alternative,
whether she was mostly at
on the evidence before me, I am not satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that ARK was wholly at fault for the accident.
The damage to ARK’s car
occurred to the back driver’s side passenger door, not to the front of the
vehicle. The collision
did not occur between the front driver’s side of
the claimant’s vehicle but rather further back on the car. This suggests
that at least half of ARK’s vehicle had passed in front of DN’s
vehicle prior to the collision. Through his evidence,
DN has failed to keep a
proper lookout. His actions have contributed to the accident.
on the evidence before me, I determine that ARK was not wholly at fault. Now I
turn to whether I am satisfied that ARK was
mostly at fault.
3.11(2) and 3.28(2) provide:
“A motor accident was caused
mostly by the fault of a person if the contributory negligence of the person in
relation to the
motor accident (as referred to in section 3.38) was greater than
order to be found to be mostly at fault, ARK must be more than 61% contributory
Insurer has not made any alternative findings in relation to contributory
negligence. Specifically, the Insurer has not made
any finding as to percentage
that ARK would be found to be contributory negligent if she was not found to be
wholly at fault.
Insurer has not made any submissions as to findings of contributory negligence.
There is no submission from the Insurer balancing
the respective actions of ARK
and the insured driver leading to a finding of a percentage of contributory
negligence other than determining
that ARK was wholly at fault.
balancing the respective actions ARK and DN, I find their actions equal. Both
did not keep a proper lookout when entering and travelling
through a roundabout.
Both travelled at a speed that did not enable them to take evasive action to
avoid a collision. I therefore
determine that ARK was 50% contributory
the purposes of section 3.38 of the Act, the insurer is entitled to reduce
statutory benefits payable in respect of the motor
accident for contributory
negligence of ARK by 50%.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
has not made any submissions in relation to costs.
Insurer has submitted that where no claim is made for costs, no assessment of
costs ought to be made. I am not convinced by that
submission nor that
proposition given that it is clear that ARK has been represented by legal
representatives since the commencement
of the dispute and work has been
undertaken in relation to determination of this dispute before DRS.
the Insurer’s submissions of 12 May 2020, the Insurer submitted that
“where the Assessor affirms the Insurer’s
decision on liability it
would not be fair and reasonable that it bear any amount for the
claimant’s legal costs”. I
reiterate as set out above that it is
not my role to either affirm nor set aside any decision made by an Insurer. It
is my position
to make a fresh and new decision based on materials that are
before me. This is not a merit review situation where I am looking
merits or the content of the decision made by the Insurer. Although it is
relevant to the overall determination of the matter,
it is not determinative
especially in relation to the issue of costs.
is further submitted that given that the property damage Insurer as well as the
CTP Insurer have both declined liability for the
claim made by the applicant
based on circumstances of the accident, ARK should not be awarded any costs in
the event that I determine
that ARK is wholly or mostly at fault.
has been represented by Turner Freeman Lawyers since the commencement of the
dispute. ARK’s solicitors prepared and lodged
the application with DRS and
appeared on behalf of ARK at numerous teleconferences. As well as obtained a
further statement from
ARK in relation to the circumstances of the accident.
am not satisfied that the entitlement to legal costs which are paid directly to
the solicitors are tied to the outcome of my determination
of the claim. I am
not satisfied that I should reduce the costs awarded as a result of any action
of the claimant or her legal representatives.
am satisfied that ARK’s legal representatives are entitled to the maximum
amount for legal costs for a dispute before DRS.
I allow costs in the sum of
$1,660.16 plus GST, making the total awarded for costs $1,826.18.
My determination of the Miscellaneous Claim is as follows:
the purposes of section 3.28 or 3.36 the motor accident was not caused wholly or
mostly by the fault of the injured person
the purposes of section 3.38 the insurer is entitled to reduce statutory
benefits payable in respect of the motor accident for
contributory negligence of
the injured person of 50%.
The amount of ARK’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
is $1,826.18 inclusive of
Sarah Warren
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (11.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter