URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Holz v Camden Park Ex-Servicemen and Bowling Club Ltd [2003] NSWCC 1 (11 February 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Holz v Camden Park
Ex-Servicemen and Bowling Club Ltd
[2003] NSWCC 1
Camden Park Ex-Servicemen & Bowling Club Ltd
NUMBER: 39837 of 2001 of 2003.00
CATCH WORDS: Appeal; Elements
of Workers Compensation
LEGISLATION CITED:
DATES OF HEARING: 11/02/03
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPELLANT: Mr J A Jobson
instructed by McCulloch & Buggy
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr P R Stockley
instructed by Paul A Curtis
1. This is an appeal by the unsuccessful respondent, Camden Park
Ex-Servicemen & Bowling Club Ltd (“the employer”)
decision of Commissioner Wright, given by judgment on 6 September 2002 in favour
of the successful applicant, Gina Marie
Holz, (“the worker”) making
an award in favour of Ms Holz on the basis of total incapacity for work from 16
January 2001
to date and continuing under s 36 and
Compensation Act 1987
(“the Act”).
2. The basis of the award was a series of factual findings made by the
Commissioner in which it is sufficient to say he accepted the
evidence that she had suffered psychological injury arising out of and
apparently also in the course of her employment
with the respondent, and
dismissed the employer’s defence based on
of the Act. I say it is
sufficient to outline the Commissioner’s factual findings in this way
because the grounds of appeal
before me have been considerably narrowed. They
are contained in the affidavit of Mr Stewart, the solicitor for the employer
on 26 September 2002. They were originally ten in number.
3. Those relied on by Mr Jobson of counsel who appears for the employer now
are only grounds 7 and 10 which are respectively:
The Commissioner also ignored the applicant’s own evidence that she
thought she was capable of performing a wide range of activities
and has been
seeking work.
“The Commissioner found that the applicant was totally incapacitated
for work but did not offer or adopt any diagnosis of her
condition other than
sustained psychological injury’
4. It is important first to analyse the law applicable to appeals of this
kind. It was acknowledged by Mr Jobson that
Compensation Court Act
governs the present appeal. Relevantly, it reads in subsection (1):
If a party to any proceedings before a Commissioner is aggrieved by an award
of a commissioner, in point of law or on a question as
to the admission or
rejection of evidence that party may appeal to a judge.
5. No misuse of statutory discretion as the phrase is used in
relied on by Mr Jobson, nor was any mentioned in the grounds of appeal relied
upon by him, nor was any application made by him
for the admission of further
evidence within
, so that those subsections are irrelevant to this
6. Much law exists of course on what is a “point of law” as that
phrase is used
I was referred by Mr Stockley of counsel for the
worker to the
locus classicus
in relation to the meaning of that term in
this State, which is
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR
, where the distinction is, with respect, helpfully made, particularly in the
reasons of Glass JA, between the question of weight
of evidence as opposed to
whether there is
evidence for a factual conclusion.
7. The first question is not one of law; the second is. The latter is so
because it is a question of law whether there is any evidence
whatsoever for a
particular factual conclusion; if there is not, the conclusion is an erroneous
one in point of law. Such is established
by the case cited by Glass JA at 155,
McPhee v S Bennett Ltd
(1935) 52 WN (NSW) 8
at 9 per Jordan CJ and by the
cases cited by the learned Chief Justice there.
8. On the other hand, as Glass JA points out in
at 156-157,
the mere fact that a factual conclusion
made upon evidence
is against the
weight of that evidence, even to the point of being perverse, cannot attract
appellant intervention where the statute
conferring that right is cast in the
, which is materially identical to the section conferring a
right of appeal in
which was s 37(4)(a) of the Workers
Compensation Act 1926, where the same phrase “in point of law” is
used (see Kirby
P (as he then was) at 141). The question therefore is whether
evidence was before the Commissioner upon which he could have based
his conclusion, which is expressed at paragraph 46 of his judgment
at page 12,
that the worker was totally incapacitated for work as a result of psychological
injury in the course of and arising out
of her employment with the employer.
9. It is necessary in order to examine that question to look at what
“total incapacity” means in the Act, where it is
used in particular
in s 36 and s 37, which are the sections of the Act confirming entitlement to
compensation for total incapacity
for work. That question is conveniently dealt
with in a case again cited by Mr Stockley for the worker,
Moran Healthcare
Services v Woods
[1997] NSWSC 147
(1997) 14 NSWCCR 499
, where at 502 Mason P remarks that the
expression “total incapacity” is not defined in the Act, but that an
authoritative
point of reference is
Ball v William Hunt & Sons Ltd
(1912) AC 496
where Lord Loreburn LC said at 499:
In the ordinary and popular meaning which we are to attach to the language
of this statute, I think there is total incapacity for
work when a man has a
physical defect which makes his labour unsaleable in any market reasonably
accessible to him, and there is
partial incapacity for work when such a defect
makes his labour saleable for less than it would otherwise fetch.
10. Mason P observes there that this passage has frequently been cited with
approval, citing
Thompson v Armstrong & Royse Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 46
(1950) 81 CLR
McGale v Glad
[1981] FCA 89
(1981) 36 ALR 81
A J Bartlett Pty
Ltd v Drenkovski
(1982) 64 FLR 328
at 331. To these may be added
Corrimal-Balgownie Collieries Ltd
[1938] HCA 70
(1938) 61 CLR 120
at 129 per Latham CJ.
As Mason P points out at 503,
case was also cited with
approval in
Metropolitan Coal Co Ltd v Duffy
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 163
168 per Jacobs J A.
11. The relevant question is therefore whether there was
for the Commissioner’s conclusion that the applicant was at all material
times totally incapacitated for work to the
effect that the worker’s
labour was unsaleable in any market reasonably accessible to her, applying the
time-honoured words
of Lord Loreburn in
12. I think it was undoubtedly the case, as Mr Jobson submitted, and as
indeed the Commissioner acknowledged at paragraph 21 on page
5 of his judgment,
that after resigning from her employment on 7 May 2001, the worker began seeking
work not long afterwards. The
evidence establishes and the Commissioner
acknowledged that the worker applied for jobs as a part-time customer service
officer and
pharmacy assistant and also enrolled in courses to improve her
computer and typing skills and after completing those courses, sought
office nature and also made what the Commissioner described as a genuine
application for work with the Commonwealth Bank.
13. The fact is however that some three months after her resignation from the
employment of the employer in the circumstances set
out at paragraph 20 of the
Commissioner’s judgment on page 5 thereof, the worker saw a psychiatrist,
Dr Christopher Canaris,
who was qualified by her solicitors. That
doctor’s report dated 16 July 2001 was part of Exhibit A, which consisted
of a number
of medical reports tendered by the worker before the Commissioner.
Materially that report, which is somewhat extensive, supports
Commissioner’s conclusion as to the worker’s capacity for work at
the time of his examination, which would appear
to have been on 12 and 13 July
2001, at paragraphs 38 and 39 of the report on page 6. These read:
38. From what she tells me about herself and what I have seen, I cannot
envisage her returning to the workforce for the present.
The continuing
litigation and the lack of acknowledgment by the Club and the Secretary/Manager
that anything wrong was done is a
significant factor driving her continuing
illness. Her boundaries have been violated by the way she perceives herself to
treated and she lacks the resources for now to repair the
39. I see her as needing ongoing treatment and would see her as likely
to remain disabled for work even after this matter is resolved.
It would take
her a good year or two in the best case scenario to get back into the workforce.
It may take a good deal longer -
however, only time will tell.
14. The terms in which those paragraphs are cast clearly support a
conclusion, not only that the worker could not as at the date of
perform her pre-injury work, which seems to have been as a bar attendant with
the employer, but that she is not capable
of returning to the workforce at all,
and will remain similarly incapable for at least a year, if not two. As Dr
examinations were on 12 and 13 July 2001, this meant his opinion
was that the worker was totally incapacitated right up to the date
before the Commissioner, 6 September 2002, and for some time thereafter.
15. However, there are medical certificates supporting incapacity for work
also contained in Exhibit A before the Commissioner extending
from 16 January
2001 until 1 May 2001 from a Mr Alex Frater, psychologist, who seems to have
been the applicant’s treating
practitioner, and it is opined in a
certificate of that person dated 16 May 2001 that by that stage the worker was
fit for suitable
duties between 17 and 30 May 2001.
16. There was thus a difference of opinion in the worker’s own camp so
far as the medical reports were concerned as to her capacity
for work. It may
indeed be that the worker was fortunate in persuading the Commissioner that she
was totally incapacitated for work
at any time after she was certified fit for
suitable duties by Mr Frater, who was after all her treating psychologist,
particularly
having regard to her evidence of attempts to find work even before
she saw Dr Canaris. That is nothing in point however on the question
evidence to justify the Commissioner’s conclusion that
the worker was totally incapacitated for work on a continuing basis.
17. The plain fact is that there was such evidence in the form of Dr
Canaris’ report, from which I have quoted the material
sections, which
satisfies the criteria of “total incapacity for work”, where it is
used in s 36 and s 37 of the Act,
according to the explications of that term in
the authorities from which I have quoted.
18. The fact that there was also a body of evidence tendered by the employer
in Exhibit 4, which consisted of the medical reports
of a number of
practitioners, medical and otherwise, who disagree with Dr Canaris’
conclusion that the worker was and is totally
incapacitated for work, is
likewise not in point. I have carefully read these reports, along with all of
the worker’s medical
reports and the other exhibits and the transcript of
the two days upon which this matter was heard before the Commissioner on 30
2002 (Wollongong) and 26 August 2002 (Parramatta), and certainly it is possible
of the evidence may have favoured the conclusion that
the worker was partially rather than totally incapacitated for work on a
basis. That, as I have said, is not the question before me. The
question is whether there is
evidence for the Commissioner’s
conclusion that the worker is totally incapacitated on a continuing basis and as
I have said,
that evidence was before the Commissioner in the form of Dr
Canaris’ report.
19. The employer complains in paragraph 6 of the grounds of appeal set out in
Mr Stewart’s affidavit that this conclusion was
reached by the
Commissioner in the absence of any contemporaneous medical evidence to that
effect, and also in paragraph 9 of those
grounds it is asserted that the
Commissioner accepted and
“an out of date report of Dr
to the effect that
“the applicant was totally unfit
. Mr Jobson did not rely on this last ground at all, but I
observe in passing that the report of Dr Canaris cannot be described as
date when it specifically contains an opinion as to capacity for work in the
near future, as indeed it does where Dr Canaris
says that it would take the
worker a good year or two “
in the best case scenario”
back into the workforce.
20. The fact that other minds may have found this conclusion lacking in
weight and unconvincing is nothing in point; the question
is whether it provides
evidence with the conclusion that the Commissioner formed. I think
it did. I do not think the mere fact that the worker herself
gave evidence in
the witness box of attempts to find work before, and for that matter after, Dr
Canaris’ examination means
that as a matter of law, the Commissioner was
obliged to reject Dr Canaris’ conclusion. It was on that evidence quite
for example for the Commissioner to conclude, although he did not
specifically articulate the matter this way, that the worker then
herself to be capable of working in a lighter capacity but that Dr
Canaris’ conclusion as an expert that she was not
so capable was to be
21. One should carefully note the distinction drawn by Glass JA in
at 156 between questions of absence of evidence for conclusions
where the person complaining of a factual conclusion in his or her
being made carries the onus of proof of it, and such questions where
the person complaining of a factual conclusion
carry the onus. As Glass JA points out there, however, “
the party not
bearing the onus puts an argument, which assumes
against himself
evidence has been accepted, but submits that it is not capable of establishing
”. Applying that approach here, it is still the case in my
view that Dr Canaris’ report provides expert support in the
appropriate
field for the Commissioner’s conclusion that the worker remains totally
incapacitated for work.
22. I appreciate also that the Commissioner’s conclusion was apparently
based purely on a statement in a document and was not
expressed to be dependent
on the demeanour of the worker or of Dr Canaris (who did not give oral evidence)
as an expert, as to which
Abalos v Australian Postal Commission
[1990] HCA 47
(1990) 171 CLR 167
Ahmedi v Ahmedi
(1991) 23 NSWLR 288
, and that an
appellate court is not disadvantaged compared with a trial judge in merely
drawing inferences from documents:
Earthline Constructions Pty Ltd v State
Rail Authority of NSW
[1999] HCA 3
(1999) 160 ALR 588.
However Dr Canaris’
conclusion is clear and unequivocal, if on some views a little extreme, and
clearly supports on its wording
the Commissioner’s conclusion.
23. My conclusion is that, as I have said, there was evidence for the
conclusion reached by the Commissioner that the worker was totally
incapacitated
for work on a continuing basis, and as this is the only basis upon which the
appeal is now put by Mr Jobson for the
employer, despite his earlier reliance on
an alleged misconstruction by the Commissioner of s 11A of the Act, which he
specifically
abandoned, as noted in the transcript, the appeal must fail.
24. The appeal is dismissed and the employer must pay the worker’s
costs as agreed or assessed.
Mr J A Jobson instructed by McCulloch &
Buggy appeared for the appellant.
Mr P R Stockley instructed by Paul A Curtis
appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (23.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter