URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Secretary, Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses and Midwives' Association [2025] NSWIC 20 (12 November 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Secretary, Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’
Association
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 20
Hearing Date(s):
24 February 2025, 25 February 2025 and 10 March 2025 (final submissions
received 14 March 2025)
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Chin J, Vice President
(1) Pursuant to
s 139(3)(e)
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Court imposes the following penalties on the respondent:
(a) penalty of
$21,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the Commission on 9 September
2024 in respect of the respondent’s
conduct on 9 and 10 September
(b) a penalty of $4,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the
Commission on 9 September 2024 in respect of the respondent’s
12 September 2024;
(c) a penalty of $49,000 for contravening dispute orders
made by the Commission on 9 September 2024 (as varied on 18 September 2024)
18 September 2024 in respect of the respondent’s conduct from 19 to 24
September 2024;
(d) a penalty of $56,000 for contravening dispute orders made
by the Commission on 8 November 2024 in respect of the respondent’s
conduct from 8 to 13 November 2024.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — industrial disputes — dispute
orders — penalty — proper approach to imposing
penalty pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) in light of Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
(2022) 274 CLR 450
purpose of penalty imposed under
s 139(3)(e)
— standard of proof —
calculation of maximum penalties — course of conduct
Legislation Cited:
Evidence Act 1995
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act 1991
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Relations Amendment Act 2023
(NSW) Sch 1.2, Sch 1.3
Industrial Relations
(Public Sector Conditions of Employment) Regulation 2014 (repealed)
Cases Cited:
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union
(2017) 249 FCR 458
[2017] FCAFC 53
Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union (The Nine Brisbane Sites
(2019) 366 ALR 698
[2019] FCAFC 59
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] HCA 13
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Macdonald (No 11)
(2009) 256 ALR 199
[2009] NSWSC
Australian Workers’ Union, New South Wales v Bluescope Steel (AIS)
Pty Limited
(2006) 151 IR 153
[2006] NSWIRComm 71
Bluescope Steel Ltd
(formerly known as BHP Steel Ltd) v The Australian Workers’ Union, New
South Wales
[2006] NSWIRComm 338
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34
Commissioner of Police (NSW Police Force) v Naser
[2025] NSWCA
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Fair Work
(2023) 322 IR 233
[2023] FCA 72
Construction, Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes Constructions Pty Limited
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Williams
(2009) 191 IR 445
[2009] FCAFC 171
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Union v Cahill (2010) 194 IR 461;
[2010] FCAFC 39
Cook’s Construction
Pty Ltd v Brown
(2004) 49 ACSR 62
[2004] NSWCA 105
Director General, NSW
Department of Health v New South Wales Nurses Association (No 3)
NSWIRComm 190
Director-General, NSW Department of Education and Training v
NSW Teachers Federation
[2010] NSWIRComm 44
Fair Work Ombudsman v Maritime
Union of Australia
[2017] FCA 1363
Fair Work Ombudsman v Roach (The Melbourne
Quarter Case)
[2023] FCA 781
Fire Brigade Employees' Union v Industrial
Relations Secretary (on behalf of Fire and Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm
Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v Australian Salaried Medical
Officers' Federation (New South Wales)
[2025] NSWIRComm 5
Health Secretary,
Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives Association
[2024] NSWIRComm
Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’
Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 3
Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW
Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 4
Health Secretary,
Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association (No 2)
NSWIRComm 9
Health Services Union v Health Secretary (NSW Ambulance)
NSWIRComm 1014
Industrial Relations Secretary v Public Service Association
and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New
(2017) 93 NSWLR 723
[2017] NSWSC 71
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228
CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
Royer v Western Australia
(2009) 197 A Crim R 319
[2009] WASCA 139
Secretary NSW Department of Education v The Australian
Education Union New South Wales Teachers Federation Branch
[2022] NSWSC
Secretary of the Treasury v Public Service Association and Professional
Officers' Association Amalgamated Union (NSW) (No 2)
(2013) 231 IR 349
[2013] NSWIRComm 25
Secretary, Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association
(2022) 320 IR 249
[2022] NSWSC 1178
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Trade Practices Commission v Allied Mills Industries Pty Ltd (No 4)
[1981] FCA 133
Texts Cited:
Andrew Stewart, Anthony Forsyth, Mark Irving, Richard Johnstone and Shae
McCrystal, Creighton & Stewart’s Labour Law (7th
ed, 2025, The
Federation Press)
Philip Boncardo and Ben Bromberg, “Civil Penalties in
Industrial Law” in Deniz Kayis, Eloise Gluer and Samuel Walpole
Law of Civil Penalties (2023, The Federation Press)
Matthew Peckham, Cam
Truong KC, Ian Latham and Amanda Storey, Civil Penalties in Australia (2025,
LexisNexis)
New South Wales Legislative Council, Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 23 November 1995
Principal judgment
Secretary of the Ministry of Health (Applicant)
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association (Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Bartier Perry (Applicant)
M Dunstan (New South
Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/418919, 2024/431281
Publication Restriction:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Background facts
Genesis of the dispute
- paragraph 9
The dispute orders
- paragraph 15
The industrial action
The first strike
paragraph 22
The second strike
paragraph 33
The third strike
paragraph 49
paragraph 61
Relevant statutory provisions
Dispute resolution
- paragraph 67
The former “wages cap”
- paragraph 75
Contravention of dispute orders
- paragraph 79
The alleged contraventions
- paragraph 83
The proper approach to imposing penalties under ss
139(3)(e) and 139(4) of the IR Act
- paragraph
The Association’s conduct:
“organising” industrial action?
paragraph 117
Did the Association publish the Commission’s
orders in a prominent position on its website and social media?
- paragraph 126
Did the Association fail to cease organising
industrial action in the form of work bans from 10 to 30 September 2024?
- paragraph 139
The evidence
paragraph 140
Consideration
paragraph 141
The maximum penalty
- paragraph 171
The appropriate penalty
- paragraph 199
- paragraph
INTRODUCTION
and midwives employed in the NSW Health Service throughout the state who were
members of the respondent, the New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives’
Association (Association), went on strike on 10 September 2024 (first strike),
24 September 2024 (second
strike) and 13 November 2024 (third strike).
two summonses filed on 11 November 2024 (first summons) and 20 November 2024
(second summons), the applicant, the Secretary of
the Ministry of Health (Health
Secretary), seeks orders imposing monetary penalties on the Association.
the first and second summonses allege 27 separate contraventions of orders made
by this Commission (when constituted otherwise
than as the Industrial Court).
The orders in question were made by me on 9 September 2024 (first dispute
orders) and by Taylor J,
President on 18 September 2024 (second dispute orders)
and 8 November 2024 (third dispute orders). Those orders required the
Association
to cease organising industrial action. They also required the
Association to remove any reference to the strike action from its social
accounts and website and to publish the Commission’s orders in a prominent
Health Secretary alleges that the Commission’s orders were breached by the
Association, not only by reason of its conduct
in failing to cease organising
the first, second and third strikes, but also by failing to cease organising
industrial action in
the form of work bans that are alleged to have been imposed
from 10 to 30 September 2024 (work bans). The Health Secretary seeks
imposition of penalties totalling $189,000.
Association admits most of the alleged contraventions arising from its conduct
associated with the first, second and third strikes.
The parties, however, join
issue on some aspects of the nature and extent of the Association’s
conduct in “organising”
the strike action, as well as on the number
of contraventions attracting the imposition of penalties in these proceedings.
Association puts in issue 5 of the 27 alleged contraventions. It does not admit
one contravention for failure to cease organising
any work bans, or four
contraventions alleging failures to publish some of the Commission’s
orders in a prominent position
on its website and social media.
am satisfied that the Association deliberately contravened the first, second and
third dispute orders so as to warrant the imposition
of four separate penalties
in the total sum of $130,000.
first outlining the background facts underlying the Association’s
contraventions, the applicable legislation and the alleged
contraventions, I
address the issues arising as follows:
(1) the proper approach to imposing penalties under
ss 139(3)(e)
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) (IR Act) in light of
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
(2) the proper characterisation of the Association’s conduct as
“organising” industrial action (at [
(3) whether the Association published the Commission’s orders in a
prominent position on its website and social media (at [
(4) whether the Association or its members engaged in work bans, and if so,
whether the Association failed to take immediate steps
to cease organising those
work bans from 10 to 30 September 2024 (at [
(5) identifying the maximum penalty by reference to the proper number of
contraventions for which penalties should be imposed having
regard to the extent
to which the Association engaged in one or more course or courses of conduct (at
(6) determining the appropriate penalties (at [
Background facts
Genesis of the dispute
genesis of the underlying industrial dispute is set out in the decision in which
I made the first dispute orders,
and in the subsequent statements and recommendations made by Taylor J in the
course of conciliating that
I touch on the salient
features of the dispute as follows.
parties were engaged in negotiations over pay and conditions regarding the
Public Health System Nurses' and Midwives' (State)
Award 2023 and the Crown
Employees Nurses' (State) Award 2023 (the Awards), which expired on 30 June
expiry of the Awards and the parties’ negotiations followed the repeal of
the so-called ‘wages cap’ which restored
the Commission’s
ability to effectively arbitrate wage disputes and to grant wage increases in
recognition of work value. Previously
under the wages cap, the Commission was
instead required to give effect to government policy on adjusting wages for
public sector
employees. The result was that, for most of the period from 2011
to 2023, nurses and midwives were unable to obtain a wage increase
higher than
2.5% per annum.
parties' negotiation process included the Association serving a log of claims on
the Health Secretary on 10 May 2024 and a series
of discussions between the
parties taking place from 21 May 2024 to 13 August 2024.
crux of the dispute was remuneration.
13 August 2024, the Association notified the Commission of an industrial dispute
Act. The Association sought,
amongst other claims, a 15% increase to remuneration for one year. Following
this, the parties appeared
before the Commission and the matter was listed for
conciliation.
The dispute orders
6 September 2024, the Health Secretary also notified the Commission of an
industrial dispute. This dispute concerned the Association’s
strike action on 10 September 2024, as well as “ongoing industrial action
currently being undertaken by members
of the NSWNMA across the public health
system in the form of stop work meetings, and work bans”.
Commissioner
McDonald urgently conciliated this dispute on the same day that it was notified.
The conciliation culminated in the Commissioner
making recommendations that the
Association and its members immediately cease organising and participating in
industrial action from
10 September 2024 to 18 September 2024:
Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives Association
NSWIRComm 1056
the ensuing weekend, the Association’s Council determined that it would
not comply with Commissioner McDonald’s recommendation
and would continue
with the first strike.
9 September 2024, the Health Secretary sought the first dispute orders, which I
made pursuant to ss 136(1)(c) and 137(1)(a) of
the IR Act:
Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 3
. The first dispute orders were in the following
“A. Pursuant to s 136(1)(c) and
s 137(1)(a)
Relations Act 1996
(NSW), the Commission makes the following orders:
(1) The New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association
(“the Association”), its officers and employees, and
its members
employed in the NSW Health Entities listed in Schedule 1 to the document marked
MFI 1 (“Health Entities”)
immediately take steps to cease organising
and refrain from taking industrial action on and from Tuesday 10 September
2024 to Wednesday
18 September 2024, by those employees engaged by a Health
Entity under the Public Health System Nurses’ and Midwives’
Award 2023.
(2) The Association must by no later than 5.30 pm on Monday, 9
September 2024:
(a) remove any reference to the strike action of Tuesday 10
September 2024 from its website, social media accounts or any documents
to its website or social media accounts; and
(b) publish these orders and directions in a prominent position
on its website and social media accounts.
(3) The Association, its officers, employees, agents and
members must not induce, advise, authorise, support, encourage, direct,
abet members of the Association to organise or take industrial action contrary
to Order 1.
(4) These orders take effect immediately.”
(Footnotes omitted).
also made directions requiring the Association to notify its members of the
first dispute orders and to direct its members to comply
with those orders and
not take industrial action on 10 September 2024.
18 September 2024, with the consent of the parties, Taylor J made the second
dispute orders pursuant to ss 136(1)(c) and 137(1)(a)
of the IR Act in the
following terms:
“The Orders made by Chin J on 9 September 2024 are varied as follows:
1. Order 1 is varied by removing the words “Wednesday, 18 September
2024” and replacing them with the words “Monday,
30 September
2. I make new Order 2A, as follows: The Association must by no later than 5.30pm
on 18 September 2024, post a copy of the orders
(as amended) in a prominent
position on its websites and social media accounts.
3. I make new Order 5, as follows: The parties have liberty to apply on short
notice for this matter to be relisted should urgent
circumstances
The next day, Taylor J amended order 2 of the second dispute orders to
substitute “19 September 2024” for the reference
September 2024”.
8 November 2024, Taylor J made the third dispute orders pursuant to
ss 136(1)(c) and 137(1)(a) in the following terms:
“1. Pursuant to
ss. 136(1)(c)
(1)(a) of the
Relations Act 1996
(NSW), the Commission makes the following orders:
(1) The New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association (“the
Association”), its officers and employees, and its
members employed in the
NSW Health Entities listed in Schedule 1 to these orders (“Health
Entities”) immediately take
steps to cease organising and refrain from
taking industrial action on and from 4.00pm today 8 November 2024 to Friday 29
2024 by those employees engaged by a Health Entity under the Public
Health System Nurses’ and Midwives’ (State) Award
2. The Association must by no later than 5.30 pm on 8 November 2024:
(1) remove any reference to the strike action of Wednesday, 13 November 2024
from its website, social media accounts or any documents
linked to its website
or social media accounts; and
(2) publish these orders and directions in a prominent position on its website
and social media accounts.
3. The Association, its officers, employees, agents and members must not induce,
advise, authorise, support, encourage, direct, aid
or abet members of the
Association to organise or take industrial action contrary to Order 1.
4. These orders take effect immediately.”
The industrial action
The first strike
5 September 2024, the Association uploaded a video on Facebook directing its
members to strike for 12 ½ hours on 10 September
2024 from 7:00 am to 7:30
pm. The video featured the Association’s General Secretary, Ms Shaye
Candish, explaining that “we
know now that the government has failed to
meet our deadline of issuing you a new pay offer by close of business today...So
asking for you to join with us and take strike action next
Association also posted on their Facebook page: “BREAKING: Public sector
nurses and midwives STRIKE called for TUESDAY 10
SEPTEMBER” and updated
the “Value us: public health campaign” section of the
Association’s website as follows:
5 September 2024
The clock has run out. It is time to strike.
Earlier this week we wrote to Health Minister Ryan Park and demanded the NSW
government make a better pay offer than its insulting
3% per year, over three
For months the NSWNMA and your Log of Claims Committee have made a compelling
case for a 15% pay increase over one year. Despite
this, the government has
shown no willingness to budge.”
(Emphasis in original).
7 September 2024, the Association’s Council met to consider Commissioner
McDonald’s recommendations referred to at
]. The Council
determined unanimously that the recommendation should not be complied with, and
the first strike should proceed. Following
this, the Association’s website
displayed a banner declaring: “Public health system nurses and midwives to
Sept 2024” (emphasis in original). The banner contained a
button displaying the words “Find out more here” which,
when clicked
on, redirected to additional content on the strike stating, among other things:
“Next Tuesday, 10 September, nurses
and midwives will strike from
and we need your voice to send a strong message to the NSW
government”.
post embedded a video titled “‘We’ve had enough’ –
it’s time to strike”. Below the video,
the post included the
following statement:
“Yesterday, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission recommended we
don’t go ahead with Tuesday’s strike. Your NSWNMA
Council met today
to consider these recommendations and determined unanimously,
the strike on
Tuesday will continue
. Council does not want to take a backwards step, they
are fired up and stand firmly with you – now is the time for
(Emphasis in original).
I made the first dispute orders on 9 September 2024 referred to at [
Association’s Council determined that it would not comply with the orders.
It informed its members of its decision by
posting on the Association’s
website. The Association updated the banner found at the homepage of its website
to include the
following statement: “the NSW Industrial Relations
Commission made orders for the NSWNMA to cease industrial action. The NSWNMA
Council has determined the orders cannot be complied with and the strike will go
addition, the Association updated the “Value us: public health
campaign” page of the Association’s website which
was accessible
after clicking “Find out more here” to read as follows:
Where are we up to?
9 September 2024
We are all angry, we are all frustrated, and we are all ready to go!
Join us tomorrow from 0700, as members strike statewide for improved pay and
working conditions.
It is time for NSW government recognised the worth of
our female-dominated professions.
Today, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission (IRC) made orders against the
NSWNMA to cease our industrial action. Click here to
see the orders.
Your NSWNMA Council has determined these orders cannot be complied with. Our
strike will go ahead tomorrow and Council stands with
you as we continue the
fight for fair pay until a meaningful offer is delivered.
It is disappointing that the government has pushed this matter into the IRC,
trying to get the court system to do its dirty work.
For months, we have
continuously showed up to negotiation meetings and acted in good faith. We even
did their work for them, by identifying
savings ready to fund our pay claim.
Yet, the government continues to disrespect and ignore the true value of your
work. Not once has government sat down and negotiated
Our 10 September strike from 0700 is going ahead as planned.
to see a list of rally locations.
(Emphasis in original).
post also embedded a video titled: “This government has left us no choice
but to fight”. Below the video, the post
continued as follows:
What you need to know about the Industrial Relations Commission (IRC)
The IRC has made orders against the NSWNMA and its members, to cease industrial
action on 10 September.
Your employer may try to use these orders to dissuade you from taking action.
While the NSWNMA can be fined for not complying with the IRC orders, you
personally will not face fines for taking part in industrial
Remember, your NSWNMA Council is strongly backing members who take part in this
important strike. Our industrial action will send
a loud and clear message to
the NSW government: nurses and midwives deserve more in 2024.
Click here and take a moment to look over our industrial action guidance. This
sign in to Member Central
to view the tips.
We never take industrial action lightly. As dedicated nurses and midwives,
we strive to provide compassionate, high-quality
care to our patients every day.
However, the NSW government’s refusal to value us and put a decent offer
on the table has left
us with no choice.
Our actions will raise community awareness and hold politicians accountable.
The haemorrhaging of staff to other states, unlivable pay, and unsafe
working conditions must be addressed.
See you tomorrow! Wear your NSWNMA union scrubs, bring your placards, and raise
your voice!
(Emphasis in original).
Association also published multiple posts on Facebook, one of which provided a
link to the first dispute orders which stated:
Today, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission made orders for the NSWNMA to
cease industrial action: nswnma.info/3ASzJyW
NSWNMA Council has determined the orders cannot be complied with and
Tuesday’s STRIKE will go ahead.
www.nswnma.asn.au
(Emphasis in original).
Association also posted a video from its President, O’Bray Smith. The post
displayed the following quote from the video
“Let me assure you, the
strike tomorrow IS MOST DEFINITELY GOING AHEAD”. The transcript of Ms
Smith’s video is
as follows:
Hi members, here we are on the eve of our strike action and we have orders
against us to not strike tomorrow. Let me assure you the
strike tomorrow is most
definitely going ahead and these orders are expected. Let me assure you
individual members cannot be fined
for their strike action. As an Association we
can be, but not you as an individual member. The Council have met and voted for
action to continue. We're hearing far too many stories of members who
can't pay their bills or worse some of our members are being
forced to sleep in
their cars. This government has left us no choice but to fight. So tomorrow we
have our first big strike. We're
looking forward to seeing you out in force.
Bring your scrubs, bring your chants and bring your enthusiasm because tomorrow
and stand as one. You're not alone and together we can win this.
Together we fight. Good luck everyone.
8:59 pm Mr Mattson, the Health Secretary’s solicitor, emailed the
Association. The email contained a screenshot of the Association’s
which contained the banner outlined at [
] and asserted that the Association had contravened
the Commission’s dispute orders of 9 September 2024 by failing to remove
any reference to the strike action of 10 September 2024, and by failing to
publish the Commission’s orders in a prominent position
first strike took place on 10 September 2024, during which the above social
media and website posts remained online. The Health
Secretary estimated that
second strike
18 September 2024, the Association updated its website to address its members by
claiming that their strike action had achieved
a meeting with the Treasurer, the
Health Minister, and the Industrial Relations Minister but that it had
nevertheless reached a stalemate
in talks with the government in the context of
conciliation proceedings before the Commission. This notice also stated that the
had until 5:00 pm the following day to make a “meaningful
this time the Commission had made the second dispute orders referred to at [
]. The post on the
Association’s website referred to in the preceding paragraph stated that
the Association’s committee
of delegates would meet soon to
“discuss” these orders.
Association also uploaded a publication titled “Industrial Action Tips
Escalating Industrial Action 24 hour strike: from
beginning of AM shift on 24
September”. The document was described as offering tips on “how to
strike”, provided
“steps to take when preparing for the
action” and answered “frequently asked questions” about taking
action. The document remained available on the Association’s
website from 18 September to 24 September.
J then issued a statement which contained a recommendation that “the
parties should enter into four weeks of intensive
discussions”. This was
on the basis that the Health Secretary agrees to provide an immediate 3% interim
increase effective
1 July 2024, and the Association commits to “cease all
industrial action that is affecting patient care, pending the outcome
discussions and any subsequent arbitration”:
Health Secretary, NSW
Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses and Midwives Association
NSWIRComm 4.
19 September 2024, the Association updated the homepage of the website to
include a banner which stated as follows:
‘Public health system nurses and midwives to STRIKE: 24 Sept 2024
STRIKE’, Nurses and midwives will be on strike statewide
starting from the
AM shift on 24 September 2024 to demand the NSW government value our
professions’.
The banner also contained a link – titled “Find out more
here” − to the second dispute orders.
Association’s website also declared that the government had failed to make
an offer in accordance with the Association’s
deadline and that, despite
the second dispute orders: “we are going on strike for 24 hours, from the
start of morning shift
next Tuesday, 24 September”. The notice included
details of three major rallies across the state, namely in Sydney, Tweed Heads
and Albury.
addition, the Association made the following post on its Facebook page stating
“BREAKING: Public sector members STRIKE CALLED
FOR 24 SEPTEMBER”. In
the comment section of the post, the Association provided a link to the
“Value us: public health
campaign” page of the Association’s
website which contained the post referred to in the preceding paragraph,
the link as providing “[m]ore details on the strike, including
strike rallies”.
the Association outlining the recommendations made
by Taylor J. The letter
proposed that the Health Secretary would “adopt the recommendations of the
Commission, including to
commence payment of a 3% increase to salaries and
salary-related allowances and facilitate back payment of this increase to be
from first pay period on or after 1 July 2024” on the condition
that the Association “immediately cease and committing
to refrain from
undertaking industrial action.”
the next few days, the Association maintained the content which it posted on its
website on 19 September 2024 pertaining to the
planned strike action on 24
September 2024. The website also displayed a banner with the words “Public
health system nurses
and midwives: 24 Sept STRIKE”.
Association also posted on Facebook notifying its members of the planned 24-hour
strike and asking them to advise their managers
as soon as possible of their
intended strike action to “help plan for both maximum participation and
life preserving staffing”.
21 September 2024, the Association updated the “Value us: public health
campaign” section of its website asking its
members to “join us on
strike and at one of our rallies”.
next day, the Association posted on Facebook:
IT’S STRIKE DJ TIME!
What would be on your strike playlist for this Tuesday?
(Emphasis in original).
24 September 2024, the Association’s website declared that “nurses
and midwives will be on 24 hour statewide strike
beginning from the start of the
morning shift on 24 September 2024 to demand the NSW government value our
professions” and
contained the following notice:
Where to meet
Location to meet:
Hyde Park North (grass patch near fountain), 110
Elizabeth St, Sydney NSW 2000
Tuesday, 24 September 2024
Instructions:
Meet at Hyde Park North (grass patch near fountain) at
11:30 AM, then march at 12 PM down Macquarie Street to outside NSW Parliament
Macquarie St, Sydney NSW 2000).
Getting there
Making your own way there?
Click here for directions.
Train timetable:
[Image of a train timetable]
Hopping on the NSWNMA bus?
RSVP for the NSWNMA bus
heading to the CBD from certain locations
https://nswnma.info/phs-rally-rsvp
(Emphasis in original).
information was also provided for rallies at other locations, namely
“Northern NSW – Tweed” and “Southern
Association also posted a notice on Facebook declaring that “nurses and
midwives will be ON STRIKE!” for 24-hours
“from today’s
morning shift”.
24 September 2024, a number of nurses and midwives employed by the applicant
engaged in industrial action by not attending work.
The Health Secretary
estimated that about 6500 nurses and midwives participated in the
The third strike
7 November 2024, the Association made:
(1) the following posts on Facebook; and
BREAKING: 24 HOUR STRIKE CALLED FOR 13 NOVEMBER FOR PUBLIC SECTOR MEMBERS!
***Public Sector nurses and midwives will be ON STRIKE on Wednesday, 13
More details here: https://nswnma.info/PHSactions
(2) the following post on Instagram:
Association also updated the “Value us: public health campaign”
section of its website to inform members of the strike,
and to inform them of
the availability of buses organised by the Association to transport members to
rallies. The Association asserted
that “the government now wants to
arbitrate in the Industrial Relations Commission and lock in low wages for
nurses and midwives
for another three years.” The notice also provided the
Association’s members with a “prewritten email template”
they could download and use to notify their managers of their intention to take
strike action, which they were encouraged to
do as soon as they were able in
order to “help the NUM/MUM make decisions about what resources will be
available during the
8 November 2024, the Association posted additional material to its social media
pages and website. Firstly, the Association posted
the following on Instagram
accompanied with a video of NSWNMA General Secretary Shaye Candish and Assistant
General Secretary Michael
Whaites bearing the caption “the negotiations
have fallen over”:
“What’s the bigger crime here: us taking strike action, or a
government that is refusing to fix the crisis?”
NSWNMA General Secretary Shaye Candish and Assistant General Secretary Michael
Whaites have a message for members as we ramp us for
strike action next week.
the Association made a publication available for download on its website titled
“Escalating Industrial Action 24 hour
strike: from beginning of AM shift
on 13 November”. The document was described as offering “industrial
action tips”
on “how to strike” and provided “steps to
take when preparing for the action”. The second page of the document
answered “frequently asked questions” on industrial action.
the Association posted a link to an article on LinkedIn published by “The
Lamp” (the Association’s magazine)
titled “No deal
struck” with the caption “Nurses and midwives in the NSW public
sector have called a second 24
hour strike as negotiations with the NSW
government break down.”
the Association posted a link to the third dispute orders referred to at [
] on LinkedIn with the
following message:
Today, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission made orders for the NSWNMA to
cease industrial action:
https://lnkd.in/g9_nxCuC
NSWNMA Council has determined that the orders cannot be complied with and
Wednesday’s STRIKE will go ahead.
https://nswnma.info/4fCYu0O
(Emphasis in original).
the Association updated the “Value us: public health campaign”
section of its website to provide a link to the
third dispute orders and to
inform members of the strike:
It’s appalling that we are in this situation again, forced to take strike
action – but the NSW government continues to
treat nurses and midwives as
if we’re not worth the investment.
Today, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission made orders for the NSWNMA to
cease industrial action. You can find a copy of the
orders here.
Industrial action is a valid means for union members to stand up for fair pay
and conditions. It’s important for you to know
that only the NSWNMA as an
organisation can be fined for strike action. Individual members cannot be fined,
so we’re encouraging
you to attend on Wednesday.
Wednesday’s STRIKE will go ahead. Don’t be dissuaded or threatened
by the many tactics used to try and prevent you from
taking action.
What you need to know:
Be prepared for pushback
– your employer may attempt to discourage
or pressure you to stay on duty, whether through a memo to all staff or a direct
To help you handle these tactics, read our tips on how to respond here.
Notify your NUM/MUM –
if you plan to participate in the strike,
it’s essential to inform your NUM/MUM. Use our prewritten email template
make this process easier.
Your participation in the strike does not need your employer’s approval
you decide if you participate, no one else. Be sure to notify your
NUM/MUM as soon as possible so they can plan for the day. If there
are concerns
direct supervisor.
Stand together in solidarity –
we must act together, strike
together and stand together, just as we have done in the past. It is in our
numbers that we have power
and protection.
Know your rights
– while the NSWNMA can be fined for not complying
with such orders, no individual member can be targeted for fines.
Join our briefing webinar
we are hosting a webinar on
Monday, 11 Nov at 5pm to answer your questions and address any concerns you have
taking part in the strike – click here to
(Emphasis in original)
9 November 2024, the Association posted an additional update to their website
containing information about the 13 November 2024
rally in Sydney, including
arrangements for the Association “busing members” to the rally, a
link for members to “click
here to secure your seat” and a
“strike ready checklist”.
11 November 2024, the Association published a document that was available for
download titled “Industrial action tips: Addressing
tactics”. The document noted that “the NSW Industrial Relations
Commission may make orders against the NSWNMA
for taking industrial action. But
remember, you cannot be fined as an individual for striking. Only the NSWNMA as
an organisation
can be fined.” It also provided a template response for
members to respond to employer requests while they were taking industrial
12 November 2024, the Association’s homepage carried a banner that noted
the effect of the third dispute orders immediately
before declaring that
“our strike will go ahead as planned”.
the morning of 13 November 2024, the Association posted an image on Instagram
that read “STRIKE IS ON!” (emphasis in
original). The caption read
“Public sector nurses and midwives: ON STRIKE NOW!” (emphasis in
third strike took place on 13 November 2024. The Health Secretary estimated that
applicant engaged in industrial
action by not attending work on 13 November 2024.
26 and 30 August 2024 various branches of the Association notified the applicant
pay and conditions dispute. For
example, on 26 August 2024, the Royal Prince Alfred Branch of the Association
notified that, effective
immediately, “members of the RPA NSWNMA branch
will not be undertaking any domestic duties (eg, but not limited to: cleaning,
physically moving patients, emptying of bins or skips), or any other duty that
is performed by another classification of worker”.
after initially notifying the Lismore Base Hospital of work bans to commence
immediately on 27 August 2024, the next day
the Lismore Base Hospital Branch of
the Association notified further “work to rule” and
“bans” commencing
on 2 September 2024 as follows:
Work to Rule - Non nursing duties (Clause 44)
Domestic Duties, ordinarily carried out by other classifications, including
pushing beds, cleaning of beds and other areas, emptying
linen skips, restocking
supplies or any duties covered by Award clause 44.
Duties ordinarily undertaken by PSOs such as answering phones, doorbells for
locked wards and processing paperwork of a purely administrative
nature. Only
M/NUM and MINIC phones will be answered.
Food services suppliers. Nurses will not collect any food services from kitchen
areas. All supplies must be delivered to units. Nurses
will no longer prepare
breakfast or any meals for patients.
Nurses will not collect non-urgent medications from pharmacy.
Nurses will claim overtime>/=15mins for missed meal breaks and working past
rostered hours.
Bans - All Areas
No ad hoc Data collection of QARS, Hand Hygiene or any other audits will be
Staff will attend Safety Huddles but will not complete the online form.
Members will not complete standardised outcome measures including Mental Health
Phase of Care such as HonOS, HoNOSCA &HoNOS65+
that are included in Mental
Health outcome measures
Refusal or restrictions to overtime
Under clause 25 of the award, members are encouraged to refuse overtime work.
This includes but is not limited to refusal to stay
back after the completion of
a rostered shift & refusal to work extra shifts. Additionally, all entitled
breaks (paid & unpaid)
are to be taken with overtime claimed on any missed
or partial breaks & on any requirement to stay back. As per Clause 25(iv),
(members are not to be compelled to take any overtime as time in Lieu. Members
are also not required to sign 10 hour waver (sic)
forms & are encouraged to
rescind previously signed forms.
branches of the Association announced work bans to commence on:
27 August 2024
(the Tweed Hospital Branch and the Greater Newcastle and Hunter Valley Mental
Health Branch);
28 August 2024
(the Air Ambulance Branch, the Deniliquin Hospital Branch and the Morisset
Hospital Branch);
30 August 2024
(the Bathurst Branch, the Patient Transport Branch and the Grafton Base Hospital
Branch); and
2 September 2024
(the Tweed Heads Community Branch, the Ryde Hospital and Community Health
Service Branch, the Byron Central Hospital
and Byron Community Health Branches,
the South East Regional Hospital Branch, the Royal North Shore Hospital Branch,
the Metropolitan
Reception and Remand Centre Branch, the Griffith Branch and the
Belmont Branch).
is uncontroversial that, on or about 30 August 2024, the Association posted on
its website a document titled ‘'Industrial
Action Tips: Stop Work, Work to
Rule and Work Bans” (the Association’s Work Bans Post). The document
defined “stop
work” as a strike, “work to rule” as
working exclusively within a role description and “work ban” as
“a refusal... to complete particular tasks within their role” and
stated that “the most effective work bans cause
disruption to an
employer’s operations or finances”. Under a column titled
“What are we doing now? All of them!!”
(referring to all three
identified forms of industrial action: stop work, work to rule and work bans),
the Association’s Work
Bans Post provided a list of “work to
rule” actions that “we [i.e. the Association] are advising”
a restriction on duties such as pushing beds. It also stated:
In some specialities, branches have passed resolutions to place work bans on the
following activities:
Mental Health:
Non-completion of HONOS data entry
Delay the data entry for TOC (Take Over Care), Cat 2 and Cat 3
patients for at least 10 mins.
Members should still be completing patient records, and paperwork that has an
impact on clinical care.
(Emphasis in original).
reasons that I will explain below, it is of critical significance that there is
no direct evidence of the document referred to
in the preceding paragraph
appearing or being made available on the Association’s website, nor its
contents otherwise being
communicated to its members at any time after 30 August
2024, or at any time on and from the date the first dispute orders were made
9 September 2025.
the first dispute orders were made, the evidence establishes that some work bans
did take place at various locations including
at Port Macquarie Hospital,
Lismore Base Hospital and by nurses engaged in the Patient Transport Service
(PTS). The extent of these
bans, and the question of the Association’s
role in organising such bans, is considered in paragraphs [
Relevant statutory
Dispute resolution
core industrial function of the Commission, conferred by s 10 of the IR
Act, is to make awards that set fair and reasonable conditions
of employment for
public sector and local government employees. It is required to do so in
accordance with the objects of the IR
Act which are set out in s 3,
including “(a) to provide a framework for the conduct of industrial
relations that is fair and
just” and “(g) to provide for the
resolution of industrial disputes by conciliation and, if necessary, by
arbitration
in a prompt and fair manner and with a minimum of legal
technicality”.
IR Act also empowers the Commission to deal with industrial disputes. The
Dictionary to the IR Act defines “industrial dispute”
dispute (including a question or difficulty) about an industrial matter”.
Section 6 defines “industrial matters”
as “matters or things
affecting or relating to work done or to be done in any industry, or the
privileges, rights, duties or
obligations of employers or employees in any
provisions of the IR Act make it clear that Parliament intended for the
Commission to be the principal organ to assist with the
resolution of industrial
disputes which may be resolved by a process of conciliation, and, if necessary,
by arbitration and the making
Secretary, Ministry of Health v New
South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association
(2022) 320 IR 249
Nurses Case
”) at [33] (Walton J);
Health Services Union v Health Secretary (NSW Ambulance)
NSWIRComm 1014
the IR Act encourages employers and unions to use the expertise of the
Commission in the resolution of their disputes by
conciliation and
arbitration;
it does not make
industrial action of itself unlawful in the absence of dispute
stands in contrast to the system for regulating strikes in New South Wales which
prevailed for most of the 20th century, the
legislative history of which is
comprehensively outlined in
Public Service Association and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales v Industrial
(2018) 96 NSWLR 762
[2018] NSWCA 39
”) at [57]-[87]. Until the passage of the
Industrial Relations
(NSW), the Commission and its predecessors had no power to restrain
actual or threatened industrial action, because in most cases
industrial action
would have been presumptively unlawful under the legislation
This history demonstrates
an increasing emphasis on the resolution of industrial disputes by the
Commission, including a significant
expansion of the types of dispute order
which it was entitled to make.
IR Act’s Dictionary defines “industrial action” broadly as
“a strike by employees or a lock-out by an
employer” including:
“a practice relating to the performance of work, adopted in connection
with an industrial dispute,
that restricts, limits or delays the performance of
work”, or “a ban, limitation or restriction affecting the
performance
of work, or the offering or acceptance of work, that is adopted in
connection with an industrial dispute”, or “any failure
in connection with an industrial dispute to attend for work or to perform
2 of Chapter 3 of the IR Act deals with dispute orders. Relevantly, under
s 138(1), a dispute order may be made only against
a party to the
industrial dispute, including an industrial organisation which has the power to
notify the Commission of the existence
of a dispute under s 130(1)(a).
power under s 137(1)(a) to “order a person to cease or refrain from
taking industrial action” extends to “making
orders directing an
industrial organisation to refrain from directing its members to engage in
industrial action or to refrain from
organising industrial action as defined in
the IR Act”, and “contravention of such orders is not conditional on
or industrial action actually
occurring”.
at [122], Bathurst CJ (Gleeson JA and Simpson JA agreeing) recognised
that orders of this kind assist the Commission in performing
its functions of
resolving industrial disputes through a process of conciliation and arbitration
in a “prompt and fair manner”
and by providing “a framework
for the conduct of industrial relations that is fair and just” in
accordance with the objects
of the IR Act highlighted at [
The former “wages cap”
is relevant to note that the industrial action at issue in these proceedings was
taken to advance a claim for increased wages in
circumstances where, until
recently before this pay dispute arose, the Commission had been effectively
deprived of its ability to
fulfil its wage setting function for over a
making any award dealing with the remuneration of public sector employees,
former s 146C of the IR Act, together with the former
Industrial Relations
(Public Sector Conditions of Employment) Regulation 2014
, required the
Commission to give effect to government policy. This limited any increase in
public sector wages to 2.5% per annum,
unless unions were able to demonstrate
employee-related cost savings or productivity increases. The Regulation was
amended on 24
June 2022 to increase the cap from 2.5% to 3%.
so-called “wages cap” had the effect of suppressing public sector
wages growth for an extended period from 2011 in
the sense that it generally
prevented the Commission from awarding an increase greater than 2.5% to
recognise matters such as changes
in work value and improvements in
productivity:
Fire Brigade Employees' Union v Industrial Relations Secretary
(on behalf of Fire and Rescue NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1063
the repeal of s 146C and the reconstitution of the Commission, including
the re-establishment of the Industrial Court in July
it has been necessary for the
Commission to remind major industrial organisations which have been involved in
wage-related industrial
action that, as I have highlighted above, the nature of
the system for the resolution of disputes under the IR Act centres upon the
orderly processes of negotiation, conciliation with the assistance of the
Commission, and, if necessary, arbitration:
Health Secretary, Ministry of
Health v Australian Salaried Medical Officers' Federation (New South Wales)
[2025] NSWIRComm 5
. The Association was one of those
organisations.
Contravention
of dispute orders
139 of the IR Act governs the Industrial Court’s power with respect to
alleged contraventions of dispute orders. The
Court, “on application, must
deal expeditiously with an alleged contravention of a dispute order”:
s 139(1). It is required,
before dealing with the alleged contravention, to
summon the person to show cause why the Court should not take action for the
contravention:
139(3) provides that the Court may, after hearing any person who answered the
(a) dismiss the matter if it finds that the dispute order was not contravened or
if it finds that the circumstances were such that
the Commission should take no
action on the contravention,
(b) cancel the approval of an enterprise agreement,
(c) suspend or modify for any period all or any of the entitlements under an
industrial instrument,
(d) cancel the registration of an industrial organisation or take any other
action authorised by Division 2 of Part 3 of Chapter
(e) impose a penalty on an industrial organisation or an employer as provided by
subsection (4),
(f) make any other determination that the Commission considers would help in
resolving the industrial dispute.
139(4) provides:
The maximum penalty that may be imposed on an industrial organisation or
employer is—
(a) except as provided by paragraph (b)—a penalty not exceeding in total
$10,000 for the first day the contravention occurs
and an additional $5,000 for
each subsequent day on which the contravention continues, or
(b) if a penalty has previously been imposed on the industrial organisation or
employer for a contravention of an earlier dispute
order—a penalty not
exceeding in total $20,000 for the first day the contravention occurs and an
additional $10,000 for each
subsequent day on which the contravention continues.
light of the penalty imposed in the
Nurses Case
, it was common ground
that s 139(4)(b) applied.
The alleged contraventions
the first summons the Health Secretary alleged 17 contraventions. In summary, of
these allegations the Association admitted the
following contraventions of the
first dispute orders:
(1) On 9 and 10 September 2024, the Association contravened order A1 of the
first dispute orders by not immediately taking steps
to cease organising the
first strike on 10 September 2024 (Contraventions 1 and 2). The particulars of
Contraventions 1 and 2 referred
to the actions that are set out at [
(2) The Association contravened order A2(a) of the first dispute orders by not
removing any reference to the first strike from its
website or any documents
linked to its website by 5:30 pm on 9 September 2024 (Contraventions 3 and 4).
The particulars of Contraventions
3 and 4 referred to the actions that are set
(3) The Association contravened order A2(a) of the first dispute orders by not
removing any reference to the first strike from its
social media accounts,
namely Facebook and YouTube, by 5:30 pm on 9 September 2024 (Contraventions 5
and 6). The particulars of Contraventions
5 and 6 referred to the actions that
are set out at [
(4) The Association contravened order A3 of the first dispute orders by
inducing, advising, authorising, supporting, encouraging
and directing its
members to take industrial action, namely the first strike, on 9 and 10
September 2024 (Contraventions 9 and 10).
The particulars of Contraventions 9
and 10 referred to the actions that are set out at [
] above and the
proposition that “[t]he statements and actions of [the Association], and
the failure of [the Association] to
comply with the dispute orders A1 and A2,
thereby, individually and collectively, continued to authorise, support,
encourage and
direct members of the Respondent to take strike action”.
Association also admitted the following contraventions of the second dispute
orders alleged in the first summons:
(1) On 19 September 2024, and again from 20 to 24 September 2024, the
Association contravened order A1 of the first dispute orders
as varied by order
1 of the second dispute orders by not taking steps to cease organising the
second strike on 24 September 2024
(Contraventions 12 and 13). The particulars
of Contraventions 12 and 13 referred to the actions that are set out at [
(2) On 19 September 2024, and again from 20 to 24 September 2024, the
Association contravened order A2 of the first dispute orders,
as varied by order
2 of the second dispute orders, by failing to publish the Commission’s
orders in a prominent position on
its website by 5:30 pm on 19 September 2024
(Contraventions 14 and 15). The particulars of Contraventions 14 and 15 included
as follows:
“(a) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website and not on the first
page where the strike was
advertised.
(b) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website, but the orders had to be located
by scrolling down
the webpage (and were not readily visible when opening that page).”
In addition, it was alleged specifically that “[t]here was no change to
the website of [the Association] in relation to the
positioning of the orders.
Instead, more material was posted promoting the strike, such as details of the
(3) On 19 September 2024, and again from 20 to 24 September 2024, the
Association contravened order A3 of the first dispute orders
(the effect of
which was varied by the second dispute orders) by inducing, advising,
authorising, supporting, encouraging and directing
its members to organise or
take industrial action, namely the second strike, on 24 September 2024
(Contraventions 16 and 17). The
particulars of Contraventions 16 and 17 referred
to the actions that are set out at [
] above and the proposition that the statements and
actions of the Association, and its failure to comply with orders A1 and A3 of
the first dispute orders (as varied) during the relevant periods “thereby,
individually and collectively”, continued
to “authorise, support,
encourage and direct members of [the Association] to take strike
Association did not admit the following contraventions alleged in the first
(1) On 9 and 10 September 2024, the Association contravened order A2(b) of the
first dispute orders by not publishing those orders
in a prominent position on
its website (Contraventions 7 and 8). The particulars of Contraventions 7 and 8
included as follows:
“(a) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website and not on the first
page/homepage where the strike
was advertised.
(b) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website but the orders had to be located
by scrolling down
the webpage (and were not readily visible when opening that page).”
In addition, it was alleged specifically that “[a]t 8.59pm on 9
September 2024 the Applicant’s representative wrote to
the representative
[of the Association] by email asking it to ‘
carefully consider its
position and comply with the orders of the Commission
’. There was no
response [from the Association] to this communication”.
(2) From 10 to 30 September 2024, the Association contravened order A1 of the
first dispute orders by not immediately taking steps
to cease organising
industrial action, namely work bans (Contravention 11). The particulars of
Contravention 11 referred to the Association’s
Work Bans Post set out at
] above, as well as
the following additional matters:
“(b) Some of the reported work bans include:
(i) Nurses undertaking patient transport functions at HealthShare NSW Patient
Transport Service continually refused to perform patient
transport functions
each day from 9 September 2024 to 30 September 2024.
(ii) Flight nurses at the Aeromedical Control Centre (ACC) Air Ambulance, NSW
Ambulance: refused to perform some administrative,
data entry, billing work, and
some P5 triaged jobs from 14 September 2024 to 30 September 2024.
(iii) Registered Nurses (RNs) and Clinical Nurse Coordinators (CNCs) at the
Virtual Clinical Care Centre (VCCC), NSW Ambulance refused
to conduct some
Secondary Triage and Referral or assist with the Clinical Advice Line from 14
September 2024 to 30 September 2024.
(iv) From at least 12 September 2024 to 17 September 2024, RNs at the Illawarra
Shoalhaven Local Health District engaged in work
bans such as refusing to wash
beds, refusing to remove linen, refusing to perform Emergency Care Assessment
and Treatment (ECAT)
protocols, and not collecting medications.
(v) On 12 September 2024, the Port Macquarie Branch Executive of the NSWNMA
notified local management at the Mid North Coast Local
Health District of
actions the local branch will be undertaking "work to rule" and the implementing
a number of other work bans,
including not completing data entry, not collecting
medication, not escorting patients to radiology, not undertaking any clerical
work and not discharging patients.
(vi) On or around 13 September 2024, the NSWNMA representatives from the
Endoscopy Unit at Lismore Base Hospital advised of numerous
work bans to
commence on 16 September 2024, including garbage removal, emptying linen,
cleaning beds, terminal cleaning and completing
(c) There has been no statement published by the Respondent on its website or
other forum that has asked members to cease industrial
action by imposing work
the second summons the Health Secretary alleged 10 contraventions of the third
dispute orders of which, in summary, the Association
(1) On 8 November 2024, and again from 9 to 13 November 2024, the Association
contravened order 1(1) of the third dispute orders
by taking steps to cease
organising the third strike on 13 November 2024 (Contraventions 18 and 19). The
particulars of Contraventions
18 and 19 referred to the actions that are set out
(2) On 8 November 2024, and again from 9 to 13 November 2024, the Association
contravened order 2(1) of the third dispute orders
by not removing references to
the third strike from its website or any documents linked to its website and its
social media accounts,
namely Facebook, Instagram and LinkedIn, by 5:30 pm, 8
November 2024 (Contraventions 20 to 23). The particulars of Contraventions
23 referred to the actions that are set out at [
(3) On 8 November 2024, and again from 9 to 13 November 2024, the Association
contravened order 3 of the third dispute orders by
inducing, advising,
authorising, supporting, encouraging and directing its members to organise or
take industrial action, namely
the third strike, on 13 November 2024
(Contraventions 26 and 27). The particulars of Contraventions 26 and 27 referred
to the actions
that are set out at [
] above and the proposition that the statements and
actions of the Association, and its failure to comply with orders 1 and 2 of the
third dispute orders during the relevant periods thereby “individually and
collectively” continued to authorise, support,
encourage and direct
members of the Association to take strike action.
Association did not admit the following contraventions alleged in the second
(1) On 8 and 9 November 2024, the Association contravened order 2(2) of the
third dispute orders by not publishing those orders in
a prominent position on
its website (Contraventions 24 and 25). The particulars of Contraventions 24 and
25 included as follows:
“(a) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website and not on the first
page / homepage where the
strike was advertised.
(b) The Commission’s orders were published on another page of [the
Association’s] website but the orders had to be located
by scrolling down
the webpage (and were not readily visible when opening that page).”
In addition, it was alleged in particular that “[t]here was no change
to the website of [the Association] in relation to the
place of the orders. The
website however continued to add content promoting the strike action thereby
moving the orders further down
The proper approach to imposing penalties under ss 139(3)(e) and 139(4) of
139(3)(e) of the IR Act provides for the imposition of civil
Health Secretary contended for an unqualified application of the approach to
imposing civil penalties that was established by
the High Court in
. She submitted that there is “no compelling reason in
principle, or from the text and structure of the IR Act, to depart from”
this approach.
at [38]-[39], the High Court held that the
“proportionality principle” − which required that a penalty
must not be disproportionate to the seriousness of the offending conduct
− was not applicable to the imposition of civil penalties
retribution has no part to play. Instead, the majority (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Keane, Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ) at [15]
held that civil penalties are
imposed “primarily, if not solely” for the purpose of deterrence of
further contraventions
of a like kind, and (at [17]) accepted that “a
civil penalty...must be fixed with a view to ensuring that the penalty is not
such as to be regarded by [the] offender or others as an acceptable cost of
doing business”.
approach means that there is no constraint on the formulation of an appropriate
penalty by the objective circumstances of the
contravening
Because deterrence is
the principal object of the imposition of a civil penalty, considerations such
as the seriousness of the contravening
conduct are relevant only to the extent
that they shed light on what penalty is required to achieve general and specific
deterrence.
Similarly, where
multiple contraventions are concerned the principles relating to
“totality” and course of conduct may
be applied “as an
analytical tool so as to ensure that the overall penalty is not oppressive or
disproportionate in the sense
that it is greater than necessary to achieve the
object of deterrence”.
principles guiding the imposition of civil penalties established in
are succinctly summarised by Wheelahan J in
Ombudsman v Roach (The Melbourne Quarter Case)
[2023] FCA 781
the reasons set out below, I adopt and apply these principles with one
qualification that is rooted in the distinctive statutory
text and context of
this Court’s power to impose penalties for the contravention of dispute
primacy of the purpose of deterrence (specific and general) in the imposition of
civil penalties cannot be doubted in light of
. The universal
exclusivity of this purpose, however, has been questioned.
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Fair Work
(2023) 322 IR 233
[2023] FCA 72
, Rangiah J
considered whether the High Court in
definitively held that
factors unrelated to deterrence could never be applied to reduce a civil
penalty. His Honour observed at [88]
that “[i]t is possible that the High
Court refrained from definitively stating that the
purpose of a
penalty is deterrence in order to leave open the possibility that a penalty may
be reduced by some public interest or
other factors that are inconsistent with
deterrence. The utilitarian value of admissions might be in that category”
in original).
J (at [92]) ultimately did not consider it necessary to reconcile the
discounting of penalties for the utilitarian value of
admissions with
. This was because special leave to appeal on a particular
ground had been refused in
such that there was no dispute
before the High Court that the primary judge had erred by imposing penalties
without applying the
material discount for cooperation to which the respondents
were entitled.
Nevertheless,
Rangiah J held that the utilitarian value of admissions, even unaccompanied by
contrition, must be taken into account
and may operate to reduce the penalty
that would otherwise have been imposed. His Honour so concluded in circumstances
where there
was no suggestion or argument that discounting a penalty to reflect
the utilitarian value of admissions was compatible with the purpose
deterrence.
addition, and of particular relevance for present purposes, two decisions of the
Supreme Court of NSW have qualified the approach
endorsed in
in point of principle, when applied to the imposition of penalties under
s 139 of the IR Act. Firstly, in the
Nurses Case,
Walton J found
some differences between the statutory context of the
Fair Work Act 2009
and the IR Act such that the principles in
were not applicable without some qualification. His Honour at [728]
“First, although the majority’s judgment was expressed broadly,
their Honours nevertheless emphasised that their decision
based on the features
of the Act in that case, that is, the
Fair Work Act
: see, eg, at 322 [66]. The
civil penalty provisions in
of that Act have a ‘statutory function
of securing compliance with provisions of the [statutory] regime’:
Commonwealth
v Director, Fair Work Building Industry Inspectorate
(2015) 258 CLR
[2015] HCA 46
(French CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Nettle and Gordon JJ,
as Kiefel CJ then was) (‘Commonwealth v FWBII’). In this respect,
purpose of civil penalties in
Fair Work Act
and s 139 of the
NSW Act are distinguishable. Although securing compliance with orders of the
Commission is an important purpose,
the latter [NSW] regime also serves the
important purpose of helping to resolve the industrial dispute between the
parties and promoting
the system of conciliation and arbitration established by
(Emphasis added).
Honour observed that the regime for dealing with contraventions of dispute
orders under the IR Act is distinguished in this way
by empowering the
Industrial Court − not only to impose civil penalties − but also to
“make any other determination
that the Commission considers would help in
resolving the industrial dispute” pursuant to s 139(3)(f): the
Nurses Case
at [729] citing Fagan J in
Industrial Relations
Secretary v Public Service Association and Professional Officers’
Association Amalgamated Union of New
South Wales
(2017) 93 NSWLR 723
Honour also highlighted the relevance of considering whether an industrial
dispute continues to be or is no longer a “live
issue” that calls
for the Court’s intervention to restore industrial order by imposing civil
penalties under s 139(3)(g)
specifically to deter further industrial action
as a means of dispute resolution: the
Nurses Case
at [730] citing
Bluescope Steel Ltd (formerly known as BHP Steel Ltd) v The Australian
Workers’ Union, New South Wales
[2006] NSWIRComm 338
Director-General, NSW Department of Education and Training v NSW Teachers
[2010] NSWIRComm 44
Honour identified a second basis on which to qualify the approach in
“Secondly, there is a tension with the reference to the ‘cost of
doing business’ in
with s 139 of the Act. The
concept of the ‘cost of doing business’ is very understandable in
the context of competition
and consumer law where, for example, the advantage to
be gained from engaging in unlawful anti-competitive behaviour or making
and deceptive statements can be clearly seen. It can also be
discerned in the facts of
where the union dues collected from
the implementation of a ‘no ticket, no start’ policy can be
But it becomes more difficult for a court to calculate the
‘cost’ or gains, in a monetary amount, from organising or
industrial action in support of a claim for conditions of employment for
its members. The prosecutor did not suggest how this should
be calculated or
considered in these proceedings.”
the differences, his Honour held that deterrence was an important consideration
under both regimes and that
was generally applicable, with some
qualifications. Indeed, in the
Nurses Case
at [732], his Honour
nevertheless determined to impose a penalty “that will apply the full
force of general deterrence”.
the Health Secretary rightly conceded that in
Secretary, Department of
Education v Australian Education Union New South Wales Teachers Federation
(NSWTF) Branch (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1365
Teachers Case
”), Adamson J adopted the approach taken in the
Nurses Case
, albeit while also asserting that her Honour’s assessment
of penalty nevertheless focussed on deterrence in line with the doctrine
. I agree that in the
Second Teachers Case
adopted, as a matter of principle, the approach articulated by Walton J in the
Nurses Case
Honour initially rejected a submission (at [75]) that the Explanatory Note to
the Bill which became the IR Act demonstrated that
Fair Work Act
the IR Act were not analogous. However, Adamson J ultimately embraced the
proposition that
could be distinguished because of the
differences between the
Her Honour held that,
pursuant to s 139(3) of the IR Act, a “fine ought be set at an
appropriate level having regard to the
particular purposes of general and
specific deterrence, as well as, to borrow Walton J’s words in [728] of
The Nurses Case Case
[sic], ‘the important purpose of helping to
resolve the industrial dispute between the parties and promoting the system of
conciliation
and arbitration established by the
Honour’s endorsement of the principle that civil penalties under
s 139(3) of the IR Act also serve the purpose of resolving
the underlying
industrial dispute rested upon the premise, articulated by Walton J in the
Nurses Case
at [728] and [731], that
can be distinguished
because the statutory function of
Fair Work Act
identical to the function served by s 139 of the IR Act.
Honour otherwise regarded the notion that the only object of civil penalties is
to attempt to put a price on contravention that
is sufficiently high to deter
repetition by the contravener and others as being “inapposite” in a
case where, in breaching
dispute orders, a union can be taken to have been
responding to the concerns of its members about the level of their remuneration:
Teachers Case
at [78]-[79]. This was because her Honour
agreed with Walton J in the
Nurses Case
at [733] (extracted at [
] above) that the
concept of the “cost of doing business” which underpinned the
reasoning in
does not have any particular meaning in this
agree with this proposition and reject the Health Secretary’s contrary
contention. The Association’s pursuit of its
members’ industrial
interests in this context is quite different to the concept of “doing
business” at least in
the sense of engaging in unlawful conduct which may
be sufficiently profitable or monetarily rewarding to absorb the
of fines as an acceptable and necessary or consequential
Association contended for the approach taken by Walton J in the
which, as I have found, is supported by the
, and which I adopt. The effect of this approach, according to the
submission ultimately reached by Association, is that the penalty
to be imposed
should be assessed by reference to the proposition that “there is no
current necessity...[for a] deterrent to
stop the Association from engaging in
ongoing industrial action”. This is because the parties have since agreed
to submit their
wages dispute to resolution by arbitration before the
Commission. I accept the Association’s contention in this regard.
the heart of the Health Secretary’s contention for the unqualified
application of the doctrine in
is the notion that the purpose
of the power to impose a penalty under s 139(3)(e) of the IR Act can be
distinguished from the purposes
underlying the other measures available to the
Commission that are set out in that subsection. She submitted that “it is
to see” how the imposition of a penalty under s 139(3)(e)
(or the exercise of any of the powers under ss 139(3)(b) to (d)
achieves” the purpose of resolving industrial disputes;
while conceding that s 139(3)(f) plainly is a power to resolve disputes
that taking no action on the contravention pursuant to s 139(3)(a) may be
“more directly relevant” to settled disputes.
argument misconceives the particular nature and operation of s 139 of the
IR Act. The power to impose a penalty pursuant to s
139(3)(e) for a
contravention of dispute orders must be construed alongside its statutory
context and the subject matter, scope and
purpose of the IR Act as a whole:
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR
[2017] HCA 34
. I make the following two observations about the
relevant statutory context and purpose.
by the terms of s 139(3), the power to impose a penalty may be exercised by
itself or in combination with any one or more
of the remedies or measures
available in s 139(3), including in s 139(3)(f): “any
determination that the Commission considers would help in resolving
the industrial dispute” (emphasis added). The reference
“any other” such determination suggests that each of the measures
available to the Commission in s 139(3) are,
at least in part, similarly
directed to the purpose of helping to resolve the underlying dispute. They may
be utilised individually
or in any combination to achieve that purpose.
Fair Work Act
sets out the powers
of the Court in dealing with a contravention of only one kind of order, namely,
a dispute order under
This kind of order serves a specific
function. As I have observed at [
] above, such an order is intended to assist the
Commission in performing its functions of resolving industrial disputes through
process of conciliation and arbitration in accordance with the objects of the
IR Act: the
at [122]. The imposition of civil penalties for
breach of industrial instruments is to be found in another part of the IR Act
stands in contrast to
Fair Work Act
which permits
pecuniary penalties to be ordered for contraventions of “civil remedy
provisions” set out in the table
which impose a wide range
of disparate obligations including compliance with minimum employment conditions
enshrined in the National
Employment Standards. It has been observed that
“most of the provisions of the
Fair Work Act
which impose an
obligation, provide a protection, or otherwise establish norms of conduct,
attract a civil penalty if they are
contravened”,
and that the
imposition of civil penalties under
is the primary method of
enforcing employment obligations in the federal
course, as was acknowledged in both the
Nurses Case
Teachers Case
, securing compliance with the dispute orders of the Commission
is an important purpose of s 139(3)(e) of the IR Act. However, to
function to this extent − and to regard s 139(3)(e) and
Fair Work Act
as perfectly analogous counterparts as the Health
Secretary contends − is to ignore the true nature and purpose of the kind
of orders to which the compliance regime in
is exclusively
means that it is relevant for this Court to consider whether the industrial
dispute continues to be or is no longer a “live
issue” that calls
for the Court’s intervention to restore industrial order and promote the
resolution of the underlying
industrial dispute such as by imposing civil
penalties specifically to deter further industrial action.
Accordingly,
I find that the approach in
is generally applicable in this
case, but with the qualification that, in addition to general and specific
deterrence, a penalty
under s 139(3)(e) of the IR Act should also serve the
purpose of helping to resolve the industrial dispute between the parties.
the parties have since agreed to submit their dispute to arbitration before the
Commission, this consideration justifies the
imposition of a penalty that is
lower than what might have been necessary to specifically deter further
industrial action.
ability to modulate penalties for contraventions of dispute orders in this way
is an important component of the means available
to the Commission to promote
the system of conciliation and arbitration established by the IR Act. The
penalties to be imposed in
this case must nevertheless fulfil the function of
vindicating the authority and integrity of the Commission as an essential part
of that system.
The Association’s conduct:
“organising” industrial action?
accordance with the approach to assessing civil penalties in
the objective seriousness of the Association’s contravening conduct may be
assessed to the extent that it sheds light on what
penalty is required to
achieve general and specific deterrence.
issue in the proceedings was the proper characterisation of the
Association’s conduct in “organising” the first,
third strikes for the purposes of Contraventions 1-6, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16-23, 26
Association’s admissions were limited to actions amounting to
“inducing, advising, supporting, encouraging, directing,
abetting” the strike action. The Health Secretary did not allege any
conduct beyond those descriptors.
parties joined issue, however, on the extent to which the Association’s
contravening conduct could be said to have been
more serious because it was
“active”, or whether it was entirely passive and thus less serious.
The Association initially
contended that the evidence did not establish that it
took any “active steps” to organise the strike action such as by
“making physical arrangements” which would support the action, or by
marshalling or coordinating the action “beyond
exhorting members via
public electronic communication”.
closing submissions however Mr Dunstan, who appeared for the Association,
properly conceded that there was “significant evidence”
Association dissuading its members from attending work through its online
communications, and that there was an available
inference that the Association
provided its members with transportation by buses to the rallies, and that this
was “a more
active step”. Ultimately, Mr Dunstan essentially sought
to mitigate the Association’s actions by distinguishing the evidence
its online communications from what he described as the more active steps that
might be associated with the organisation of strike
action such as
“organising a picket, or barring entry to a workplace”.
Notwithstanding
the absence of any picket, the evidence established that Association utilised
the contemporary means of communicating
with its members, through its website
and social media posts, to actively promote its members engaging in the first,
second and third
strikes. The involvement of the Association cannot be
characterised as passive in any relevant sense merely because its actions were
largely manifested in online communications. Those communications showed the
Association engaging in the active promotion and coordination
of each of the
three strikes, including by advertising the various locations throughout the
state for rallies, which its members
were encouraged to attend, and by providing
practical guidance and advice to its members on how to proceed with the
industrial action.
Furthermore,
I infer from the Association’s communications that, at least with respect
to the second and third strikes, it organised
buses to transport its members
across the state to attend the rallies that were held in Sydney. This
represented the kind of practical
logistical support for the industrial action,
or the making of “physical arrangements” which the Association
denied in its written submissions.
therefore accept that, although the Association did not go so far as to organise
pickets or to otherwise physically prevent entry
into any workplace, it
nevertheless actively promoted, marshalled and coordinated each of the strike
actions. On each occasion, the
Association promoted the strikes in strident
terms. It did so in flagrant and unapologetic disregard of the
Commission’s dispute
take this conduct into account in considering the appropriate penalty below. For
present purposes, I find that the need for the
penalty to serve the purpose of
deterrence is not diminished because the Association’s contravening
conduct can be said to
have been merely passive. Its conduct in organising the
three strikes was, instead, extensive and decidedly active.
the Association publish the Commission’s orders in a prominent position on
its website and social media?
Association put in issue alleged Contraventions 7, 8, 24 and 25 referred to at
] above. By these
contraventions the Health Secretary asserts that the Association contravened
order 2(b) of the first dispute orders
and order 2(2) of the third dispute
orders by, in each case, failing to publish the respective orders in a prominent
position on
its website.
is no allegation that the Association failed to do so with respect to its social
media accounts (as distinct from its website)
which was also required by the
response to order 2(b) of the first dispute orders, the Association updated the
the post referred to at [
] above. When the
“Find out more here” label was clicked on the banner, it redirected
to the “Value us: public health
campaign” page. The post on this
page is reproduced at [
]. The Commission’s orders were available on
that page by clicking a hyperlink present in the sentence “Today, the NSW
Industrial Relations Commission (IRC) made orders against the NSWNMA to cease
our industrial action.
Click here to see the orders.
” (emphasis
first dispute orders thus could be found only by selecting or
“clicking” on the “Find out more here” link
banner on its website’s homepage, and then by scrolling down the resulting
webpage to find and click another link.
Association also provided a link to the first dispute orders on its website via
a post on its Facebook page as set out in [
response to order 2(2) of the third dispute orders, the Association posted a
banner on the homepage of their website. The banner
was titled 'Public health
system nurses and midwives to STRIKE 13 Nov’ and it contained a link that
stated “Find out
more here”. When selected, the link directed to the
“Value us: public health campaign” page which contained the
reproduced at [
The Association provided access to the Commission’s orders via a link in
the part of the page stating: “Today, the
NSW Industrial Relations
Commission made orders for the NSWNMA to cease industrial action. You can find a
copy of the orders here.”
When clicked, the link redirected to the third
dispute orders.
Association also posted a link to the third dispute orders on its LinkedIn page
as set out at [
9 November 2024, the Association made a further update to the “Value us:
public health campaign” page which contained
the post set out at [
]. The Association
provided a link to the Commission’s orders in the following text:
“Today, the NSW Industrial Relations
Commission made orders against the
NSWNMA to cease industrial action. You can find a copy of the orders
here.” The Association
also maintained the banner as described at [
accept the Health Secretary’s contention that the orders were not
displayed in a prominent position because the orders were
not visible or
accessible directly on the homepage of the Association’s website. Instead,
the homepage displayed a banner as
outlined at [
] which would redirect
to the “Value us: public health campaign” section of the
Association’s website after selecting
the “Find out more here”
button. Within the respective updates to the “Value us: public health
on 9 September 2024 and 8 November 2024, the Association
provided a link which then needed to be clicked to then see the
Commission’s
orders in the manner reproduced at [
Commission’s orders required the Association to give prominence to the
dispute orders on its website in the ordinary sense
of making them stand out,
conspicuous or very noticeable so that they can be easily seen. A subsidiary web
page, access to which
required the reader to click through a banner appearing on
the homepage, to scroll down the “Value us: public health campaign”
section to which the reader is thereby re-directed, and then to click through to
another page cannot be described as a “prominent
position” on the
Association’s website. It is clear that, by positioning the orders in this
way, the Association was
instead giving precedence to its message to the members
that the first and third strikes would proceed.
Dunstan conceded that, in terms of compliance with the dispute orders, the
Association’s positioning of the orders in this
manner introduced
“one extra click of riskiness”. He directed attention instead to the
Association’s contemporaneous
social media posts which on their face
provided a direct link to the dispute orders that were published on the
Association’s
website. He invited the Court to infer that a common method
of accessing websites generally is through various social media channels,
find that the Association’s relevant Instagram and LinkedIn posts
satisfied the Association’s obligations to promote
the orders on its
submission must be rejected. The Association’s social media posts
fulfilled its obligations to publish the orders in a
prominent position on its
social media accounts. Even assuming for arguments sake that the
Association’s website is commonly
accessed by its members via the
Association’s social media accounts – a matter on which there was no
the Association’s social media posts did not answer the
requirement to publish the orders in a prominent position on the website
so as to make them very noticeable or easily seen on that website as distinct
from the Association’s social media accounts.
The terms of the
Commission’s orders were clear. The risk of contravention taken by the
Association in diminishing the orders
on its website was realised.
Accordingly,
I find that by its conduct as alleged in Contraventions 7, 8, 24 and 25 the
Association contravened the first and third
dispute orders.
the Association fail to cease organising industrial action in the form of work
bans from 10 to 30 September 2024?
Contravention 11 in the first summons the Health Secretary alleges that the
Association breached order A1 of the first dispute
orders in the terms referred
The evidence
Health Secretary submitted that the evidence enables the Court to draw an
inference that the Association had work bans in place
that it did not cease
organising during the relevant period. Mr Mattson who appeared for the Health
Secretary emphasised that the
evidence should be considered in the context of
the Association’s active role in organising three different strike actions
in contravention of the Commission’s orders, and relied on the evidence of
what he described as a “continuum of events”
as follows:
(1) the Association’s ongoing industrial “campaign” for a 15%
(2) the imposition of work bans consistent with that campaign;
(3) the decision of the Association’s executive to not comply with the
Commission’s orders;
(4) the Association’s Work Bans Post set out at [
(5) a letter dated 12 September 2024 from the Port Macquarie Branch of the
Association to the Director of Nursing and Midwifery at
Port Macquarie Hospital
which notifies a series of work bans and work to rule actions, including work to
rule for domestic duties
and duties undertaken by ward clerks, and various work
bans in specialty areas such as mental health, oncology (e.g. “not
drugs from pharmacy non urgent, only S8s and S40s and urgent
drugs”) and ICU (Port Macquarie Letter);
(6) an email dated 16 September 2024 from Emma Corvalan from the Ministry of
Health to Elizabeth Allen and Marko Marelic (also from
the Ministry of Health)
informing them of continuing work bans in Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health
District (Illawarra Shoalhaven
Email) which included table outlining the work
bans taking place across Wollongong, Shoalhaven, Mental Health and Shellharbour
as well as the impacts of the actions;
(7) an email dated 16 September 2024 from Patrick Reay, Acting Nursing Unit
Manager, Endoscopy Unit of Lismore Base Hospital, to
Sam Cook from Northern NSW
Local Health District which reproduced text from what he described as an email
he received on “Friday”
(i.e. 13 September 2024) stating that that
“[a]s a result of the current industrial action, NSWNMA members and fellow
colleges of the endoscopy department will NO longer undertake the
following non-nursing duties” (such as garbage removal including
waste, cleaning and pushing beds) which are “currently agreed upon
by” 12 individuals (identified only by their
first names) and which
“will take place as of Monday 16/9/24” (Lismore Email);
(8) the evidence of the Director, Industrial Relations (Nursing and Midwifery)
and Policy in the Workplace Relations Branch at the
Ministry of Health,
Elizabeth Allen, on which the Health Secretary relied in these proceedings, that
nurses engaged by the PTS “refused
to undertake lower acuity jobs that
other non-nursing patient transport staff could perform” from 9 to 29
September 2024; and
that she had received from Kate Coles, an Associate Director
at PTS, a table outlining the work bans undertaken by nurses at PTS
period (PTS Work Bans Table);
(9) comments made on the record by the Association’s representative, Ms
Craig, on 18 September 2024, when both parties appeared
before the President at
a conciliation conference, acknowledging that different branches were
implementing work bans as follows (Ms
Craig’s Comments):
“... in terms of bans that would be genuine bans, yes, some of our members
have opted and voted through their democratic process
to apply different types
of bans. We remain open to having discussions with the Ministry of Health with
them and we have received
might be able to move through them, and we're open to continuing to have those
lines of communication open so that we can minimise any sort of impact of the
bans on a particular patient.”
(10) the speaking notes from a webinar conducted by Shaye Candish (General
Secretary) and Michael Whaites (Assistant General Secretary)
of the Association
on 27 September 2024 in which there appears a reference to work bans in the
following terms: “[w]e are discussing
'working to the award' with the MOH
- which will go to some of the Workbans [sic] we have in place” (Ms
Candish’s Speaking
Notes); and
(11) the lack of evidence that the Association directed its members to stop
any work bans.
Consideration
was common ground that the civil onus of proof applies. The Health Secretary
must prove her case on the balance of probabilities:
Evidence Act 1995
was also common ground that the principles enunciated in
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34
”) apply, such that “inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony and indirect inferences” will not be sufficient to
out a case in a matter of this seriousness:
Walton J recognised in the
Nurses Case
at [67], the
approach is warranted by the seriousness of the matter which
is exemplified by the fact that “one of the possible consequences
industrial organisation that is found to have contravened a dispute order may be
cancellation of its registration, namely,
its very existence as an entity for
the purposes of the [IR] Act is extinguished”.
addition, the seriousness of the contravention pleaded in respect of work bans
is also exemplified by the fact that this single
alleged contravention
encompasses contravening conduct over a period of 21 days which, if proven,
would attract a maximum penalty
of $220,000, which represents more than 50% of
the total maximum penalty ($390,000) for the 27 contraventions contended for by
Health Secretary in these proceedings.
Health Secretary urged the Court to follow the approach of Jagot J in
Work Ombudsman v Maritime Union of Australia
[2017] FCA 1363
Hutchison Ports Case
”) in which her Honour observed (at [20]) that
the seriousness of the matter does not alter the standard of proof in a civil
matter, and (at 22]) that:
“What is required in a civil case is not the exclusion of any rational
inference consistent with innocence. This is the criminal
standard of proof in
action. It will suffice in a civil case if the evidence, including evidence of
circumstances, makes it more
probable than not that the contravention has
occurred. While this requires that the evidence enable a positive inference to
rather than merely equally competing possibilities, the
characterisation of the evidence as evidence of circumstance does not mean
it is not evidence or is incapable of discharging the onus.”
(Footnotes omitted)
respectfully agree with these observations. There is no doubt that the Health
Secretary must “establish that the circumstances
appearing in the evidence
give rise to a reasonable and definite inference and not merely to conflicting
inferences of equal degrees
probability”.
Hutchison Ports Case
, the Fair Work Ombudsman alleged that the
Maritime Union of Australia (MUA) had contravened the
Fair Work Act
organising unlawful industrial action, by arranging for employees to cease work
at the Sydney and Brisbane terminals of Hutchison
Port. This action was in
response to the employer announcing the intention to sack nearly 100
J embraced “a realistic assessment of the evidence as a whole”
which, in that case, led “overwhelmingly to
the inference that the MUA
intended to and did in fact organise the industrial action in the required
Hutchison Ports Case
at [80], [99]. Her Honour found that
there was clear evidence that the MUA had marshalled, rallied and coordinated
employees to take
industrial action.
example, there was documentary evidence that a union member read out a
resolution to management stating that “the MUA R
& F [rank and file]
at Hutchison Ports Port Botany...have passed a resolution to condemn the sacking
of workers without consultation
and move for the company to commence
negotiations with our union immediately to resolve and avert this crisis”
(which was unanimously
endorsed). The MUA Deputy Branch Secretary had earlier
spoken on the telephone with the member who read out the resolution; and the
Deputy Branch Secretary also addressed the prior meeting of workers on
speakerphone. Following this resolution, the employees refused
to work the
balance of their shift whilst the MUA Deputy Branch Secretary and the Assistant
Branch Secretary erected MUA placards
and flags which stated that the MUA would
‘never surrender’.
the context of the MUA’s public statements that it would do everything in
its power to ensure that the sackings did not occur,
and that it needed to
industrially mobilise the workforce and to win the workforce over in order to
defeat what it saw to be an existential
threat, Jagot J (at [42]) had no
difficulty in inferring from the actions referred to in the preceding paragraph
that the MUA, via
its officers, organised the employees to refuse to work when
required to do so.
circumstantial evidence before me, however, is not so clear − both as to
the extent to which any work bans were in place
between 10 and 30 September
2024, and what role the Association played in organising them.
the contraventions involving strike action, there is no direct evidence of the
Association conducting any online organising
activity for work bans during the
relevant contravention period, either on its website or via its social media
accounts. The only
evidence of this type relied upon by the Health Secretary is
the Association’s Work Bans Post which the evidence established
addition, although Mr Dunstan accepted that the actions of the
Association’s various branches should be taken to be the
Association’s
actions for present purposes, almost all of the evidence
comprising correspondence from those branches giving notice of the
implementation
of work bans (referred to at [
] above) precede the contravention period, with no
direct evidence of any one or more of those branches continuing with the
action on or from 10 September 2024.
its highest, the Port Macquarie Letter, when taken together with other relevant
circumstances, establishes that the Association’s
Port Macquarie Hospital
Branch had notified the taking of work bans as part of its industrial campaign
for a 15% pay rise on at least
one day during the contravention period, namely
on 12 September 2024.
Port Macquarie Letter stated that “specific work bans” will start on
“0600am on Monday 2 September 2024”.
It is not clear whether this
was a typographical error and was intended to refer to the date of the letter
being “12 September
2024“, or whether it was referring
retrospectively to the earlier commencement of the bans.
any event, Mr Dunstan conceded, albeit by way of an alternative submission, that
given the context of the Association’s prior
calls for industrial action
including work bans, the Port Macquarie Letter may be sufficient to establish
that the Association engaged
in the contravening activity, but only on the date
on which the letter was apparently sent. Mr Dunstan fairly submitted that, on
the evidence, the judgment as to whether the Association engaged in
Contravention 11 on 12 September 2024 was “finely balanced”.
Port Macquarie Letter should be considered in the context of the
Association’s Work Bans Post and Ms Craig’s Comments
by which she
conceded that work bans were being organised and implemented by local branches
of the Association as at 18 September
2024. The example provided by Ms Craig of
work bans on “domestic duties” such as “the emptying of linen
is reflected in the Port Macquarie Letter which states that the
Port Macquarie Hospital Branch will undertake “Work to Rule”
such as “Domestic duties (pushing beds, cleaning beds & other areas,
emptying linen skips, restocking supplies
& clause 44)”.
light of the direct evidence of the Association notifying the placement of work
bans at Port Macquarie Hospital on 12 September
2024, I am prepared to infer
that the Association in fact did not cease organising the work bans at that
hospital on that date as
part of its industrial campaign for a wage increase.
The Health Secretary has thus proven Contravention 11 to this extent.
it is also not essential for the Health Secretary to prove that work bans in
fact occurred in order to establish the contravention
of an order to
“cease organising” industrial
it is relevant to note
that here is no direct evidence that work bans in fact took place at Port
Macquarie hospital. In cross-examination,
Ms Allen admitted that she had no
direct knowledge as to the activity of the work bans or any of the work
practices taking place
at Port Macquarie hospital. The Health Secretary led no
documentary evidence and called no witnesses beyond Ms Allen to establish
industrial action, if any, had occurred at Port Macquarie hospital.
am not, however, satisfied on the evidence that the Association organised work
bans at any other time during the period 10 to 30
September 2024. In the absence
of any other direct evidence of work bans being organised by the Association
during the 21 day period,
I am not prepared to “pile inference upon
in order to
conclude that there has been a continuing contravention of the first dispute
the Port Macquarie letter, the Illawarra Shoalhaven Email, Lismore Email, and
the PTS Work Bans Table do not constitute direct
evidence of relevant organising
activity by the Association.
Illawarra Shoalhaven Email is authored by Ms Corvalan who appears to have some
knowledge of the work bans occurring at Wollongong,
Shellharbour and Shoalhaven
hospitals as at 16 September 2024. The table provided by Ms Corvalan stated in
relation to Wollongong
hospital: “I spoke briefly to the delegate who
confirmed the work bans are still in place...the delegate expected that if the
discussions did not have a positive outcome, then the members would be asked to
vote on ongoing action.” Ms Corvalan’s
email also noted that she
discussed the work bans with the Shoalhaven and Mental Health (Mental Health
Service inpatient wards at
Shellharbour Hospital) sub-branches of the
Association. However, Ms Corvalan was not called as a witness and Ms Allen
conceded in
cross examination that she had no direct knowledge of the work bans
mentioned in the email, and was not aware of previous work practices
the hospitals mentioned.
the Lismore Email did not contain any direct evidence of work bans. The email
from Patrick Reay on 16 September 2024 contains
text describing an “email
below from Friday” (13 September 2024). The text appears to be an extract
of an email which
outlines proposed work bans to commence on 16 September 2024.
However, the original email is not before the Court and the Health
conceded that the Lismore Email does not prima facie establish that the
Association was responsible for organising work
For example, the email
identified “NSWNMA members and fellow nursing colleges of the endoscopy
department” as the group
taking action and noted that the action is
“currently agreed upon by Rosie, Kellie, Laura, Riley, Jen, Chloe, Jes,
Ange, Luka,
Nina, Karen, Leah” but does not establish any clear link to
the Association.
PTS Work Bans Table also suffered from the same deficiencies. Ms Allen did not
create the table which meant that she was unable
to clarify the data it
contained. For example, in cross-examination Ms Allen stated that the table had
“dynamic tracking”
meaning that it was updated periodically and the
precise date of the table that appeared in her 17 December affidavit was
In addition, Ms Allen
could not confirm whether the reference to “Nurses completing zero
transports” meant that nurses
were completing zero transports, or, were
completing zero non-acute
transports.
creator of the table, Kate Coles, was not called as a witness to shed any light
on these matters, or anything else regarding the
work bans in practice. I am not
persuaded that I can draw the inference that the table establishes a series of
contraventions by
the Association. Even if I accepted that the PTS work bans
evidence established the fact that work bans were taking place, this would
be sufficient to establish contraventions. Ms Allen’s evidence regarding
the PTS only goes to the fact of the work bans
being in place. It does not
establish the role of the union in coordinating or organising the industrial
remaining two aspects of the evidence relied on by the Health Secretary do not
significantly improve her case on Contravention
11. Firstly, the concession of
the Association’s representative made in the course of Ms Craig’s
Comments does not rise
much higher than the proposition that some work bans were
taking place as at 18 September 2024. Ms Craig’s reference to the
Association “continuing to have those lines of communication [with the
Ministry] open so that we can minimise any sort of impact
of the bans on a
particular patient” is directed to ameliorating the impact of bans and
does not in terms say anything about
the Association’s activities in
“inducing, advising, supporting, encouraging, directing, aiding or
abetting” the
imposition of any such bans.
Ms Candish’s Speaking Notes might suggest that there were ongoing work
bans in place. The notes, under the heading,
“Keep up some pressure”
state that the Association is “discussing 'working to the award' with the
which will go to some of the Workbans [sic] we have in
.” However, in the absence of any other evidence about the
webinar, the probative value of the speaking notes alone is low.
appear to be incomplete and in draft form. In addition, Mr Mattson conceded
that, on the evidence, what was contained in
the speaking notes may not have
been presented or conveyed at the webinar by either by Ms Candish or Mr
circumstances where a party must prove the contravention and prima facie has
available evidence that would directly deal with the
question which she has
− without explanation − not called, a court will be very hesitant in
drawing an inference in her
favour from indirect and second-hand evidence: Cf.
Cook’s Construction Pty Ltd v Brown
(2004) 49 ACSR 62
[2004] NSWCA 105
stark contrast to the ample evidentiary foundation for establishing the
contraventions in respect of the three strikes which consisted
of a thorough
examination of the Association’s online communications with its members,
there was no evidence of any online
activity by the Association concerning work
bans beyond the Association’s Work Bans Post on 30 August 2014. Mr Mattson
that it would have been a simple task to bring evidence of the currency
of the Association’s Work Bans Post as at 10 September
2024. There was no
such evidence, and no explanation for its absence.
circumstances where it is clear that the Association’s primary means of
organising the industrial action that was taken by
its members in prosecuting
its claim for higher wages, was by its website and social media communications,
I am not prepared to draw
the inference for which the Health Secretary contends,
namely that the Association had failed to cease organising work bans
continuously
from 10 to 30 September 2025.
the absence of evidence of any relevant online organising activity by the
Association in that period, I regard such an inference
and the prospect that
some of the Association’s members had implemented work bans or continued
with them after the Association
had ceased to induce or encourage that action to
be equally competing possibilities.
The maximum penalty
attention to maximum penalties is
the High Court held that the concept of proportionality, which prevents a court
from imposing a sentence near or at the maximum
except in cases of greatest
objective seriousness, has no application when imposing a civil penalty. The
maximum penalty does not
constrain the exercise of the discretion “beyond
requiring some reasonable relationship between the theoretical maximum and
final penalty imposed”:
at [55]. The reasonableness of
the relationship between the maximum penalty and the penalty imposed is
determined having regard to
the fact that the maximum penalty is not intended to
be reserved for the “worst possible case”, but rather is intended
“to be imposed in respect of a contravention warranting the strongest
deterrence within the prescribed
Health Secretary’s position on the maximum penalty shifted over the course
of the hearing. She initially contended for a
maximum penalty for the
contraventions of $470,000 in respect of nine separate penalties to be imposed
for the 27 pleaded contraventions.
her reply closing submissions dated 14 March 2025, however, the Health Secretary
contended for a total maximum penalty of $390,000
based on a grouping of the
contraventions which would attract the imposition of four separate penalties
– one each for Contraventions
1 to 10 (first group), 11 (second group), 12
to 17 (third group), and 18 to 27 (fourth group) respectively. Initially framed
alternative proposal in oral closing submissions, the Health
Secretary’s ultimate position on penalty is set out in the following
Contravention
Amount sought
First strike – the first dispute orders (Contraventions 1-10 alleged
in the first summons)
(9 and 10 September 2024)
Work bans – the first dispute orders (Contravention 11 alleged in the
first summons)
(10 to 30 September 2024)
Second strike – the second dispute orders
(Contraventions 12-17 alleged in the first summons)
(19 to 24 September 2024)
Third strike – the third dispute orders
(Contraventions 18-27 alleged in the second summons)
(8 to 13 November 2024)
Health Secretary’s ultimate position recognised the appropriateness of
treating the Association’s contravening conduct
in respect of each
instance of industrial action as a single course of conduct which occurred for
the duration of that action. It
is appropriate to do so because the pleaded
contraventions of the orders that required positive acts (i.e. to remove
references to
strike action from and to publish the Commission’s orders on
the Association’s website and social media accounts) were
of the same
character as the orders which required the Association to cease organising the
industrial action.
approach to fixing pecuniary penalties when a course of conduct is involved
follows the
at [149], as applied in the
Nurses Case
[681]-[688] and
Secretary NSW Department of Education v The Australian
Education Union New South Wales Teachers Federation Branch
[2022] NSWSC 263
, [333] (“the
First Teachers Case
propose to adopt the same approach in applying the principle relating to course
of conduct, which may be employed as an “analytical
imposing civil penalties.
majority in
held that the principles relating to course of
conduct and totality − as derived from the criminal sentencing context
are “not so closely tied to retribution as to be incompatible with
a civil penalty regime focussed on deterrence”: at
[45]. Thus, where civil
penalties for multiple contraventions are to be imposed, the Court may apply the
course of conduct principle
as an analytical tool to ensure that the overall
penalty is not oppressive or disproportionate in the sense that it is greater
necessary to achieve the object of
deterrence.
approach is also consistent with that taken by the Full Bench of this Court in
Australian Workers’ Union, New South Wales v Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty
(2006) 151 IR 153
[2006] NSWIRComm 71
which determined
that orders in the nature of orders A(2) and A(3) of the first dispute orders,
2A of the second dispute orders and
2(1) and 2(2) of the third dispute orders
are ancillary or facilitative and do not constitute separate dispute orders
s 137(1)(a).
The Full Bench held at [62] that “the single
exercise of power under
, which includes the power to make such
ancillary orders as are necessary to give effect to the statutory purpose of
that section,
to which the maximum penalties specified in
intended to apply”.
Association generally accepted this approach to the grouping of the
contraventions for the purpose of determining the maximum
penalties. However,
the Association’s primary contention was for a total maximum penalty of
$140,000 calculated on the basis
that the maximum penalties for each of the
first, third and fourth groups of contraventions relating to the first, second
strikes respectively should be: $20,000, $60,000 and $60,000. It was
submitted that, for each group, the day on which the strike
action took place
should be excluded from the period over which the contraventions occurred.
Alternatively,
the Association contended that, in addition to the contraventions relating to
the three strikes, in the event that
the Court determines that the Association
had engaged in Contravention 11 on a single day – such as by sending the
Port Macquarie
Letter on 12 September 2024 – the maximum penalty is
$10,000. This seemed to have been argued on the basis that the first day
contravention should be regarded as having occurred (contrary to the
Association’s primary submission referred to in
the preceding paragraph)
upon the Association’s contravention of the first dispute orders by
failing to cease organising the
first strike on 10 September 2024.
Association’s submissions give rise to two issues that require resolution.
Firstly, I reject the contention that each of
the days on which the strike
action took place should be excluded from the relevant contravention periods. It
is clear that the Association
continued to fail to cease organising the
industrial action on those days by (at least) maintaining its online
exhortations and instructions
to its members to take strike action. I have found
that the Association continued to promote and coordinate each of the three
by advertising the various locations throughout the state for rallies
which it encouraged its members to attend, and by providing
practical guidance
and advice to its members on how to proceed with the industrial action. In
addition, at least with respect to
the second and third strikes, the Association
organised buses to transport its members across the state to attend the rallies
were held in Sydney on the strike days.
Accordingly,
so far as concerns the three strikes, the Association should be treated as
having engaged in three separate contraventions
of the first, second and third
dispute orders respectively, each of which involved a single course of conduct
which occurred over
period that included the day on which each strike was
given my finding that Contravention 11 is proven only in respect of the
Association’s conduct on 12 September 2024,
the issue arises as to whether
or not its actions in notifying the commencement of work bans at Port Macquarie
Hospital should be
treated as being part of a single course of conduct in
organising the first strike. A single course of conduct will be established
as the Association effectively contended, the contravention on 12 September 2024
continued on a day after the first day of the
contravention occurring for the
purposes of s 139(4)(b) of the IR Act.
is a difficulty with the Association’s approach to the penalty for
Contravention 11. The Association accepted the appropriateness
of the Health
Secretary’s proposal for separate penalties to be imposed according to the
four distinct courses of conduct referrable
to each of the four instances or
separately, the work
bans. However, its position on the maximum penalty for
Contravention 11 on a single day is inconsistent with this approach in that
conflates into a single course of conduct the Association’s actions in
organising the first strike together with the work
bans notified at Port
Macquarie Hospital.
inconsistency is indicative of the qualitative differences between the actions
of the Association in organising the different
forms of industrial action in the
circumstances as established by the evidence before the Court.
common law course of conduct
seeks to prevent an
offender from being punished twice for the same “criminality”. As
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
requires “careful identification of what is “the same
criminality” and that is necessarily a factually specific
“necessary to examine all the conduct and enquire how its course and its
explanation factually and legally informs the
imposition of penalties, in order
to avoid double
punishment.”
course of conduct thus requires an interrelationship between the legal and
factual elements between the two
this case, the legal relationship is established because the contraventions
stemmed from the same orders, namely, the first dispute
orders. However, I
consider that there is an insufficient interrelationship between the factual
elements of the first and second
contravention groups.
both instances of industrial action were taken in pursuit of the same ultimate
industrial goal - a 15% pay rise for nurses
- a “[b]are identity of motive
for commission of separate offences will seldom suffice to establish the same
criminality in
separate and distinct acts of offending acts or
omissions”.
of the contravening and organising conduct of the Association relating to the
first group of contraventions was geared towards
the promotion and coordination
of the first strike only. This was a mass statewide strike involving the
complete withdrawal of labour
for a limited period (12 ½ hours) that was
centrally coordinated by the Association.
contrast, the evidence failed to establish that, at any time after the first
dispute orders were made, the Association had continued
to organise and
coordinate ongoing work bans across the state as part of a centrally coordinated
campaign which included the organisation
and promotion of the first strike. The
provision of the Port Macquarie Letter is, at least on the evidence, an isolated
of the Association acting through one of its branches to notify the
implementation of work bans at a single hospital. It took place
two days after
the first strike had concluded, and was not contemplated or foreshadowed by the
Association’s online communications
by which it organised the first
strike. The evidence of the Association’s organisation of the first strike
did not indicate
or imply that work bans would be imposed subsequently at Port
Macquarie Hospital, or at any other hospital, either as a continuation
escalation of the withdrawal of labour taken during that strike.
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2017) 249 FCR 458
[2017] FCAFC 53
, the majority (Dowsett and Rares JJ, North J dissenting) distinguished
between organising and participating in a blockade on one
day and, after the
blockade came to an end, making a threat to return the next day. They held that
“[t]here was no evidence
or explanation about how that threat was part of
the original coercion, other than to add a greater sting to it”, and found
the subsequent threat to have been “a new, deliberate act of unlawful
coercion” which must be penalised as a separate
contravention.”
different approach was taken to a work stoppage followed by a threat of further
stoppages in circumstances where it was found that
the contravener’s
conduct in implementing the initial stoppage itself indicated that the stoppage
would continue until his
demands were met:
Construction, Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union v Williams
(2009) 191 IR 445
[2009] FCAFC 171
insufficient connection or interrelationship between the first strike and the
work bans notified on 12 September 2024 may be contrasted
with the single course
of conduct found in the
Nurses Case
at [681]-[688] where, despite
variations in the length of strikes implemented by different branches of the
Association at different
locations, there was a centrally coordinated effort to
strike for a single 24-hour period and where the evidence demonstrated that
Association’s actions were all geared towards that single coordinated
strike action.
may also be contrasted with the single course of conduct comprising three
instances of industrial action established in the
Second Teachers Case
[67], namely: strike action, a ban on implementing all new Government policies
and initiatives and the act of walking out of any
school that was being visited
by a Government Member of Parliament. Adamson J found that they were
“three arms of attack”
amounting to a single contravention because
the applicant in that case had pleaded the contravention in this manner, in
circumstances
where the union’s organising activity involved
communications and “member alerts” directing or authorising members
to undertake all three forms of action in a coordinated fashion.
contraventions thus lack any temporal link or other circumstance compelling the
conclusion that both the organisation of the first
strike and the communication
of the Port Macquarie Hospital Letter arose out of substantially the same act,
omission or occurrence.
position might have differed if the evidence established that the
Association’s conduct in relation to the first strike
and the imposition
of work bans had proceeded together as a continuum of coordinated organising
activity in breach of the first dispute
orders. This may have provided a firmer
foundation for inferring a sufficient nexus between the first strike and any
subsequent work
bans. However, for the reasons that I have given at [
] above, the evidence
fell short of doing so.
organisation of work bans at Port Macquarie hospital, which on the evidence
before me was organised by the Association independently
of the prior statewide
strike, is a distinct category of conduct in breach of the first dispute orders.
I decline to apply the course
of conduct principle in these circumstances. I do
not consider that it is necessary to do so to ensure that the overall penalty is
not oppressive or disproportionate in the sense that it is greater than
necessary to achieve the object of
deterrence.
I find that the Association’s actions in notifying the commencement of
work bans at Port Macquarie Hospital on 12
September 2024 should be treated as a
separate course of conduct in contravention of the first dispute orders which is
distinct from
the organisation of the first strike, and thus attracts a maximum
penalty of $20,000.
follows from my findings that the 27 alleged contraventions should be treated as
four separate courses of conduct and contraventions
to which applies four
maximum penalties in the total amount of $190,000, as
Contravention
First strike – the first dispute orders
(Contraventions 1-10 alleged in the first summons)
(9 and 10 September 2024)
Work bans – the first dispute orders
(Contravention 11 alleged in the first summons)
(12 September 2024)
Second strike – the second dispute orders
(Contraventions 12-17 alleged in the first summons)
(19 to 24 September 2024)
Third strike – the third dispute orders
(Contraventions 18-27 alleged in the second summons)
(8 to 13 November 2024)
The appropriate penalty
is appropriate for the Court to impose pecuniary penalties on the Association
for its contravening conduct. This is common ground.
The penalties ought be set
at an appropriate level having regard to the particular purposes of general and
specific deterrence, as
well as − to echo Walton J in the
at [728] and Adamson J in the
Teachers Case
“the important purpose of helping to resolve the industrial dispute
between the parties and promoting the system
of conciliation and arbitration
established by the Act.”
the extent that the objective seriousness of the Association’s conduct
sheds light on the penalty required to deter future
contraventions, I have found
that it actively promoted, marshalled and coordinated each of the strike actions
and that, on each occasion,
it did so flagrantly, stridently and in unapologetic
disregard of the Commission’s dispute orders. In these circumstances,
there is a heightened need to give substantial weight to general deterrence, as
observed in the
at [157] and the
First Teachers Case
[397], and consistently with
. In this case, the overall penalty
should reflect the force of general deterrence.
agree with the Health Secretary that the penalties should also reflect an
element of specific deterrence to deter the Association
from attempting to
resolve disputes by contravening the Commission’s dispute orders. I
recognise that the Association “has
generally had a good record in terms
of industrial behaviour over a long period of time, including by complying with
orders, directions
and recommendations of the Commission, and actively
participating in conciliation”: the
Nurses Case
General, NSW Department of Health v New South Wales Nurses Association (No
[2010] NSWIRComm 190.
However, its conduct in contravening the first,
second and third dispute orders follows upon its more recent contravening
in 2022 as determined in the
Nurses Case
Furthermore,
as the Taylor J recognised in making recommendations in the midst of the subject
Health Secretary, NSW Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 4
“It is a matter of some concern that the Nurses Federation, having invoked
the jurisdiction of this Commission to resolve the
dispute over its log of
claims, then determined not to prosecute that dispute by conciliation and
arbitration before this Commission,
but instead by taking industrial action.
That is notwithstanding the efforts that this Commission took to deal with its
expeditiously as possible in the manner that I have described.”
Commission’s efforts to deal with the dispute referred to by the President
in this passage included an offer conveyed to
the parties on 14 August 2024 to
conciliate the dispute expeditiously, which the Association declined without
indicating at that
time anything about the potential for industrial action in
the form of the first strike held on 10 September. Shortly thereafter
September 2024, the Association notified its members of the first strike.
Association’s contravening conduct was a calculated part of an industrial
strategy of prioritising direct action −
at least for an initial period
− over the peaceful means of dispute resolution by conciliation and
arbitration which it had
earlier initiated but subsequently eschewed. The
Association’s strategy anticipated the making of dispute orders by the
Commission.
Ms Smith, the Association’s President at the time, for
example, told its members that the Association had “expected”
first dispute orders while assuring them that the first strike “is most
definitely going ahead”.
circumstances surrounding the contravening conduct in respect of the third
strike was particularly egregious. This involved the
Association’s failure
to adhere to a prior commitment it gave to the Commission that it would cease
all industrial action pending
discussions with the Health Secretary
subsequent arbitration
, in accordance with the President’s
recommendation. In
Health Secretary, NSW Ministry of Health v New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives Association (No 2)
[2024] NSWIRComm 9
“It is my view that the Nurses Association, in determining to announce
further industrial action and to not proceed to engage
in a process to allow the
disputes to be set down for arbitration expeditiously, is acting contrary to the
commitment it gave to
the Commission. I view that as a failure by a major
industrial party to abide by a commitment given to this Commission.”
Association conceded that this conduct carries weight in the Commission’s
assessment of the objective seriousness of its
conduct with respect to the third
strike. As to this, the only submission put in its favour was that the
Association’s “commitment”
to the Commission fell short of a
binding undertaking. It may be accepted that the Commission’s
recommendations made in the
course of conciliating industrial disputes are not
binding on the parties. It is not necessary to determine the enforceability of
the Association’s commitment to abide by the President’s
recommendation. It suffices to observe that, by resiling from
that commitment
the Association acted unlawfully in contravention of the third strike orders.
Association’s conduct in this regard is to be deprecated. It is a
significant blot on the Association’s historical
record as a good and
responsible industrial citizen. And it diminishes the extent of leniency that
this record would otherwise have
Association conceded that there is “some level of greater
seriousness” of its contravening conduct in organising the
third strike
(in comparison to the preceding two strikes) because of its failure to abide by
its commitment to the Commission. I
agree. The penalty to be imposed for this
contravening conduct should reflect the greater seriousness of the
Association’s
conduct and the concomitant need for deterrence.
the other end of the spectrum is the relatively low objective seriousness of
Contravention 11 involving the work bans at Port Macquarie
Hospital. The
evidence does not demonstrate this to be anything other than an isolated
instance of organising activity by one branch
of the Association, which may or
may not have resulted in the implementation of actual work bans at Port
Macquarie Hospital. I consider
the need for deterrence against future
contraventions of this kind to be modest.
accept that the motivation of the Association and its members is part of the
circumstances surrounding the contravening conduct.
It is clear from the
Association’s historical record that nurses do not take industrial action
lightly. And it is clear from
the evidence of the Association’s
communications with its members that they strongly believed that their pay and
were not appropriate, and felt very intensely that the position taken
by the Health Secretary did not adequately reflect their work
scheme of the IR Act is, however, designed to encourage employers, such as the
Health Secretary, and employee organisations, such
as the Association, to
resolve their disputes by conciliation and arbitration instead of taking or
organising industrial action in
defiance of the Commission’s orders.
Unlike the position of some public sector workers who took direct action during
of the former wages cap, the Association’s contravening conduct
cannot be explained by frustration with any constraint on the
Commission’s
capacity to resolve its pay dispute to the satisfaction of the Association and
its members: Cf. the
Second Teachers Case
at [88]. In making the first
dispute orders, I emphasised the need for the parties to utilise the
Commission’s extensive conciliation
and arbitration powers which were
effectively restored after the repeal of s 146C and the reconstitution of
the Commission, including
the re-establishment of the Industrial Court in July
2024 (see at [
Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 3
broadly accept the Health Secretary’s evidence of the impact of the strike
actions, which was largely recorded in “situation
reports” provided
by Ms Allen. Although not derived from Ms Allen’s first-hand knowledge,
these reports were provided
contemporaneously at multiple times throughout the
day, collated information gathered by multiple teams at the Ministry of Health
and were coordinated by a central System Flow Centre that was set up to assist
with management of the strike action.
reports contained estimates that a total of over 18,000 nurses participated in
taking industrial action across the three strikes.
The strike actions resulted
in significant impacts on the provision of health services across the state.
Although Ms Allen could
not identify any forced closures of entire facilities or
wards, there were significant numbers of bed closures, i.e. about 76 beds
closed during the first strike, 167 during the second strike and 113 during the
third strike. There was also evidence that a
substantial number of surgical
cases had to be cancelled or rescheduled, i.e. up to about 520 surgical cases
during the first strike,
545 during the second strike and 711 during the third
accept that, given the nature of these records, the true extent of the strike
impacts may vary from these figures. However, even
accounting for the real
possibility of such variance, I am satisfied that the Health Secretary has
demonstrated that the disruption
caused by the strike action was substantial and
not insignificant. Some cancelled or rescheduled surgical procedures very likely
resulted in real and considerable inconvenience for the affected patients.
the evidence of the strike impacts relied on by the Health Secretary was not as
extensive as it might have been. Except perhaps
in one instance at Coffs Harbour
Acute Mental Health Unit involving an agitated patient who experienced prolonged
seclusion, the
evidence did not disclose any specific adverse health outcomes
for individual patients.
addition, I accept Ms Allen’s evidence to the effect that there was a
significant degree of co-operation and assistance provided
by the Association in
mitigating the effects of each of the strikes, including timely communications
with Ms Allen’s team at
the Ministry and with local managers about the
anticipated staffing shortfalls at various health facilities. I note, however,
her evidence was that the extent of this co-operation was mixed or
variable, with some instances or problematic or delayed responses
Association.
length of the contravening conduct associated with the second strike must be
seen in the context that the Association was, in
the contravention period
leading up to the second strike, actively engaged with the Health Secretary in
conciliation proceedings
before Commissioner Muir in attempting to ameliorate
the effects of the strike including by the provision of minimum staffing levels
to ensure patient care.
is also the case that, although the contravention concerning the second strike
continued over six days, strike action occurred
over only one 24-hour period.
This was also the case for the contravention concerning the third strike which
also continued for a
period of six days.
the evidence shows that the Association’s actions were not designed to
inflict maximum disruption to the operations
of the NSW Health Service. I accept
that the Association made some significant efforts to reduce the impact of
patients throughout
each of the strike days, including by participating in
conciliation before the Commission during the period leading to the second
effort was also evident in some of the Association’s communications with
its members urging them to notify their managers
of their intention to take
strike action as soon as possible in order to allow them to plan for their
absence, and emphasising the
need to plan for “life preserving
staffing” levels, notwithstanding the Association’s call for maximum
participation.
In this respect, the responsible nature of the
Association’s actions redounds to its credit in my assessment of the
of the Association reoffending.
I accept the Health Secretary’s submission that the Association has not
expressed any remorse or contrition. This is
relevant to the need for specific
deterrence. The most that the Association was able to muster was an
acknowledgement from the bar
table by Mr Dunstan, expressly on instructions,
that its contravening conduct was “serious”. This is not an
of remorse nor contrition. Indeed, the Association chose not to call
any evidence at all. The Court did not have the benefit of any
evidence from any
of the Association’s officials explaining the circumstances of its conduct
or offering any indication of
remorse for the disdain with which it repeatedly
treated the Commission’s orders and, as demonstrated by the abandonment of
its commitment to abide by the President’s recommendation, the
Commission’s dispute resolution process generally. There
is no suggestion
by the Association that its admission of the contraventions relating to the
strike actions demonstrates contrition
on its part.
Nevertheless,
the utilitarian value of the Association’s admissions to most (but not
all) of the pleaded contraventions, even
unaccompanied by contrition, must be
taken into account. I accept that this consideration operates to reduce the
penalties in respect
of the strike actions that would otherwise have been
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Fair
Work Ombudsman
(2023) 322 IR 233
[2023] FCA 72
weigh these matters, together with all the relevant factors, in the process of
instinctive synthesis through which I am required
determined the appropriate
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
final matter that I take into account, for the reasons I have expressed at [
] above, is the fact
that the industrial dispute is no longer a “live issue” that calls
for the Court’s intervention
to restore industrial order by imposing civil
penalties specifically to deter further industrial action as a means of dispute
resolution.
Since the Association’s contravening conduct it has, together
with Health Secretary, commendably resumed the path of orderly
and peaceful
dispute resolution through the Commission’s arbitration process, as
intended by the IR Act. The Association’s
subsequent return to the
conciliation and arbitration system established by the IR Act justifies the
imposition of penalties that
are somewhat lower than what might have been
necessary to promote the resolution of the underlying industrial dispute such as
deterring further industrial action.
is important to set the penalties at levels that it will deter not only the
Association but also others who may consider breaching
dispute orders and to
encourage such organisations to resolve industrial disputes in accordance with
the system of conciliation and
arbitration provided in the IR Act. The major
public sector industrial parties in this state can be in no doubt that, in the
cap era, there is no excuse (if ever it was so considered) for
attempting to resolve disputes by taking industrial action in defiance
Commission’s dispute orders when they now have access to an impartial,
fully restored and adequately endowed arbitration
system: Cf.
Secretary, Ministry of Health v Australian Salaried Medical Officers’
Federation (New South Wales)
[2025] NSWIRComm 5
the NSW Court of Appeal has recently emphasised in a different context, a
central aspect of the rule of law in any democratic society
requires parties to
comply with the orders made by the courts in determining their disputes:
Commissioner of Police (NSW Police Force) v Naser
[2025] NSWCA 224
This applies equally to
the Commission’s dispute orders that are made as an integral part of the
scheme and design of the IR
Act for the orderly and peaceful resolution of
industrial disputes.
was no evidence before me of the Association’s resources or capacity to
pay substantial fines. However, on the basis of
Mr Dunstan’s invitation
for the Court to infer that the Association is a significant industrial
organisation with thousands
of members, and having regard to the
Commission’s longstanding experience with the Association as very
substantial and well-resourced
organisation,
there is no
reason to reduce the penalty based on the Association’s capacity to
regard to the matters referred to above, I have determined to impose four
penalties in the total sum of $130,000. Applying
the principle of totality, I am
satisfied that this overall penalty is not oppressive or disproportionate in the
sense that it is
greater than necessary to achieve the object of
deterrence.
make the following order:
(1) Pursuant to
s 139(3)(e)
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW), the Court imposes the following penalties on the respondent:
(a) a penalty of $21,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the Commission
on 9 September 2024 in respect of the respondent’s
conduct on 9 and 10
September 2024;
(b) a penalty of $4,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the Commission
on 9 September 2024 in respect of the respondent’s
conduct on 12 September
(c) a penalty of $49,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the Commission
on 9 September 2024 (as varied on 18 September 2024)
and 18 September 2024 in
respect of the respondent’s conduct from 19 to 24 September 2024;
(d) a penalty of $56,000 for contravening dispute orders made by the Commission
on 8 November 2024 in respect of the respondent’s
conduct from 8 to 13
November 2024.
12 November 2025 - 12/11/2025 - "there is no reason to reduce the penalty
based on the Association’s capacity to pay" added
at the end of the second
sentence in paragraph [227]
Health Secretary, Ministry of
Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 3
Health Secretary,
Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm
and Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW Nurses and Midwives’
Association (No 2)
[2024] NSWIRComm
The Nurses Case at [32],
citing New South Wales Legislative Council, Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), 23
November 1995 at 3850-3851
(The Hon Jeffrey W Shaw
Health Services Union v
Health Secretary (NSW Ambulance)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1014
The PSA Case at [75],
The PSA Case at
The PSA Case at
Industrial Relations
Amendment Act 2023
(NSW): Sch 1.2,
In the context of the
making of the first dispute orders: Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v NSW
Nurses and Midwives’ Association
[2024] NSWIRComm 3
Cf. the PSA Case
at [51]. See also the Nurses Case at [65] citing with approval Secretary of the
Treasury v Public Service Association
and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated Union (NSW) (No 2)
(2013) 231 IR 349
[2013] NSWIRComm 25
Philip Boncardo and
Ben Bromberg, “Civil Penalties in Industrial Law” in Deniz Kayis,
Eloise Gluer and Samuel Walpole
(eds), The Law of Civil Penalties (2023, The
Federation Press) at 274.
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes
Constructions Pty Limited
[2022] FCA 992
Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes Constructions Pty
[2022] FCA 992
Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Fair Work Ombudsman
(2023) 322 IR
[2023] FCA 72
Contrary to the assertion that her Honour had rejected such a submission in
Matthew Peckham, Cam Truong KC, Ian Latham and Amanda
Storey, Civil Penalties in
Australia (2025, LexisNexis) at 204
The Second Teachers
Case at [80].
Boncardo and Ben Bromberg, “Civil Penalties in Industrial Law” in
Deniz Kayis, Eloise Gluer and Samuel Walpole
(eds), The Law of Civil Penalties
(2023, The Federation Press) at
Andrew Stewart, Anthony
Forsyth, Mark Irving, Richard Johnstone and Shae McCrystal, Creighton &
Stewart’s Labour Law (7th
ed, 2025, The Federation Press) at [19.34],
Securities and Investments Commission v Macdonald (No 11)
(2009) 256 ALR 199
[2009] NSWSC 287
citing Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy,
Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v
Competition and Consumer Commission
(2007) 162 FCR 466
[2007] FCAFC
The PSA Case at
Trade Practices
Commission v Allied Mills Industries Pty Ltd (No 4)
[1981] FCA 133
(1981) 37 ALR 225
Tcpt, 25 February
2025, 126(25).
February 2025, 36(35).
24 February 2025, 55(35).
Pattinson at [52] citing with approval Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357;
[2005] HCA 25 at [31].
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 992
citing Pattinson at
Pattinson at
Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes Constructions Pty
[2022] FCA 992
As distilled in Royer v Western Australia
(2009) 197 A Crim R 319
[2009] WASCA
, and the authorities discussed in the Nurses Case at
[671]-[680].
(2010) 194 IR
[2010] FCAFC 39
Australian Building
and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and
Energy Union (The Nine Brisbane
Sites Appeal)
(2019) 366 ALR 698
[2019] FCAFC
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill (2010) 194 IR 461;
[2010] FCAFC 39
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill (2010) 194 IR 461;
[2010] FCAFC 39
. See also Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union
(2021) 307 IR 411
[2021] FCA 622
Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Richard Crookes Constructions Pty
[2022] FCA 992
Citing Australian Industry Group v Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering,
Printing & Kindred Industries Union
[2000] FCA 629
, quoted with
approval in AGL Energy Ltd v Hardy (No 2)
[2017] FCA 863
Siminton v Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
(2006) 152 FCR 129
Nurses Case at [751] and the authorities referred to
See the Nurses Case
at [751] and the authorities referred to therein.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (15.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter