URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/175.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Matthews v R [2025] NSWCCA 175 (5 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Matthews v R
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 175
Hearing Date(s):
20 October 2025
Date of Orders:
05 November 2025
Decision Date:
5 November 2025
Ball JA at [1];
N Adams J at [2];
Sweeney J at [3]
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Dismiss the appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIME – appeals – appeal against sentence – one count of
not stopping and driving a vehicle dangerously knowing
that police officers were
in pursuit of the vehicle – one count of assaulting a police officer in
the execution of his duty
– guilty plea – where the applicant was
serving the balance of parole
SENTENCING – appeal against
sentence – whether the sentencing judge erred in the consideration of
totality and a finding
of special circumstances – whether the sentence was
manifestly excessive – no point of principle – leave to appeal
granted – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
Edquist-Wheeler v R
[2024] NSWCCA 49
[2017] NSWCCA 200
[2019] NSWCCA
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Johnson v The Queen
[2004] HCA 15
(2004) 78 ALJR 616
(1988) 166 CLR 59
[1988] HCA 70
Obeid v R (2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
[2025] NSWCCA 121
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988)
164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
Principal judgment
Sean Matthews (Applicant)
Crown (Respondent)
Representation:
S Kluss (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Ross Hill & Associate Solicitors
(Applicant)
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2023/437280
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
21 March 2025
File Number(s):
2023/437280
I agree with Sweeney J.
I agree with Sweeney J.
Sean Matthews, the applicant, seeks leave to appeal against the aggregate
sentence imposed upon him by her Honour Judge Culver in
the District Court on 21
March 2025.
sentence was for two offences to which Mr Matthews had pleaded guilty in the
Local Court. All the offences before the court occurred
on 2 December 2023. The
first offence for sentence was an offence of not stopping and driving a vehicle
dangerously, knowing that
police officers were in pursuit of the vehicle,
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
), with a maximum penalty of 3 years imprisonment. When Mr
Matthews was sentenced for that offence an offence of resisting a police
in the execution of his duty was taken into account on a Form 1. The sentence
indicated for the police pursuit offence with
the Form 1 offence taken into
account, with a 25% discount for Mr Matthews’ guilty plea, was 18 months
imprisonment. The other
offence for sentence was assaulting a police officer in
the execution of his duty, contrary to
maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment. The sentence indicated for that
offence, including the 25% discount for the guilty
plea, was 18 months
imprisonment. The aggregate sentence was 28 months imprisonment, with a
non-parole period of 20 months, backdated
to commence on 2 December 2024, and
thus accumulated by 12 months on Mr Matthews’ balance of parole which he
was serving at
the time he was sentenced.
Matthews was also dealt with for two offences pursuant to
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) of, being an unaccompanied learner
driver and not displaying L-plates. For both of those matters he was convicted
and no other
penalty was imposed, pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW). Mr Matthews’ driver’s licence was
suspended for a total of 3 years and 3 months for his driving offences.
Grounds of Appeal
Matthews sought to rely on three grounds of appeal.
“1. Her Honour erred in failing to find a causal connection between the
offending and the mental illness of the applicant.
2. Her Honour erred in the considerations of totality and failed to give effect
to her finding of ‘special circumstances’.
3. Her Honour imposed a sentence that was manifestly excessive, and a different
sentence is warranted at law.”
the hearing of the appeal counsel did not press Ground 1, accepting that Judge
Culver found that Mr Matthews’ mental ill
health materially contributed to
his offending conduct.
Remarks on Sentence - Facts
her Remarks on Sentence her Honour summarised the agreed facts. She had viewed
some Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) footage of
part of the event. The Crown
invited this Court to view the CCTV footage. Mr Matthews’ counsel did not
invite the Court to
do so but did not object as that footage was before the
sentencing court. I viewed it. It graphically illustrated part of the event
showed that those parts were somewhat understated in the Agreed Statement of
Facts. The relevant facts are summarised as follows.
8:25PM on Saturday, 2 December 2023 Mr Matthews was driving a grey Audi A4 in
Gladesville, alone, although he was the holder
of a learner licence. Constable
Bellina and Probationary Constable Jeffers were patrolling in a marked police
car in uniform. They
noticed the grey Audi was weaving between vehicles in light
traffic. Because of the manner of driving, Constable Bellina made a U-turn,
activated the warning lights and sirens and followed the grey Audi for
approximately 500m. The Audi did not stop. Mr Matthews braked
harshly and turned
left in to a street, with police pursuing him, he turned right on to another
street and accelerated sharply, then
turned right on to Gladesville Road, at
speed, on to the wrong side of the road, into incoming traffic, past a no entry
sign. Constable
Bellina terminated the pursuit. The total distance of the
pursuit was 1.34 km.
Audi hit a parked car on Gladesville Road outside the Hunters Hill Hotel.
Constable Bellina stopped the police car behind the
Audi. Constable Jeffers got
out of the police car and Mr Matthews reversed the Audi, which hit the police
car door, and the door
made contact with Constable Jeffers’ leg. That was
the offence of resisting a police officer. Constable Jeffers approached
and took hold of the driver’s door handle with his taser out. Mr Matthews
drove forward and collided with the police
car before driving up on to the
footpath at speed and hitting a pillar, which, the CCTV footage showed was part
of a building. A
woman on the footpath moved out of the way to avoid being hit
by the Audi.
police officers approached the Audi. Constable Jeffers had his firearm drawn.
Constable Bellina struck Mr Matthews with his baton
and pulled him out of the
car. He resisted arrest by striking out at police, tensing his arms and legs and
moving his body. Police
continued to attempt to subdue Mr Matthews. He was held
on the ground for a short period of time before three members of the public
attempted to assist police with arresting Mr Matthews, who continued to resist
by tensing his arms and legs and swinging his body
and limbs around.
CCTV footage shows that it took considerable time and effort to subdue Mr
Matthews. He continued to resist and strike out at Constable
Bellina. Both
officers used considerable effort to subdue Mr Matthews but were unable to. Mr
Matthews pushed Constable Bellina in
the throat with his hand. That was the
offence of assaulting a police officer. Constable Bellina fell back on to the
ground. Further
police officers arrived and Mr Matthews was handcuffed.
Constable Bellina was struggling to breathe, was lightheaded and was unable
stand. He vomited while waiting for medical assistance.
officers were taken to hospital. Constable Bellina was observed to have left arm
weakness, slower and slightly slurred speech,
and red marks on the left side of
his neck. Constable Jeffers had ankle and knee tenderness and redness on his
knee. Both officers
were prescribed pain relief medication. Actual bodily harm
was not an element of the assault offence.
seriousness
Honour assessed the objective seriousness of the police pursuit as in or
“towards” the mid-range, taking into account
the driving from the
time the police commenced their pursuit until Mr Matthews stopped driving by
crashing into the pillar, not a
lengthy journey but driving erratically and
unsafely, despite warnings to stop, with light traffic and pedestrians present,
it was prior erratic driving which brought him to police attention.
assessing the offence of assaulting Constable Bellina as “towards the
mid-range”, her Honour took into account that
it was an actual physical
assault, forceful, to a vulnerable part of the body, the impact of which
affected the officer for some
Honour found that both offences were committed without regard to public safety.
Mr Matthews’ mental health
Honour found there was a causal connection between Mr Matthews’ mental ill
health and his offending.
was diagnosed by a psychiatrist, Dr Bench, with Antisocial Personality Disorder,
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Stimulant Use
Disorder in enforced remission and
Schizophrenia. His longstanding mental ill health involved a persistent
delusional persecutory
belief that he was being unfairly targeted by police,
which predated these offences.
Honour took into account Mr Matthews’ mental health to reduce the
objective gravity of both offences. Her Honour found that
Mr Matthews’
mental ill health, combined with his drug abuse and entry into the criminal
justice system from a young age, likely
disrupted his development and
maturation, and therefore reduced his moral culpability.
Honour did not find that Mr Matthews’ substance abuse underpinned these
offences, but found his drug use exacerbated his
mental health conditions.
Honour found that Mr Matthews’ mental health made his experience of
custody more onerous, although his mental health caused
him to be the
protagonist in incidents in custody sometimes. Her Honour reduced the emphasis
to be given to general deterrence and
specific deterrence because of Mr
Matthews’ mental health. Her Honour found that Mr Matthews presented as a
risk to the community
because of his mental health, and that protection of the
community required emphasis in sentencing him.
Matthews’ subjective circumstances
Honour took into account a report by Mr Matthews to Dr Bench of a serious
traumatic experience in his childhood or adolescence,
not further described,
which her Honour found enlivened the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
and reduced his moral culpability.
Matthews was 35 when he was sentenced. He was receiving a disability support
pension and had NDIS support at the time of the offences.
mother’s support.
record of previous convictions was found to raise the principles in
The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14.
was on parole when he committed these offences, for an offence of attempting to
cause grievous bodily harm with intent to cause
grievous bodily to a police
officer. I will address that offence and the sentence for it more fully in
connection with consideration
of appeal ground 2.
Honour noted from reports that Mr Matthews’ response to supervision while
on parole had been gradually declining during
2023, although accepted that he
had a period of stability on parole between April and September 2023. His parole
for the prior offence
was revoked because of these offences.
Honour found that Mr Matthews’ remorse was limited, although recognised
that that was affected by his mental health, which
limited his ability to see
how serious his offending was.
Honour found that Mr Matthews’ capacity to rehabilitate himself required
intensive support and strict compliance by him
with the available supports.
Honour found that Mr Matthews was at risk of institutionalisation.
Ground 2: Her Honour erred in the considerations of totality and
failed to give effect to her finding of ‘special
circumstances’.
Ground 3: Her Honour imposed a sentence that was manifestly excessive, and
a different sentence is warranted at law.
respect of “totality” her Honour stated that she took into account
that she was sentencing Mr Matthews for a number
of offences, that one offence
had an offence on a Form 1 to be taken into account, and that he was serving the
balance of parole
for an offence of attempting to cause grievous bodily harm
with intent to do so, which occurred on 12 July 2018, with an assault
Corrective Services officer on a Form 1. He was sentenced by Judge Bennett on 2
July 2019. The principal offence involved Mr
Matthews approaching a police
officer, not known to him, who was in uniform standing outside the police
station at which he worked,
and swinging at the officer’s head and neck
three times with a 30 cm knife. The knife did not connect with the police
who reflexively blocked it. Judge Bennett sentenced Mr Matthews to 7
years and 6 months imprisonment, with a non-parole period of
4 years and 6
months, commencing on 12 July 2018, the non-parole period to expire on 11
January 2023. The sentence will expire on
11 January 2026.
Matthews’ parole was revoked from 2 December 2023, the date of the
offences for sentence.
Honour stated that the sentence must take into account the overall criminality
of the offences for sentence, then consider when
the sentence should be fixed
with reference to the sentence Mr Matthews was serving, and must ensure the
sentence was not “unduly
Honour stated that she made a “modest” finding of special
circumstances by Mr Matthews’ experience of custody
being more onerous and
his risk of institutionalisation. However, her Honour stated:
“... with respect to the total period the offender will be in custody
since his revocation of parole, I expressly note and
intend that the ratio will
be disturbed such that the overall time the offender will be in custody from the
revocation of his parole
will exceed 75% of that total period. I do so noting
the protection of the community, but also noting that the Court cannot allow
disproportion in the application of totality to come to bear when the Court
imposes the current sentence. It is expressly done and
intended by the
Honour backdated the commencement of the sentence to 2 December 2024 “in
light of the offender’s time in custody and
noting his current sentence
with the application of the principles of totality”. Thus the sentence her
Honour imposed was accumulated
by 1 year on the balance of parole Mr Matthews
had begun serving on 2 December 2023.
The applicant’s
submissions
Matthews’ counsel’s submissions addressed Grounds 2 and 3 of his
appeal together. Counsel acknowledged that she could
not point to any particular
error in the sentencing judge’s application of the totality principle
which fell within
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40.
submitted that by her Honour accumulating the sentence imposed on the balance of
parole of the previous sentence by 12 months,
the ratio of the effective
non-parole period to the total effective sentence is 80%, and the period of 8
months on parole is insufficient,
particularly given Mr Matthews’
long-standing mental illness issues and institutionalisation. Counsel submitted
that a longer
period on parole under supervision would better serve community
protection, with which her Honour was concerned.
submitted that each of the indicative sentences was at the top of the range of
sentences reflected in the sentencing statistics
maintained by the Judicial
Commission, and that both offences could have been dealt with in the Local
Court, and their objective
circumstances did not warrant their being dealt with
in the District Court.
submitted that the degree of accumulation between the previous sentence and the
sentence imposed made the total sentence manifestly
excessive and
disproportionate to the totality of the offending, so that the sentence is
The Crown’s submissions
Crown’s submissions focused on Mr Matthews’ mental illness, its
interrelationship with his long-standing drug addiction
and the concerns about
community safety to which those factors gave rise. Mr Matthews’ medical
records which were in evidence,
on which the Crown addressed the Court, show a
history of him lacking insight into his mental illness, being resistant to
and refusing to take medication, acting impulsively and aggressively
when not treated and continuing to use methamphetamine type
Consideration
noted above at paragraph [33] her Honour specifically explained her intention
that the overall non-parole period would exceed 75%
of the total effective
sentence and the reasons for that decision, it being preferable for a sentencing
judge to expressly say why
the overall non-parole period exceeded the 75%
statutory ratio, though it is not an error to exceed the ratio:
[2017] NSWCCA 200
[2019] NSWCCA 310
[2019] NSWCCA 144
Edquist-Wheeler v R
[2024] NSWCCA 49
Judge Culver referred to Mr Matthews’ record of prior convictions, she did
not do so in detail. An examination of Mr
Matthews’ prior record shows
that in addition to the offence in 2018 for which he was sentenced by Judge
Bennett and on parole,
his record as an adult included prior offences of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm, affray, assault, and armed robbery. Of
having regard to a person’s prior record and the need for protection of
the community to be afforded weight in sentencing,
does not permit a sentence
imposed to be more severe than is appropriate for the offences for sentence.
applicant must establish that the sentence imposed upon him was unreasonable or
plainly unjust:
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
and the cases cited therein at [443].
[2025] NSWCCA 121
Bell CJ, Garling J agreeing, said:
“[4] Mere disagreement by appellate judges with the sentence imposed
is not enough to warrant a conclusion that a sentence
is manifestly excessive
(or manifestly inadequate). The significant degree of latitude afforded to
sentencing judges when reviewing
sentences for manifest excess or manifest
inadequacy reflects the fact that sentencing is a discretionary exercise in
which there
is no one correct sentence and that, within a range of
acceptability, the judgment of a sentencing judge as to an appropriate sentence
should be respected:
[2025] NSWCCA 111
[5] As noted in
(2021) 104 NSWLR 518
[2021] NSWCA 95
, an applicant seeking to challenge a sentence on the ground of manifest
excess has a ‘very heavy practical burden’, and
must show a kind of
disproportion which is so ‘manifest on its face as to be indicative of,
not a mere difference of idiosyncratic
opinions, but, rather, of substantive
error of law’, citing
[2000] NSWCCA 235
a court sentences a person for more than one offence or sentences a person
serving an existing sentence, the overall sentence
must be just and appropriate
to the totality of the offending behaviour:
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
Johnson v The Queen
[2004] HCA 15
(2004) 78 ALJR
for Mr Matthews conceded that no specific error could be identified by the
sentencing judge in her application of the principle
of totality to the
sentence. She placed emphasis on Mr Matthews’ history of mental illness
as making it desirable for him
to be released into the community under
supervision for an extended period of time, which indicated that a longer parole
period would
be appropriate. However, when one considers the circumstances of
the offences for sentence, the maximum penalties prescribed for
them, that Mr
Matthews was on parole for a serious offence against a police officer at the
time of their commission, the attitude
he has taken in the past to the treatment
of his mental illness, his related history of drug abuse, and his prior violent
Mr Matthews has not demonstrated that the sentence imposed on him, or
the total effective sentence by reason of its being accumulated
on his balance
of parole, is disproportionate to his total offending, unreasonable or plainly
unjust. I would grant leave to appeal,
but dismiss the appeal.
orders I propose are:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Dismiss the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter