URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/277.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Herbert v Zhang [2025] NSWCATAP 277; (31 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Herbert v Zhang
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 277
Hearing Date(s):
16 July 2025
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Appeal Panel
J Ledda, Senior Member
(1) If required, Mr Tao Chen is granted leave under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) to represent
the Respondent in the appeal.
(2) Leave to appeal is refused
to the extent leave is required.
(3) The appeal is
Catchwords:
LEASES AND TENANCIES —
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
termination notice for non-payment of rent — relevance of rental bond to
determining arrears
APPEAL — obligation of party to lodge
material relied on — consequences of failure by appellant to lodge
transcript or
recording of hearing below
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Crimes Act 1900
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Interpretation Act 1987
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Residential Tenancies Amendment
Residential Tenancies Regulation 2019
Cases Cited:
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Purr Pets Pty Ltd v Moussad
[2024] NSWCATAP 201
Boreland v Brewis
NSWCATAP 140
Brahmbhatt v Osorio
[2023] NSWCATAP 188
Candy Events Pty Ltd
v Thrain Pty Ltd t/as Digital Solutions Group
[2025] NSWCATAP 164
Hobart Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
(2022) 276 CLR 216
[2022] HCA 16
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force v White
[2025] NSWCATAP 30
Damico v Secretary,
Department of Customer Service
[2025] NSWCATAP 109
Donohoe v Albulario
FVA v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAP
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP
Hawkins v Wimbledon 1963 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1465
Houda v Seraphim
[2025] NSWCATAP 135
Imbree v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
NSWCATAP 158
McEwan v Port Stephens Council
[2022] NSWCATAP 300
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
Myers v VCAT
[2024] VSCA 206
Woollahra Holdings Pty Ltd v Ice Box Liquor Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATAP
Rushton v St George Community Housing Limited
[2025] NSWCATAP 222
v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Secretary, Department
of Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP 139
Song v Dickson (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 208
The Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2025] NSWCATAP 180
Trkulja v Markovic
[2015] VSCA 298
[2025] NSWCATAP 163
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Young v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
(2023) 278 CLR
[2023] HCA 31
Texts Cited:
A Anforth et al, Residential Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW (8th ed,
Federation Press, 2022)
NCAT Consumer and Commercial Division
Guideline—Representation (August 2019)
Principal judgment
Stephen Noel Herbert (Appellant)
Aimin Zhang (Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-represented)
T Chen (Agent) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00118102
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
13 March 2025
Dr D Goldman, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2025/00009292; 2024/00464526
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal by Stephen Herbert (the Appellant) against certain decisions made
by the Tribunal in the Consumer and Commercial
Division (the Tribunal at first
decisions concern residential premises at Wolli Creek that were formerly leased
by the Appellant (the Rented Premises). The residential
tenancy agreement over
the Rented Premises (the Tenancy Agreement) was between the Appellant as the
tenant and Aimin Zhang (the Respondent)
as the landlord. The
Residential
Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW) (RT Act) applied to the Tenancy Agreement.
decisions of the Tribunal under appeal concerned two related claims.
first claim (Case No 2024/00464526) was lodged by the Respondent against the
Appellant (the Respondent’s Rent Claim). The
claim sought unpaid rent and
an order terminating the Tenancy Agreement based on a termination notice given
to the Appellant by the
Respondent because of the unpaid rent (the Termination
Notice). The Tribunal decided to grant the remedies for the claim sought by
second claim (Case No 2025/00009292) was lodged by the Appellant against the
Respondent (the Appellant’s Bathroom Claim).
The claim sought: (1) repairs
to a bathroom; and (2) an associated rent reduction for the period when a
bathroom could not be used;
and (3) general compensation for disappointment and
distress because of the disrepair of the bathroom. The Tribunal decided not to
grant the remedies for the claim sought by the Appellant.
appeal came on for hearing on 16 July 2025. At this hearing (the appeal
hearing), the parties agreed for the appeal to be determined
on the papers. The
Appeal Panel, which was then constituted by me and another Senior Member, made
orders to give effect to this agreement.
However, the other Senior Member
subsequently became unavailable. Consequently, the Acting President, Judge R
Seiden SC gave a direction
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act) for the Appeal Panel to be constituted by
Appeal Panel as reconstituted has decided for the following reasons to refuse
leave to appeal against the decisions to the extent
leave is required and to
dismiss the appeal.
parties entered the Tenancy Agreement in June 2024. The stated period for the
Agreement was the period commencing on 21 June 2024
and ending on 18 July
Tenancy Agreement took effect after the end of a short-term residential tenancy
agreement between the parties (the Short-Term
Tenancy Agreement).
Respondent gave the Termination Notice to the Appellant dated 12 December 2024.
It sought vacant possession on 26 December 2024.
The claimed basis for the
Notice was that the Appellant had failed to pay rent due under the Tenancy
noted in the Overview, the Respondent’s Rent Claim and the
Appellant’s Bathroom Claim were lodged with the Tribunal
determination.
13 March 2025, the Tribunal at first instance made the following
1 The Tribunal orders the Residential Tenancy Agreement is terminated
immediately and vacant possession is to be given to the landlord
Azmin Zhang on
the date of termination.
2 The Tribunal makes an order under
section 114(2)
Residential Tenancies
, that the order for possession is suspended until 08 April 2025.
3 The tenant respondent Stephen Noel Herbert is to pay the landlord Azmin Zhang
a daily occupation fee, at the rate of $200.00, per
day from the day after the
date of termination, 19 March 2025 until the date vacant possession is given.
4 The landlord may request the relisting of this application, to determine the
occupation fee, owing, within 60 days from the date
of possession.
5 The respondent Stephen Noel Herbert, Apartment 803 Level 8 - 32-34 Lot No. 803
LEVEY STREET Street WOLLI CREEK NSW 2205, is to
pay the applicant Azmin Zhang,
Apartment 803 Level 8 - 32-34 LEVEY STREET Street WOLLI CREEK NSW 2205, the sum
of $15,000.00, immediately.
Details of the money order:
1. Payment of unpaid rent reduced to jurisdictional limit 21 June 2024 to 13
March 2025 $15,000.00
Note: Failure to pay the money owed, can result in this certified money order,
being registered by the person owed the money, in
the Local or District Court to
enforce the debt. This may result in additional costs and interest being added
to the amount payable.
6 The Rental Bond Board is directed to pay the applicant Azmin Zhang, Apartment
803 Level 8 - 32-34 LEVEY STREET Street WOLLI CREEK
NSW 2205, the whole bond
plus interest of Rental Bond Number U019036-3.
7 These orders are made in these proceedings and related proceedings
2025/00009292.
18 March 2025, the Tribunal at first instance gave written reasons for its
Appellant lodged his notice of appeal on 27 March 2025. The Respondent lodged
his reply to appeal on 3 April 2025.
Appellant applied for a stay of orders 1−6 made by the Tribunal at first
instance. The Appeal Panel (constituted by Principal
Member D A C Robertson)
denied the stay application on 9 April 2025.
Appellant appeared for himself at the appeal hearing. Mr Tao Chen appeared for
the Respondent. Mr Chen claimed to represent the
Respondent in his capacity as
the Respondent’s agent. The Appeal Panel was informed during the hearing
that the Appellant had
already vacated the Leased Premises.
the appeal hearing, the Appellant said he was unwell. He then requested an order
for the appeal be determined on the papers. Mr
Chen consented to this
Appeal Panel was satisfied that the issues for determination could be adequately
determined without oral submissions from the
parties by considering the written
submissions and other material lodged with or provided to the Appeal Panel. As a
result, the Appeal
Panel made an order on 16 July 2025 for the Panel to
determine the appeal on the papers without further oral submissions.
Appellant indicated at the hearing that he had been unable to access documents
lodged by the Respondent with the Tribunal on 27
May 2025 using his email until
the day before the hearing. He said he had not received hard copies of the
documents. Mr Chen said
the Respondent had attempted to serve the documents, but
that the documents could not be delivered to the address provided by the
Appellant. As the Appeal Panel had decided the appeal could proceed on the
papers, the Panel also made orders on 16 July 2025 to
allow the Appellant to
lodge written submissions about the Respondent’s documents. The orders
also allowed the Respondent to
lodge submissions in
Respondent’s representative in appeal
dealing with the merits of the appeal, it is first necessary to address an issue
concerning the Respondent’s representative
for the appeal.
mentioned above, Mr Chen appeared at the appeal hearing as the representative
for the Respondent. Mr Chen also appeared, with the
leave of the Tribunal at
first instance, as the Respondent’s representative in the proceedings
before the Tribunal despite
the Appellant’s objection. The Appellant
contends that the Tribunal was wrong to grant leave. During the brief appeal
the Appellant also seemed to object to Mr Chen appearing for the
Respondent in the appeal.
45(1) of the NCAT Act provides that a party to proceedings in the
(1) has the carriage of the party’s own case and is not entitled to be
represented by any person; and
(2) may be represented by another person only if the Tribunal grants leave:
(a) for that person to represent the party; or
(b) in the case of representation by an Australian legal practitioner—for
a particular or any Australian legal practitioner
to represent the party.
45(2) of the NCAT Act provides that a party to an internal appeal does not
require the leave of the Appeal Panel to be represented
in the appeal if the
person was entitled to be represented by such a person without the leave of
Tribunal in the proceedings in which
the decision under appeal was made.
to limited exceptions that are not presently relevant, a party to proceedings in
the Consumer and Commercial Division is not
entitled to be represented without
leave by another person:
Boreland v Brewis
[2024] NSWCATAP 140
The proceedings before the Tribunal at first instance were in the Consumer and
Commercial Division. Consequently, Mr Chen also requires
leave to represent the
Respondent in the appeal.
is unclear from the interlocutory material before the Appeal Panel whether Mr
Chen previously sought or was granted leave to represent
the Respondent in the
appeal. Mr Chen did not seek leave during the hearing before us. However, the
Appeal Panel does not consider
this significant because of the brevity of the
36(1) of the NCAT Act states that the guiding principle for the Act and the
procedural rules, in their application to proceedings
in the Tribunal, is to
facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings. In a similar vein,
s 38(4) requires the Tribunal to act with as
little formality as the circumstances of the case permit and according to
equity, good
conscience and the substantial merits of the case without regard to
technicalities or legal forms.
Appellant sought, and obtained, an order for the appeal to be determined on the
papers with the consent of Mr Chen. These papers
include material that was
lodged by Mr Chen for the Respondent, including written submissions made on
behalf of the Respondent. The
reply to appeal makes it clear that Mr Chen was
purporting to represent the Respondent. That Mr Chen did so is understandable
he was granted leave to represent the Respondent in the proceedings
before the Tribunal at first instance.
determination of the appeal on the papers would not be possible if Mr Chen were
not permitted to represent the Respondent. Consequently,
the Appellant’s
request for the appeal to be determined on the papers necessarily implies that
the Appellant acknowledges that
Mr Chen is authorised to represent the
Respondent in the appeal. However, it would be inappropriate to treat it as an
acknowledgment
that the Tribunal correctly decided to grant leave initially
because that decision is under appeal.
this context and having regard to the guiding principle and s 38(4) of the NCAT
Act, the Appeal Panel considers that Mr Chen
should be permitted to continue to
represent the Respondent in the appeal. If leave to represent the Respondent is
technically required
under s 45(1), leave should be granted. A grant of leave is
consistent with the usual practice of the Tribunal sitting in the Consumer
Commercial Division to grant leave for a managing agent of leased residential
premises to represent the landlord
: NCAT Consumer and Commercial Division
Guideline—Representation
(August 2019) (CCD Representation Guideline)
at para [10(j)].
Statutory context
Obligations concerning payment of rent
33(1) of the RT Act provides that a tenant under a residential tenancy agreement
must pay the rent under the agreement on
or before the day set out in the
agreement. A contractual obligation to pay rent is also imposed by cl 3 of the
Tenancy Agreement.
88 of the RT Act makes provision as follows for the giving of termination
notices for the non-payment of rent:
Termination notices for non-payment of rent or
(1) A termination notice given by a landlord on the ground of a breach of
the residential tenancy agreement arising solely from
a failure to pay—
(a) rent, or
(b) water usage charges, or
(c) charges for the supply of electricity, gas or oil (
payable by the tenant (a
non-payment termination notice
no effect unless the rent has, or the water usage charges or utility charges
have, remained unpaid in breach of the agreement
for not less than 14 days
before the non-payment termination notice is given.
(2) A non-payment termination notice is not ineffective merely because of
any failure of the landlord or the landlord’s agent
to make a prior formal
demand for payment of the rent, water usage charges or utility charges.
(3) A non-payment termination notice must inform the tenant that the
tenant is not required to vacate the residential premises if
the tenant pays all
the rent, water usage charges or utility charges owing or enters into, and fully
complies with, a repayment plan
agreed with the landlord, unless the Tribunal
makes a termination order on the basis that the tenant has frequently failed to
rent, water usage charges or utility charges on time.
(4) Despite any other provision of this Part, a landlord may apply to the
Tribunal for a termination order before the termination
date specified in a
non-payment termination notice. The Tribunal must not consider any such
application until after the termination
89 of the RT Act makes provision as follows concerning the Tribunal making a
termination order after a termination notice
for the non-payment of rent has
been given:
Repayment of rent and charges owing following issue of non-payment
termination notice
(1) This section applies if a landlord gives a tenant a non-payment
termination notice.
(2) The Tribunal must not make a termination order on the ground set out
in the notice if the tenant pays all the rent, water usage
charges or charges
for the supply of electricity, gas or oil (
utility charges
or enters into, and fully complies with, a repayment plan agreed with the
(3) A termination of the residential tenancy agreement solely on the
ground of non-payment of rent, water usage charges or utility
charges, and any
warrant for possession issued as a result of any order for possession, cease to
have effect if the tenant pays all
the rent, water usage charges or utility
charges owing or enters into, and fully complies with, a repayment plan agreed
landlord and the tenant has not vacated the residential premises.
(4) If a tenant repays all the rent, water usage charges or utility
charges owing or enters into, and fully complies with, a repayment
plan agreed
with the landlord, the landlord must notify—
(a) the Tribunal, if the landlord has applied to the Tribunal for a
termination order on the ground of non-payment of rent, water
usage charges or
utility charges and the application has not been finally dealt with, or
(b) the Sheriff, if a termination order has been made and a warrant
for possession of the residential premises has been issued but
has not been
enforced by the Sheriff.
Maximum penalty—20 penalty units.
(5) The Tribunal may, on application by a landlord, make a termination
order despite subsection (2) or (3) if it is satisfied that
the tenant has
frequently failed to pay either or both of the following amounts owing to the
landlord for the residential premises—
(a) rent, on or before the day set out in the residential tenancy
(b) water usage charges in accordance with section 39.
(5A) The Tribunal may make a termination order under subsection (5) on the
grounds set out in subsection (5)(b) only if the landlord
has, on each relevant
occasion, requested payment from the tenant within 3 months of the issue of the
bill for those charges by the
water supply authority.
(6) If the Tribunal makes a termination order as referred to in subsection
(5), a warrant for possession may be issued as a result
of that order, even if
the tenant has paid all rent, water usage charges or utility charges owing or
complied with a repayment plan.
19 May 2025, the law concerning the giving of termination notices changed
because of amendments made by Sch 1 to the
Residential Tenancies Amendment
(NSW) (the residential tenancy reforms). The Termination Notice was
given before this date. Clause 2 of Sch 2 to the RT Act requires
the Tribunal to
apply the law in force at the time a termination notice was given to the extent
the law has changed since the notice
was given: RT Act, Sch 2, cl 36. However,
neither s 88 nor 89 were amended by the residential tenancy reforms.
114 of the RT Act enables the Tribunal to suspend the operation of a termination
order it makes and to impose an obligation
on a tenant to pay a specified
occupation fee for the period for which the order for possession is suspended.
In addition, s 123(1)
provides that a tenant who fails to comply with an order
for possession of the Tribunal is liable to pay an occupation fee to the
landlord for the period the tenant remains in possession of the residential
premises after the date the tenant is required to vacate
Obligations concerning habitable premises and
52(1) of the RT Act provides that a landlord under a residential tenancy
agreement must provide the residential premises in
a reasonable state of
cleanliness and fit for habitation by the tenant. Section 52(4) provides that
this obligation is a term of
every residential tenancy agreement.
63(1) of the RT Act provides that a landlord under a residential tenancy
agreement must provide and maintain the residential
premises in a reasonable
state of repair, having regard to the age of, rent payable for and prospective
life of the premises. Section
63(4) also provides that this obligation is a term
of every residential tenancy agreement.
Remedies and
Tribunal’s jurisdictional limits
RT Act provides for various remedies concerning non-compliance with obligations
under the RT Act.
43(1) of the RT Act enables a tenant to make a written request to the landlord
at any time for a reduction in rent if the
landlord reduces or withdraws any
goods, services or facilities provided with the residential premises.
44(1)(b) of the RT Act enables the Tribunal, on the application of a tenant, to
make an order that rent payable under an existing
or proposed residential
tenancy agreement is excessive, having regard to the reduction or withdrawal by
the landlord of any goods,
services or facilities provided with the residential
premises and that, from a specified day, the rent for residential premises must
not exceed a specified amount.
65(1) of the RT Act also enables the Tribunal, on the application of a tenant,
to make any of the following orders concerning
(1) an order that the landlord carry out specified repairs;
(2) an order that the landlord reimburse the tenant an amount for urgent repairs
carried out by the tenant;
(3) an order that the landlord reimburse the tenant an amount for repairs to a
smoke alarm carried out by the tenant under section
s 187(1)(d) of the RT Act, when read with s 187(2), enables the Tribunal to make
an order for compensation to be paid for:
(1) loss of rent; or
(2) any other breach of a residential tenancy agreement; or
(3) loss or damage suffered by a person as a result of inaccurate, ambiguous or
out-of-date information being listed about the person
on a residential tenancy
s 187(4)(a) of the RT Act prevents the Tribunal from making an order for an
amount that exceeds the amount (if any) prescribed
by the regulations. Clause 40
Residential Tenancies Regulation 2019
(NSW) (RT Regulation)
provides that the amount prescribed for the purposes of s 187(4)(a)
(1) if the order is with respect to a rental bond—$30,000; or
(2) otherwise—$15,000.
Rental bonds
157 of the RT Act defines a rental bond to mean an amount of money paid or
payable by the tenant or another person as security
against any failure by a
tenant to comply with the terms of a residential tenancy agreement.
159(1) of the RT Act provides that a landlord, landlord’s agent or any
other person must not require or receive from
a tenant or another person a
rental bond of an amount exceeding 4 weeks rent under the residential tenancy
agreement for which the
bond was paid (as in force when the agreement was
entered into). Section 159(4) provides that a person who contravenes s 259
an offence attracting a maximum penalty of 20 penalty units. A penalty
unit is equivalent to $110:
Interpretation Act 1987
4 (definition of “penalty unit”);
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
The maximum penalty for the offence in dollar terms is
therefore $2,200.
160 of the RT Act makes it an offence for a landlord, landlord’s agent or
any other person to require or receive from
a tenant or another person anything
other than a rental bond as security for any failure by a tenant to comply with
the terms of
a residential tenancy agreement. The maximum penalty for the
offence is 20 penalty units ($2,200).
162(1) of the RT Act provides that a landlord, landlord’s agent or other
person who receives an amount of rental bond
must deposit that amount with the
Secretary within the deposit period together with a notice in the approved form.
The Secretary
is defined to mean the Commissioner for Fair Trading or, if no
person is employed in that office, the Secretary of the Department
of Customer
Service: RT Act, s 3(1) (definitions of “Secretary” and
“Department”). The deposit period is
10 business days after the bond
is paid or such other period as may be prescribed by the regulations: RT Act, s
162(3). No other
period has been prescribed by the RT Regulation. A person who
contravenes s 162 also commits an offence attracting a maximum penalty
penalty units ($2,200): RT Act, s 162(5).
should be noted that ss 159, 160 and 162 do not expressly make the obligations
imposed by them terms of a residential tenancy agreement.
This contrasts with
the obligations imposed by ss 52 and 63 of the RT Act mentioned above.
is true that the Tenancy Agreement (which is based on the standard form from 28
September 2020 prescribed by the RT Regulation)
contains provisions concerning
the rental bond.
section at the beginning of the Tenancy Agreement (the Rental Bond Clause)
states the following:
Rental bond
Cross out if there is not going to be a bond
A rental bond of $5,600 must be paid by the tenant on signing this agreement.
The amount of the rental bond must not be more than
4 weeks rent.
The tenant provided the rental bond amount to—
■ the landlord or another person, or
□ the landlord’s agent, or
□ NSW Fair Trading through Rental Bonds Online.
All rental bonds must be lodged with NSW Fair Trading. If the bond is paid to
the landlord or another person, it must be deposited
within 10 business days
after it is paid using the Fair Trading approved form. If the bond is paid to
the landlord’s agent,
it must be deposited within 10 business days after
the end of the month in which it is paid.
41 of the Agreement also imposes an obligation on the landlord to provide
certain information to the tenant if the landlord
or the landlord’s agent
applies to the Rental Bond Board or the Tribunal for payment of the whole or
part of the rental bond.
Nevertheless,
the Rental Bond Clause should not be read as imposing a separate contractual
obligation on the landlord to deposit a
rental bond within 10 business days
after it is paid. The reference to the 10-day period is contained in a note
rather than in the
substantive provisions of the Agreement like cl 41. The note
merely provides information about the obligation imposed on a landlord
Act. The obligation is therefore statutory rather than contractual.
163(3) of the RT Act provides that a claim for the payment of a rental bond must
not be made before the termination of a residential
tenancy agreement
(1) it is made jointly by or on behalf of the landlord and all the tenants;
(2) it is made by or on behalf of the landlord and directs that the rental bond
be paid to all the tenants; or
(3) it is made by or on behalf of all the tenants and directs that the rental
bond be paid to the landlord.
167 sets out the circumstances in which the Secretary must pay the amount of a
claim for rental bond where there is no dispute
circumstances are if—
(1) the claim is made jointly by or on behalf of the landlord and tenant; or
(2) the claim is made by or on behalf of the landlord and directs the payment of
an amount to the tenant; or
(3) the claim is made by or on behalf of a tenant and directs the payment of an
amount to the landlord; or
(4) the claim is made by or on behalf of the landlord or the tenant for payment
to the party by or on whose behalf the claim is made
and the Tribunal or another
party to the agreement fails to notify the Secretary of a dispute within the
claim notice period.
a claim for the whole or part of a rental bond is made by a landlord or a tenant
without the consent of all the other parties to
a residential tenancy agreement,
s 164 of the RT Act requires the Secretary to give a claim notice to all other
parties concerning
168(2) limits the power to the Secretary to pay a claim that is disputed in the
Tribunal or a court to the following circumstances:
(1) if the party who disputes the claim gives the Secretary written notice of
the party’s consent to payment of the claim;
(2) in accordance with an order of the Tribunal or court;
(3) if any applicable order of the Tribunal or court has been satisfied;
(4) if the proceedings are withdrawn.
166(1) of the RT Act makes it clear that one of these bases for making a rental
bond claim is for any rent or other charges
owing and payable under the
residential tenancy agreement or the RT Act. However, it is also clear from the
provisions mentioned
above that the ability of a party to a residential tenancy
agreement to lawfully claim amounts from the rental bond is contingent
valid claim being made to, and then paid by, the Secretary.
177 of the RT Act constitutes the Rental Bond Board as a corporation. The Board
holds on trust amounts credited to the Rental
Bond Account: RT Act, s 185(1A).
Rental bonds paid to Secretary under the RT Act must be paid into the Rental
Bond Account: RT Act,
s 185(1)(a). Also, the amount of any rental bond payable
under the RT Act is to be paid out of the Account: RT Act, s
Decision of the Tribunal at first instance
following is a summary of the reasons given by the Tribunal at first instance on
18 April 2025.
Appellant’s objection to Respondent’s
representation
Tribunal granted leave under s 45(1) of the NCAT Act for Mr Chen to represent
the Respondent before the Tribunal despite the Appellant’s
Tribunal noted that it granted leave for the following reasons:
(1) Mr Chen produced an email from the Respondent authorising him to represent
the Respondent.
(2) Mr Chen was the main, if not sole, correspondent with the Appellant, which
is common under landlord agency agreements.
(3) The satisfaction of many of the criteria in s 45 of the NCAT Act and r 32 of
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), read with the CCD
Representation Guideline (which at para [10(j)] specifically refers to the usual
practice of granting leave
to a managing agent of a landlord of residential
(4) Mr Chen had the Respondent’s authority to act, he was fully aware of
the proceedings and able to act and there was no prejudice
that could be
identified in granting leave for Mr Chen to represent the Respondent.
(5) Having regard to the guiding principle in s 36 of the NCAT Act, efficiency
and justice would not be served by adjourning the
proceedings.
Respondent’s Rent Claim
Tribunal noted that the Respondent elected to have the Tribunal determine the
Respondent’s Rent Claim after the Tribunal
informed Mr Chen that the
Tribunal could not award more than $15,000 for rental arrears because of the
operation of 187(1) and (4)(a)
of the RT Act and cl 40(b) of RT Regulation.
Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s evidence that the rent owing was
$26,992 and that the Termination Notice created a right
to an order for
possession. The Tribunal also found the formal requirements for the Termination
Notice under s 88 of the RT Act were
Tribunal rejected the Appellant’s claims for rental credits for
prepayments made for the Short-Term Tenancy Agreement. The
Tribunal found there
was no evidence before it that the Appellant was entitled at the outset of the
Tenancy Agreement to credits
for the rent payable under it. The Tribunal also
found that the Appellant’s own evidence in his SMS message on 12 December
2024 to Mr Chen was an admission that the Appellant was liable to the Landlord
for $8,700 and for $10,100 on the next day.
Tribunal found the rental bond could not be taken into account for the purpose
of the rental arrears in the absence of an agreement
from a landlord to treat it
differently from the tenancy agreement terms requiring security in the form of
the rental bond for a
tenant’s performance obligations. It found the
Appellant’s obligations were continuing and there was no evidence of any
agreement from the Respondent to apply the bond to the arrears that were due and
payable when the termination notice was given and,
as a result, the statutory
and contractual obligations to pay rent and outgoings were breached.
Tribunal also rejected the Appellant’s submission that he had failed to
pay rent after 29 November 2024 because he did not
know who the landlord was.
The Tribunal found that it was not clear how the Appellant could have become
confused on 29 November 2024
This is because the Appellant had been paying rent until that time. The Tribunal
found that the Tenancy Agreement clearly named the Respondent as the landlord
and there was no excuse or justification for the non-payment
Appellant’s Bathroom Claim
Appellant’s claim concerned relocation accommodation costs and the
disrepair of a bathroom in the Rented Premises.
accommodation costs
Tribunal accepted the evidence of the Appellant that in the first week of the
Short-Term Tenancy Agreement he stayed in the Meriton
Suites Zetland with his
family because he was unable to stay in the Rented Premises because of old
mattresses in the premises, clutter
and the need for cleaning. The Appellant
also claimed $300 for the removal of mouldy mattresses from the rental premises.
Ultimately,
the Tribunal found that the payments for the accommodation totalled
$846 based on bank statements provided by the Appellant.
Tribunal noted that the Appellant relied on the High Court decision in
Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Baltic Shipping
) in support
of his claim for compensation for “disappointment and distress”
because of the disrepair of the bathroom.
The amount of compensation sought was
an amount based on one-third of the weekly rent. The Tribunal also noted that
the entitlement
to compensation for “disappointment and distress”
for a breach of contract recognised in
Baltic Shipping
extended to a
breach of a residential tenancy agreement. The Tribunal cited
Young v Chief
Executive Officer (Housing)
(2023) 278 CLR 208
[2023] HCA 31
in support of
this proposition.
Tribunal pointed to ss 43, 44, 52, 63 and 65 of the RT Act concerning the
Appellant’s legal entitlements with respect to
repairs. The Tribunal found
that the Appellant had not brought his claim within the limitation period
applicable for claims under
ss 52 and 63. This left only the claim for rental
abatement under s 44(1)(b) and a work order for repairs under s 65.
Tribunal held that even if the Appellant were permitted to make a claim under ss
52 and 63, the calculation of compensation under
those sections would be the
same as that under s 44(1)(b). The Tribunal held that a work order for repairs
under s 65 would be of
no utility because the Respondent’s entitlement to
have the Tenancy Agreement terminated for non-payment of rent.
Tribunal found that any compensation or rental abatement due to the Appellant
must be mild having regard to the evidence of delays
in notifying the problem to
the Respondent, the paucity of evidence showing flooding, damage and
modification of domestic rearrangements
because only one, and not two, bathrooms
were available.
considering comparative decisions involving claims of compensation and
abatement, the Tribunal considered it appropriate to
award the Tenant a rental
abatement of $2,500 under s 44(1)(b) of the RT Act. The Tribunal said this
recognised that the rent amount
otherwise payable under the Tenancy Agreement
was excessive: (1) by reference to the loss of facility and amenity entailed by
problems with the second bathroom; and (2) by taking into account the
evidence of the Respondent’s disappointment and distress,
period 8 September 2024 to 17 January 2025.
mentioned above, the Tribunal’s findings resulted in the Tribunal awarding
the Respondent $15,000 for unpaid rent because
of its jurisdictional limit even
though it had found that $26,992 was owing.
Tribunal decided that the amount owing to the Appellant for his Bathroom Claim
should be set off against the rental amount owing
of $26,992 rather than the
$15,000 it had jurisdiction to award. The Tribunal held, having regard to what
Griffith AJA said in
Hawkins v Wimbledon 1963 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1465
) at [86]−[87], that there was nothing that prevented the
Tribunal from considering matters which exceed the amount of its jurisdictional
the set off, the Tribunal found that the net amount owed by the Appellant to the
Respondent for unpaid rent was $23,746. However,
because the Tribunal was
that the amount otherwise
owed by the Respondent to the Appellant should not be
recoverable by the Appellant.
orders made by the Tribunal are set out above.
Nature and scope
of internal appeals
80(1) of the NCAT Act allows a party to proceedings in the Tribunal to make an
internal appeal to an Appeal Panel against
an internally appealable decision of
the Tribunal. An internally appealable decision includes a general decision of
the Tribunal:
NCAT Act, s 32(1) and (4). A decision of the Tribunal made under
the RT Act is a general decision: NCAT Act, s 29(1) and (3);
Song v Dickson
[2025] NSWCATAP 208
Song (No 2)
) at [30]. The decisions of
the Tribunal at first instance in issue are therefore internally appealable
Role limited to correcting appealable errors
role of an Appeal Panel when determining an internal appeal is limited to
remedying appealable errors, if there are any, made
by the Tribunal rather than
to reconsider the matter afresh. In
Brahmbhatt v Osorio
[2023] NSWCATAP
, the Appeal Panel noted:
“[It] is not sufficient for an appellant to disagree with the outcome and
to contend that there should have been a different
outcome: an appellant must
demonstrate either that an error was made on a question of law or that there is
a basis upon which leave
to appeal should be granted.”
a consequence, an internal appeal is not simply an opportunity for a losing
party to rerun its case at first instance:
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Appeals against
interlocutory decisions
80(2) of the NCAT Act distinguishes between interlocutory decisions and other
decisions of the Tribunal. Section 80(2)(a)
requires leave (that is, permission)
from the Appeal Panel for an appeal against any interlocutory decision of the
Tribunal. An interlocutory
decision is a preliminary decision of procedural
nature that does not finalise the substantive proceedings: NCAT Act, s 4(1)
(definition
of “interlocutory decision”);
McEwan v Port Stephens
[2022] NSWCATAP 300
–[22]. Leave will not be granted
unless there are substantial reasons for granting it, which usually involves
showing an error
of principle and a risk of substantial injustice if leave is
not granted:
Houda v Seraphim
[2025] NSWCATAP 135
Appeals against decisions other than
interlocutory decisions
appeals against decisions other than interlocutory decisions, s 80(2)(b) draws a
distinction between grounds raising a question
of law (for which no leave is
required) and other grounds (for which leave is required).
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v White
[2025] NSWCATAP 30
) at [21]–[23], the Appeal Panel summarised the relevant
principles concerning the identification of questions of law for the
purposes of
s 80(2)(b) in the following terms:
“21 There are several important cases relevant to the construction of s 80
of the NCAT Act. These were recently referred to
Unique Commercial Group
Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
22 The Appeal Panel there said, inter alia, that:
(1) Absent leave to appeal, the question of law is the subject matter of the
Ferella v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2014] NSWCA 378
Medical Council of New South Wales v Mooney
[2024] NSWCA 180
(2) The question of law should be articulated with precision:
Ferella v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2014] NSWCA 378
Kudrynski v
Orange City Council
[2024] NSWCA 33
Wollondilly Shire Council v Styles
[2024] NSWCATAP 104
(3) A question of law means a pure question of law:
Wilson v Chan &
Naylor Parramatta Ltd atf Chan & Naylor Paramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
(4) A ‘pure question of law’ does not depend on facts not found:
Orr v Cobar Management Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCCA 2020
(5) A mixed question of fact and law is not a question of law:
Bimson, Roads
& Maritime Services v Damorange Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 734
(6) An appeal is ‘on’ any question of law: s 80(2) of the NCAT Act.
The question of law must not be hypothetical or arid:
Liu v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2024] NSWSC 382
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at 353-354;
(7) An appeal is against orders and not reasons:
AZC20 v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Property Investors Alliance Pty Ltd v C88 Project Pty Ltd (in
[2023] NSWCA 291
Kramer v Stone
[2023] NSWCA 270
. Therefore, the question of law must be capable of affecting the orders
the subject of the appeal.
23 Recently in
Donohoe v Albulario
[2025] NSWSC 9
, Basten AJ identified
that when a question of law arises as to whether proceedings were procedurally
fair it may be appropriate and
necessary, on appeal, to make findings about what
occurred at the hearing. His Honour noted at [33] (footnotes omitted):
‘To the extent that there is a fact/law dichotomy, the facts which are not
to be reviewed by the appeal court dealing with
a question of law are the facts
relevant to the matter in dispute. There is a categorical distinction between
the facts in dispute
(what part of the building was completed?) and facts
relating to the composition or conduct of the Tribunal.’
of questions of law that are presently relevant include the following:
(1) Whether there has been a material denial of procedural fairness by the
Tribunal at first instance:
FVA v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2024] NSWCATAP 127
(2) Whether the Tribunal at first instance has applied a wrong legal principle
(as opposed to wrongly applying a correct legal principle):
Unique Commercial
Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Unique Commercial
) at [34(1)].
relation to procedural fairness, a failure by the Tribunal to respond to
substantial, clearly articulated arguments based on established
constitute a denial of procedural fairness:
Unique Commercial Group
[32(4)]. It may also constitute the legal error of constructively failing to
exercise jurisdiction:
Candy Events Pty Ltd v Thrain Pty Ltd t/as Digital
Solutions Group
[2025] NSWCATAP 164
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd
v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
is not necessarily a denial of procedural fairness if the Tribunal provides
guidance to a party concerning the conduct of their
case, particularly if the
party is self-represented. The guidance may extend to substantive matters as
well as procedural matters:
Trkulja v Markovic
[2015] VSCA 298
Section 38(5) of the NCAT Act recognises the appropriateness of the Tribunal
doing so. It provides that the Tribunal is take such
measures as are reasonably
practicable:
(1) to ensure that the parties to the proceedings before it understand the
nature of the proceedings; and
(2) if requested to do so, to explain to the parties any aspect of the procedure
of the Tribunal, or any decision or ruling made
by the Tribunal, that relates to
the proceedings.
the Tribunal must not become the advocate of the self-represented party, and the
presiding member must maintain both the
reality and appearance of neutrality at
all times and to all parties:
Myers v VCAT
[2024] VSCA 206
mentioned in the passage from
quoted above, a question of law must
be pure. This will generally be the case if its answer does not require the
Appeal Panel to
resolve disputed facts:
Damico v Secretary, Department of
Customer Service
[2025] NSWCATAP 109
) at [43]. However, the
requirement for purity will not preclude an Appeal Panel from making necessary
findings of fact if the ground
of appeal is the denial of procedural fairness:
Donohoe v Albulario
[2025] NSWSC 9
requiring leave
an appeal is against a decision of the Tribunal in the Consumer and Commercial
Division (such as this appeal) on a ground requiring
appeal, cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act provides that an Appeal
Panel may grant leave to appeal only if it is satisfied
that the appellant may
have suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice because:
(1) the decision under appeal was not fair and equitable (see cl 12(1)(a));
(2) the decision under appeal was against the weight of evidence (see cl
12(1)(b)); or
(3) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not
reasonably available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt
with) (see cl 12(1)(c)).
12(1) requires the Appeal Panel to be satisfied that the
appellant “may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of
because of one of the circumstances mentioned in
cl 12(1)(a), (b) or (c). There is a substantial miscarriage of
justice if there
is a “significant
possibility” or “chance which was fairly
open” that a different and more favourable result
have been achieved for the appellant had the relevant circumstance
mentioned in cl 12(1)(a) or (b) not occurred or if the fresh
evidence under
12(1)(c) had been before the Tribunal at first instance:
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Appeal Panel in
at [77(1)] said that, without being
exhaustive, a decision of the Tribunal will not be fair and equitable if there
has been a denial
of procedural fairness. However, what constitutes unfairness
and inequity is not limited to circumstances where there has been a
procedural fairness. It may include circumstances where the decision, or the
decision-making process, of the Tribunal might
reasonably be considered to
result in unfairness and inequity to one or more of the parties:
[2025] NSWCATAP 163
decision will be against the weight of evidence if ”the evidence in
its totality preponderates so strongly against the conclusion
found by the
tribunal at first instance that it can be said that the conclusion was not one
that a reasonable tribunal member could
at [77](2).
substantial miscarriage of justice merely enlivens the discretion to grant leave
to appeal; it is still necessary for an Appeal
Panel to decide whether it is
appropriate to grant leave:
Bark N Purr Pets Pty Ltd v Moussad
NSWCATAP 201
. The relevant principles for deciding whether to grant
leave were summarised in
at [84] as follows:
“84 The general principles derived from these cases can be summarised as
(1) In order to be granted leave to appeal, the applicant must demonstrate
something more than that the primary decision maker was
arguably wrong in the
conclusion arrived at or that there was a bona fide challenge to an issue of
BHP Billiton Ltd v Dunning
[2013] NSWCA 421
the authorities cited there,
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
(2) Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal only in matters that
(a) issues of principle;
(b) questions of public importance or matters of administration or policy which
might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of going beyond merely
what is arguable, or an error that is plain and readily
apparent which is
central to the Tribunal’s decision and not merely peripheral, so that it
would be unjust to allow the finding
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and clearly mistaken;
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact finding process in such an
unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to produce
result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
BHP Billiton Ltd v Dunning
[2013] NSWCA 421
authorities cited there,
[2013] NSWSC 253
[9] and the authorities cited there,
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
There must be utility to appeal
Ultimately,
an internal appeal must be of utility regardless of whether it is brought as of
right or requires leave:
Song (No 2)
at [41]. An appeal that raises a
question of law should, if upheld, be capable of affecting the orders at first
instance in a meaningful
Narraport Woollahra Holdings Pty Ltd v Ice Box
Liquor Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATAP 240
. Its determination must also
serve a practical purpose:
The Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
Force v Parish
[2025] NSWCATAP 180
Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP 139
. Where leave to
appeal is required, there must similarly be utility in granting leave:
v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWCATAP 158
Determination of appeal
81(1) of the NCAT Act provides that an Appeal Panel may determine an internal
appeal by making such orders as it considers
appropriate in light of its
decision on the appeal, including (but not limited to) orders that provide for
any one or more of the
(1) the appeal to be allowed or dismissed;
(2) the decision under appeal to be confirmed, affirmed or varied;
(3) the decision under appeal to be quashed or set aside;
(4) the decision under appeal to be quashed or set aside and for
another decision to be substituted for it;
(5) the whole or any part of the case to be reconsidered by the
Tribunal, either with or without further evidence, in accordance
directions of the Appeal Panel.
Appeal Panel may, when confirming, affirming or varying, or making a
decision in substitution for, a decision under appeal, exercise
the functions that are conferred or imposed by the NCAT Act or other legislation
on the Tribunal at first instance and may exercise
those functions on grounds
other than those relied on at first instance: NCAT Act, s
Material before Appeal Panel
Appeal Panel has had regard to the following material in determining the
(1) The orders made by the Tribunal at first instance determining the
Respondent’s Rent Claim and the Appellant’s Bathroom
(2) The reasons given by the Tribunal for its orders which were summarised
(3) The notice of appeal lodged by the Appellant and the submissions and other
documents annexed to the notice.
(4) The reply to appeal lodged by the Respondent and the documents annexed to
(5) The bundle of documents lodged by the Appellant marked as received by the
Appeal Registry on 27 March 2024 (Appellant’s
Document Bundle)
(6) The bundle of documents lodged by the Respondent (including written
submissions) marked as received by the Appeal Registry on
27 May 2025
(Respondent’s Document Bundle). This is the bundle of documents about
which the Appellant was permitted to make
written submissions after the hearing
by the orders made by the Appeal Panel on 16 July 2025.
(7) The interlocutory orders and directions concerning the appeal made by the
differently constituted Appeal Panel.
addition, the Appeal Panel has had regard to the written submissions of the
Appellant dated 25 July 2025 that were lodged after
the hearing pursuant to the
orders made by the Appeal Panel on 16 July 2025. The Respondent also lodged a
bundle of documents marked
as received by the Appeal Registry on 5 September
2025. This bundle of documents appears to be the same bundle of documents as the
Respondent’s Document Bundle mentioned
Appellant’s case
Panels take a benevolent approach to discerning appeal grounds for
self-represented appellants in internal appeals. The Appeal
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
gave the following explanation for this
“It may be difficult for self-represented appellants to clearly express
their grounds of appeal. In such circumstances and
having regard to the guiding
principle, it is appropriate for the Appeal Panel to review an appellant’s
stated grounds of appeal,
the material provided, and the decision of the
Tribunal at first instance to examine whether it is possible to discern grounds
may either raise a question of law or a basis for leave to appeal. The
Appeal Panel has taken such an approach in a number of cases,
Khan v Kang
[2014] NSWCATAP 48
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP
However, this must be balanced against the obligation to act fairly and
impartially (
Bauskis v Liew
[2013] NSWCA 297
Hamod v State of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 367
). Relevantly, s 38(2) provides that that Tribunal ’may
inquire into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks
subject to the rules of natural justice’.”
the Appellant is self-represented, it is appropriate to adopt this benevolent
approach to his appeal grounds. However, this is
subject to the caveat that
appeal grounds discerned by an Appeal Panel must be reasonably discernible from
the material before it
rather than the result of an artificial construct imposed
on the material by the Panel:
starting point for discerning the appeal grounds is the Appellant’s notice
the notice of appeal, the Appellant seeks to have the Appeal Panel set aside the
orders 1−6 made the Tribunal at first instance
on 13 March 2025 (which
were set out earlier) and for the Appeal Panel to uphold the Agreement until the
18 July 2025. The Appellant
also asks the Appeal Panel to put a payment plan be
put in place with compensation. Finally, the Appellant asks for a fine to be
imposed on Mr Chen under s 71 of the NCAT Act.
support of these remedies, the Appellant makes the following claims in the
notice of appeal:
(1) The Respondent did not pay the rental bond to the Rental Bond Board until
approximately 6 months after the Appellant moved into
the Rented Premises. This
was in contravention of the Tenancy Agreement which required payment within 10
days. Order 6 made by the
Tribunal directs the Board to pay the whole bond back
plus interest to the Respondent. However, the Tribunal and the Appellant were
not informed that the bond was released to the Respondent in January 2025 before
the hearing by the Tribunal.
(2) The Termination Notice was defective because the Appellant was not 14 days
overdue in rent. Therefore, the Tribunal did not have
order terminating the Tenancy Agreement. The Appellant says the Tribunal did not
take into account the agreement
and discussion between the Respondent and the
Appellant regarding the rental bond being used as rent. The Appellant also says
the Tribunal should have taken into account that the rental bond was not
lodged until after the Termination Notice had been given.
(3) The Tribunal did not explain how it worked out the Appellant’s
compensation for the 17 weeks of not being able to use the
main bathroom toilet
and shower due to plumbing issues. The Appellant says the Tribunal did not take
into consideration the verbal
evidence, texts and pictures provided by phone he
gave concerning the Appellant not being able to move into the Rented Premises,
the removal of mattresses and rubbish and having to reside at the Meriton Suites
until being able to move in on 7 June 2024.
addition, the Appellant seeks leave to appeal in the notice of appeal against
the decisions of the Tribunal at first instance on
the following bases having
regard to the bases for granting leave stated in cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT
Decision not fair and equitable
The Tribunal did
not consider whether Mr Chen was the landlord, the landlord’s agent or a
family friend.
Mr Chen did not
comply with the orders of the Tribunal concerning the presentation of evidence.
In addition, the Tribunal allowed
Mr Chen to adduce new evidence when the
Appellant was denied that opportunity.
Mr Chen speaks
fluent English and the use of an interpreter “resulted in unsatisfactory
proceedings”.
The Tribunal
gave Mr Chen legal advice and suggestions.
Mr Chen made
false statements to the Tribunal, which is an offence under s 71 of the NCAT Act
Crimes Act 1900
The Tribunal
failed to exercise due diligence and care because it did not read and give
correct weight to the Appellant’s evidence,
particularly in relation to
whether the rental bond had been deposited within the timeframe required by the
The Tribunal
misinterpreted the Termination Notice and whether the Appellant was in arrears
with his rent.
The Tribunal
erred in the way it calculated the amount of monetary compensation concerning
the bathroom disrepair.
The order of the
Tribunal requiring the Appellant to pay $15,000 for unpaid rent was harsh,
unjust and unreasonable and “unsatisfactory
professional”.
Decision against weight of evidence
The Tribunal
should have given weight to the Respondent not lodging the rental bond within
the period required by the Tenancy Agreement.
The Tribunal
should have taken into account the decision of the High Court in
for the 17 weeks of non-use of the bathroom.
The Tribunal
should have taken into account the evidence presented by the Appellant that the
parties agreed that the rental bond should
be applied for rental
Significant new evidence
The Appellant
indicated he was seeking evidence from the Rental Bond Board that the Respondent
had not deposited the rental bond until
around 23 January 2025 with the result
that the Tribunal had been misled.
This evidence
would be new evidence because it was not known by the Tribunal and the Appellant
at the time of the hearing.
discerning the appeal grounds, it also important to have regard to the
Appellant’s written submissions (both initially and
in response to the
orders the Appeal Panel made on 16 July 2025). These submissions (which both
restate and add to what was included
in the notice of appeal) may be summarised
as follows:
(1) The Appellant accuses Mr Chen of willingly and knowingly giving false and
misleading evidence.
(2) The Appellant contends that he made offers of settlement to Mr Chen to pay
off any rent allegedly owning for the leased permits
which were rejected by Mr
(3) The Rental Bond Board has refused to give him documentation and records
(4) The rental bond was deposited 6-months late.
(5) The Appellant and his family would have moved out of the Rented Premises
immediately if he had been told that the bond had been
released to the
Respondent.
(6) The Appellant claims he gave Mr Chen around $2,400 to move into the Rented
Premises, but entry was denied and he and his family
had to stay at the Meriton
Suites Zetland for the period of two 2 weeks. He submits that he should have
been refunded that amount
by the Tribunal.
(7) The Appellant submits that he should have been awarded compensation
calculated by reference to the sum of 1/3 of the weekly rent
for the non-use of
the bathroom for a period of around 7 months from his memory.
(8) The Appellant says he should be awarded compensation for: (1) the
unsatisfactory professional conduct and lack of due diligence
and care by the
member constituting the Tribunal at first instance; (2) the wrongful conduct of
the Rental Bond Board concerning
the release of the rental bond; and (3) the
unlawful conduct of Mr Chen.
(9) The Tribunal was wrong to allow Mr Chen to give evidence using an
interpreter because he could speak English.
regard to the notice of appeal and the Appellant’s written submissions and
taking the benevolent approach to the discernment
of the appeal grounds
mentioned above, the following appeal grounds (which have been the bolded labels
below for ease of reference)
can reasonably be discerned from this
Respondent’s Agent Ground
This ground is comprised of the following contentions:
Mr Chen was
wrongly permitted to represent the Respondent.
The identity of
the landlord was not properly determined by the Tribunal.
Mr Chen gave
false and misleading evidence for which he should be fined by the Appeal
Invalid Termination Notice Ground
This ground is that the Termination Notice was invalid because the Appellant
was not in arrears with his rent and, consequently, the
Tribunal had no
Rental Bond Ground
This ground is comprised of the following contentions:
The Respondent
did not pay the rental deposit to the Secretary within the mandated period.
The Respondent
accessed the rental deposit before the hearing by the Tribunal at first instance
and the Tribunal was therefore misled
releasing to the bond to the Respondent.
The Tribunal
should have considered whether there was an agreement between the parties for
the rental bond to be applied to payment
Procedural Unfairness Ground
This ground is comprised of the following contentions:
The Tribunal
showed partiality by giving Mr Chen legal advice and suggestions and by allowing
him to adduce evidence while refusing
to allow the Appellant to do so.
The Tribunal
should not have allowed Mr Chen to use an interpreter because Mr Chen could
speak English.
Compensation Calculation Ground
This ground is comprised of the following contentions:
The Tribunal
Baltic Shipping
when deciding the amount of compensation for
“disappointment and distress” for the Appellant’s Bathroom
The Tribunal
should have ordered an amount of $2,400 for his alternative accommodation costs
at the Meriton Suites.
Improper Conduct Compensation
This ground seeks compensation from the Appeal Panel for the alleged
misconduct of the Tribunal, the Rental Bond Board and Mr Chen.
it should be noted that the notice of appeal refers only to the case number for
the Respondent’s Rental Claim. However,
it is clear from the notice of
appeal and the Appellant’s written submissions that he also seeks to
appeal against the Tribunal’s
decision concerning the Appellant’s
Bathroom Claim.
noted earlier, s 38(4) of the NCAT Act provides for the Tribunal to act with as
little formality as the circumstances of the case
permit and according to
equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case without regard to
technicalities or legal
forms. With this in mind, it is appropriate for the
Appeal Panel to treat the appeal as an appeal against the Tribunal’s
concerning both the Respondent’s Rental Claim and the
Appellant’s Bathroom Claim.
Respondent’s
following is a summary of the Respondent’s response to the appeal having
regard to both his reply to appeal and written
submissions:
(1) The Appellant’s last rent payment was on 29 November 2024. The
Appellant admitted in a SMS text message that he owed the
Respondent $10,100.
(2) The Respondent rejects the Appellant’s claim that the rental bond was
improperly paid to the Respondent on 23 January 2025.
This is because the
Appellant did not object to the payment when he was contacted about it by the
Rental Bond Board.
(3) The Respondent only found out that the bond had been refunded when it sought
to act on the Tribunal’s order for the bond
to be paid to the
Respondent.
(4) The Appellant should not be granted leave to appeal because the Appellant
was seeking in effect to live in the Rented Premises
rent-free. Also, the case
has imposed a devastating financial strain on the Respondent as well and having
a considerable emotional
Consequences of failure to lodge relevant material
turning to the appeal grounds that have been discerned, it is necessary to say
something more about the limits of the material
before the Appeal Panel.
Appeal Panel (constituted by Principal Member D A C Robertson) made standard
orders on 9 April 2025 concerning the lodgement of
material with the Appeal
Panel for the determination of the appeal. The standard orders direct each party
to an appeal to lodge:
(1) the evidence given to the Tribunal at first instance (and any new evidence
for which leave is sought) on which the party intends
to rely; and
(2) the party’s written submissions; and
(3) if the party seeks to rely on what happened during the hearing before the
Tribunal at first instance—a typed transcript
of the relevant parts of the
hearing before the Tribunal at first instance on which the party intends to rely
in the appeal (along
with a copy of the sound recording of the entire hearing).
importance of a party complying with these standard orders cannot be gainsaid.
The self-evident purpose of the standard orders
is to require a party to
identify the evidence, parts of the hearing and submissions on which they rely
in support of their case.
This necessarily implies that it is not the role of
the Appeal Panel to make the party’s case by seeking out this material
mentioned above, the material before the Appeal Panel includes the
Appellant’s and Respondent’s Document Bundles, along
written submissions. However, the Appeal Panel has not been provided with a
transcript or sound recording of the hearing
before the Tribunal at first
appellant must establish the grounds for an appeal against a decision of the
Tribunal. As a result, if what happened during the
hearing before the Tribunal
is relevant to those grounds, the appellant bears the consequences of failing to
provide a transcript
or sound recording of the hearing:
Rushton v St George
Community Housing Limited
[2025] NSWCATAP 222
. As discussed below,
aspects of the Appellant’s case rely on what he claims happened during the
hearing before the Tribunal
at first instance. The absence of a transcript or
recording means that the Appeal Panel is unable to determine what happened
the hearing unless it is mentioned in the Tribunal’s
Consideration of appeal grounds
this in mind, the appeal grounds can now be
considered.
Respondent’s Agent Ground
decision of the Tribunal concerning whether to allow a person to represent a
party in proceedings before it is an interlocutory
decision: NCAT Act, s 4(1)
(para (h1), definition of “interlocutory decision”). Consequently, s
80(2)(a) of the NCAT
Act requires the leave of the Appeal Panel for an appeal
against the decision and there must be substantial reasons to justify granting
leave. As mentioned above, this usually requires an appellant to show that there
is an error of principle and a risk of substantial
injustice if leave is not
Appeal Panel sees no substantial basis for granting leave for the Appellant to
appeal against the Tribunal’s decision to
allow Mr Chen to represent the
Respondent. As the Tribunal noted, the evidence quite clearly shows that the
Appellant dealt with
Mr Chen as the Respondent’s agent over a considerable
period concerning issues with the Rented Premises. Moreover, the Tribunal
provided with written authorisation from the Respondent. The granting of leave
was also consistent with the usual practice of
the Consumer and Commercial
Division as stated in the CCD Representation Guideline.
Appeal Panel also rejects the Appellant’s claim that he did not know the
identity of the landlord of the Rented Premises.
It is clear from the terms of
the Tenancy Agreement, which the Appellant signed, that the Respondent (and not
Mr Chen) is named as
the landlord. The fact that the Appellant dealt principally
with Mr Chen rather than with the Respondent does not mean that the Respondent
was not the landlord under the Agreement.
mentioned above, the Appellant again suggested at the appeal hearing that Mr
Chen should not appear for the Respondent. The Appellant
claimed that Mr Chen
kept changing his first name and that it was now “Tao”. Mr
Chen’s response was that he sometimes
used an anglicised version of his
first name to assist him in his dealings as a real estate agent. There is no
evidence to cast doubt
on what Mr Chen claims.
it should be noted that the Appellant also accuses Mr Chen of contravening s 71
of the NCAT Act by giving false or misleading
evidence to the Tribunal and asks
the Appeal Panel to impose a fine. Apart from there be no cogent evidence for
this accusation,
the Appeal Panel does not have jurisdiction to impose a fine.
Proceedings for an offence against s 71 must be brought in the Local
any penalty for the offence may only be imposed by that Court: NCAT Act, s
to appeal on this ground is refused.
Invalid Termination Notice
Ground and Rental Bond Ground
two grounds should be dealt with together because they both raise whether the
Appellant was relevantly in arrears with his rent.
If the Appellant was not
relevantly in arrears at the time the Termination Notice, then the Tribunal at
first instance would have
made an error by making a termination order for the
Tenancy Agreement.
the Appellant was relevantly in arrears raises a factual question rather than a
legal question. Accordingly, leave to appeal
is required to the extent to each
ground raises the issue. To obtain leave, the Appellant must persuade the Appeal
Panel that he
may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice because of
one of the reasons mentioned in cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act
summarised above).
88 and 89 of the RT Act were set out earlier in these reasons. In their
application to the non-payment of rent, the following
provisions from these
sections are particularly relevant to this appeal:
(1) A notice has no effect unless the rent has remained unpaid in breach of the
agreement for not less than 14 days before the non-payment
termination notice is
given: s 88(1).
(2) A notice is not ineffective merely because the landlord or the
landlord’s agent failed to make a prior formal demand for
payment of the
rent: s 88(2).
(3) A notice must inform the tenant that the tenant is not required to vacate
the residential premises if the tenant pays all the
rent, and fully complies
with, a repayment plan agreed with the landlord unless the Tribunal makes a
termination order on the basis
that the tenant has frequently failed to pay rent
on time: s 88(3).
(4) The Tribunal must not make a termination order for the non-payment of rent
if the tenant pays all the rent owing or enters into,
and fully complies with, a
repayment plan agreed with the landlord: s 89(2).
Appellant acknowledged he owed the Respondent rent in the SMS message to Mr Chen
(referred to as Jayden) on 12 December 2024 set
out in the Tribunal’s
reasons. In that message, the Appellant said:
“Good morning Jayden please check your books and all texts up too [sic]
tomorrow 13 December 2024, I am owning [sic] you around
$8,700 in total minus
bond $5,600 equals $3,100. But from tomorrow another $1,400 so technically from
tomorrow it’s $10,100
minus $5,600 bond equals $4,500. Plus the second
bathroom we can’t use from around September as I previously advised you
said try to fix it yourself.,[sic] so please book a time to fix that thank
you Steven [praying hands, dove emojis inserted].”
Chen replied:
“Good morning Steven. Yes. That’s correct. You owing [sic] $8700
total but from tomorrow 13th of December another $1400
is coming.”
accepting that there was an arrangement for the rental bond to be applied to
cover some rental arrears, the Appellant’s
SMS message was an unequivocal
acknowledgment that he owed rent even if the amount of the bond was
subtracted.
the time the Tribunal was asked to make a termination order, the Appellant
sought to argue that he was not in arrears. The Tribunal
was plainly right when
it said in its reasons:
“26 There was no evidence before the Tribunal that the Tenant was entitled
at the outset of the Tenancy Agreement to credits
for the rent payable under it.
The evidence of payments in the 3 weeks prior to the Tenancy Agreement are
consistent with $1,200
per week being paid under the short term agreement. They
do not affect the rent claim the subject of the Landlord’s termination
notice. Even [if] there was a surplus to be taken into account, there was still
a significant rental default which does not affect
the validity of the
termination notice arising from breach of the Tenancy Agreement for non-payment
27 The Tenant’s own evidence in his SMS on 12 December 2024 to the
Landlord’s agent admits he was liable to the Landlord
for $8,700 and for
$10,100 the next day, ignoring the deductions for accommodation and expenses
considered in paragraph 24 above.
These 12 December SMS figures also ignore the
deduction for the bond which the Tenant now makes to this total, for $5,600
the admitted liability to $3,100 or $4,500). The bond, however, cannot
be taken into account for the purpose of the rental arrears
in the absence of
agreement from a landlord to treat it differently from the tenancy agreement
terms which require security in the
form of the rental bond for a tenant’s
performance obligations. Here, the Tenant’s obligations were continuing.
there was no evidence of any agreement from the Landlord to apply the bond
to the arrears which were due and payable when the termination
notice was sent.
The statutory and contractual obligations to pay rent and outgoings were
28 Any which way this evidence is considered, the termination notice from the
Landlord was valid given the breach by the Tenant for
non-payment of rent and
other charges. There were rental arrears of at least $8,700 or $10,100 on the
Tenant’s own numbers,
excluding his self-declared and impermissible
discounts (in the absence of a Tribunal or court order making orders to discount
rent or compensate the Tenant).”
89(2) prevents the Tribunal from making a termination order on the ground set
out in the notice if the tenant pays all the
rent owing or enters into, and
fully complies with, a repayment plan agreed with the landlord.
is clear from the passages from the Tribunal’s reasons quoted above that
the Tribunal did consider whether the rental bond
could be applied to calculate
the amount of rent owing. The Tribunal concluded that the bond could not be
applied in this way. The
Appeal Panel agrees.
rental bond operates as a form of security and can only be released in the
circumstances permitted by the RT Act. This includes
when there has been an
order by the Tribunal or if the tenant consents to its payment to the landlord.
Theoretically, a repayment
plan for the purposes of s 89 of the RT Act could
include an agreement between the parties for the bond to be released to offset
rent owing. However, in the present case there is insufficient evidence about
whether there was a repayment plan, its terms and what
would constitute full
compliance with the plan where the bond was insufficient to cover the arrears.
Instead, it is clear to the
Appeal Panel (as it was to the Tribunal) from the
evidence that the Appellant owed rent and that it had not been fully paid by the
time the Tribunal made its termination order.
release of the rental bond to the Respondent in January 2025 (which the
Respondent concedes in his submissions) does not make
any difference. It simply
means that the order made by the Tribunal for the payment of the bond was
unnecessary to authorise its
release. There would be no utility in setting aside
the Tribunal’s order on this basis. The amount of the rental arrears found
by the Tribunal, less the rental bond, remains owing.
is inappropriate for the Appeal Panel to determine whether (as the Appellant
alleges) the rental bond: (1) was not deposited by
the Respondent within the
statutorily mandated period; or (2) was unlawfully released to the Respondent by
the Rental Bond Board.
noted, the obligation imposed on a landlord to deposit the rental bond is a
statutory obligation rather than a contractual obligation:
see [51] above. A
contravention of this obligation may give rise to an offence. However, the
Tribunal (including an Appeal Panel)
does not have jurisdiction to decide
whether an offence has been committed even if the issue is raised in
proceedings. The function
of deciding whether an offence has been committed is
reposed in the Local Court rather than the Tribunal: RT Act, s 202.
the Appeal Panel cannot determine whether the Rental Bond Board was wrong to
release the rental bond. The role of the Appeal
Panel is limited to remedying
appealable errors made by the Tribunal. Assuming the Appellant is correct about
the release being wrongful,
this would have been an error made by the Board
rather than the Tribunal at first instance. The Board was not a party to the
proceedings
before the Tribunal, and the Tribunal was not asked to make a
finding on the issue.
all these reasons, both appeal grounds should be rejected and leave to appeal is
refused to the extent leave is required.
Procedural Unfairness
mentioned above, a question concerning whether there has been a material denial
of procedural fairness by the Tribunal raises a
question of law for which leave
to appeal is not required.
the absence of a transcript or recording of the hearing before the Tribunal at
first instance, the Appeal Panel is unable to determine
whether the Tribunal
acted with inappropriate partiality in its dealing with Mr Chen as the
Respondent’s agent. There is nothing
in the reasons given by the Tribunal
to suggest that it acted with such partiality. Although the reasons record that
the Tribunal
raised the issue of its jurisdictional limit with the Respondent,
this is consistent with the Tribunal’s duty under s 38(5)(a)
of the NCAT
Act to ensure that the parties to the proceedings before it understand the
nature of the proceedings. It is also consistent
with the Tribunal’s duty
to ensure that it remains within the confines of its jurisdiction:
Hobart Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
(2022) 276 CLR 216
[2022] HCA 16
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 192
and [105(1)].
absence of a transcript or recording also results in the Appeal Panel being
unable to determine whether there is material to support
the Appellant’s
claim that he was denied procedural fairness by not being allowed to adduce new
decision of the Tribunal to allow Mr Chen to use an interpreter was an
interlocutory decision because it was a preliminary decision
of procedural
nature that did not finalise the substantive proceedings. Accordingly, leave is
required to appeal the decision: NCAT
Act, s 80(2)(a). The Appeal Panel cannot
see any substantial reasons to justify granting leave. Even assuming Mr Chen can
speak English,
his English may not be sufficiently proficient to allow him to
participate in complex legal proceedings without some assistance.
The Appellant
has not provided any evidence concerning the issue other than his claims that
his interactions with Mr Chen have been
in English and an inference that he can
speak English from the number of properties he manages.
appeal ground is rejected and leave to appeal is refused to the extent that
leave is required.
Compensation Calculation Ground
Baltic Shipping compensation calculation
relation to the Appellant’s contention that the Tribunal at first instance
wrongly applied
Baltic Shipping
, the Appellant contends:
(1) He and his family suffered disappointment and distress for the period of 8
September 2024 up to and including the 17 January
2025 because of the issues
with a bathroom and is entitled to compensation calculated at 1/3 of the weekly
rent (that is, at rent
reduced to $933.33 per week). He says this equates to a
total sum of $8,733.39.
(2) A senior member of the “Tribunal” (the Appellant’s
emphasis) known previously as the Consumer Trader and Tenancy
(CTTT) expressed
and implied that compensation under
Baltic Shipping
is to be calculated
at 1/3 of the weekly rent.
mentioned above, the application by the Tribunal of a wrong legal principle
rather than the wrong application of the correct legal
principle may give raise
to a question of law for which leave is not required.
Tribunal clearly identified and sought to apply the principle in
. The Appellant concern appears to be with the amount awarded rather
than with a failure to apply the correct principle. The claimed
error of the
Tribunal appears to be a claim that the Tribunal wrongly applied the correct
principle rather than applying the wrong
principle. This, together with factual
issues the claim raises, suggests that leave to appeal is required.
basis for the Appellant’s second contention mentioned above is unclear. If
the Appellant is saying there is a published
precedent of the CTTT on the point,
he has not cited it, and the Appeal Panel cannot locate it. If the Appellant is
saying that this
was the opinion of a former CTTT member expressed to him, then
it is irrelevant. In either case, the contention does not assist the
Panel in determining whether
Baltic Shipping
was wrongly applied by the
Appellant’s first contention is clearer. The Appellant says he should have
been awarded compensation calculated by reference
to a reduction of his weekly
by a third. Instead, the Tribunal found that the amount should be $2,400.
arriving at the amount of $2,400, the Tribunal pointed to the following
“(1) Despite becoming aware of the bathroom issues, the Tenant took
approximately 2 months to bring the issue to a head with
the Landlord on 8
November 2024;
(2) It appears that self-help by the Tenant to some extent relieved the issue
with the bathroom - at least such that requests of
the Landlord were not renewed
until 12 December 2025 when a plumber attended;
(3) A further callout occurred on 17 January 2025 which has apparently resolved
(4) It was in evidence that there was a second bathroom. It is not clear what
the extent of those facilities was and in what way
the sole use of that facility
may have caused disappointment and distress and required reorganisation of
domestic arrangements.”
Tribunal considered compensation should be mild given the delay in reporting the
issues to the Respondent. The Tribunal also had
regard to comparable awards
(with allowances for inflation) as set out in A Anforth el al,
Residential
Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW
(8th ed, Federation Press, 2022) (Anforth)
at [2.63.4] and [2.187.2]—Table of Comparative Verdicts.
Compensation
for loss of the kind recognised in
Baltic Shipping
is a species of
general damages (that is, damages awarded for non-economic loss). As noted in
Anforth at [2.187.5]:
“Damages for non-economic loss, sometimes called general damages, are
assessed on the basis of prevailing general standards
in the community, having
regard to the subjective experience of the innocent party arising out of the
O’Brien v Dunsdon
(1965) 39 ALJR 78
(2010). Thus it is necessary to explore the level of distress,
anxiety, etc arising for the particular applicant concerned in the
light of his
or her particular circumstances and personality.
General damages are usually assessed by reference to comparative verdicts, that
is, by comparison to the sums that other people have
received for similar
breaches. This approach to the assessment of damages is permissible as long as
the comparative verdicts are
used as a guide only and the Tribunal takes into
account the individual circumstances of the case:
Planet Fisheries P/L v La
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
Vulin v Cox
[2005] ACTCA 22.
as the Tribunal recognised, the calculation of general damages of this kind (as
opposed to damages for economic loss) is
not an exercise capable of arithmetic
precision. It is typically a matter of impression informed by common sense:
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
at 195. With this in mind, it is
difficult to see how there could be an inflexible rule (as the Appellant
suggests) that compensation
must be calculated by reference to an abatement of a
third of the weekly rent for the period in question.
Tribunal at first instance went about the task of assessing compensation based
Baltic Shipping
in an entirely orthodox manner having regard to
comparable verdicts and the individualised circumstances of the case before it.
Appellant’s contention that the Tribunal misapplied
is therefore rejected and leave to appeal on this basis should be
refused to the extent leave is required.
Meriton Suites
accommodation calculation
Appellant’s contention concerning his Meriton Suites accommodation costs
essentially raises the question of whether the
Tribunal wrongly calculated the
amount having regard to the facts. It therefore requires leave to appeal.
relation to this claim for compensation, the Tribunal found:
“I accept the evidence of the Tenant that in the first week of the
short-term tenancy preceding the Tenancy Agreement, he stayed
in the Meriton
Suites with his family on the basis that he was unable to stay in the rental
premises because of old mattresses in
the house, clutter and cleaning required.
The claims will be admitted in the amounts appearing on pages 38 and 39 of
Exhibit 1, exercising
a discretion and on the assumption that those pages are
extracts of a bank statement evidencing the payments. Those payments total
Appellant claims that the amount should have been $2,400. He says this is the
amount he gave Mr Chen to move into the Rental Premises
under the Short-Term
Tenancy Agreement for the 2 weeks his family were unable to stay there.
its reasons, the Tribunal found (at [26]) that evidence of payments in the 3
weeks before the Tenancy Agreement were consistent
with $1,200 per week being
paid under the Short-Term Tenancy Agreement. Nevertheless, the appropriate
measure of the Appellant’s
loss concerning the alternative accommodation
was what he actually paid for the accommodation rather than the rent paid for
he and his family were unable to stay at the Rented Premises.
Obviously, he could not recover both the 2 weeks of rent and the actual
the accommodation because this would involve double compensation.
assuming that the Appellant should have been awarded $2,400 instead of $846,
there would be no utility in allowing the appeal
on this basis. This is because
it involves a shortfall of only $1,554. Increasing the amount by this shortfall
would not make a meaningful
dent in the rental arrears measured against the
gross amount of $26,992 found by the Tribunal (as opposed to the $15,000 it was
to awarding because of the jurisdictional limit). In this regard, the
Tribunal was right in holding that
supports offsetting amounts
owed to a tenant against the total amount of rent owed to the landlord even if
the total amount exceeds
the jurisdictional limit of the Tribunal. As Griffiths
AJA noted in
at [86]−[87], the jurisdictional limit only
imposes a maximum amount for an order but does not make an application invalid
if more than the limit is claimed. There is therefore nothing to prevent the
Tribunal from finding that a landlord is owed rent in
excess of $15,000 even if
the Tribunal can only make an order for an amount not exceeding $15,000. That
being the case, there is
no reason why an offset cannot be applied against the
actual amount of rent owed rather than the jurisdictional limit.
is noted that the Appellant also claims the cost of removing mattresses. This
appears to have been rejected by the Tribunal because
there was no receipt for
it. If that is the case, the Appeal Panel sees no reason why this factual
finding should be disturbed.
Appellant’s claim on this basis is rejected and leave to appeal is refused
to the extent leave is required.
Improper Conduct Compensation
ground seeks compensation for the alleged misconduct of the Tribunal, the Rental
Bond Board and Mr Chen.
Appellant has not presented any cogent evidence of misconduct apart from his
allegations.
relation to the conduct of the Tribunal, there is no basis for an Appeal Panel
to award compensation even if there were evidence
of misconduct. The only remedy
available is to correct any errors made by the Tribunal.
relation to the conduct of the Rental Bond Board and Mr Chen, as already noted,
the role of the Appeal Panel is limited to remedying
an appealable error of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal at first instance was not asked to decide, and did not
decide, whether there was
misconduct for which the Appellant should be
compensated. There is no appealable error that requires a remedy even assuming
compensation
could be ordered (which is doubtful).
ground must therefore be rejected.
Conclusions
the reasons given above, the Appeal Panel is satisfied that leave to appeal
should be refused to the extent leave is required
and the appeal dismissed.
for the reasons given above, leave for Mr Chen to represent the Respondent in
the appeal should be granted if leave is required.
Appeal Panel makes the following orders:
(1) If required, Mr Tao Chen is granted leave under
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) to represent the Respondent in the
(2) Leave to appeal is refused to the extent leave is required.
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (467 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter