URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v Elias Bader t/as Genuine Kitchens (No 5) [2020] NSWWCCPD 72 (10 December 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
Elias Bader t/as Genuine Kitchens (No 5)
[2020] NSWWCCPD 72
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Elias Bader t/as Genuine Kitchens
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Botros Abdelahad
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (icare Workers Insurance)
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
25 October 2019
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
10 December 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Section 155AA
Workers Compensation Act 1987
credibility
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
HEARING DATE:
7 September 2020
REPRESENTATION:
Mr A Combe, counsel
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
First Respondent
Mr I Latham, counsel
Uther Webster & Evans
Second Respondent:
Mr A Davis, counsel
Veritas Legal
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 25 October 2019 is confirmed.
INTRODUCTION
appeal concerns the construction of
Workers Compensation Act
(the 1987 Act). In particular, the appeal challenges a finding made by
the learned Arbitrator at first instance that the first respondent
was an exempt
employer within the meaning of s 155AA and as a consequence was exempt from
holding a workers compensation policy of
insurance at the time the worker
suffered an injury in the course of his employment with the first respondent.
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
appellant, the Nominal Insurer, asserted that this was not an appropriate matter
to deal with on the papers. In the circumstances
I accepted this submission and
a formal appeal hearing was heard before the Commission constituted by myself on
7 September 2020.
This hearing was conducted by audio-visual means given the
currency of the pandemic.
dispute in this matter rests within a defined compass. The contest was whether
or not the first respondent to this appeal was
an exempt employer pursuant to s
155AA of the 1987 Act. The determination of this question depended upon a
contest of the credit
of the first respondent (the employer, Mr Bader) and the
second respondent (the worker, Mr Abdelahad). This involved cross
examination
of both men and the examination of a number of documents going to
this issue. There was no contest regarding injury or incapacity
evidence which was before the learned Arbitrator on those issues is not relevant
for consideration in this appeal.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
Nominal Insurer and Mr Bader agree that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
PREVIOUS PROCEEDINGS
is some history to these proceedings before the Commission. It is necessary to
outline the history of the prior proceedings,
as well as the current
proceedings. The factual dispute however was the same in both the prior and
current proceedings. There were
prior proceedings commenced in 2015 in the
Commission that were discontinued. The current proceedings have involved a
determination
by Arbitrator Homan,
an appeal before Deputy President
which revoked the first
Certificate of Determination, and a re-determination of the matter by Arbitrator
The re-determination by
Arbitrator Perry (the learned Arbitrator) is the subject of the appeal now
currently before me. The salient
elements of each of those proceedings is
briefly overviewed below. Each of the proceedings and determinations referred to
be discussed in turn.
Matter No: 5474/15 (Bader No 1)
a notice dated 14 August 2015, issued to Mr Bader, the Nominal Insurer claimed
reimbursement of payments made totalling $30,815.82.
23 September 2015, Mr Bader lodged a miscellaneous application in the Commission
in accordance with s 145(3) of the 1987 Act. He
asserted that he was an
“exempt employer” pursuant to s 155AA of the 1987 Act.
2 February 2016, Arbitrator Batchelor issued consent orders, in which the
proceedings were discontinued. The consent orders contained
a notation that Mr
Bader was to pay the Nominal Insurer the amount of $5,000 within 14 days and
$1,075.64 per month for the following
The current proceedings – matter no 954/18
arbitration before Arbitrator Homan (Bader No 2)
15 January 2018, the Nominal Insurer issued a second notice, in which it sought
reimbursement of a further $70,188.02 from Mr Bader.
Mr Bader again lodged a
miscellaneous application with the Commission pursuant to s 145(3) of the 1987
Act, asserting that he was
an “exempt employer”.
Bader also made an application for a reconsideration of the consent orders dated
2 February 2016 from
miscellaneous application and the reconsideration application were heard
together before Arbitrator Homan on 30 May 2018. In addition
to proceeding on
the documentary evidence, oral evidence from Mr Bader was adduced and leave was
granted for him to be cross examined.
Mr Bader gave evidence without the
assistance of an interpreter. Counsel for the parties addressed, and Arbitrator
Homan reserved
her decision.
issues before Arbitrator Homan were:
(a) whether the Commission had
power to reconsider the Certificate of Determination – Consent Orders
dated 2 February 2016;
(b) if so, whether the discretion to reconsider that Certificate of
Determination should be exercised;
(c) whether Mr Bader was estopped from arguing that he was an exempt
employer, and
(d) whether Mr Bader was an exempt employer pursuant to s 155AA of the 1987
1 August 2018, the Commission issued a Certificate of
Determination,
in which Arbitrator
Homan determined:
(a) Mr Bader was not an “exempt
employer” pursuant to s 155AA of the 1987 Act;
(b) Mr Bader was liable to reimburse the Nominal Insurer the amount specified
in the notice pursuant to s 145(1) of the 1987 Act served
on him on 15 January
(c) the application for reconsideration pursuant to s 350(3) of the 1998 Act
of the Certificate of Determination – Consent Orders
dated 2 February 2016
issued in Commission proceedings 5474/15 was declined, and
(d) the application for orders terminating the agreement noted in the
Certificate of Determination – Consent Orders dated 2
February 2016 issued
in Commission proceedings 5474/15 was declined.
First Presidential appeal before Deputy President Wood (Bader
Bader appealed the Certificate of Determination issued by Arbitrator Homan dated
1 August 2018. That appeal was determined by Deputy
President Wood in
Elias Bader t/as Genuine Kitchens v Workers Compensation Nominal
seven grounds advanced by Mr Bader, he alleged there was an error of law by
Arbitrator Homan by failing to afford Mr Bader
procedural fairness by rejecting
the evidence of the accountant, Mr Shenouda, without first putting the
rejection to Mr Bader. Ultimately,
this was the only ground that was
, Wood DP extensively set out the evidence of Mr Bader,
including his oral evidence, Mr Bader’s documentary evidence, and Mr
Abdelahad’s evidence. She then discussed the evidence relied upon by the
Nominal Insurer in support of its case. Deputy President
Wood set out Arbitrator
Homan’s reasons, and extracted relevant passages from the decision of
Kula Systems Pty Ltd v Workers Compensation Nominal
respect to Mr Shenouda’s evidence, Wood DP noted:
Arbitrator afforded some weight to Mr Shenouda’s evidence, but formed the
view that it was less credible, partly
because it was not elevated to the level
of sworn testimony, but also because it was unusual that Mr Shenouda could
recall with such
particularity conversations between him and Mr Bader more than
three years earlier. She observed that Mr Bader did not mention that
consulted Mr Shenouda until after the first notice pursuant to s 145(1) had been
issued. Further, ... Arbitrator [Homan] thought
that evidence to be inconsistent
with Mr Bader’s attempt to obtain a policy of insurance shortly after and
on the day of the
injury, and his expectation that the injury would be covered
by that insurance.”
relation to the submissions made during the course of proceedings, the Deputy
President continued:
“During the course of the proceedings,
neither the Nominal Insurer nor Mr Abdelahad raised any issue or made any
in respect of the relevance of, the credibility of, or the weight to
be afforded to, the evidence of Mr Shenouda. The Arbitrator’s
conclusion was essentially one in which she doubted the credibility of that
DP observed it was not part of either respondent’s case that Mr
Shenouda’s evidence should not be accepted. She was
of the view that in
the circumstances of the case:
“where neither the Nominal
Insurer, or Mr Abdelahad had adduced any evidence or made any submission that
challenged the evidence
of Mr Shenouda, the risk of an adverse finding based on
an inference drawn from the facts about that evidence would not have been
apparent to Mr Bader.”
further added:
“Had Mr Bader been afforded the opportunity, he
could have made submissions as to why that evidence was relevant and ought to
accepted. The Nominal Insurer would also have had the opportunity to make
submissions, including as to its relevance. The Arbitrator
considered that it
was relevant and her ultimate determination was in part based on that evidence,
which made that evidence important
to the final
Deputy President found Mr Bader had “been denied procedural fairness by
not being afforded the opportunity to address the
concerns articulated by the
Arbitrator and the inference she drew from Mr Shenouda’s
“[s]uch a breach of procedural fairness [had] deprived Mr Bader of the
possibility
of a successful
(emphasis in
original) and required that
be revoked.
18 December 2018, Deputy President Wood revoked the Certificate of Determination
dated 1 August 2018, and remitted the matter to
another arbitrator for
re-determination.
Second Arbitration before Arbitrator Perry
Deputy President Wood’s determination, Mr Bader lodged with the Commission
on 18 April 2019 an Amended Miscellaneous
Application.
matter was listed before Arbitrator Perry on 5 April 2019 for re-determination.
Mr Bader applied for an adjournment on the basis
that he had just received
documents that he had sought for some time. The Arbitrator granted this
adjournment; listing the matter
next for hearing on 7 June 2019. At that
hearing, Mr Bader was cross examined. The hearing did not conclude on this day
and was further
listed for hearing on 5 July 2019. On 5 July 2019, issues and
documents were identified and Mr Abdelahad was cross examined. Following
this hearing, in accordance with a Direction issued by the learned Arbitrator
dated 5 July 2019, the parties also made written submissions.
19 July 2019, Mr Bader lodged his submissions.
Nominal Insurer lodged its submissions on 2 August 2019 (with a minor
typographical error corrected by email on 5 August 2019).
16 August 2019, Mr Abdelahad lodged his submissions.
22 August 2019, Mr Bader lodged submissions in reply.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS (BADER NO 4)
25 October 2019, the learned Arbitrator issued a Certificate of Determination
accompanied by 30 pages of written reasons. He identified
the following
issues for determination:
(a) whether Mr Bader was an exempt
employer pursuant to s 155AA of the 1987 Act;
(b) whether Mr Bader was estopped from arguing that he was an exempt
employer, and
(c) whether there should be an order that Mr Bader not be liable to reimburse
the Nominal Insurer pursuant to the 2015 notice.
learned Arbitrator set out the documentary evidence that was before him,
including Mr Bader’s statements dated 10 December
2014 and 21
February 2018. He also summarised an affidavit sworn by Mr Bader on 1 May 2019
which set out the circumstances in which
Mr Abdelahad came to be employed by
him. The learned Arbitrator set out how Mr Abdelahad was paid. At [20] of
the Reasons, the learned
Arbitrator noted Mr Bader’s account of the
morning of Monday 20 October 2014, in which Mr Bader said he handed
Mr Abdelahad
a letter dated 19 October 2014, which advised Mr Abdelahad
that Mr Bader was formally ending Mr Abdelahad’s employment. The
translation of the letter said:
“Dear Botros,
I am so sorry to ask you to leave work with us by the end of this week. The
only reason is that I do not want to expand business,
and I do not have enough
work. It has been just an opportunity for you to start from here, and the
purpose was for you to be with
me for 2 or 3 weeks. Having told you once and
again to leave work, and given that you have ignored what I said, I now have to
this notice in order for you to understand that it is serious. Thank you
for having been with us.”
[20]–[22] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator set out Mr Bader’s
evidence about the factual investigation undertaken
by Allianz. At [24] of the
Reasons, the learned Arbitrator set out Mr Bader’s recollection of being
asked to complete an employer
injury form. In that form dated 19 November 2014,
Mr Bader set out Mr Abdelahad’s wages and marked on the form Mr Abdelahad
was never to return to work. The learned Arbitrator also recorded that
Mr Bader says he also ticked the “full time” and
“permanent” boxes on the form because at the time Mr Abdelahad was
employed, he was full time and permanent for the short
period he had agreed to
employ Mr Abdelahad for. At this point, I note that that form also included at
the bottom of that form a
declaration which was signed by Mr Bader as being true
and correct.
learned Arbitrator proceeded to set out other documents relied upon, including
Mr Bader’s tax return for the financial year
ending 2015. The learned
Arbitrator also set out various passages from correspondence from WorkCover and
learned Arbitrator made note of other statements including from Mr Shenouda,
Mr Bader’s accountant, Mr Philip Kass, a contract
installer, and Ms
Mary Lahoud, Mr Bader’s daughter. The learned Arbitrator extensively set
out Mr Bader’s oral evidence.
learned Arbitrator also set out the evidence relied upon by the Nominal Insurer,
including the report by Mr John Gottstein dated
3 December 2014, Mr
Abdelahad’s evidence, including copies of Western Union money transfers,
which Mr Abdelahad said were money
transfers from him to family in Lebanon.
Reference is made to statements made by Mr Abdelahad dated 12 November 2014, a
declaration dated 1 December 2014 and a statement dated 6 June 2019.
The learned Arbitrator also set out Mr Abdelahad’s oral
learned Arbitrator proceeded to summarise the parties’ written submissions
from [62] to [110] before setting out the principles
he was guided by in his
determination at [111]–[113] of the Reasons. The learned Arbitrator said
he was bound by
. He also quoted various passages from the High
Court’s decision in
respect to the first issue, whether Mr Bader was an exempt employer, the learned
Arbitrator held the circumstances were consistent
with Mr Bader telling Mr
he would employ him on
a casual basis to start out in the workforce. The learned Arbitrator also noted
there was no denial of this
by Mr Abdelahad. The learned Arbitrator noted the
reference “casual” does not necessarily equate to temporary
employment,
and noted that Mr Bader had ticked the box
“permanent” on the claim form. The learned Arbitrator disagreed with
the criticism
that Mr Bader’s evidence had no credit due to his failure to
tick the “temporary basis” box. The learned Arbitrator
explanation in the letter to WorkCover on 14 September 2015 that he had
inadvertently ticked the box “permanent”.
The learned Arbitrator
noted he had had the opportunity to observe Mr Bader in cross examination and
the difficulties with English
as his second language. He also accepted
Mr Bader’s explanation that he did not fully understand the legal
meaning of the terms.
The learned Arbitrator agreed with the submission that it
can often be a matter of legal argument as to what these terms mean.
learned Arbitrator noted the significance of Mr Bader’s statement to Mr
Gottstein that he told Mr Abdelahad that he would
employ him on a casual basis
and noted the context of the use of the word “casual”. The learned
Arbitrator noted there
was no express reference to employment being temporary in
Mr Bader’s statement dated 10 December 2014.
learned Arbitrator turned to evidence that was either agreed or uncontested for
assistance. He also noted that there was no express
or clear evidence from Mr
Abdelahad to contradict Mr Bader’s evidence that Mr Abdelahad was told
that the employment would
be on a casual (in context temporary) basis. At [133]
of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator said he was not prepared to infer from
Abdelahad’s statement of 12 November 2014 (where he said he commenced
employment on a full-time basis) that Mr Abdelahad’s
employment would be
respect to Mr Bader’s tax return for the financial year ending in 2015, at
[136] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator
disagreed with the assertion that
the content of that tax return showed that a reasonable person could not have
believed the wages
payable in that year would not exceed $7,500. He noted total
business income was noted at $234,935, and total expenses came to $234,421.
learned Arbitrator noted what those expenses were comprised of. He said there
was no deeper analysis of the tax return and partly
for that reason, did not see
the tax return as of assistance either way.
[137] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator noted Mr Bader’s reliance on
the tax return which noted that total salary and
wage expenses total $4,800. The
learned Arbitrator noted this was correct on a literal basis. As to whether
there was any real difference
though, the learned Arbitrator said he was unsure
and Mr Bader’s evidence in this regard was unsatisfactory.
[142] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator said he believed that Mr Bader told
Mr Abdelahad that he could only employ him for
a short term to assist him
in entering the workforce.
[146] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator discussed the letter dated 19
October 2015 (sic, 2014), set out above. The learned
Arbitrator recorded the
Nominal Insurer’s submission that it was a disingenuous attempt for Mr
Bader to assert that he was
not asked about the letter by the investigator
leading to his 10 December 2014 statement. The learned Arbitrator was of the
that Mr Abdelahad had not contradicted this evidence.
[147] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator finds that Mr Bader has not made a
concession that he did not give Mr Abdelahad the
letter. At [148], the learned
Arbitrator said:
“For reasons earlier given, I also accept his
reference to ‘casual’ included the employment being temporary. In
cross examination on 7 June 2019 he also stated that ‘this is the first
time for a person to be injured’. In viewing
the whole of the evidence,
including the lack of evidence contradicting this, I also accept such evidence.
It is consistent with
him stating he was not particularly sophisticated with
these types of issues.”
learned Arbitrator says that contrary to the Nominal Insurer’s submission,
there is no evidence, including from Mr Abdelahad
to contradict Mr Bader that he
gave the notice to Mr Abdelahad. The learned Arbitrator recorded “[a]
submission has been made
letter on 31 May 2018, stating that [Mr Abdelahad] maintains he did not receive
‘... letter conveniently dated 19 October 2014
learned Arbitrator accepted that Mr Abdelahad’s solicitor would not have
made that submission without instructions from
Mr Abdelahad. The learned
Arbitrator noted that procedure before the Commission is to be conducted with as
little formality and technicality
as proper consideration of the matter permits,
and reference is made to
Onesteel Reinforcing Pty Ltd v
The learned
Arbitrator added that even if the letter had not been provided to Mr Abdelahad,
it did not detract from the fact that
Mr Bader had asked Mr Abdelahad to find
other worker and that Mr Bader had told Mr Abdelahad that he needed to terminate
the employment.
learned Arbitrator proceeded to deal with Mr Bader’s statement of 21
February 2018 and said that nothing turned on the inconsistency
statement that the termination notice was dated 24 October 2014. The learned
Arbitrator accepted that the employment was
intended by Mr Bader to be short
term and that Mr Bader became increasingly conscious of the need to formally
terminate Mr Abdelahad’s
employment.
[153] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator held Mr Abdelahad’s evidence
was not totally reliable either. He pointed out
inconsistencies in Mr
Abdelahad’s evidence concerning the duration of his employment with Mr
Bader. The learned Arbitrator
also noted at [154] of the Reasons,
inconsistencies in Mr Abdelahad’s evidence regarding amounts he was paid,
which were variously
said to be either $1,200 or $1,000 per week. The learned
Arbitrator noted that after his cross-examination, without being prompted,
Abdelahad added the amount of cash he was paid per week was $600 per week. The
learned Arbitrator did not accept this evidence
and was of the view that it was
inconsistent with other evidence from Mr Abdelahad that the cash payment(s) for
overtime was $400.
a credibility finding at [155] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator said he
did not think Mr Abdelahad was being deliberately
deceptive. He added that
he was not inclined to make any adverse findings about the other parts of his
evidence by Mr Bader. The
learned Arbitrator did point out that there was
sufficient doubt about Mr Abdelahad’s evidence being totally reliable to
care needing to be taken with it. At [156], the learned Arbitrator
“In all the circumstances, including the lack of
evidence for each respondent to contradict the applicant, I find it more likely
than not that the applicant did give the notice of finish to the worker on 20
October 2014. I also find that the applicant did, indeed,
raise with the worker
his concern about the worker needing to look for other employment, and to leave
(or prepare to do so), on more
than one occasion prior to 17 October 2014,
because he believed he could not keep the worker employed for much longer as the
limit may be crossed. I believe this likelihood to be consistent with
the preponderance of the evidence.”
learned Arbitrator then dealt with Mr Bader’s letter dated 21 February
2015 sent to Mr Abdelahad and said this letter did
not change the learned
Arbitrator’s view about the core issue to be decided, being whether Mr
Bader had reasonable grounds
for believing that the total amount of wages
payable during the 2015 financial year was not more than the exception limit.
The learned
Arbitrator said this was a side issue and was unnecessary and
inappropriate for him “to conduct an analysis of the rights and
this letter – except to the extent such is relevant to the issues that
remain in” the case.
concluded at [158] of the Reasons that with reference to the main issue in the
case, the letter really only amounted to Mr Abdelahad
having more work after 20
October 2014, but only specifically referring to the next day. The learned
Arbitrator held this was no
consistent with his earlier analysis and findings
that Mr Bader had intended to finally force the termination of
Mr Abdelahad’s
employment by 24 October 2014.
learned Arbitrator then dealt with the evidence of Mr Shenouda, Ms Lahoud and
Mr Kass, which it is not necessary to set out in
detail for the purposes of
this appeal.
[163] of the reasons, the learned Arbitrator said there is no requirement to
accept the whole evidence of any one witness, relying
He also applied the
principle that although the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
“it is still required to
draw its conclusions from satisfactory material,
in the probative sense, to ensure such conclusions are not seen to be
capricious,
arbitrary or without proper foundation or material”, applying
learned Arbitrator then dealt with the issue of whether Mr Bader was estopped
from arguing that he was or is an exempt employer,
which for this appeal, it is
not necessary to set out in detail the learned Arbitrator’s findings and
analysis. Following this,
the learned Arbitrator then considered whether there
should be an order made that Mr Bader not be liable to reimburse the Nominal
Insurer pursuant to the 2015 notice.
Certificate of Determination recorded:
“1. The applicant was
an exempt employer, within the meaning of
Workers Compensation
between 1 July 2014 and 24 October 2014.
applicant is deemed to have obtained from the first respondent, and the first
respondent is deemed to have issued, a policy of
insurance in accordance with
Workers Compensation Act 1987
for the period between 1
July 2014 and 24 October 2014.
applicant is not estopped from arguing that he was an exempt employer with
respect to the notice issued by the first respondent
on 15 January 2018,
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
applicant’s claim for an order that he not be liable to reimburse the
first respondent with respect to the notice issued
by that respondent on 14
August 2015 under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Nominal Insurer appeals against that determination.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
Nominal Insurer brings the following five Grounds of
(a) “Ground 1: The Arbitrator erred at
[120]–[133] in accepting the Employer employed the Worker on a casual
a temporary basis and accepted the Employer as to credit”;
(b) “Ground 2: The Arbitrator erred at
[136]–[137] with respect to the FYE 2015 tax return”;
(c) “Ground 3: The Arbitrator erred at
[146]–[151] in finding that the Nominal Insurer and the Worker did not
contradict the service of the notice of termination”;
(d) “Ground 4: The Arbitrator erred in
finding at [157]–[158] the letter dated 21 February 2015 only
established the Worker
having work for the next day after 20 October
(e) “Ground 5: The Arbitrator erred in
rejection of the
estoppel based on a finding the Employer
compromised for reasons including the ‘evidentiary landscape’ and
find the prejudice to the Nominal Insurer founded an
the commencement of the hearing on 7 September 2020, the Nominal Insurer stated
that it did not press Ground 5. Accordingly, it
is not necessary to set out the
parties’ submissions on that ground or consider it further.
PRINCIPLES ON APPEAL
appellant in this matter is essentially challenging a number of factual findings
that were made by the learned Arbitrator. Given
the approach adopted by the
appellant to this appeal, it is necessary to set out in some detail the
principles which are applied
on appeal. This is especially relevant where
factual findings that were made at first instance are under challenge.
352(5) of the 1998 Act provides:
“An appeal under this section
is limited to a determination of whether the decision appealed against was or
was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction
of any such error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
Roche DP applied
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v
(cited with
approval by Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
v Cosmarnan Concrete Pty
) to the nature of the
appeal process involving factual error, pursuant to s 352 of the 1998
“(a) An Arbitrator, though not basing his or her
findings on credit, may have preferred one view of the primary facts to another
as being more probable. Such a finding may only be disturbed by a Presidential
member if ‘other probabilities so outweigh that
chosen by the [Arbitrator]
that it can be said that his [or her] conclusion was wrong’.
(b) Having found the primary facts, the Arbitrator may draw a particular
inference from them. Even here the ‘fact of the [Arbitrator’s]
decision must be displaced’. It is not enough that the Presidential
member would have drawn a different inference. It must
be shown that the
Arbitrator was wrong.
(c) It may be shown that an Arbitrator was wrong ‘by showing that
material facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too
little weight in
deciding the inference to be drawn: or the available inference in the opposite
sense to that chosen by the [Arbitrator]
is so preponderant in the opinion of
the appellate court that the [Arbitrator’s] decision is
Davis v Ryco Hydraulics Pty Ltd
, Keating P observed that these principles
“have been consistently applied in the
Commission”.
President in
also cited the following passage from
Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
in that process of considering the facts for itself and giving weight to the
views of, and advantages held by, the trial
judge, if a choice arises between
conclusions equally open and finely balanced and where there is, or can be, no
preponderance of
view, the conclusion of error is not necessarily arrived at
merely because of a preference of view of the appeal court for some fact
facts contrary to the view reached by the trial
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
Sackville AJA
, if a statutory right of appeal
requires a demonstration that the decision appealed against was affected by
error, the appellate
tribunal is not entitled to interfere with the decision on
the ground that it thinks that a different outcome is preferable: see
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513
principles applicable to appeals pursuant to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act were
recently considered by the Court of Appeal in
Workers Compensation Nominal
Insurer v Hill.
Honours said there was no error in a Presidential member, dealing with an appeal
pursuant to s 352(5), applying the description
of a judge’s function on
appeal as explained by Barwick CJ in
Whiteley Muir.
“With respect to errors of fact finding, the line
between preferring a different result and identifying error is by no means
to draw, but that is clearly what the Deputy President sought to do by adopting
the language complained of. It was also what
Barwick CJ sought to do in
Whiteley Muir
in using such language to identify the difference between
an appeal based on a finding of error and a hearing de novo (and, one must
add, a rehearing). If, on an appeal by way of rehearing, the court asked whether
the findings of fact were ‘open’
to the trial judge, that might
demonstrate an unduly limited understanding of the court’s function;
however, that language
is not out of place in determining an appeal from factual
findings under
LEGISLATION
145 of the 1987 Act provides:
145 Employer or insurer to
reimburse Insurance Fund (cf former s 18C (21)–(26))
(1) The Nominal Insurer may serve on a person who, in the opinion of the
Nominal Insurer, was—
(a) in respect of an injured worker to or in respect of whom a payment has
been made by the Nominal Insurer in respect of a claim
under this Division, an
employer at the relevant time, or
(b) an insurer under this Act of such an employer,
a notice requiring that person, within a period specified in the notice, to
reimburse the Insurance Fund an amount (not being an
amount exceeding the amount
of the payment made) specified in the notice.
(2) The Nominal Insurer may, by instrument in writing, waive the liability of
an employer under subsection (1) to reimburse the Insurance
Fund an amount, if
the Nominal Insurer, in respect of the amount, is satisfied that—
(a) the amount is beyond the capacity of the employer to pay,
(b) the employer could not reasonably have been expected to regard himself or
herself as an employer at the relevant time,
(c) the employer, not being a corporation, is bankrupt and the liability
under this section is not provable in the bankruptcy,
(d) the employer, being a corporation, is being wound up and the liability
under this section is not provable in the winding up,
(e) the employer, being a corporation, has been dissolved, or
(f) it would not be commercially feasible for the Nominal Insurer to attempt
to recover the amount.
(3) A person on whom a notice has been served under subsection (1) in respect
of an injured worker may, within the period specified
in the notice, apply to
the Commission for a determination as to the person’s liability in respect
of the payment concerned.
(4) The Commission may hear any such application and may—
(a) make such determination in relation to the application, and
(b) make such awards or orders as to the payment of compensation under this
Act to or in respect of the injured worker concerned,
as the Commission thinks fit.
(4A) The Commission is not authorised to make a determination that waives the
liability of an employer under subsection (1) to reimburse
the Insurance Fund or
that limits or otherwise affects any function of the Nominal Insurer to decide
whether or not any such liability
should be waived.
(5) In any proceedings under subsection (4), a certificate executed by the
Nominal Insurer and certifying that—
(a) the payments specified in the certificate were paid to or in respect of
an injured worker named in the certificate, and
(b) a person named in the certificate was, in the opinion of the Nominal
Insurer, liable at the relevant time to pay to or in respect
of the injured
worker compensation under this Act or work injury damages,
is (without proof of its execution by the Nominal Insurer) admissible in
evidence in any proceedings and is evidence of the matters
stated in the
certificate.
(6) The Nominal Insurer may recover an amount specified in a notice served
under subsection (1) (being a notice in respect of which
an application has not
been made under subsection (3)) from the person to whom the notice was given as
a debt in a court of competent
(7) An order by the Commission that the Nominal Insurer is to be reimbursed
by a person named in the determination concerned may be
enforced under section
362 of the 1998 Act.”
155AA of the 1987 Act provides:
155AA Exempt employers
not required to obtain policy of insurance
(1) An employer is an
exempt employer
during a financial year
while the employer has reasonable grounds for believing that the total amount of
wages that will be payable
by the employer during the financial year to workers
employed by the employer will be not more than the exemption limit for that
financial year.
(2) An employer is not an exempt employer whenever the employer—
(a) is a member of a group constituted under Division 2A, or
(b) employs a person under a training contract (within the meaning of the
Apprenticeship and Traineeship Act 2001
training contract
is a contract entered into for
the purpose of establishing an apprenticeship or traineeship.
(3) An employer who is an exempt employer for the whole or any part of a
financial year is deemed to have obtained from the Nominal
Insurer (and the
Nominal Insurer is deemed to have issued) a policy of insurance in compliance
with section 155 (an
exempt employer policy)
for any period for
which the employer is an exempt employer during the financial year. No premium
is payable for an exempt employer
(4) An exempt employer policy covers the employer for any period for which
the employer is an exempt employer but does not cover the
employer for any
period for which the employer has actually obtained a policy of insurance under
section 155.
(5) An administration fee of an amount prescribed by the regulations is
payable to the Nominal Insurer by an employer in respect of
each claim made
against the employer in respect of an injury to a worker received during any
period for which an exempt employer
policy covers the employer.
(6) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to the payment of
an administration fee, including provision for or with
respect to any of the
(a) the period within which an administration fee must be paid,
(b) the payment of a late payment fee if an administration fee is not paid
within the required period,
(c) the full or partial waiver or refund of an administration fee or late
payment fee.
(7) The Nominal Insurer is entitled to recover as a debt in a court of
competent jurisdiction an administration fee payable by an
employer together
with any late payment fee payable.
(8) In this section—
exemption limit
for a financial year means $7,500 or such
other amount as may be fixed by the Workers Compensation Market Practice and
Premiums Guidelines
as the exemption limit for that financial year.
financial year
means a period of 12 months commencing on 1
July in any year.
means wages as defined in section 174 and includes any
distribution to a worker as a beneficiary under a trust that would (under
section 174AA) constitute wages for the purposes of section 174.”
SUBMISSIONS
Nominal Insurer and Mr Bader made general submissions before turning to address
each ground of appeal. It is convenient that I
set it out those general
submissions before turning to discuss the submissions in respect of each ground
Mr Abdelahad’s role in these proceedings
the outset, I note that the second respondent, Mr Abdelahad, did not lodge a
Notice of Opposition. Given the nature of these proceedings,
namely the Nominal
Insurer seeking recovery from an uninsured employer, Mr Abdelahad’s role
in the proceedings was necessarily
the morning of the hearing, I received a one-page document from
Mr Abdelahad’s counsel setting out his submissions. Those
submissions
state that Mr Abdelahad “does not oppose the orders as proposed, and
respectfully agrees with (and adopts) the
submissions of the [a]ppellant.”
He says that the issues on the appeal largely do not affect him, and for that
reason, “it
is not proposed to address in any detail the issues
Mr Abdelahad
contends that the issues of employment; injury; incapacity, and average weekly
earnings are not, and never have been,
in dispute. He notes that the orders
sought on the appeal do not seek to affect those issues. Mr Abdelahad adds
that, “provided
only that no party or the Commission seek to adversely
affect the interests of the [s]econd respondent, or make a determination that
may have such an [e]ffect”, Mr Abdelahad “does not need to be
heard on the issues raised in the appeal, other than to
note its general
agreement with the submissions already advanced by the [a]ppellant”.
Mr Abdelahad
further adds that on the basis that no binding determination is to be made as to
the relevant weekly wage rate that may
prejudice him, there is no need to
address the issues. He also notes that the learned Arbitrator
to make any
determination on the issue and Mr Abdelahad takes no issue in that
Mr Abdelahad
concludes that in view of the above, he does not intend to make lengthy or
detailed submissions on the matters raised
in the appeal “other than as
maybe required” for the reasons referred to above and to note
“general agreement”
with the Nominal Insurer’s
submissions.
for Mr Abdelahad and his instructing solicitor attended the oral hearing.
At that hearing, counsel confirmed that Mr Abdelahad’s
really one of seeking to protect just the position of the
“the real concern is findings that may be adverse to the worker that may
have an implication should something arise
the Nominal Insurer’s and Mr Bader’s oral submissions, counsel for
Mr Abdelahad submitted in response to the
assertion that the learned Arbitrator
believed one witness, that that was not the case. Mr Abdelahad noted that there
were various
aspects where the learned Arbitrator accepted aspects but not other
aspects. Reference was made to [161] of the Reasons where the
learned Arbitrator
noted he largely accepted the evidence of Mr Bader on critical issues. Mr
Abdelahad submits there are aspects
of evidence that the learned Arbitrator has
not accepted or found unsatisfactory.
for Mr Abdelahad also made a submission that the Nominal Insurer’s
assertion that the error found in
in respect of procedural
fairness has been replicated in the current matter. Mr Abdelahad says that this
is a different point in the
present case to that in
The Nominal Insurer’s general submissions
Written submissions
Nominal Insurer refers to s 352(1) and (5) of the 1998 Act. It submits the
appeal is to be determined in accordance with
[17]–[31]. It contends credibility based findings may be overturned if
incontrovertible facts or uncontested evidence establish
the findings were
wrong. The Nominal Insurer, referring to
submits that in rare
cases, although the facts fall short of being incontrovertible, such findings
may be overturned if they are
“glaringly improbable” or
“contrary to compelling inferences”. Relying on
v Cessnock City
the Nominal Insurer
says a finding of fact may not be open to an arbitrator if it was not claimed or
was not an issue in a case.
Nominal Insurer recounts the claim was one under s 145(1) of the 1987 Act
regarding the sum of $70,188 and the disputation by
Mr Bader on the basis of s
155AA of the 1987 Act. The Nominal Insurer sets out that the issue was whether
Mr Bader was an exempt
employer, and this legal issue was determined by factual
issues that required credibility findings between the Nominal Insurer’s
and Mr Bader’s evidence. The Nominal Insurer notes Mr Bader’s
evidence was preferred. It submits the learned Arbitrator’s
credibility
based findings were a mixed error of fact and law, as the erroneous factual
findings “led to an erroneous legal
conclusion as to exempt
“[t]his erroneous legal conclusion as to exempt employer led to a final
erroneous legal conclusion that [Mr Bader]
was not liable to reimburse the
Nominal Insurer under s 145 of the 1987
Oral submissions
moving onto submissions addressing each ground of appeal, the Nominal Insurer
corrected some errata in its written submissions
and gave some background to the
matter. Specifically, the Nominal Insurer drew my attention to a number of
documents in the evidence,
which it is convenient to outline here.
first documents related to evidence of the initial management of the claim that
was initially made to Allianz as a scheme agent,
which was then transferred to
the Nominal Insurer.
then referred to the first Notice issued pursuant to s 145(1) of the
1987 Act on
August 2015,
and the consent
orders that were ultimately
The Nominal Insurer
submitted that there was evidence Mr Bader had repaid $23,285.88 or about 80%
following those consent orders
onto the Amended Miscellaneous Application dated 8 April 2019, the Nominal
Insurer recounted that at Part 6, there was an allegation
that Mr Abdelahad was
employed for a fixed period with his employment being terminated in writing by
notice issued by Mr Bader on
24 October 2014. The Nominal Insurer submits
the date of 24 October 2014 “was in effect a typographical error”
Bader “amended to assert there was a termination by way of notice
dated 19 October 2014”
that was handed to Mr Abdelahad on 20 October 2014. The Nominal Insurer also
referred to the assertion at Part 6 that for the financial
year 1 July 2014 to
30 June 2015, Mr Bader paid total wages of $4,000 gross and that the relevant
exemption limit was $7,500.
Nominal Insurer also referred to the transcript of proceedings before Arbitrator
Homan from 30 May 2018, which the learned Arbitrator
admitted into evidence
before him.
Nominal Insurer also noted both parties’ reliance upon
is said to be the only Presidential authority on s 155AA.
relation to the first issue before the learned Arbitrator, being whether Mr
Bader was an exempt employer, which was dependent on
credit findings, the
Nominal Insurer referred to Mr Bader’s statement dated 10 December 2014,
specifically at [8] where the
Nominal Insurer says it states Mr Abdelahad
commenced employment with Genuine Kitchens on 1 September 2014 on a casual
cabinetmaker.
Nominal Insurer states Mr Bader’s statement dated 21 February
details that he set up his
business in retirement and he had no need for employees and was aware of the
$7,500 cap on the exemption
under s 155AA of the 1987 Act.
Nominal Insurer also refers to [9] of that statement, where Mr Bader gave
evidence that he employed Mr Abdelahad after he (Mr
Abdelahad) approached
Mr Bader, and Mr Bader indicated to Mr Abdelahad that Mr Bader would not provide
long term employment and would
only employ Mr Abdelahad on the short term for
what was called a “short term contract”.
Nominal Insurer recounts Mr Bader’s evidence that he paid Mr Abdelahad
$600 per week gross, deducted $50 in tax and deposited
$500 into Mr
Abdelahad’s bank account and that Mr Bader gave Mr Abdelahad the deposit
slips as receipts.
Reference is
also made to a deposit slip dated 17 October 2014, which contained handwritten
notes on the back of it.
Nominal Insurer also draws attention to the Notice to finish work dated 19
October 2014
accompanying translation
submits that in contrast, Mr Abdelahad’s evidence was that he was employed
by Mr Bader on a full-time basis; he was paid
$1,000 per week which was made up
of $600 gross, of which $50 was deducted as tax, with $550 being deposited into
his bank account
and the remaining $400 was paid in cash.
Nominal Insurer refers to Mr Abdelahad’s
in which he says he
was employed as a carpenter on a full-time
his working hours were
between 7.30 am and 4 pm Monday to Saturday if required, and he worked
longer hours up to 7 pm if
The Nominal Insurer
also notes that Mr Abdelahad
to a handwritten
he was given.
Nominal Insurer submits that on the basis of Mr Abdelahad’s evidence,
there seemed to be a direct conflict between Mr Abdelahad
and Mr Bader as to
whether Mr Abdelahad was employed as a casual or a full-time worker, and the
amount of money paid. The Nominal
Insurer says that on Mr Abdelahad’s
version of events he was paid $1,000 per week with some paid through his bank
after a deduction for tax and the remaining amount paid cash in
It relies upon Mr
Abdelahad’s evidence to investigators that he was unable to prove the
payment of cash in hand.
further adds that Mr Abdelahad also said that he sent sums of money to his
family in Lebanon on a regular basis and would not have
been able to do so if he
was paid $550 per week by Mr Bader. The Nominal Insurer says that, in other
words, the explanation for the
difference of $400 is proven, if not
corroborated, by the fact that contemporaneously with being paid by Mr Bader, Mr
Abdelahad was
also sending money to Lebanon. The Nominal Insurer submits there
is an example of an electronic transfer in evidence and relies upon
Union transfer order dated 11 October
The Nominal Insurer
submits this indicates an amount of money equivalent to $US1,000 was transferred
during the time Mr Abdelahad
was employed by Mr Bader.
Nominal Insurer submits that there was a live dispute between the parties as to
the payment to be made pursuant to an employment
contract, which also then
raised an issue as to whose version of events was correct. The Nominal Insurer,
referring to the case of
Mr Bader, says that if his version was correct, Mr
Bader was only paying Mr Abdelahad $600 per week, and that employment was only
for a limited time. The Nominal Insurer argues, however, that that was
contested. It says that what is significant is that Mr Abdelahad
gave direct
evidence that he received $1,000 per week which, if his employment had continued
beyond 20 October 2014, would have meant
that having commenced on 1
September 2014, he would have well and truly exceeded the $7,500 payment level
and therefore, Mr Bader
would not have been an exempt employer.
Nominal Insurer refers to the other area of dispute, which it says involved the
issue of whether or not the Notice to finish work
dated 19 October 2014 and
allegedly given to Mr Abdelahad on 20 October 2014, was in fact given to Mr
Abdelahad. The Nominal Insurer
notes this was in contention before Arbitrator
Homan and says that the transcript of the cross examination before her was
into evidence before the learned Arbitrator in the Application to Admit
Late Documents (AALD) dated 25 March 2019.
Nominal Insurer points to a letter from Mr Abdelahad’s solicitors dated 21
“The second respondent maintains he did not receive the
alleged termination letter conveniently dated 19 October 2014.”
Nominal Insurer contends that it was submitted to the learned Arbitrator, and is
submitted on the appeal, that this constituted
a contradiction of Mr
Bader’s assertion that the notice written in Arabic dated 19 October 2014
was provided on 20 October
2014. It argues this raised an immediate dispute as
to whether or not employment was intended to continue into the future on a
basis and beyond either 20 October 2014 or some other date nominated
by Mr Bader.
Nominal Insurer contends the next issue of significance with respect to the
continuation of employment was a letter sent by Mr
Bader to Mr Abdelahad on 21
February 2015.
The Nominal
Insurer quotes the following extract of the letter:
to your previous employment at Genuine Kitchens, and in relation to
8 kitchens job to Mr Danny Sarkis, and since you
did not follow the cutting
list measures and instructions that I outlined to you, which caused about 80% of
the shelves and doors
being cut to the wrong measure and as a result had to be
The cost of replacement came up to $6,000.00 plus GST totaling [sic]
$6,600.00.”
Nominal Insurer submits this was a letter of demand and says the letter proceeds
to retrospectively refer to the injury on 20
October 2014 and submits the
following words are significant:
“it is my belief that you
intentionally inflicted this injury on yourself, since it was scheduled that the
installation of the
8 kitchens job was to commence the next day.
You used this injury to avoid the next day task which was going to reveal the
wrong cuttings you made.”
Nominal Insurer refers to the demand in the letter that Mr Abdelahad pay Mr
Bader $6,600 within 21 days, noting the letter was
the subject of cross
examination. It submits it was relied upon by the Nominal Insurer and Mr
Abdelahad to support an assertion and
submission that it indicated and supported
an inference that employment was to continue for some time after 20 October
2014. It says
this is so as it referred to the installation of eight kitchen
jobs to commence the next day and was inconsistent with an intention
terminate Mr Abdelahad’s employment as contained in the letter dated
19 October 2014.
Nominal Insurer submits there were three significant factual disputes between
Mr Abdelahad and Mr Bader shown by these documents,
and they had to be
resolved based upon issues of credit as it was “one person’s word
Mr Bader’s general submissions
Written submissions
regards to Grounds 1 to 4, Mr Bader submits in summary, that the Presidential
member should reject the attacks upon the factual
findings, which he says are
largely credit findings. Before turning to the four grounds, Mr Bader sets out
submissions under the
following headings:
(a) the nature of the
(b) the challenges to credit in general terms;
(c) questions of fact;
(d) challenges as to questions as to fact, and
(e) the challenges in this case.
the heading “the nature of the appeal”, Mr Bader refers to s 352 of
the 1998 Act and
at [17], and proceeds to quote [19], [20], and
[26]. He submits that an appeal as to the exercise of discretion requires an
of principle in terms of
House v The
relation to “the challenges to credit in general terms”, Mr Bader
notes that credit was crucial in this
He submits the challenges
to the credit findings are misconceived and misunderstand the test for
challenging credit findings.
respect of “questions of fact”, Mr Bader notes the Nominal
Insurer’s challenges to the learned Arbitrator’s
findings of fact
are largely credibility findings. He says the task is a difficult one in
proceedings such as the present where witnesses
have given oral evidence. Mr
Bader submits that absent a complete lack of evidence which is a question of
law, the determination
as to employment and its various forms is a question of
fact. Reference is made to Neil and Chin,
The Modern Contract of
Lawbook Co, 2012 at [1.250], and their description of questions
of degree as being paradigmatically factual. Mr Bader further refers
Morgan Research Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
different conclusions are reasonably open to the tribunal and the determination
of which of them is correct is a question
of fact”, and
Stations Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
Bader submits the factual findings are not converted into errors of fact and law
“because they are used to reach some ultimate
conclusion as to the exempt
status of [Mr Bader]” as the Nominal Insurer suggests on page 3, [2] of
its written submissions.
Mr Bader contends that would mean that all factual
findings relied upon to reach an ultimate conclusion would be converted into
of mixed fact and law.
the heading “challenges as to questions as to fact”, Mr Bader
submits that at common law there was no room on appeal
on questions of fact,
which were matters for a jury. He notes that historical justification is no
longer relevant. He observes, however,
the oral tradition of the common law is
still relevant. That tradition, it is said, is one where determinations are
often made upon
evidence of witnesses that is seen, heard and tested. Mr Bader
relies upon
Abalos v Australian Postal
v Australian National Railways
his submissions under “the challenges in this case”, Mr Bader
submits the Nominal Insurer does not adopt the proper
test to challenge these
findings. He notes the Nominal Insurer submits that the evidence was contrary to
the evidence of Mr Abdelahad
and/or the preponderance of the
Bader argues that even if the submissions were accepted, they would not lead to
a conclusion the appeal should be upheld in the
absence of a finding that the
findings were contrary to incontrovertible facts or uncontested evidence. He
submits the Nominal Insurer’s
reliance on the alternative test “of
the findings being glaringly improbabl[e] or contrary to incontrovertible facts
or uncontested
evidence” is misplaced. He says the reference to that test
Fox v Percy
is a reference to the:
“quite rare,
cases, [where] although the facts fall short of being
‘incontrovertible’, an appellate conclusion may
be reached that the
decision at trial is ‘glaringly improbable’ or ‘contrary to
compelling inferences’ in
Bader submits this is not the situation in the present case. He contends the
Nominal Insurer did not suggest either error in Ground
2, which he says the
Nominal Insurer submitted the findings of the learned Arbitrator were
“contrary to the weight of evidence
and is therefore an error of fact and
law”. Mr Bader submits Ground 2 should be rejected without the necessity
for further
examination.
Bader adds that the remaining challenges made by the Nominal Insurer do not
claim that the findings were not contrary “to
incontrovertible facts or
uncontested evidence”. Mr Bader argues they accordingly fail. In any
event, he says the conclusions
are not glaringly improbable or contrary to
compelling inferences.
Bader says the determination of that threshold will determine much of the
appeal. He notes the learned Arbitrator made a number
of factual findings and
had the advantages of seeing and hearing the witnesses. Mr Bader submits there
was nothing contrary “to
incontrovertible facts or uncontested evidence or
even glaringly improbable or contrary to compelling inferences about the
conclusions”
the learned Arbitrator made. He argues the conclusions were
conclusions as to facts and the Presidential member should not interfere
those findings.
reply, the Nominal Insurer submits that it is not the case that the Nominal
Insurer has misstated the grounds of appeal or has
failed to suggest error, as
the findings in favour of Mr Bader made by the learned Arbitrator were
wrong in light of “incontrovertible
facts or uncontested evidence”
or were “glaringly improbable” or “contradict compelling
inferences”
in the case.
Oral submissions
Bader commenced his oral submissions by referring to the nature of an appeal
pursuant to s 352 of the 1998 Act. He notes that such
an appeal is limited to an
error of fact, law or discretion and to the correction of such error. Mr Bader
submits that it is not
an appeal by way of review or new hearing. Reference is
at [17] onwards and also [20], as well as the discussion of
Whiteley Muir
. Mr Bader submits Basten JA held in a normal appeal by way
of rehearing, there would not be discussion as to whether the findings
to the primary judge. He also submits his Honour further said that the
difference between a rehearing and an appeal of
this nature is that the test is
whether the findings of fact were open to the learned Arbitrator. Mr Bader says
this is a “very
significant
to an appellant in
matters such as the present, and refers to [88] and [89] of
the amendment to s 352 in 2011, which Mr Bader’s counsel says from memory
was after the decision of
New South Wales Police Force v
the nature of an
appeal was dramatically altered by the introduction of the last sentence of s
352(5). Mr Bader notes Basten JA’s
comment at [89] in regards to
, and submits that
proceeded by way of
Bader submits that the present case is essentially a series of complaints by the
Nominal Insurer in relation to the fact finding
process. He argues those
complaints are not that the findings were not open, “they are really
complaints about the findings
being contrary to the preponderance of evidence or
as otherwise described, glaringly impossible [sic,
improbable]”.
Mr Bader refers to the Nominal Insurer’s submissions at [9] (made
under Ground 1), [14], [15] (made under Ground 2) and [21]
(made under Ground
4), which he says are complaints that findings were against the preponderance of
the evidence. Mr Bader submits
that in relation to all of those matters, on
a prima facie basis, none of those, on the basis of the alleged errors give rise
a proper appeal in relation to s 352.
Bader acknowledges that
makes it clear that on an appeal such as the
present matter, it must be shown that the finding was wrong. He adds that in
where there is a weighing of the evidence and all of the discretions
that are necessarily entailed in that process, to find error
is a difficult
task. Mr Bader contends that that task is even more difficult where there are
credit findings involved, referring
written submissions. Mr Bader submits that in relation to credit findings, an
argument that a particular finding was against
the preponderance of evidence
would almost never be successful because “unless there is really some
complaint about the process
and an error in relation to that process, the actual
weighing of evidence and particularly the advantages given to the primary Judge
in determining credit, and that is set out in those decisions, those make it
very very difficult for an appellant to appeal credit
Bader cites the decision of
S.S. Hontestroom v S.S.
that McHugh J
referred to in
and his Honour’s
“an appellate court cannot act on that evidence to
reverse the finding unless it is satisfied ‘that any advantage enjoyed
the trial judge by reason of having seen and heard the witnesses, could not be
sufficient to explain or justify the trial judge’s
conclusion’.”
Bader contends there are two aspects of this and refers to his written
submissions. He says the first is the learned Arbitrator
got to see the
witnesses give their evidence, and so got to determine which of the two or three
or more they believe and do not believe.
He adds there is a further component,
being that the primary decision maker “without even delving into the
contest between
particular parties ... gets to make an impression upon the
character of the individual witnesses and that’s a further additional
benefit of”
Bader concedes that credit was crucial in this case. He emphasises that
challenges to questions of fact are not converted into
errors of law by calling
them such. Mr Bader sets out the distinction between errors of fact and law. He
contends that a determination
of whether a person is a temporary employee,
casual employee or full-time employee is a question of
response to the Nominal Insurer’s reliance on
Fox v Percy
says that in relation to ‘glaringly improbable’ or ‘contrary
to compelling inferences’ being confined
to rare cases, it is difficult to
imagine what sort of rare case that would be. He submits it
“difficult to understand how a fact finding process,
unless of course it [fell] into the sort of error that we find in
that relevant material, for example, was not examined or was ignored,
but it’s difficult to see how a proper fact finding process
lead to something being glaringly improbable or contrary to compelling
inferences, but in any event that’s not the
Ground One: The Arbitrator erred at [120]–[133] in
accepting the Employer employed the Worker on a casual basis and a temporary
basis and accepted the Employer as to credit
The Nominal Insurer’s written submissions
Nominal Insurer alleges the learned Arbitrator made mixed errors of fact and law
in accepting Mr Bader’s evidence and finding
that Mr Abdelahad was
employed “on a casual and temporary
It says this
acceptance was contrary to the evidence of Mr Abdelahad and “to the
preponderance of the evidence.” The
Nominal Insurer refers to
Mr Abdelahad’s statement dated 12 November 2014, where he
“I commenced employment with Genuine Kitchen as a
on a full-time basis
with Riad Mahfoud. I was introduced to the boss Elias Bader ... through his
relatives who
I knew in Lebanon. My employment with Genuine Kitchen was verbal.
There was no other workers [sic] in the company only Elias Bader
(the Nominal
Insurer’s emphasis)
Nominal Insurer submits Mr Abdelahad’s evidence was a contradiction
of Mr Bader’s case that Mr Abdelahad was employed
on a casual basis
for a limited time or temporary basis. It refers to the learned
Arbitrator’s conclusion that he “[did]
not see any such
contradiction; after reading the whole of
(referring to
Mr Abdelahad’s statement). The Nominal Insurer submits this was
“wrong as a matter of fact and vitiates
the conclusion that [Mr
Bader’s] evidence that [Mr Abdelahad] would be employed on a casual,
temporary basis.” It concludes
that the learned Arbitrator erred in
finding at [120] of the reasons that there was no direct evidence from
Mr Abdelahad that he
was employed on a full-time basis in contradiction of
Nominal Insurer adds that the acceptance that Mr Bader employed
Mr Abdelahad on a casual basis for a limited time is contrary
to the effect
of the overall evidence, such that it was not reasonably open to accept Mr Bader
as a witness of truth. It refers to
Mr Bader’s report of injury form and
the pre-injury average weekly earnings form which were both ticked
“permanent”,
and the employer’s report of injury form was also
ticked “full-time” as to Mr Abdelahad’s employment. Mr
Bader’s evidence was inconsistent with the facts of the nominated
declarations of employment as “full-time” and
“permanent”, while it was glaringly improbable that this nomination
was an error.
The Nominal
Insurer says these were documents that were signed by Mr Bader as having been
read and attested as to the truth and quotes
the declaration on both
Nominal Insurer submits that both documents had the option for ticking the box
marked “casual” and the employer injury
claim form could nominate
“temporary”. These boxes were left blank. It submits these documents
were completed within
one month after the date of injury and contradicted Mr
Bader’s claim that Mr Abdelahad’s employment was on a casual
and with “an intention of limited time of
employment”.
The Nominal
Insurer submits these documents were sufficient to determine that Mr Bader was
not an “exempt employer”.
It says the claim that these were
completed by mistake is contrary to evidence, given the fact that the alleged
mistake was made
on two separate forms that were adopted as true and correct and
Mr Bader was able to complete a statement and other documents, including
affidavit, in English.
Nominal Insurer notes Mr Bader did not use an interpreter when he was
cross-examined before Arbitrator Homan in 2018, nor when
providing statements
and affidavit evidence. It says this meant there was an error as to credit when
the learned Arbitrator found
that he did not form an unfavourable impression of
Mr Bader’s evidence. It argues the favourable credibility finding did not
refer to evidence that Mr Bader gave in the first arbitration under
cross-examination, without an interpreter, when his legal representatives
in attendance. The Nominal Insurer says that no objection was taken before the
first Arbitrator on the basis that Mr Bader did
not understand questions asked
of him. It adds that no objection was taken by Mr Bader himself on the basis of
an inability to understand
English. The Nominal Insurer notes Mr Bader provided
in English, and without an interpreter, a statement to factual investigators
dated 10 December 2014, a written letter to the WorkCover Authority dated
14 September 2014, a statement annexed to a miscellaneous
application, an
affidavit, and a letter of demand to Mr Abdelahad for damages on a business
letterhead.
Nominal Insurer goes on to submit that Mr Bader’s credit as to any claim
of mistake in completing documents or giving evidence
due to poor English should
not and could not be accepted, as the preponderance of evidence was that he did
not use an interpreter
to complete multiple documents in English. It says the
inference that should have been made was he read and understood the employer
injury claim form and pre-injury average weekly earnings form and completed
these forms correctly. The Nominal Insurer argues the
learned Arbitrator’s
favourable finding of fact based on credit, was inconsistent with these
documents and glaringly improbable.
Nominal Insurer, referring to
(as applied in
), submits that a finding of credit in favour of Mr Bader, and the
consequential finding “that the ticking of the boxes
‘permanent’
and ‘full-time’ was
‘guileless’
contrary to the preponderance of the evidence”, such that the decision of
the learned Arbitrator was affected by error.
It adds Mr Bader was an
experienced business person who had owned cabinetmaking businesses since 1967
under different names and had
employed at least two staff to assist his
business. Citing
Fox v Percy
, the Nominal Insurer submits that the
conclusion that Mr Bader made a mistake in completing the employer injury claim
form is improbable
and contrary to the compelling inference he did not have any
difficulties in completing documents in English and was able to understand
Nominal Insurer submits that the learned Arbitrator’s finding that Mr
Bader answered questions directly in English but could
have or should have used
an interpreter was without basis given the fact Mr Bader was able to answer
questions directly in English.
It says this conclusion was not open based on the
evidence and was not a claim made by
It was also
contrary to the evidence Mr Bader completed documents without the assistance of
an interpreter, including an affidavit.
The Nominal Insurer says it was apparent
from the cross-examination before both arbitrators that Mr Bader did not require
the assistance
of an interpreter and this cross-examination was conducted
without objection by Mr Bader’s legal representatives.
Nominal Insurer further submits the learned Arbitrator did not have regard to
the statement of Mr Bader dated 10 December 2014
at [10], where he stated that
when Mr Abdelahad commenced employment: “I told him I did not have
enough work for the two of
us and that he would have to work alone at times
whilst I searched for more work”. It contends this statement contradicted
Mr Bader’s evidence that the business was established with the intention
he would work on his own and would not seek to expand.
The Nominal Insurer says
this contradiction was not addressed by the learned Arbitrator and the failure
to address this contradiction
was a significant oversight and constituted an
error by failing to have regard to relevant evidence as to
credibility.
Nominal Insurer further complains the learned Arbitrator did not find
Mr Abdelahad was not truthful in his evidence, yet rejected
Mr Abdelahad’s evidence. It says this was an error in circumstances
where Mr Abdelahad gave evidence that he was employed on
a full-time basis.
It says if Mr Abdelahad’s evidence was truthful, then his evidence on
the matter of his employment had to
be accepted as contradicting Mr Bader.
Nominal Insurer’s written submissions on this ground conclude that these
errors meant there was an error in finding that
Mr Bader was not an exempt
employer for the purposes of s 155AA of the 1987 Act. It says this has led
to an error of law that Mr
Bader was not liable to reimburse the Nominal Insurer
under s 145 of the 1987 Act.
the Nominal Insurer’s supplementary submissions lodged after receipt of
the Commission’s transcripts of proceedings
of 7 June 2019 and 5 July
2019, the Nominal Insurer further submits the learned Arbitrator’s
acceptance of Mr Bader was contrary
to the weight of the evidence. It says Mr
Bader gave evidence through an interpreter at the arbitration hearing on 7 June
was challenged by the Nominal Insurer as to the need for an
interpreter. The Nominal Insurer states the learned Arbitrator’s
acceptance of the need for an interpreter erred, as it did not take into account
the fact Mr Bader was asked by Arbitrator Homan
at the first arbitration hearing
if he was happy to give evidence in English to which he replied
“yes”. The Nominal Insurer
mentions Mr Bader’s affirmation to
give evidence and says the fact that Mr Bader was happy to give evidence under
examination
in chief and in cross-examination before Arbitrator Homan was
contrary to an acceptance of his credit when he sought to give evidence
the learned Arbitrator using an interpreter.
The Nominal Insurer’s oral submissions
its oral submissions, the Nominal Insurer asserts error on the part of the
learned Arbitrator in accepting Mr Bader’s evidence
and credit by
accepting Mr Bader employed Mr Abdelahad on a temporary basis. Referring to
the principles espoused in
Whiteley Muir
, the Nominal
Insurer submits that those principles were recently affirmed and followed in
recent presidential decisions.
The Nominal Insurer specifically relies upon [19] and [26] of
Nominal Insurer refers to
, at [20] and submits the learned
Arbitrator erred in paragraphs [120]–[133] of the reasons in accordance
with these principles,
particularly
Nominal Insurer quoted the learned Arbitrator’s reasons at [120], and
submitted that what was significant in that paragraph
was the use of the word
“casual”. Turning to Mr Abdelahad’s statement, the
Nominal Insurer points out that Mr Abdelahad
expressly stated that he was
employed on a full-time basis
which is contradictory of the use of the word “casual” as set out in
Mr Bader’s statement to
investigators.
The Nominal
Insurer argues that to assert, as the learned Arbitrator did, “in the
absence of any at least expressed denial
of evidence by [Mr Abdelahad] is ... an
response to my enquiry in argument regarding the description of the terms
“casual” and “full time”, the
Nominal Insurer clarified
that for the learned Arbitrator to assert that there was no denial was wrong in
fact, particularly, referring
to the learned Arbitrator’s statement
“I do not see any such contradiction”. The Nominal Insurer submits
it too highly and disregards the contradiction and is just simply
wrong. It adds that insufficient weight has been given to what
was drawn to the
learned Arbitrator’s attention as to the contradiction.
Nominal Insurer again referred to the injury claim
and pre-injury average
weekly earnings form
completed by Mr Bader. The Nominal Insurer notes the options on the injury claim
form that were ticked were “full
time” and “permanent”
and the options of “temporary”, or “other” were not
ticked. The Nominal
Insurer submits that was an option available to Mr Bader to
nominate on the forms that this was a limited employment. It could have
on the option of temporary, but that was not adopted. The Nominal Insurer says
the learned Arbitrator did not take into
account or give any weight to the
submission that this document was declared by Mr Bader as having been read and
the information
as being true and
The Nominal Insurer
argues this was submitted to the learned Arbitrator in its written submissions
dated 2 August 2019
submits that that argument does not appear to have been considered, or given any
weight at all, even in passing, by the learned
Arbitrator.
other words, the Nominal Insurer submits the acceptance of Mr Bader’s
explanation that this was simply a mistake overlooked
material facts. It says
these material facts were the declaration and the fact that this mistake was
apparently made on at least
two occasions in those forms by the person who was
the employer. It argues the learned Arbitrator gave undue or no weight at all
that declaration, despite it being drawn to the learned Arbitrator’s
attention in written submissions. The Nominal Insurer
submits that “those
declarations are weighty documents ... [which] attest to the representations
made therein but they simply
do not seem to have factored at all in the
reasoning process of the
Arbitrator.”
Nominal Insurer argues, was an attack on Mr Bader’s credibility and needed
to be dealt with in some way by the learned
Arbitrator.
Nominal Insurer further contends error on the part of the learned Arbitrator in
his reasons at [123] that Mr Bader’s credit
was impugned by the use of an
interpreter to give evidence. It notes Mr Bader gave evidence before Arbitrator
Homan without an interpreter.
It says he provided a number of documents,
including an affidavit and wrote a letter of demand for $6,600 that was written
in English.
The Nominal Insurer notes these appear to have been done without the
use of an interpreter. It argues these were not short documents;
business records, a precursor to litigation, and an affidavit, as well as
testimony before Arbitrator Homan.
Nominal Insurer submits the inference that was drawn by the learned Arbitrator
at [123] that at “times he answered questions
directly in English without
using an interpreter, perhaps when he could have or should have” is
contrary to the preponderance
of the evidence. The Nominal Insurer submits the
inference that should have been drawn, consistent with the preponderance of the
evidence, was that Mr Bader was able to understand and complete all documents,
including those submitted to the Authority. It contends
Mr Bader is not
unsophisticated and the preponderance of evidence counted against the favourable
credit finding given to him with
respect to the use of an interpreter. The
Nominal Insurer argues that this means that the conclusion at [124] of the
learned Arbitrator’s
reasoning is incorrect. The learned Arbitrator found
that “it is likely he did inadvertently fail to tick the
‘temporary’
Nominal Insurer argues the conclusion that the investigator did not enquire
of in response to criticisms
of Mr Bader’s evidence as to his failure to inform the investigator of the
initial notice to cease
work. It submits this point does not stand when one
considers the initial reference that was sent to the investigator for the
of interviewing Mr Abdelahad, Mr Bader and to investigate the
circumstances, not only of injury, but of employment. The Nominal Insurer
to the factual investigation
the comments “please obtain relevant medical information and information
pertaining to the injury from the worker and employer”
“Employer is claiming to be an exempt
employer (total wages under $7,500.00) however the worker has indicated he was
of $1,200.00 per week and was employed on a full time basis and had
commenced employment approximately 2–3 months prior. Employer
information is conflicting. Please obtain all information possible regarding the
worker’s contract of employment,
commencement date and wages paid each
week and amount IW (injured worker) has received to date.”
Nominal Insurer also notes it says: “[p]lease obtain information regarding
any other employees that are employed by the
employer”. The Nominal
Insurer submits that in both evidence and submissions, it asserted that the
crucial questions that were
raised in cross-examination were not asked of the
employer, that is, the absence of any reference to the notice to cease work
provided; absence of any reference to the witness Mr Phillip Kass; absence
of material that became apparent in cross-examination
that went to credit simply
were not raised by the investigator because it could be inferred from the
answers given that the investigator
did not ask the right questions. The Nominal
Insurer asserts that it is apparent from the evidence that that is simply
It says the best evidence available as to the nature of employment
was the evidence that was contemporaneous, which was contained
Bader’s statement referred to above, Mr Abdelahad’s statement and
the pre injury average weekly earnings form and
employer’s injury claim
Nominal Insurer asserts the learned Arbitrator erred when he failed to have
regard to Mr Bader’s statement dated 10 December
2014 at [10], where
he stated: “I told him I did not have enough work for the two of us and
that he would have to work alone
at times while I searched for more
work.” The Nominal Insurer submits this statement was referred to in its
written submissions
at page 16 and expressly quoted the words “searched
for work”. The Nominal Insurer submits the statement of intention
inferentially raises the intent to keep Mr Abdelahad on and it is clearly
contradictory of the assertion that employment was only
to be for three to four
weeks because Mr Bader did not have enough work to keep Mr Abdelahad on. It
went against the credit of Mr
Bader and yet it did not seem to have been
considered or given any weight by the learned Arbitrator.
Nominal Insurer submits that at [125] and [126] of the Reasons, the inferences
drawn by the learned Arbitrator in those paragraphs
Mr Bader’s written submissions
Bader first refers to the asserted error by the learned Arbitrator in dealing
with Mr Abdelahad’s statement “I commenced
employment on a full
time basis”, and the learned Arbitrator’s finding that there was no
contradiction between that evidence
and a finding of casual and temporary
employment. Mr Bader submits that this submission adopts a false dichotomy and
the learned
Arbitrator was correct. Mr Bader contends there is nothing to
prevent a casual temporary worker working full-time hours. Arrangements
full-time casual employees are long
Mr Bader submits the
notion of full-time employment is in contradistinction to part-time employment.
A statement by a person that
he is full time does not contradict a finding that
he was casual or temporary.
relation to the box ticked “permanent”, Mr Bader argues that that
was carefully dealt with by the learned Arbitrator
at [120] of the reasons. Mr
Bader notes the learned Arbitrator found at [121] and [122] of the reasons, that
he believed Mr Bader’s
evidence when he stated that it was a mistake. Mr
Bader refers to his evidence that when he operated a more substantial business
that employed many employees, he employed two women who did the office work, his
English was poor, and that while he is able to speak
English, he was not
confident when filling in
to the Nominal Insurer’s “rather bold submission” that there
was an error as to credit at [8]–[9]
of its written submissions (see
[121]–[123] above) and [2] of its supplementary submissions (see [128]
above), Mr Bader submits
that that submission is inherently contrary to the
authorities it referred to above. He argues it entirely misunderstands the task
of the Commission upon appeal. It submits “it would be impossible for the
Tribunal to gainsay a finding as to [E]nglish proficiency
without having seen or
heard the witness’s evidence”. In any event, Mr Bader refers to
transcript references,
[146] of the Reasons, which he says shows Mr Bader’s significantly less
than fluent use of English. Mr Bader submits the
learned Arbitrator’s
that even if one
was familiar with the English language, in circumstances where it is not
one’s native language, there needs
to be assistance of an interpreter in
the legal setting, is correct. This, Mr Bader says, is unexceptional. In any
event, contrary
evidence of Mr Abdelahad was also at times given through an
interpreter and at times without. He also refers to Mr Abdelahad’s
statement of 6 June 2019, which was not made through an interpreter.
to the Nominal Insurer’s submission at [11] (see above at [125]) that
there was a contradiction in the evidence of
Mr Bader, Mr Bader submits there is
no contradiction in his evidence. He submits that as the learned Arbitrator
found, Mr Bader was
asked through family references to engage Mr Abdelahad
and told Mr Abdelahad he could only employ him for a short term to assist
him to get into the
Bader submits this ground is without merit and it does not even show a finding
contrary to the preponderance of evidence, let alone
one that is glaringly
improbable.
Bader refers to the Nominal Insurer’s submissions at [12] (see above at
[126]), that the learned Arbitrator did not find
that Mr Abdelahad was not
truthful in his evidence, yet rejected Mr Abdelahad’s evidence. Mr
Bader submits the Nominal Insurer’s
submission is not consistent with the
express comments and obvious inferences from the learned Arbitrator’s
(a) “the worker’s evidence is not totally
reliable either”;
(b) “I do not accept that
(c) “nevertheless, there is sufficient doubt about his evidence being
totally reliable to warrant care needing to be taken with
(d) “I have largely accepted the evidence of the applicant,
particularly on the critical
Mr Bader submits those findings are a clear example of preferring the
evidence of one witness over another and there was no error
Mr Bader’s oral submissions
Bader refers to [12] of the Nominal Insurer’s written submissions, where
it was submitted the learned Arbitrator did not
find Mr Abdelahad was not
truthful and yet rejected his evidence, which Mr Bader says appears to be the
crux of Ground 1. Mr Bader
submits it is not necessary for the Arbitrator to
find that one witness is untruthful in order to prefer the evidence of another.
He refers to the Reasons at [153]–[155] and says that there were findings
made as to the reliability of the evidence of each
of the parties. Mr Bader
specifically refers to the last sentence of [155] where the learned Arbitrator
said: “Nevertheless,
there is sufficient doubt about his evidence being
totally reliable to warrant care needing to be taken with it.”
Bader contends that the learned Arbitrator was not saying Mr Abdelahad was a
liar, but was saying there was a contest. He notes
there were issues with Mr
Abdelahad’s evidence. He cautions one must be careful and notes that to
the extent he was required
to, the learned Arbitrator preferred the evidence of
Mr Bader in relation to the crucial matters.
Bader made submissions directed to specific pieces of evidence. I will refer to
each in turn.
Bader first referred to the employer injury claim
Noting the Nominal
Insurer’s assertion of error when Mr Bader did not tick the box
“temporary”, Mr Bader asserts
the document itself refers to a number
of conclusions as to employment. He notes a number of headings overlap and the
document is
complex, such that “even an employment lawyer would have
difficulty answering”.
He also referred to my enquiry of the Nominal Insurer in argument of being a
full-time temporary employee.
Bader also refers to the uncertainty of casual employment and refers to there
now being “long term casuals”. Mr Bader
asserts the difficulty with
fixing any importance upon this document is that it was completed by him, not a
labour lawyer. Mr Bader
submits he is a carpenter who was asked to complete this
document and says that the Nominal Insurer’s submission that on the
that Mr Bader has completed the document in error, there should be an adverse
credit finding made against him on appeal is
an ambitious submission.
Bader further refers to his language skills, which he says were acknowledged by
the learned Arbitrator. He submits that the learned
Arbitrator had the advantage
of seeing and hearing Mr Bader give evidence. Mr Bader adds that when the
transcript of his evidence
is read, it is clear that Mr Bader had difficulty
understanding and also that the transcriptionist had difficulty in understanding
Mr Bader. He points out that the learned Arbitrator made a finding that Mr Bader
would have been better off giving evidence through
an interpreter and that he
had English language difficulties. Mr Bader argues that this sort of finding is
impossible to overturn
response to the Nominal Insurer’s submission that Mr Bader completed an
affidavit, Mr Bader refers to the transcript of 7
June 2019 at
14.20–30 where he was criticised about preparing the affidavit himself, to
which Mr Bader responded: “My
solicitor speaks a little bit of Arabic so
he helped me do this affidavit.” Reference is made to the learned
Arbitrator’s
observation at 17.20, where he said:
understand that, but you know that occasionally if the – even if one is
familiar with the English language, in circumstances
where it’s not his or
her native language, there needs to be assistance of an interpreter in the legal
setting. I think that’s
what he’s saying, and he’s said it a
couple of times now.”
relation to the alleged contradiction between Mr Bader’s two statements,
Mr Bader submits that there is no contradiction.
The first statement says:
“I told him I did not have enough work for the two of us and he would have
to work alone at times
when I searched for more work.” Mr Bader notes the
second statement refers to his evidence that he would not be seeking to
Mr Bader argues that in the first statement, he is not seeking to expand at all,
and does not even have enough work for the
business as it currently stood.
Mr Bader submits this was supportive of the proposition that he engaged Mr
Abdelahad for a short
time as a family favour, which was what the learned
Arbitrator concluded.
Bader agreed to the proposition that in relation to the declaration completed by
him in the employer injury claim form, the learned
Arbitrator dealt with this by
evaluating and considering all of the material before him. Once the learned
Arbitrator reached the
view there was an error in it, the declaration could not
be held against him.
The Nominal Insurer’s submissions in reply
its written submissions in reply, the Nominal Insurer asserts there is no false
dichotomy. The Nominal Insurer submits there was
contradictory evidence as to
the allegation that Mr Abdelahad was employed on a limited basis, referring
to the employer’s
report of injury form and the pre-injury average weekly
earnings form, which were both ticked “permanent” and
“full-time”
by Mr Bader. The Nominal Insurer contends Mr Bader has
not dealt with the fact that these documents were signed by him as having
read and attested to the truth. It adds that nominations on the employer’s
report of injury form and the pre-injury average
weekly earnings form were both
consistent with Mr Abdelahad’s statement dated 14 November 2014,
in which he stated he was employed
as a carpenter on a “full time
Nominal Insurer then refers to [32] (see [143] above) of Mr Bader’s
submissions, arguing it is the case that the “compelling
that was available was that there was no mistake in the completion of the
employer injury claim form or pre-injury
average weekly earnings form. It says
this compelling inference is based on these signed and attested forms, as well
as the fact
that Mr Bader had previously given evidence including by an
affidavit without the benefit of an interpreter.
referring to Mr Bader’s submissions at [40] (see [146] above), the Nominal
Insurer maintains it remains the case that
notwithstanding the statements made
by the learned Arbitrator as referred to, no finding was made that
Mr Abdelahad was not truthful
in the evidence he gave. The Nominal Insurer
cites [155] of the Reasons in which he expressly stated he was not inclined
make any adverse findings about the other criticisms of his evidence
by [Mr Bader]”, the Nominal Insurer says at its highest,
it was stated
that it was necessary for “care needing to be taken with
Ground Two: The Arbitrator erred at [136]–[137] with
respect to the FYE 2015 tax return
The Nominal Insurer’s written submissions
Nominal Insurer alleges the learned Arbitrator made mixed errors as to fact and
law in the interpretation and inferences to be
drawn from Mr Bader’s tax
return. This relates to the learned Arbitrator’s findings at [136] of the
Reasons that the
total business income of $234,935 is consistent with Mr
Bader’s position that he worked alone and did not really need an employee.
The Nominal Insurer submits these findings were contrary to the weight of
evidence and are therefore an error of fact and law. The
Nominal Insurer notes
the submission it made
that the tax return showed substantial business income at $234,935 and was
inconsistent with the assertions made by Mr Bader
that the business was not able
to support Mr Abdelahad on a permanent, full-time basis. The Nominal
Insurer contends the business
income was inconsistent with such assertions and
was inconsistent with an allegation that Mr Bader had no reasonable grounds for
believing that he would be an exempt employer.
Nominal Insurer further submits the tax return was contradictory of Mr
Bader’s evidence. It says the use of contractors
equivalent to $45,572 is
indicative of a successful business that would be more likely to employ persons
with wages paid in excess
of $7,500 for the year ending 30 June 2015. It asserts
the conclusions in [136] of the reasons are therefore contrary to the
preponderance
of the evidence.
note at this point, that in its supplementary submissions, the Nominal Insurer
has made submissions under the heading “Ground
2: the Arbitrator erred at
[146]–[151] in finding that the Nominal Insurer and the Worker did not
adequately contradict the
service of the notice of termination”. In its
written submissions in reply, the Nominal Insurer clarifies that those
submissions
are made in respect of Ground 3, not Ground
Accordingly, I will deal
with those submissions under the third ground of appeal.
The Nominal Insurer’s oral submissions
Nominal Insurer refers to Mr Bader’s statement that his intention was to
set up the business in his retirement and he never
had an intention to expand
it. It refers to Mr Bader’s
where he says:
“I advised him [an insurance broker] I was coming out of retirement after
selling Acme Kitchens and was setting
up a new business for me to operate as a
sole trader.”
Nominal Insurer also refers to Mr Bader’s evidence that he did not want to
keep Mr Abdelahad on because he did not have
that much work and was not
busy. It refers to the tax return and estimated eligible income of
and argues it is
significant and inconsistent with a business that was set up for Mr Bader to act
in his retirement. There is also
reference to total wages paid in that tax
return of $4,800. The Nominal Insurer argues that is not inconsistent with Mr
Abdelahad’s
version of events that for the period from the commencement of
employment until the injury, he was paid $550 per week into his bank
after a deduction of tax of $50. The Nominal Insurer suggests it is not
inconceivable that that arrangement would be set
up to minimise tax by paying a
portion of an income cash in hand. It says this is Mr Abdelahad’s
Nominal Insurer also says that it had been drawn to the learned
Arbitrator’s attention that in the tax return there were
contractor,
subcontractor and commission expenses of $45,572. The Nominal Insurer says that
the contractor expenses are inconsistent
with a small business. It argues it was
not simply trading sufficiently to be able to employ people. The Nominal Insurer
the learned Arbitrator made reference to the other expenses of $153,537
as being referrable to potentially other things, including
rent. It notes
however, that rent is a separate expense of $28,000.
Nominal Insurer argues the inference that should have been drawn, based upon a
preponderance of the evidence, including the demand
that was made that referred
to a job of eight kitchens commencing the next day, indicates a business that
would have employed Mr
Abdelahad on a permanent basis for an extended
period of time. It contends the preponderance of the evidence did not support
inference that the tax return did not show a business that could employ a
worker for an extended period of time.
Nominal Insurer agreed with the proposition I put during argument that it shows
it was of a significant magnitude that it would
need other people working in the
business to derive the income in the tax return, but also added that the
inference is that this
was a business that was sufficiently busy that it would
be reasonable for a person to anticipate that there would be wages payable
excess of $7,500. The Nominal Insurer refers to
and submits the
evidence known from that tax return is that there was significant trade being
conducted such that a reasonable person
in the position of Mr Bader would not
have believed that his wages would be less than $7,500 for the financial year
ending 30 June
Mr Bader’s written submissions
noted above, in his general submissions, Mr Bader submitted that this ground
should be rejected without further examination as
the Nominal Insurer has not
adopted the proper test to challenge these findings and that even if the
submissions were accepted, they
would not lead to a conclusion the appeal should
be upheld in the absence of a finding that the findings were contrary to
incontrovertible
facts or uncontested evidence. He submits the Nominal
Insurer’s reliance on the alternative test “of the findings being
glaringly improbabl[e] or contrary to incontrovertible facts or uncontested
evidence” is misplaced. Mr Bader also notes that
the present case is not
one of those rare cases referred to in
Fox v Percy
to the Nominal Insurer’s assertion that Mr Bader’s tax return is
contrary to the assertion that the employer
did not really need an employee, Mr
Bader submits that conclusion “does not leap from the
the learned Arbitrator found at [136] of the reasons “While total business
income is noted at $234,935, total expenses
come to $234,421”. Mr Bader
argues that does not show evidence of a highly profitable business. He says
neither that evidence,
nor the contractor’s payments of $45,527, are
necessarily inconsistent with the learned Arbitrator’s finding.
Bader submits “[a]n amount of $234,935 is not above any threshold that
requires employment”. Mr Bader cites as an example,
barrister could earn that amount of money without any inference being drawn that
the person needed an employee.”
He says the Nominal Insurer’s real
ground of appeal is that the Nominal Insurer disagrees with the conclusion,
which Mr Bader
says is not a sufficient ground to overturn the
The Nominal Insurer’s submissions in reply
the Nominal Insurer’s written submissions in reply, it contends Mr Bader,
in his written submissions, did not deal with the
Nominal Insurer’s
assertion that total business income of $234,935 was substantial and
inconsistent with an assertion made
by Mr Bader that his business was not able
to support Mr Abdelahad on a permanent, full-time basis. It argues that it
case that the assertion is made of a highly profitable business. The
Nominal Insurer submits the inferences that were to be drawn
were that a
business income of $234,935 shows substantial business income and the use of
contractors equivalent to $45,572 is indicative
of a successful business that
would be more likely to employ persons with wages in excess of $7,500 in the
year ending 30 June 2015.
Nominal Insurer refers to Mr Bader’s analogy to a barrister and submits
that that analogy should be rejected, as it can
be inferred that a barrister
would have a higher charge-out rate than a person working in carpentry and
kitchen fittings (which was
Mr Bader’s and Mr Abdelahad’s area
Ground Three: The Arbitrator erred at [146]–[151] in
finding that the Nominal Insurer and the Worker did not adequately contradict
the service of the notice of termination
The Nominal Insurer’s written submissions
Nominal Insurer asserts error of mixed fact and law on the part of the learned
Arbitrator by finding the Nominal Insurer and Mr
Abdelahad did not adequately
dispute Mr Bader’s claim that he provided Mr Abdelahad with a notice
of termination dated 19 October
2014. That notice, Mr Bader said, was handed to
Mr Abdelahad on the morning of 20 October 2014. The Nominal Insurer submits
it challenged Mr Bader’s evidence on this in the arbitration hearing
before Arbitrator Homan. The Nominal Insurer submits the
learned Arbitrator
erred at [146] and [147] of the reasons in finding that the Nominal Insurer and
Mr Abdelahad did not contradict
that the notice was given by Mr Bader.
Nominal Insurer contends that the extract of cross-examination quoted by the
learned Arbitrator was in isolation and did not consider
the preceding cross
examination on this topic. It argues “[t]here was a clear and direct
challenge of the claim that the termination
notice was provided to
[Mr Abdelahad] and as part of a challenge to [Mr Bader] that he did not
mention the notice in his statement
dated 10 December
The Nominal
Insurer contends the full extract of the cross examination must be read from
page 7 of the transcript of 30 May 2018,
through to page 11. It submits the
reference to the transcript at 8.30 is incomplete and not an accurate reflection
of the challenge.
The Nominal Insurer says it is apparent on a reading of the
totality of the cross examination that there was a clear challenge by
Nominal Insurer to Mr Bader’s claim that the notice dated 19 October
2014 was given to Mr Abdelahad.
Nominal Insurer asserts error on the part of the learned Arbitrator in
that there was no
evidence from Mr Abdelahad to contradict Mr Bader’s evidence that the
notice was given to Mr Abdelahad. It
refers to the learned
Arbitrator’s statement that a “submission” had been made by
Mr Abdelahad’s solicitors
and submits this did not amount to
evidence. The Nominal Insurer argues that the “submission” was a
reference to a letter
from Mr Abdelahad’s solicitors to the WorkCover
Authority dated 21 May 2018.
That letter, the Nominal Insurer says, was admitted into evidence without
objection. The Nominal Insurer contends this letter was
clear in the denial that
the notice of termination was given to Mr Abdelahad. The Nominal Insurer
argues this letter was a matter
on which the Commission could inform itself of
pursuant to s 354(2) of the 1998 Act as contradiction of Mr Bader’s claim
evidence. It says that to regard the letter as other than an adequate
contradiction from Mr Abdelahad is to dispute the authority
solicitor to act on instructions for Mr Abdelahad and to conclude the
solicitor did not have instructions. The Nominal Insurer
argues there is no
basis to find that the letter was not clearly and adequately a contradiction by
Mr Abdelahad of having been given
the notice dated 19 October 2014.
Nominal Insurer concludes by submitting the learned Arbitrator’s
conclusion that it and Mr Abdelahad did not adequately
contradict the notice was
the Nominal Insurer’s supplementary written submissions, it refers to the
learned Arbitrator’s finding at [146] of
the reasons where he says the
Nominal Insurer did not “adequately” contradict the assertion of the
service of notice
of termination dated 19 October 2014 and [149] of the reasons
that there was no evidence from Mr Abdelahad to contradict Mr Bader
gave notice of the termination to Mr Abdelahad. The Nominal Insurer asserts
these were errors of fact and law, as well as
a denial of procedural
Nominal Insurer submits the transcript of 7 June 2019
demonstrates
that counsel for
Mr Bader did not object to Mr Abdelahad’s solicitor’s letter
dated 21 May 2018 which contained a denial
of service of the notice of
termination. It maintains there was no issue raised by the learned Arbitrator
whether this letter was
evidence or not. The Nominal Insurer refers to the
Application to Admit Late Documents dated 30 May 2018, which it says was
before Arbitrator Homan without objection. It adds that the
cross-examination of Mr Bader before Arbitrator Homan, challenging Mr
Bader’s assertion the notice of termination was served, was predicated on
Mr Abdelahad’s letter from his solicitor dated
21 May 2018. The
Nominal Insurer submits that in cross-examination on 5 July 2019, Mr Bader did
not challenge Mr Abdelahad by putting
that the notice of termination was
Nominal Insurer contends that the matter proceeded on the basis that the letter
dated 21 May 2018 was evidence of a contradiction
of the service of the
notice of termination. It submits the learned Arbitrator denied the Nominal
Insurer procedural fairness by
failing to raise with it, or Mr Abdelahad,
any concern that that letter was not evidence of a contradiction. It claims Mr
not make a submission to that effect, referring to
Mr Bader’s written submissions dated 7 June 2019 and 22 August 2019.
Nominal Insurer submits the finding at [149] of the reasons plainly affected
the outcome of the hearing and affected the reasoning
process of the learned
Arbitrator, “on a central evidentiary issue”.
Nominal Insurer continues that Mr Abdelahad was called to give evidence and
could have testified as to the matters contained in
the letter if the learned
Arbitrator’s concerns had been made known. The Nominal Insurer submits
this was not a point raised
by the parties nor the learned Arbitrator in an
extensive hearing in a matter that had a lengthy history. It concludes by
the finding by the learned Arbitrator, that the letter dated 21 May
2018 was not evidence without a prior indication of this concern,
was a denial
of procedural fairness, citing
The Nominal Insurer’s oral submissions
Nominal Insurer alleges this ground contains the most significant errors. It
refers to the learned Arbitrator’s reasons
at [146]–[149] in which
the learned Arbitrator found that Mr Abdelahad did not contradict Mr
Bader’s evidence that the
notice to finish had been handed to him. The
Nominal Insurer submits this was an error and the finding that the Nominal
Insurer did
not adequately contradict that this notice had been handed to
Mr Abdelahad was also an error. It argues these errors affected the
outcome, as they determined whether Mr Bader’s credit could be accepted as
the notice to finish work was the only objective
evidence that employment was
allegedly for a limited period.
Nominal Insurer refers to the transcript of proceedings before Arbitrator Homan
on 30 May 2018 at pages 6 to 11 and says it is
clear that there was a
fulsome contest of the allegation of provision of the notice to finish. This
transcript was admitted into
evidence in the present proceedings, and the
learned Arbitrator noted in the reasons at [5] that he had read that transcript.
Nominal Insurer specifically referred to the following
“Q. Yes. And you had no reason to hide anything from
him, did you?
did ask me a lot of question [sic] but I find that he didn’t put down all
the – all what I said.
didn’t make any mention in your statement dated 10 December 2014 of this
letter that you say you provided the worker, do
didn’t tell him what to write down, the question he asked me I
this, the Nominal Insurer submits it was clear from this point that there was a
challenge whether or not that letter was provided
to Mr Abdelahad. It says the
second answer above confirms that in the interview with the investigator Mr
Bader made no mention of
the letter dated 19 October 2014. The Nominal Insurer
adds that this line of questioning continued and included raising with Mr Bader
why it was that he gave Mr Abdelahad the letter at approximately 7.30 am on 20
October 2014, but then still drove him to the worksite
where they worked
together until approximately 4.00 pm when the injury occurred. The Nominal
Insurer notes it was put to Mr Bader
that it seemed somewhat incredulous that he
did not refuse to take Mr Abdelahad to the worksite at Hurlstone Park. The
Nominal Insurer
also recites the following question and
“Q. I have to do this formally, sir. I put it to you
that you never gave [Mr Abdelahad] a letter dated 19 October 2014?
Probably be the following
adds that there was clarification on the point, but argues that it was clearly
put to Mr Bader that he never gave the letter to
Mr Abdelahad. The Nominal
Insurer says it was confirmed at page 9, lines 10–15 of the transcript
that if Mr Bader had given
Mr Abdelahad the letter, he “probably”
would have referred to it in his statement dated 10 December 2014.
Nominal Insurer then notes that the first time Mr Bader referred to the letter
was when he wrote to the WorkCover Authority on
14 September 2015, nearly a year
after the injury. It says what is significant about this is that counsel for Mr
Abdelahad clarified
that there had been a challenge to the issue of the letter
dated 19 October 2014, and cited the following after Mr Bader had been
“The only thing I’m ... I think my friend has
actually dealt with it and, in fact, I don’t need to seek your leave
cross-examine but I just want to be clear that it’s not accepted as a
proposition from the second respondent that the letter
was given has been
denied, as long as I don’t have to formally put it on – it’s
been dealt with in cross-examination,
I think, in any event by Mr
It further notes an unidentified male voice then says:
“We’ve got no ..(not transcribable 00.19.08).. specifically put
to him that that letter was never given to the
Nominal Insurer submits that counsel for Mr Abdelahad clarified that he did not
need to cross-examine on the issue of whether
or not the letter of 19 October
2014 had been given to Mr Abdelahad. It submits that this is apparent from the
transcript and the
totality of the cross-examination of Mr Abdelahad from pages
7 to 11 of the transcript of 30 May 2018.
Nominal Insurer contends the written evidence that is referred to in the
cross-examination of Mr Abdelahad is the letter from
Mr Abdelahad’s
solicitors dated 21 May 2018 that appears in the AALD dated 30 May 2018 at page
10. The Nominal Insurer refers
to the passage of the letter: “The Second
Respondent maintains he did not receive the alleged termination letter,
conveniently
dated 19 October 2014, being the day prior to his workplace
injury”. The Nominal Insurer submits what is significant about
that it was written by solicitors on instructions in the context of litigation
before the Commission. The letter says Mr
Abdelahad did not receive the
alleged letter. The Nominal Insurer refers to the use of “alleged”,
as it means that there
is a live dispute this letter even exists, and it could
not be clearer that they asserted to the Commission that the letter was not
Nominal Insurer says that the learned Arbitrator held this was not sufficient
evidence of a denial that the letter was provided.
The Nominal Insurer submits
this is wrong because it is plain from the transcript that Mr Abdelahad was
directly challenged in cross-examination
and the letter dated 21 May 2018, which was admitted into evidence, was a
denial. The Nominal
Insurer notes the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence but is to have regard to such matters as it thinks fit. The Nominal
Insurer asserts this is a clear denial and there is no unfairness in asserting
Mr Abdelahad denied receiving the letter dated 19
October 2014.
relation to [151] of the reasons, the Nominal Insurer asserts the learned
Arbitrator is in error because he said it was not evidence
in circumstances
where the letter of 21 May 2018 was admitted into evidence and where Mr
Abdelahad was not directly challenged when
he was cross-examined as to whether
or not the letter of 19 October 2014 was given to him. The Nominal Insurer
contends the error
really arises from the fact the learned Arbitrator found that
there was no challenge in circumstances where he did not attempt to
analyse that
Mr Abdelahad, via his solicitor, denied receipt of the letter. The learned
Arbitrator acknowledged the procedure before
the Commission is to be conducted
with as little formality and technicality as the proper consideration of the
matter permits, but
does not take into account the fact the letter concedes and
acknowledges that it has been prepared for the purposes of litigation
made directly contradictory of the assertion that the letter was provided. To
assert, the Nominal Insurer contends, that
the conclusions still need to be
drawn from satisfactory material in a probative sense to ensure that they are
not seen to be capricious,
arbitrary or without proper foundation ignores the
substance of those matters referred to.
Nominal Insurer submits this leads to a fundamental error at [156] of the
Reasons, because having reviewed all of this, the learned
Arbitrator made the
finding that in all the circumstances, including the lack of evidence for each
respondent to contradict Mr Bader,
the learned Arbitrator found it more likely
than not that Mr Bader did give the notice to finish to Mr Abdelahad on 20
October 2014.
The Nominal Insurer submits that that finding was based on a false
conclusion that there was a lack of evidence for each respondent
to contradict
Nominal Insurer contends the learned Arbitrator led from a proposition at [146]
when he says, “I do not believe that the
worker does contradict this
evidence”. That, the Nominal Insurer submits, was the commencement of the
analysis that concluded
at [156] and is flawed. Noting its written submissions,
the Nominal Insurer says the use of the word “adequately” is
clear. It says it either is or is not contradicted. It adds “that is a
word that seems to be normative without identifying
what would constitute an
adequate contradiction in circumstances where the transcript is clear that there
was a series of contradictions”
within the totality of the cross
examination that went to all elements of a failure to notify the investigator of
the existence of
the letter. The Nominal Insurer acknowledges that while there
is an analysis, the analysis starts with a flawed proposition at [146]
Nominal Insurer notes the letter dated 21 May 2018 was given to the learned
Arbitrator at the commencement of the arbitration
hearing on 7 June 2019. It
notes that the matter was then stood over to 5 July 2019. It says that
presumably the learned Arbitrator
had time to read the material in the interim
and no concern was raised by the learned Arbitrator as to the adequacy of the
The Nominal Insurer notes the letter was tendered into evidence without
objection. It further observes Mr Abdelahad was cross-examined
on 5 July 2019
and it was not put to him that the letter of 19 October 2014 was not provided to
other words, the Nominal Insurer says that there was no indication to either it
or Mr Abdelahad’s representatives that there
was an issue with
respect to the adequacy of the denial contained in the letter of 21 May 2018 in
the mind of the Arbitrator. It
argues that if there had been such notice given,
then presumably it could have been rectified by calling further oral evidence
Mr Abdelahad on 5 July 2019. The Nominal Insurer says that what is
significant about the cross examination is that it was actually
objection because it was believed that the case was closed.
Nominal Insurer refers to the transcript of 5 July 2019 at 10.20, pages 11 to 13
and 17, in relation to the application to cross-examine
Mr Abdelahad and his
cross-examination. It argues that it would have been opportune and procedurally
fair for the learned Arbitrator
to raise a concern that the letter of 21 May
2018 was not cogent evidence for it to be addressed when he was available to
give evidence.
Further, the Nominal Insurer asserts that it was not raised by Mr
Bader that that letter did not constitute cogent evidence or an
adequate denial.
The Nominal Insurer submits this was unfair as a significant issue in the case
was whether the letter of 19 October
2014 was given to Mr Abdelahad. It contends
this informed the issue of whether Mr Abdelahad’s employment was meant to
term and therefore, Mr Bader had reasonable grounds for believing he
was an exempt employer pursuant to s 155AA of the 1987 Act.
Mr Bader’s written submissions
Bader refers to the learned Arbitrator’s reasons at [146] when the learned
Arbitrator says: “[a]gain, I do not believe
the worker does contradict
this evidence. There is no reference in the submission as to where such evidence
may be found.”
Mr Bader says the Nominal Insurer now appears to rely on
the letter to WorkCover. Mr Bader submits the learned Arbitrator was correct
find that the letter was not evidence. He says whilst the Commission has some
inquisitorial aspects, an arbitrator “is not
required to pursue some
roving search for material to bolster one party’s
In any event, Mr
Bader submits the learned Arbitrator was correct to find that the submission was
not evidence. He maintains the
submission was filed “as part of the
reconsideration material.” Mr Bader submits that that letter was in an
Application
to Admit Late Documents and in that, the author states that it
“makes the following submissions by way of reply”. This,
says, is an accurate description. Mr Bader submits this ground is without
Bader adds that in any event, the learned Arbitrator went on to deal with the
point as if this submission was evidence at [151]
of the reasons. Mr Bader
refers to the learned Arbitrator’s finding that the submission would not
have changed his view given
that “such submission still does not extend to
deny the evidence of [Mr Bader] that he had already requested, on more than
occasion, for the worker to find other work and that he needed to terminate the
worker’s employment.” Mr Bader submits
that conclusion was not
challenged. He contends that it provides an alternative reason to accept Mr
Bader’s reasonable grounds
for belief.
Bader refers to [6] of the Nominal Insurer’s supplementary submissions
(see [179] above) where the Nominal Insurer submits
“[t]he finding by the
Arbitrator that the letter dated 21 May 2018 was not evidence without a
prior indication of this concern
was a denial of procedural fairness”. Mr
Bader says that point is not comprehended by the grounds of appeal. It says that
the Nominal Insurer seeks to have that new point heard, draft further amended
grounds of appeal and submissions in support should
be lodged and served, and
leave sought to rely upon them. He says that if the intent is not to further
amend the grounds of appeal
and submissions in support, amended supplementary
submission should be lodged that are within the scope of submissions in reply.
Mr Bader submits that leave should not be granted. It says there was no error in
any event, and the learned Arbitrator was correct
at [46] of the
Mr Bader’s oral submissions
Bader referred to [146]–[151] of the Reasons and submits the learned
Arbitrator dealt with this point in some significant
detail and went through all
of the options. Mr Bader contends the learned Arbitrator stated at [146] that on
the basis of the transcript
of 30 May 2018 at 8.30, the assertion was not
contradicted and the learned Arbitrator provided reasons as to why he made that
response to the Nominal Insurer’s assertion that the transcript must be
read as a whole, Mr Bader submits that there was
not a specific refutation of
that submission. Mr Bader submits the learned Arbitrator at [148] went through
the issues of concern
with the notice and dealt with them. He refers to
[149]–[150] and notes the learned Arbitrator referred to the submission
by instructing his solicitor and properly “accept[ed] that the
worker’s solicitor would not have made that submission
instructions from him”, but says “but it is not evidence”. Mr
Bader argues that it was a statement of fact
and there is no error.
the event that the learned Arbitrator is found to be in error, Mr Bader repeats
that at [151], the learned Arbitrator dealt with
it in any event, when he says:
“Even if that evidence was taken into account these are the conclusions
that I would reach”.
to the Nominal Insurer’s submissions concerning an alleged denial of
procedural fairness, Mr Bader notes that a question
of procedural fairness needs
to be determined in the context of the statutory scheme and s 354 of the 1998
Act. He says there is
no right to cross examine in the Commission and the rule
Browne v Dunn
does not specifically apply.
Bader adds that the cross examination was limited and it is entirely appropriate
in such hearings.
Bader says the Nominal Insurer’s submission appears to be that the learned
Arbitrator should have informed the parties that
only a submission had been made
to him, not evidence, and that therefore the parties should have then been able
to seek an adjournment
so that they could get evidence or call further evidence
from Mr Abdelahad. Mr Bader submits there is no such right, procedurally
otherwise, where a decision maker is required to point out errors in the running
of a party’s case. He argues there was
no obligation on the learned
Arbitrator to point out that failure and have the parties remedy it.
The Nominal Insurer’s submissions in reply
Written submissions
its written submissions in reply, the Nominal Insurer submits Mr Bader’s
submissions do not deal with the fact that the Nominal
Insurer, as the Nominal
Insurer, plainly challenged the termination notice was provided to
Mr Abdelahad, referring to [16]–[17]
of its submissions. The Nominal
Insurer reiterates the full extract of the cross-examination by it before
Arbitrator Homan must be
read from 7.5–11.30. It refers to [146] of the
Reasons, where the learned Arbitrator says: “[a]lso, I do not agree that
the passage of [Mr Bader’s] evidence referred to in this submission does,
at least adequately, contradict his assertion.”
argues that the use of the word “adequately” is clearly erroneous as
the contradiction was placed plainly before Mr
Bader in cross-examination and
was a challenge to the claim the termination notice was provided. It says the
transcript of evidence
was admitted as evidence before the learned Arbitrator
and needs to be ready in totality.
Nominal Insurer argues that it remains the case that there was an error of the
learned Arbitrator in finding there was no evidence
from Mr Abdelahad to
contradict Mr Bader’s evidence that the notice of termination was given to
Mr Abdelahad. It reiterates
the letter dated 21 May 2018 which was referred
to as the “submission”, was admitted into evidence without objection
and was a denial that the notice of termination was given to Mr Abdelahad.
The Nominal Insurer contends this was something the Commission
could inform
itself of pursuant to s 354(2) of the 1998 Act as a contradiction of Mr
Bader’s assertion. It says that to regard
the letter as anything other
than a contradiction by Mr Abdelahad “is to dispute the authority of
the solicitor to act on instructions
from [Mr Abdelahad]”.
respect to the Nominal Insurer’s point in respect of procedural fairness,
which Mr Bader asserts is a new ground of appeal,
the Nominal Insurer submits it
is not the case that a new point is being raised by way of a further ground of
appeal. It says the
reference to a failure to provide procedural fairness in the
supplementary submissions falls within the parameters of Ground 3. The
Nominal Insurer submits a failure to provide procedural fairness is an error of
law in the reasoning of the learned Arbitrator. It
contends the errors of law in
this ground in rejecting Mr Abdelahad’s denial of receipt of the
termination notice includes
the failure of the learned Arbitrator to raise a
concern with the parties about the letter from Mr Abdelahad’s
solicitors being
evidence when it was admitted without objection. The Nominal
Insurer maintains the learned Arbitrator’s reasoning in accepting
Bader’s claim he gave the termination notice to Mr Abdelahad was
based in part on a finding at [150] of the reasons that
that letter was not
evidence of a denial or challenge to Mr Bader on this important issue.
Nominal Insurer further refers to Mr Abdelahad’s evidence given under
cross-examination. It says presumably had the learned
Arbitrator raised a
concern about the letter being evidence, then this could have been addressed by
evidence in chief. It says the
denial of procedural fairness identified in the
transcript before the learned Arbitrator can be dealt with under this
Nominal Insurer concludes that Mr Bader “has not contradicted that the
transcript of evidence before [the learned Arbitrator]
on 7 June 2019 show [sic]
the Arbitrator did not raise an indication of this concern”. The Nominal
Insurer adds that the transcript
was only available after the grounds of appeal
had been settled.
Oral submissions
its oral submissions in reply, the Nominal Insurer refers to
at [129]–[131] and [137]. In
, the Nominal Insurer
contends, a similar issue arose in relation to the evidence by Mr
The Nominal Insurer
submits the third ground of appeal in
made a complaint that
concerns about the reliability of the letter by Mr Shenouda, the accountant
were not raised with the parties
and they were not given an opportunity to
address on those concerns, which constituted a denial of procedural
notwithstanding the
contents of s 354 of the 1998 Act.
Nominal Insurer contends that, in effect, the point raised by Mr Bader was
actually relied on by him to assert procedural fairness
in a situation that is
almost analogous to that which the Nominal Insurer asserts in the present
appeal, with respect to the treatment
of the letter dated 31 May 2018, which
denied receipt of the notice of termination of employment.
Mr Abdelahad’s submissions
the end of the oral hearing, Mr Abdelahad made a submission in relation to the
procedural fairness issue and the assertion
made that the present matter was
akin to the error found in
. Mr Abdelahad submits that
was a case where the actual material was in fact evidence and was found
to be evidence. He says that it is a different point to the
point in this case
which is about the effect of a submission.
Ground Four: The Arbitrator erred in finding at
[157]–[158] the letter dated 21 February 2015 only established the Worker
work for the next day after 20 October 2014
The Nominal Insurer’s written submissions
this ground, the Nominal Insurer asserts error of mixed fact and law on the part
of the learned Arbitrator regarding the letter
dated 21 February 2015. It
submits the learned Arbitrator’s interpretation that the letter could only
be read as referring
to the “next day”, was contrary to the plain
terms of the letter. The Nominal Insurer notes Mr Abdelahad adduced into
evidence a letter of demand dated 21 February
that was provided to him
by Mr Bader. The Nominal Insurer says that that letter was written in
English and was on a business letter
head. The Nominal Insurer adds that that
letter of demand is not challenged by Mr Bader. The letter stated: “... it
is my belief
that you intentionally inflicted this injury on yourself, since it
was scheduled that the installation of the 8 kitchen jobs was
to commence the
next day.” The Nominal Insurer says the learned Arbitrator found this was
“specifically only referring
to the next day.”
Nominal Insurer submits this finding was an error, as it was contrary to the
preponderance of that letter when read as a whole
and was glaringly improbable.
The Nominal Insurer notes the letter refers to eight kitchen jobs that were to
commence the next day,
however it does not state the work was to be completed on
the next day. The Nominal Insurer submits the compelling inference is that
employment will continue for some time beyond the “next day” given
the number of jobs. It also argues that letter was
contrary to the evidence of
Mr Bader that he did not have enough work to support both himself and
Mr Abdelahad. The Nominal Insurer
says the letter was evidence that Mr
Bader was not an exempt employer.
The Nominal Insurer’s oral submissions
Nominal Insurer notes the letter dated 14 February 2015 was in the AALD dated 30
May 2018 at page 20. It submits the conclusion
that was drawn by the learned
Arbitrator was wrong in fact because it placed an unduly restrictive
interpretation on that letter
commencing with the words, “As for the
injury you sustained”, because it goes on to talk about the installation
eight kitchen jobs to commence the next day. In other words, the next day
was meant to be a continuation. The Nominal Insurer argues
there was no end date
placed in that letter. It says the obvious inference that should have been
drawn, in accordance with the preponderance
of the evidence, was that the
employment was to continue for some time beyond the 20th of October
Mr Bader’s written submissions
to the Nominal Insurer’s
submissions
that the learned
Arbitrator erred in finding that the words “the next day” meant the
next day, Mr Bader submits this
is hardly a glaringly improbable conclusion. It
is hardly even improbable. Mr Bader says it is not only probable, but entirely
He says there was no evidence nor any compelling inference that the
employment would continue for some time beyond the next day.
Mr Bader submits
there was no inference available that the completion would continue beyond the
termination day being the end of
the week, referring to the translated version
of the notice to finish work.
It says that in any event, there was evidence that Mr Phillip Kass was the
Mr Bader submits
the amount of work required for installation had nothing to do with the amount
of work required to be performed
by Mr Abdelahad.
Mr Bader’s oral submissions
Bader repeated his submission that “the next day” means the
“next day” and was supported by the line “You
used this injury
to avoid the next day task”. Referring to the notice at p 20 of the AALD
dated 30 May 2018, Mr Bader seeks
to explain the meaning of the notice. He notes
it discusses that the scheduled installation of eight kitchen jobs was to
the next day. Mr Bader acknowledges the Nominal Insurer’s
submission that that necessarily meant that the installation was
to commence on
the next day and continue on beyond that day. Mr Bader submits it did not mean
that, and says the learned Arbitrator
came to a similar conclusion. Mr Bader
argues that the line “You used this injury to avoid the next day
task” meant that
the task was to take place the next day. He refers to the
evidence that there was a contractor installer engaged by Mr Bader who
the task of installing the kitchens. Mr Bader asserts it was entirely proper for
the learned Arbitrator to make the finding
he made in relation to the
The Nominal Insurer’s submissions in reply
its written submissions in reply, the Nominal Insurer asserts Mr Bader ignores
the clear terms of the letter of demand provided
by Mr Bader dated 21 February
2015. It argues there was a plain inference available that completion would
continue beyond the termination
day, being the end of the week, and the letter
was contrary to the evidence of Mr Bader that he did not have enough work to
himself and Mr Abdelahad. It says that the plain terms of the
letter were that the work was to commence on the next day, not start
on the next day. The Nominal Insurer reasserts the learned Arbitrator erred by
making a finding that was glaringly improbable
and contrary to the compelling
inference that employment would continue for some time beyond the “next
Ground Five: The Arbitrator erred in rejection of the Anshun
estoppel based on a finding the Employer compromised for reasons including
‘evidentiary landscape’ and failing to find the prejudice to the
Nominal Insurer founded an estoppel
Nominal Insurer did not press Ground 5.
can be seen from the above, the contest in this matter as to whether or not Mr
Bader was an exempt employer involved a contest
of evidence between Mr Bader and
Mr Abdelahad.
considering the various appeal points and how the learned Arbitrator dealt with
this contest, it is worth recording some matters
which were not in dispute.
was no disagreement that Mr Abdelahad had been employed by the first respondent.
Both Mr Abdelahad and Mr Bader give similar
evidence which is to the effect that
Mr Abdelahad was recommended to Mr Bader by relatives in Lebanon. The
dispute revolved around
the basis of that employment, namely whether it was
full-time, permanent, temporary or casual, and depending upon the settlement
that consideration, whether that had an effect upon the alleged or maintained
status of the first respondent as an exempt employer.
There is no evidence that
Mr Bader was actively looking to employ staff at the time that he engaged Mr
Abdelahad or at any time afterwards.
was no dispute that Mr Abdelahad suffered injury in the course of his employment
with Mr Bader and was paid compensation as
a result. There was no dispute that
at the time Mr Abdelahad suffered his injury, Mr Bader did not have a
workers compensation policy
of insurance in place.
Nominal Insurer, and this is particularly so with respect to Ground 2, invites
close consideration of Mr Bader’s tax return.
The Nominal Insurer, as the
argument goes, alleges that the total business income of $234,935 is consistent
with Mr Bader conducting
a substantial business “that would be more likely
to employ persons with wages paid in excess of $7,500 for the year ended
Notwithstanding
this submission, the only evidence before the learned Arbitrator regarding any
employees of Mr Bader during the relevant
time only identified the single
employee, Mr Abdelahad.
is also noteworthy that at no stage in either the hearing below or during this
appeal did the appellant identify a particular figure
in excess of $7,500 which
it asserts was either paid to Mr Abdelahad or employees generally during
the relevant financial year and
thus proving that the statutory limit of $7,500
had been exceeded. Rather, this is the inference that this Commission has been
to draw from the evidence. In making this remark however, it is to be
borne in mind that the test to be applied was whether the employer
reasonable grounds for believing the total amount of wages payable during the
financial year will not be more than the exemption
The learned Arbitrator
correctly set out the principles in this regard at [111]–[113] of the
Reasons and there is no challenge
made to this approach on this appeal.
now turn to a consideration of each ground of appeal.
As to Ground One
Nominal Insurer alleges that the learned Arbitrator made mixed errors of fact
and law in accepting Mr Bader’s evidence when
he found that Mr Abdelahad
was employed on a casual and temporary
Nominal Insurer refers to Mr Abdelahad’s statement of 12 November 2014 and
his assertion contained therein that he was employed
on a full-time basis and
that this evidence contradicted Mr Bader’s case. In support of Mr
Abdelahad’s assertion, the
Nominal Insurer points to Mr Bader’s
report of injury form and pre-injury average weekly earnings form which both
permanent and full-time boxes. The Nominal Insurer also makes much of
the use by Mr Bader of an interpreter in these proceedings
but not in the
previous proceedings before Arbitrator Homan in 2018. In short, this submission
is designed to undermine Mr Bader’s
explanation as to why these forms
were not correctly completed, that is by indicating that Mr Abdelahad’s
engagement was on
a basis other than permanent or full time. The clear inference
from this submission is that Mr Bader had no need of an interpreter
an experienced businessman, at all times had sufficient English skills both oral
and written to understand the full purport
and effect of what he was saying or
an error is alleged in that the learned Arbitrator did not find that Mr
Abdelahad was not truthful, yet the evidence was
rejected. The
says that if
Mr Abdelahad’s evidence was truthful, then evidence on this matter of
employment had to be accepted as contradicting
with this latter point, with respect to the Nominal Insurer, this is not the
process that was undertaken by the learned Arbitrator.
Rather, the learned
Arbitrator in a carefully reasoned decision examined the evidence of both Mr
Bader and Mr Abdelahad. He noted
that the evidence of both was in some respects
unsatisfactory however it is clear that the learned Arbitrator did prefer Mr
evidence to that of Mr Abdelahad. It is not correct for the
Nominal Insurer to assert that Mr Abdelahad’s evidence was rejected.
is noteworthy that the learned Arbitrator heard evidence from both Mr Bader and
Mr Abdelahad. Both were cross-examined. Mr Bader,
with some force, relies
upon a number of binding authorities which deal with the limitations placed upon
appellate courts when it
comes to overturning factual
In the section of
this decision beneath the heading “Principles on Appeal” (see paras
[58]–[63]), I have set out
in terms the approach which this Commission has
taken with regards to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act and appeals made thereunder.
Ground 1, a number of factual contests which were conducted below remain in
contest on appeal. It is for the appellant to establish
error in the
am also paying much regard to the dicta of Basten JA in
above) where his Honour discusses that whether findings of fact were open to a
trial judge is a concept which is not out
of place in determining an appeal from
factual findings under s 352(5). I respectfully agree with and adopt that
learned Arbitrator, at [114]–[164] of the Reasons, in some detail and with
great care examined the question as to whether
Mr Bader was an exempt employer.
This involved dealing with the credit dispute between Mr Bader and Mr Abdelahad.
The Nominal Insurer,
as I have described above, relies upon Mr Abdelahad’s
statement of 12 November 2014 and the marking of his employment status
Mr Bader into documents.
is quite true that these documents describe what the Nominal Insurer alleges.
However, issue with both Mr Abdelahad’s description
of his employment
basis and how the documents were completed in the way that they were was clearly
taken by Mr Bader in the proceedings.
learned Arbitrator with respect to the question of the nature of Mr
Abdelahad’s employment, that is was it casual, temporary
or permanent,
deals with this matter in some detail, particularly at [121] and [122] of the
Reasons. He also deals with Mr Abdelahad’s
statement of 12 November
2014 upon which reliance is now placed by the Nominal Insurer at [120] of the
Reasons. Ultimately in weighing
up these matters, the learned Arbitrator reached
a view that “it is likely he did inadvertently fail to tick the
‘temporary’
box. I accept his evidence in that respect
At [124] of the
Reasons, the learned Arbitrator agrees with the submission that it is often a
matter of legal argument as to what
the terms associated with employment law,
namely part-time, permanent, full-time and casual, actually mean. It is obvious
Arbitrator gave Mr Bader the benefit of the doubt when he reviewed
all of the evidence. At [125] of the Reasons, he refers to the
interview with Mr
Gottstein on 10 December 2014 where it was asserted that Mr Abdelahad
was employed on a casual basis. Ultimately
the learned Arbitrator was satisfied
that Mr Abdelahad had been told that he could not be employed on a permanent
basis and that
that led to a reasonable person believing that the total amount
of wages would be no more than
Nominal Insurer asserts these pieces of evidence as if they were uncontradicted.
They were put in issue and the learned Arbitrator,
as he was duty bound to do,
carefully weighed the explanation contrary to what appeared in those documents.
The learned Arbitrator
accepted that explanation and having regard to the
evidence put forward by Mr Bader, this was certainly open for the learned
to make a finding as he did. I do not accept the Nominal
Insurer’s allegation that the mistakes made in filling out the two
documents were improbable.
I have set out above, an attack is made upon Mr Bader for the use of an
interpreter when being cross-examined. The learned Arbitrator
dealt with this
submission in detail at [123] of the Reasons. The telling finding made by the
learned Arbitrator in this regard,
which has not been moved on appeal, is as
“In my opinion, the applicant did not seek to use the
benefit of the interpreter for any reason other than to assist him when
needed it. At times, he answered questions directly in English without using the
interpreter, perhaps when he could or should
have. He has conceded that he is
able to speak English, but it is not his native
finding by the learned Arbitrator was certainly available to him. He had the
full benefit of hearing Mr Bader’s evidence
and judging for himself the
need or not that Mr Bader had to be assisted by an interpreter. In my
opinion the learned Arbitrator
is the person best placed to evaluate the issue
raised by the Nominal Insurer regarding the use of the interpreter. In coming to
this view, I am mindful of the various High Court authorities regarding how an
appellate court should approach findings of fact at
first instance. I do not
consider that the Nominal Insurer has been able to displace the findings with
respect to the use of the
interpreter in the terms required by those
authorities. In particular, in
, Justice McHugh said
“an appellate court cannot act on that evidence to
reverse the finding unless it is satisfied ‘that any advantage enjoyed
the trial judge by reason of having seen and heard the witnesses, could not be
sufficient to explain or justify the trial judge's
conclusion’”.
This with respect is the situation here; the learned Arbitrator has carefully
considered the evidence before making the finding of
fact and it cannot be said
that the advantage enjoyed by the learned Arbitrator has been displaced.
1 has not been made out and is thus dismissed.
As to Ground Two
set out above, Ground 2 takes issue with the learned Arbitrator’s
interpretation and inferences relating to Mr Bader’s
tax return for the
financial year ending in 2015. The gravamen of the Nominal Insurer’s
charge in this regard is that the tax
return reveals a successful business
“that would be more likely to employ
with wages paid in
excess of $7,500 for the year ended 30 June
(emphasis added).
The clear inference from this submission is that Mr Abdelahad could not be the
only employee working for Mr Bader’s
business during this financial year,
simply based upon an examination of the employer’s tax return.
learned Arbitrator details his conclusions regarding the tax return at [136] of
the Reasons. It is alleged that these conclusions
are “contrary to the
preponderance of the
this appeal point, the appellant is directly challenging the construction of the
tax return. The inference which is being invited
is that a business with an
income of $234,935
have had staff who were paid wages in excess of
$7,500. This is the inference which the Arbitrator was asked to draw from this
and which he declined to do.
[136] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator details, as far as he can, the
constituent portions of the total business income.
There is an amount left for
“all other expenses” of $153,537. The Arbitrator then found as
“I do not see any detail of those other expenses. I
may be able to assume that in a business such as kitchen installation, the
of building materials and structures would be high. But I do not need to make
any such assumption. There was no deeper analysis
of this tax return by either
party. Partly for this reason, I do not see the tax return is of assistance
either way. Assuming the
regularity of the claimed expenses, and there is no
evidence otherwise, it may be that $234,935 per annum for total business income
is consistent with the applicant’s position that he worked alone and did
not really need an
this end I would interpolate the following evidence from Mr Abdelahad which can
be found in his statement of 12 November 2014:
“My employment
with Genuine Kitchen was verbal. There was no other workers [sic] in the company
only Elias Bader and
evidence of Mr Abdelahad is consistent with that of Mr Bader, namely, that there
were no other employees other than Mr Abdelahad
during the period that he worked
for Mr Bader. There is no evidence that I have been taken to, nor was the
learned Arbitrator taken
to any other evidence, which revealed the identity of
any other employee during the financial year concerned. Rather, it has been
approach of the appellant both at first instance and on appeal to press that
inferences be drawn which arise from a consideration
of the tax return itself.
these circumstances I fail to see how the manner in which the learned Arbitrator
dealt with the income tax return was “contrary
to the preponderance of the
evidence” as is alleged by the appellant. To the contrary, I consider that
the learned Arbitrator’s
findings at [136] of the Reasons were not only
available to him but were in fact consistent with the evidence.
error has been revealed with respect to how the learned Arbitrator dealt with
the income tax return. As a result, Ground 2 must
As to Ground Three
to the complaint in Ground 3 is that Mr Abdelahad’s solicitor’s
letter of 21 May 2018 was “admitted into
evidence without
objection”. This assertion is made by the Nominal Insurer on a number of
occasions. The Nominal Insurer in
this ground takes issue with the finding made
by the learned Arbitrator that Mr Abdelahad did not adequately contradict the
of the notice of termination.
respect to the Nominal Insurer, this submission fundamentally misunderstands the
nature of proceedings in this Commission and
the fact that s 354(2) of the 1998
Act expressly states that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence.
The practice in
the Commission is that the bundle of documents constituted by
either an Application to Resolve a Dispute, a Reply, or an Application
Late Documents are all before the Commission consistent with the terms of s
354(2) of the 1998 Act. In this case, the material
before the learned Arbitrator
was Mr Bader’s amended miscellaneous application and the replies filed by
the two respondents.
The Nominal Insurer’s submission, which maintains
that the solicitor’s letter was admitted without objection, seeks to
import into this jurisdiction all of the consequences that arise when the rules
of evidence do apply to a document which is admitted
without objection. That is,
the party who does not object to the tender of that material generally cannot
later take issue with the
veracity of the document unless consent to the tender
was conditional.
, Allsop P warned of the danger of reintroducing the rules of
evidence where they had been excluded by statute. With respect to the
Insurer, this is precisely what this submission invites in regard to the
solicitor’s letter.
the letter is of use to the Commission in that it is at the very least alerting
the reader of the document that issue has
been taken with respect to the notice
of termination. Properly understood, the solicitor’s letter became a
matter for weight.
At [150] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator approached
the matter of the letter in the following way:
“I accept that
the worker’s solicitor would not have made that submission without
instructions from him. But it is not
is an approach with which I respectfully agree. Before the learned Arbitrator
were conflicting statements regarding this issue
which were dealt with from
[146]–[156] of the Reasons. The point surrounding the termination letter
goes directly to the “reasonable
grounds for believing” basis for
the exemption found in s 155AA of the 1987 Act. In dealing with the termination
letter, the
learned Arbitrator said as follows:
“However, even
if one were to accept that this submission from the worker’s solicitor
could be taken as a denial of the
worker receiving the notice to finish, such
submission still does not extend to deny the evidence of the applicant that he
had already
requested, on more than one occasion, for the worker to find other
work and that he needed to terminate the worker’s employment.
evidence from the applicant is accepted, and I do accept it, it would still be
enough for me to be persuaded, taking all
other circumstances into account as
well, that there were the requisite ‘reasonable grounds for
believing...’, because
it would have been clear enough that the applicant
was intending to terminate the employment, whether by way of the ‘notice
to finish’ or
is a succinct statement of the learned Arbitrator’s duty with respect to a
s 155AA case as expounded by President Keating
(as he then was) in
The learned Arbitrator considered all of the evidence, including the
solicitor’s letter, in reaching his ultimate conclusion
that the Nominal
Insurer and worker had not adequately contradicted the service of the notice of
termination. As can be seen, the
learned Arbitrator considered all of the
evidence before reaching this conclusion.
to this appeal ground is the Nominal Insurer’s complaint about a lack of
procedural fairness said to be afforded by the
learned Arbitrator. This
complaint, so it goes, is that the learned Arbitrator failed to raise a concern
Abdelahad’s solicitors being in evidence when it
was admitted without objection. As I have referred to above, it is incorrect
the Nominal Insurer to allege that the letter was “in evidence” in
the sense that the rules of evidence apply. Clearly
the letter was before the
learned Arbitrator and he paid careful regard to construing the letter at
[150]–[152] of the Reasons.
It seems to me clear from a reading of the
learned Arbitrator’s decision that the letter was before him (though not
strict evidentiary sense alleged by the appellant) and that he having
considered that letter along with other matters accorded it
little weight. But
it is clear that the learned Arbitrator did deal with Mr Abdelahad’s
denial regarding the termination letter
in terms and there is thus no denial of
procedural fairness as alleged or at all.
relation to the Nominal Insurer’s supplementary submissions and the issue
of procedural fairness, the Nominal Insurer states
that it reserved a right to
raise further issues in the appeal, including additional appeal grounds,
following receipt of the transcript.
Handley v Canterbury City
“The opportunity provided to the appellant in a
timetable issued in respect of the appeal is intended to give the appellant
opportunity to respond to matters raised by the respondent which, if not
responded to by the appellant, would result in a degree
of procedural
unfairness. It is not an opportunity to raise fresh matters or matters arising
from the transcript of the arbitral
proceedings. The Commission’s practice
is consistent with the procedures adopted in many other courts and
tribunals.”
refers to clause 27 of Practice Direction No 6 which allows supplementary
submissions to be provided following receipt of transcripts.
It says that within
Ground 3, the asserted error as to the finding that there is no adequate
contradiction, the Nominal Insurer says
there was a denial of procedural
fairness because no indication was given by the learned Arbitrator to the
parties that he was concerned
the letter dated 21 May 2018 was not a
contradiction of the alleged letter dated 19 October 2014 giving notice to cease
these complaints fall away, it can be seen that this ground has no basis.
3 is dismissed.
As to Ground Four
issue in Ground 4 is an interpretation of a letter of demand sent by Mr Bader to
Mr Abdelahad dated 21 February 2015. This was
a letter in which Mr Bader
made a number of claims adverse to the worker and was claiming damages from him.
The appellant maintains
that the terms of the letter of demand reveal an ongoing
need for Mr Abdelahad to continue working and that this would negate Mr
Bader’s claim that he was an exempt employer. Central to this challenge is
how the learned Arbitrator construed this correspondence.
The section of the
decision under challenge in Ground 4 can be found at [158] of the Reasons which
reads as follows:
“However, with reference to the main issue
in the case, this letter really only amounts to the worker having more work
20 October 2014 – but only specifically referring to the next day.
This is not inconsistent with my earlier analysis and findings
applicant had intended to finally force the termination of the workers
employment by 24 October 2014.”
the preceding paragraph, that is [157] of the Reasons, the learned Arbitrator
construed the letter of demand, finding that it was
Nominal Insurer cross-examined Mr Bader about this correspondence. Of relevance
is the cross-examination of Mr Bader on 7 June
2019 at page 32 of the
transcript:
“MR COMBE: That letter plainly says that it was
scheduled that there would be an installation of eight kitchen jobs commencing
the next day, being after 20 October 2014. That’s what it says,
doesn’t it?
INTERPRETER: They were manufactured and installed before – installed
before that.
MR COMBE: That letter is signed by you, isn’t it?
INTERPRETER: But we and – me and Botros installed some of – parts
of it. We manufactured all of them, two kitchens, we
installed – me and
Botros installed two kitchens, and the rest, Phillip [Kass] installed them.
MR COMBE: Are you saying Phillip [Kass] did other installations for you?
INTERPRETER: He’s installed, we not installed it.
MR COMBE: So you were busy enough to have to employ Phillip [Kass] to do the
other installations, is that your evidence?
APPLICANT: Phillip [Kass] didn’t work in the factory. Phillip [Kass]
only just – we – we brought in him to do the
installation.”
this respect, Mr Bader’s evidence is telling. There was no issue in the
proceedings that Mr Kass was not an employee, he
was a contract installer.
This evidence reveals that it was Mr Kass who was intended to do the
installation of six of the kitchens
with Mr Abdelahad and Mr Bader having done
This evidence makes it
clear that Mr Kass was the fellow who was performing the installation. Once
this is accepted, it is clear
why the learned Arbitrator found that the letter
of demand was a side issue. This letter does not serve to otherwise undermine
earlier analysis that the learned Arbitrator had made regarding the issues
in dispute.
Nominal Insurer asserts that “[t]his finding by Arbitrator Perry was an
error as it was contrary to the preponderance of
that letter when read as a
whole and was glaringly improbable ... The compelling inference is that
employment would continue for
some time beyond the ‘next day’ given
the number of jobs ... The letter was evidence the employer was not an exempt
the Nominal Insurer is attempting to elevate the contents of this correspondence
into an admission made by Mr Bader against
interest. I do not consider the
document has that quality and in any event, as I have described above, the rules
of evidence do not
apply in these proceedings. The terms of this letter are hard
to reconcile with the other evidence, and in particular the cross-examination
undertaken of Mr Bader which I have set out above. Indeed this
cross-examination undermines the assertion found in the Nominal Insurer’s
submissions at [21] that there was sufficient work to keep Mr Abdelahad
findings made by the learned Arbitrator with respect to this letter were
certainly available to him and in particular, having
heard the evidence of both
Mr Abdelahad and Mr Bader. It cannot be said that the learned Arbitrator was
wrong to give the letter
little or no weight having undertaken the analysis that
he did of the evidence generally.
error of approach has been revealed in terms of how the letter was dealt with.
Ground 4 is dismissed.
As to Ground Five
5 was not pressed by the Nominal Insurer. As a matter of formality, Ground 5 is
also dismissed.
Certificate of Determination dated 25 October 2019 is confirmed.
Judge Phillips
10 December 2020
Elias Bader t/as Genuine
Kitchens v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2018] NSWWCC
Elias Bader t/as
Genuine Kitchens v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2018] NSWWCCPD
Bader v Workers
Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2019] NSWWCC
Elias Bader t/as
Genuine Kitchens v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
[2018] NSWWCC 182
NSWWCCPD 54
[2018] NSWWCCPD 10
), [150], [166]–[167],
[188]–[194].
[2012] NSWCA 282
Reasons, [157].
[2011] NSWCA
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
(1966) 39 ALJR 505
Whiteley Muir
[1996] HCA 140
[2017] NSWWCCPD
[2001] FCA 1833
[2013] NSWCA
of the reasons.
Transcript 7
September 2019, 45.5.
Transcript 7 September 2019,
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 41
), [145] (per Callinan
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
The Reply filed by the
Nominal Insurer (Reply), pp
Transcript 30 May 2018,
Transcript 7
September 2020, 7.17.
Transcript 7 September 2020,
Miscellaneous
Application, p 34, [8].
Transcript 7 September 2020,
Amended Miscellaneous
Application, p 21.
Miscellaneous Application, p
Abdelahad’s statement dated 12 November 2014, [8], Reply, pp
Abdelahad’s statement dated 12 November 2014, [9], Reply, p
Mr Abdelahad’s
statement dated 12 November 2014, [11], Reply, p
Which appears in the
Reply, pp 78–79.
Transcript 7 September 2020,
AALD 30 May 2018, p
AALD 30 May 2018, p
Transcript 7 September
2020, 17.4.
[1936] HCA 40
House v The King
Referring to
the transcript of 7 June 2019, 5.27, and the Nominal Insurer’s written
submissions on appeal at p 3,
[2010] FCAFC 52
268 ALR 232
[1945] HCA 13
[1990] HCA 47
[1993] HCA 78
[1955] HCA 2
Referring to
Ground 1, [4], [6], [9]; Ground 2, [14], [15], and Ground 4,
Fox v Percy
Transcript 7 September
2020, 48.32.
[2011] NSWCA
[1979] HCA 9
Transcript 7 September 2020,
Transcript 7
September 2020, 51.23.
(1927) AC 37.
Transcript 7
September 2020, 52.15.
Transcript 7 September 2020,
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
Mr Abdelahad’s
statement dated 12 November 2014, [8], Reply, p
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
Ristorante Pty Ltd v Bijas
[2011] NSWWCCPD 45
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
Referring to the letter
dated 30 May 2018, Mr Abdelahad’s Application to Admit Late Documents
dated 30 May 2018, p
Whiteley Muir
Referring to
the reasons, [124].
, [145] (per Callinan
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions,
Candy v MC Connor
Racing Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCCPD 43
, [90]–[95];
Li v Brighton
Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCCPD 44
, [26]–[29], and
[17], [20]–[22].
Reply, p 40, [8].
Transcript 7
September 2020, 20.19.
Reply, pp 24–27.
Reply, pp 28–30.
Reply, p 26.
At p 8, [19] of
the Nominal Insurer’s written submissions before the learned
Arbitrator.
Transcript 7
September 2020, 26.8.
Reasons, [124].
2019, pp 43 and 44.
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union
re Graphic Arts
[2003] AIRC 264
Industry Union re Graphic
), [10], and
Korkidas v NSW Department of Education &
[2007] NSWWCCPD 225
written submissions,
Transcript 7 June
2019, 15.25 and 17.20.
Transcript 7 June 2019,
Mr Bader refers to
[142] and [37] of the learned Arbitrator’s
Transcript 7
September 2020, 54.12.
The Nominal Insurer’s written submissions before the Arbitrator dated 2
August 2019, [33].
Nominal Insurer’s written submissions in reply,
Miscellaneous Application, p 34,
Miscellaneous Application, p
In particular [152]
Bader’s written submissions on the appeal,
The Nominal
Insurer’s written submissions on the appeal,
[149]–[150].
dated 30 May 2018, p 10.
Transcript 7 June 2019,
[129]–[148], particularly [137], citing
Workers Compensation Nominal
Insurer v Al Othmani
[2012] NSWCA 45
Transcript 30 May
2018, 7.0–11.
Transcript 30 May 2018,
Transcript 30 May
2018, 12.35–13.8.
Transcript 30 May 2018,
written submissions on appeal,
Miscellaneous Application, p
Referring to
Application to Admit Late Documents dated 30 May 2018, p
At [20]–[21] of
the Nominal Insurer’s written
submissions.
miscellaneous Application, p
Transcript 7 June
2019, 32.12–25.
Nominal insurer’s written submissions, [14]–[15].
Section 155AA(1) of the
The Nominal
Insurer’s submissions,
The Nominal
Insurer’s submissions,
Opposition,
[18]–‑[20].
Reasons, [124].
The Nominal
Insurer’s submissions,
The Nominal
Insurer’s submissions,
Abdelahad’s statement dated 12 November 2014, [8], Reply, p
[2020] NSWWCCPD
Transcript 7 June
2019, 31.22–32.25.
Transcript 7 June 2019,
Nominal Insurer’s submissions, [21].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.42 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter