URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2022/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Liu v AAI Limited t/as GIO [2022] NSWPICMRP 8; (7 October 2022)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Liu v AAI Limited t/as GIO
[2022] NSWPICMRP 8
Hongru (Amanda) Liu
AAI Limited t/as GIO
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
MERIT REVIEWER:
MERIT REVIEWER:
Maurice Castagnet
Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
7 October 2022
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS - Merit review panel; merit review application under
Schedule 2, Clause 1(i) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Act); costs of interpreting services incurred in connection with psychotherapy
– the expense of interpreting services incurred by
the claimant in connection with psychotherapy treatment provided by her
psychologist was a reasonable cost of treatment and care within the meaning of
section 3.24 of the 2017 Act.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
merit review decision of Merit Reviewer Tajan Baba dated 28 June 2021 is set
substitution, the Merit Review Panel determines as follows:
insurer’s Certificate of Determination - Internal Review dated 1 December
2020 is reviewable as a merit review matter under
Schedule 2, cl (1)(i) of the
3” of the insurer’s Certificate of Determination - Internal Review
is set aside.
the purposes of Schedule 2, cl (1)(i) of the MAI Act, the costs of interpreting
services provided by Able Interpreting (tax invoices
4061, 4149, 4271 and 4388)
in the amount of $877.30 in connection with the psychological treatment provided
by Mr Hansen Li, are
reasonable costs of treatment and care within the meaning
of s 3.24 of the MAI Act.
to Schedule 1, Part 1, cl (3)(a) of the Motor Accidents Injuries Regulation
2017, the Merit Review Panel allows the sum of
$1,980 (inclusive of GST) for the
claimant’s costs.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Introduction
claimant, Hongru (Amanda) Liu is a 52-year-old woman who was injured in a motor
accident on 18 August 2020.
10 September 2020, the claimant made a claim for statutory benefits for weekly
payments for loss of income and payment of the costs
of treatment and care under
Part 3 of the
Motor Accidents Injuries Act
2017 (the MAI Act).
her claim form, the claimant notified the insurer that she would require an
interpreter to assist her through the claims process.
She indicated that her
preferred language was Mandarin Chinese.
dispute arose over the insurer’s refusal to pay the costs of interpreters
attending the psychological treatment sessions provided
by the claimant’s
treating psychologist, Mr Hansen Li.
dispute was the subject to an internal review by the insurer. On 1 December
2020, the insurer issued a Certificate of Determination
– Internal Review.
In “Outcome 3” of that determination, the insurer affirmed its
original decision. The dispute
was then referred to the Personal Injury
Commission (the Commission) for determination.
28 June 2021, Merit Reviewer Tajan Baba determined that the Commission did not
have jurisdiction to review the dispute.
26 July 2021, the claimant lodged an application to review the Merit
Reviewer’s decision.
8 September 2021, the President’s delegate, Rachel Britliff, determined
that there was reasonable cause to suspect an error
in the Merit
Reviewer’s decision.
Review Panel (the Panel) has been constituted by the President of the Commission
to conduct a review of the
Merit Reviewer’s
BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE
insurer accepted liability to make payment of statutory benefits for the first
26 weeks after the accident. The claimant has received
payments for both types
of statutory benefits during that period.
or about September 2020,
Mr Li sought approval from
the insurer for the costs of providing psychological treatment to the claimant
by submitting an Allied
Health Recovery Request form (the AHRR form).
the AHRR form, Mr Li notified the insurer that the claimant had requested the
attendance of a Mandarin Chinese interpreter at the
psychological treatment
insurer approved payment for Mr Li to provide psychological treatment to the
claimant on Saturday 25 September 2020, Saturday
10 October 2020, Saturday 24
October 2020 and
Saturday 7 November 2020. All of
the treatment sessions were of one hour duration.
25 September 2020 and 10 October 2020, a Mandarin Chinese interpreter, Jing Wu,
attended the treatment sessions provided by Mr
Li. On 24 October 2020, a
Mandarin Chinese interpreter, Lin Liu attended the treatment session. On 7
November 2020, a Mandarin Chinese
interpreter, Hayley Hailin Chen, attended the
treatment session. All the interpreters are said to be NAATI accredited.
Subsequently,
Able Interpreting submitted the following tax invoices for the interpreting
services to the insurer for payment:
(a) Tax Invoice 4061 for the attendance on 25 September 2020 $184.80
(b) Tax Invoice 4149 for the attendance on 10
October 2020 $231.00
(c) Tax Invoice 4271 for the attendance on 24 October 2020 $231.00
(d) Tax Invoice 4388 for the attendance on 7 November 2020
insurer paid Mr Li’s invoices for the treatment sessions but rejected
payment of the Able Interpreting’s interpreting
letter dated 23 October 2020 the insurer notified the claimant that payment for
the interpreting invoices dated 25 September 2020
and 10 October 2020 were
rejected for the following reasons:
As previously
advised, you are entitled to receive payment for all ‘reasonable and
necessary’ treatment and care for injuries
sustained as a result of the
motor accident.
In determining whether we will support your treatment and care, we are
required to consider whether the treatment and care is reasonable
and necessary,
this includes;
the treatment and care-
reasonable and necessary in the circumstances; and
directly related to your motor accident; and
appropriate for the injury;
benefit you.
appropriateness of the service provider; and
the treatment and care is cost effective.
We confirm Able
interpreting services requested by Dr Li has requested the following services on
your behalf to assist in rehabilitating
your personal injuries caused by the
motor accident.
Description of Request: Interpreting services
Treating Areas: Psychological Interpreting services
Cost: $415.80
Please be advised this request has been denied as the request is not
considered reasonable and necessary.
We note Dr Hansen Li is registered on the AHPRA website. AHPRA is the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency and is the
organisation responsible for implementing the National Registration and
Accreditation Scheme (the National Scheme) across
www.ahpra.gov.au/Registration/Registers-of-Practitioners.aspx
On the profile for Dr Li he has recorded next to 'Languages (in addition to
English)' Mandarin and Shanghainese.
The context is clearly medical and it is also clearly implied that Dr Li as
able to fulfil his functions as a practising medical professional
communicating in both Mandarin and Shanghainese.
The application for personal injury benefits in this matter lists Mandarin as
the preferred method of communication for the claimant.
It seems clear therefore that there is no need for the use of a Mandarin
interpreter in consultations and we therefore decline payment
for those services
Invoice #4194 [sic]and #4061 are declined.”
letter dated 20 November 2020, the insurer provided the same reasons to the
claimant for rejecting the other two Able Interpreting
invoices dated 24 October
2020 and 7 November 2020. When making the decision on this occasion, the insurer
was aware of the following
(a) On 5 November 2020, Mr Li had amended his APHRA profile to confirm that he
does not provide professional services in Mandarin
(b) On 5 November 2020, Mr Li had advised the insurer that his ability to
communicate in Mandarin Chinese is limited to a conversational
level and does
not reflect an ability to communicate in that language in a clinical setting.
(c) On 18 November 2020, Mr Li had advised the insurer that he does not speak
Mandarin Chinese in response to a questionnaire.
THE DECISION UNDER REVIEW
summary, the Merit Reviewer found that interpreting services do not fall within
the definition of ‘treatment and care’
provided under s 1.4(1) of
the MAI Act and is not an ‘expense’ incurred in connection with
receiving treatment and care
under s 3.24 of the MAI Act.
Merit Reviewer did not accept the claimant’s submission that the
interpreting services fall under “other kinds of
treatment, care, support
or services as may be prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition” as stipulated
in ss 1.4(1)(l) of the MAI Act. The FAQs issued
are not regulations and in
any event, the FAQs only specify that allied health practitioners must include
the relevant service code(s)
when requesting approval for services (including
interpreting). The FAQs do not prescribe interpreting services as
and care’ for the purposes of the definition in s1.4(1)
of the MAI Act.
Merit Reviewer did not accept that interpreter services, even those provided to
enable delivery of ‘treatment and care’,
are a form of treatment and
care prescribed under Part 3 of the MAI Act.
Merit Reviewer found an entitlement to recover costs and expenses incurred under
s 8.10 of the MAI Act relates to costs incurred
by a claimant “in
connection with the claim”. The reference to ‘claim’ in s 8.10
is a reference to claims
for statutory benefits under Part 3 of the MAI Act.
Statutory benefits are provided under Part 3 to be ‘weekly payments’
and ‘treatment and care’. The fees for the interpreting services in
dispute are not ‘weekly payments’ and
are not ‘treatment and
care’ under the MAI Act. On that basis, the claimant does not have an
entitlement to recover such
costs under s 8.10 of the MAI Act and,
accordingly, the Commission does not have jurisdiction to review the dispute
under Schedule
2 cl (1) (aa) of the MAI Act.
view of her finding that the interpreter services in dispute are not statutory
benefits under Part 3 of the MAI Act, the Merit
Reviewer concluded that the
Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine the claimant’s dispute
as a miscellaneous claims
assessment matter under Schedule 2, cl (3)(n)
of the MAI Act.
THE CLAIMANT’S
SUBMISSIONS
claimant submits that the Commission has jurisdiction to determine the matter
under any of the following bases:
(a) Clause 1(i) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act - whether the cost of treatment and
care provided or to be provided to the claimant
is reasonable for the purposes
of s 3.24(1) (Entitlement to statutory benefits for treatment and care).
(b) Clause 1(aa) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act - whether for the purposes of s
8.10 (Recovery of costs and expenses in relation to
claims for statutory
benefits) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant are reasonable and
(c) Clause 3(n) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act - any issue of liability for a
claim, or part of a claim, for statutory benefits not
otherwise specified in
this schedule.
claimant submits that she has made a claim for statutory benefits which includes
treatment and care. Section 1.4(1) of the MAI
Act defines treatment and care to
include medical treatment (including pharmaceuticals), rehabilitation and such
other kinds of treatment,
care support or services as may be prescribed by the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (the Regulation).
submitting a request for psychology and counselling services to be approved by
the insurer, the guidelines published by the State
Insurance Regulatory
(SIRA) entitled
“Providing allied health services in the NSW CTP schemes –
FAQs” psychologist is required to submit
details of the assessment and
therapy/treatment provided by a psychologist or counsellor as well as any
interpreter costs to enable
delivery of the service. The claimant submits that,
as a result, any interpreter costs to enable the delivery of the service is part
of the service provided by the psychologist.
that basis, the claimant submits that the interpreter services provided in that
context satisfies the definition of “treatment
in s 1.4(1) of the MAI Act.
claimant therefore submits that the Commission has jurisdiction to determine the
dispute under either cl 1(i) or cl 1(aa) of Schedule
2 of the MAI Act.
the alternative, the claimant submits that the dispute may be dealt with as an
issue of liability for a claim for statutory benefits
under Schedule 2, cl 3(n)
of the MAI Act.
THE INSURER’S SUBMISSIONS
insurer submits that the Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine a
dispute in relation to payment of an interpreting
invoice for a medical
assessment under cl 1(i) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act because the invoice does
not fall within the definition
of “treatment and care” in s 1.4(1)
of the MAI Act.
the claimant does not have an entitlement to recover the cost of an interpreting
invoice under s 3.24 of the MAI Act, the Commission
does not have jurisdiction
determine whether the cost was reasonable and necessary under
cl 1(aa) of Schedule 2
of the MAI Act.
insurer submits that the Merit Reviewer was correct in determining that
interpreter services are not statutory benefits under
Part 3 of the MAI Act and
accordingly, the Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine the dispute
under cl 3(n) of Schedule
2 of the MAI Act.
THE LEGISLATIVE
is appropriate to set out the relevant provisions in the MAI Act.
3.24 of the Act provides that:
“(1) An injured person is
entitled to statutory benefits for the following expenses (treatment and care
expenses) incurred
in connection with providing treatment and care for the
injured person—
(a) the reasonable cost of treatment and care.
(b) reasonable and necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred by
the injured person in order to obtain treatment and care
for which statutory
benefits are payable,
(c) if the injured person is under the age of 18 years or otherwise
requires assistance to travel for treatment and care, reasonable
and necessary
travel and accommodation expenses incurred by a parent or other carer of the
injured person in order to accompany the
injured person while treatment and care
for which statutory benefits are payable is being provided.”
and care’ is defined under s 1.4(1) of the MAI Act as
“‘treatment and care’ means the
(a) medical treatment (including pharmaceuticals),
(b) dental treatment,
(c) rehabilitation,
(d) ambulance transportation,
(e) respite care,
(f) attendant
care services,
(g) aids and appliances,
(h) prostheses,
(i) education and vocational training,
(j) home and transport modification,
(k) workplace and educational facility modifications,
(l) such other kinds of treatment, care, support or services as may be
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this definition,
but does not include any treatment, care, support or services of a kind
declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition.”
is no controversy that the psychological treatment provided by Mr Li to the
claimant was “medical treatment” within
the meaning of ss 1.4(1) (a)
of the MAI Act and therefore, “treatment and care” within the
s 3.24 (1) of the MAI Act. Indeed, the
insurer accepted that it was and made payment to Mr Li on that basis.
s 3.24 (1) of the MAI Act provides that an injured person is entitled to
statutory benefits for treatment expenses incurred
in connection with providing
treatment. On that basis, it follows that if an injured person requires the
assistance of an interpreter
to be present when treatment such as psychotherapy
is delivered, such requirement would be intrinsically linked to the treatment.
It also follows in these circumstances, that the cost of the interpreter service
is an expense incurred in connection with the treatment.
SIRA FAQ’s published for the guidance for allied health
practitioners
provides that when
a psychologist submits an AHRR request form to the
insurer for the approval of the cost of providing therapy/treatment, the request
should also include any interpreter costs to enable delivery of the service. The
Panel accepts that the SIRA FAQ’s are not
part of the Regulation. However,
the publication serves to re-enforce the Panel’s view that any interpreter
service provided
in that context is a necessary expense for the delivery of the
therapy/treatment.
the present case, there is no controversy that the claimant required the
delivery of her psychological treatment in the Mandarin
Chinese language. For
that purpose and in his AHHR form, Mr Li requested a Mandarin Chinese
interpreter in connection with the delivery
of his psychological treatment to
the claimant.
response to the AHHR request, it is apparent from its letter to the claimant
dated 23 October 2020 that the insurer regarded such
an expense to be part
of treatment and care expenses. The insurer did not reject payment of the
expense on the basis that the interpreting
services were not “treatment
and care” for the purposes of s 3.24, but rather because it held the view
that Mr Li was
capable of delivering the psychological treatment to the claimant
in Mandarin Chinese. On that view, the insurer concluded that the
interpreting
services of Able Interpreting incurred in connection with the treatment was
neither reasonable nor necessary.
it turned out, Mr Li confirmed that he could not provide the treatment to the
claimant in Mandarin Chinese because his command
of Mandarin Chinese is not
adequate in a clinical setting. The evidence reveals that this information was
provided to the insurer
on 5 November 2020. The insurer nonetheless
maintained its original decision of 23 October 2020 in declining payment of the
interpreting
these circumstances, the Panel finds that the expense of the interpreting
services by Able Interpreting incurred by the claimant
in connection with the
psychological treatment provided by Mr Li, was a reasonable cost of treatment
and care within the meaning
of s 3.24 of the MAI Act. The panel finds that the
cost of the interpreting services in the total amount of $877.30 charged by Able
Interpreting in the four subject tax invoices is
reasonable.
merit review decision of Merit Reviewer Tajan Baba dated 28 June 2021 is set
substitution, the Merit Review Panel determines as follows:
(a) The insurer’s Certificate of Determination - Internal Review dated 1
December 2020 is reviewable as a merit review matter
under Schedule 2(1)(i) of
the MAI Act.
(b) “Outcome 3” of the insurer’s Certificate of Determination
- Internal Review is set aside.
(c) For the purposes of Schedule 2(1)(i) of the MAI Act, the costs of
interpreting services provided by Able Interpreting (tax invoices
4061, 4149,
4271 and 4388) in the amount of $877.30 in connection with the psychological
treatment provided by Mr Hansen Li, are
reasonable costs of treatment and care
within the meaning of s 3.24 of the MAI Act.
claimant has made an application for the Commission to permit payment of
exceptional costs beyond the regulated amount.
insurer opposes that application.
Panel, as a merit review panel, does not have jurisdiction to allow costs on the
basis of exceptional circumstances. Pursuant
to ss 8.10(4)(b) of the MAI Act
only the Commission can permit payment of legal costs if the Commission is
satisfied there are exceptional
circumstances. Pursuant to
Personal Injury Commission Act
, the Commission consists of the
President, Deputy President, and non-presidential members, and does not include
merit reviewers.
In any event, the Panel considers that no exceptional
circumstances exist in this matter that would justify payment of legal costs
beyond the regulated amount.
to Schedule 1,
, cl (3)(a) of the Motor Accidents Injuries Regulation
2017, the Merit Review Panel allows the sum of $1,980 (inclusive of GST) for
See the claimant’s
re-submission to the Panel at paragraph 26 of these
https://www.sira.nsw.gov.au/resources-library/motor-accident-resources/publications/for-professionals/allied-health-providers-in-nsw-ctp-schemes-faqs.
The full title of the SIRA publication is referred to in paragraph 26 of these
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter