URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Tattam Express Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 7 (8 August 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Tattam Express Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 7
Hearing Date(s):
29 July 2025
Date of Orders:
8 August 2025
Decision Date:
8 August 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I find that Mr Skinner is not a worker for the purposes of s 19(1) of
the WHS Act.
(2) I stand the matter over to 10am on 8 September 2025.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — application to dismiss proceedings prior to
the close of the
prosecution case — whether defendant owed a duty to injured worker under s
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(NSW) (WHS Act) as pleaded —
interrelationship of ss 7 and 19(1) of the WHS Act — statutory
construction of WHS Act —
principles of statutory interpretation —
purpose of WHS Act is to provide for a nationally consistent framework to secure
health and safety of workers and workplaces — to fall within the ambit
of a s 19(1) worker, the person to whom the duty is
owed must, in some capacity,
be carrying out work for the PCBU duty holder while at work in their business or
undertaking —
other persons whose health and safety may be impacted are
protected by s 19(2) of the WHS Act — when viewed in the context
scheme of the WHS Act as a whole and because of the definition of
“worker” in s 7, the worker referred to in s
19(1) must be carrying
out work, in some capacity, for the duty holder conducting a business or
undertaking — worker in this
case not a worker for the defendant under
subss 19(1)(a) or (b) of the WHS Act — defendant did not owe a duty to
worker under
s 19(1) of the WHS Act — prosecution dismissed — costs
awarded to defendant
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Industrial Relations Amendment Act
Interpretation Act 1987
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Bill 2011
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[2009] HCA 41
Bull v Attorney General (NSW)
(1913) 17 CLR 370
[1913] HCA 60
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v Cross
(2012) 248 CLR 378
[2012] HCA 56
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v
[2012] NSWSC 21
Environment Protection Authority v Eastern Creek
Operations Pty Ltd
(2022) 108 NSWLR 198
[2022] NSWCCA 97
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
(2012) 250 CLR 503
[2012] HCA 55
HD Projects Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2022] NSWCCA 212
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
R v ACR Roofing Pty Ltd
(2004) 11 VR 187
[2004] VSCA 215
Re Bolton; Ex
Parte Beane
(1987) 162 CLR 514
[1987] HCA 12
SafeWork NSW v Activate Fire
[2017] NSWDC 66
SafeWork NSW v Cosentino Australia Pty Ltd
SafeWork NSW v NSW Bricklaying Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDC 160
NSW v Pendle Ham and Bacon Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 63
SafeWork NSW v Poletti
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 491
SafeWork NSW v Rawson Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWDC 237
Steel Construct Australia Pty Ltd v Guilfoyle
The Queen v Khazaal
(2012) 246 CLR 601
[2012] HCA 26
Principal judgment
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Tattam Express Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
N Read (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Coleman Greig
Lawyers (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/353738
Publication Restriction:
24 September 2024, at the application of SafeWork NSW (the prosecutor), a
summons was issued by this Court alleging that Tattam
Express Pty Ltd (the
defendant), a person who had a work, health and safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
) failed to
comply with that duty and thereby exposed workers, in particular Mr Wayne
Skinner, to a risk of death or serious injury
contrary to s 32 of the
21 January 2025, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion seeking an order that
the above summons be dismissed. The defendant also
sought an order that the
prosecutor pay its costs of the proceedings. In summary, the defendant’s
contention is that it did
not owe a duty to Mr Skinner under s 19(1) of the
, as Mr Skinner was not a worker as defined by s 7(1) of that Act.
Rather, he was an “other person” to whom the defendant
owed a duty
pursuant to s 19(2) of the
. Accordingly, the prosecution could
not succeed.
have determined that Mr Skinner did not come within subss 19(1)(a) or (b) of the
, he was not someone to whom the defendant owed a duty under s
19(1) of the
. My reasons follow.
History of the
proceedings
the first return date of the defendant’s Motion on 6 February 2025, the
Motion was stood over to enable the prosecutor to
file an Amended Summons, or
alternatively, a Motion seeking leave to file an Amended Summons.
matter returned to court on 24 February 2025. On that date, by consent, I
granted leave for the prosecutor to file an Amended
Summons. After discussion
with the parties, the matter was stood over to 24 March 2025, to enable the
parties to determine whether
there could be agreement as to the facts and
evidence that go before the Court for the purposes of determining the Motion.
The prosecutor
indicated that if there were to be an agreed evidentiary
position, it would not object to the Court dealing with the Motion on a
preliminary basis.
24 March 2025 and 7 May 2025, a series of mentions occurred in which the Court
sought assistance from the parties to determine
whether it had the power to hear
and determine the Motion as a preliminary matter. On 7 May 2025, I determined
that this Court has
the power to deal with the issue raised by the Motion by way
of a preliminary hearing and set the date for that preliminary hearing.
I did so for the reasons appearing at [7]–[10]
Dismissal of a proceeding prior to the close of the
prosecution case
(3)(f) of the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
) give power to a court, in an appropriate case, to determine during
a preliminary hearing that a summary prosecution should not proceed
Environment Protection Authority v Eastern Creek Operations Pty Ltd
108 NSWLR 198
[2022] NSWCCA 97
per Fullerton J at [216]–[217], with whom
Lonergan J agreed at [219].
provisions form part of the case management provisions which appear in Chapter 4
Part 5 Division 2A of the
(Division 2A). On 1 May 2025, the
Industrial Relations Amendment Act 2025
Amendment Act
enacted s 170(4)(c) of the
and amended s 247A(c) of the
give this Court the powers contained in Division 2A.
1.2[3] of Schedule 1 to the
Amendment Act
provides that:
“An amendment made to this Act by the
Industrial Relations Amendment
extends to proceedings for an offence committed, or alleged to have
been committed, before the commencement of the amendment but
not if the hearing
of the proceedings commenced before the commencement of the amendment.”
of 1 May 2025, neither the substantive prosecution nor the defendant’s
Motion had been listed for hearing. Accordingly, this
Court proceeded to
exercise the powers of Division 2A in respect of the substantive matter by
listing the defendant’s Motion
for hearing.
The relevant
principles of statutory construction
construction begins with a consideration of the language used. Its meaning may
require consideration in context, which includes
the general purpose and policy
of the provision and, in particular, the mischief it is seeking to remedy:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[2009] HCA 41
context and purpose of a provision are important to its proper construction
because the legal meaning of a provision must be determined
by reference to the
language of the instrument viewed as a whole:
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v Cross
(2012) 248 CLR 378
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters
Determination
of the purpose of a statute or a particular provision may be based not only on
an express statement of purpose in the
statute itself, but also by inference
from its text and structure and, where appropriate, by reference to extrinsic
materials. However,
this process does not involve a search for what the
legislature had in mind:
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) provides that the interpretation
of a provision that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act shall
be preferred
to a construction that would not do so.
materials can be used as an aid to construction, but they are not a substitute
for the language considered in context and
cannot displace the meaning of the
Re Bolton; Ex Parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR 514
[1987] HCA 12
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
250 CLR 503
[2012] HCA 55
Interpretation Act 1987
have consistently applied a broad or beneficial approach to the interpretation
of a section in work, health and safety legislation:
Rice v Henley
[1914] HCA 75
[1914] HCA 75
per Isaacs J.
Relevant legal
Amended Summons in respect of which leave to file was granted to the prosecutor
on 24 February 2025 reads as follows:
“On 12 October 2022 at 68 Cranbrook Road, Batemans Bay in New South Wales,
Tattam Express Pty Ltd (ACN 163 510 110) (
the defendant
), being a person
who had a health and safety duty under
section 19(1)
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
) to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, the safety of workers while the workers are at work in the business
or undertaking,
failed to comply with its duty and the failure to comply with
that duty exposed workers, in particular Wayne Skinner, to a risk of
serious injury contrary to
of the Act.”
A to the Amended Summons particularises that offence. The particulars of the
defendant’s alleged failure to comply
with the duty under s 19(1) of the
are set out at paragraph 12 of Annexure A. They are as
“The defendant failed to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of workers, in particular Mr Skinner,
in that it failed to
take one or more of the following reasonably practicable measures to eliminate
the risk to the health and safety,
or, alternatively, if it was not reasonably
practicable to eliminate the risk, to minimise the risk to the health and
a. Conducting a risk assessment in relation to the use of forklifts at the site
(or an adequate risk assessment), which identified
the reasonably foreseeable
hazards and risks, assessed the risks, and determined the most effective
controls to manage the risks;
b. Establishing a Driving Safety Zone (or zones) in the yard which were clearly
marked and separated from operating forklifts by
physical barriers;
c. Developing and implementing a Traffic Management Plan (TMP) which set out how
traffic risks at the site were be managed, including
information on the desired
flow of pedestrian and vehicle movements, and illustrations of the layout of
barriers, Driver Safety Zone/s
and walkways;
d. Developing, implementing and enforcing a Safe Operating Procedure (SOP) for
unloading trucks by forklift which specified:
i. The truck was to park in a defined bay;
ii. The truck driver should prepare the truck for unloading and move to the
Driver Safety Zone;
iii. The forklift is not to commence unloading until the truck driver is in the
Driver Safety Zone;
iv. If the truck driver leaves the Driver Safety Zone for any reason, the
forklift operator shall stop the forklift, and not recommence
unloading until
the driver has returned to the Driver Safety Zone;
v. Once the unloading is completed, the forklift operator shall inform the
driver they may leave the Driver Safety Zone;
e. Providing information, training and instruction to workers on a TMP and a SOP
for unloading trailers, such as those set out at
paragraphs (c) and (d)
f. Providing information and instruction to delivery drivers visiting the site
on the site traffic management rules, including the
requirement to remain in a
Driver Safety Zone whilst the forklift was unloading the truck;
g. Implementing and enforcing its rule that persons were not to operate
forklifts without a valid high-risk work licence, including
i. Keeping adequate records of high-risk work licences and their expiry
ii. Providing adequate on-site supervision; and
iii. Taking appropriate disciplinary action against unlicenced operators;
h. Developing and implementing a requirement to complete a pre-start check for
forklifts, which included a check of the forklift
safety features such as horn,
reversing lights, reversing beeper and seatbelt.”
relevantly provides:
19 Primary duty of care
(1) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, the health and safety of—
(a) workers engaged, or caused to be engaged by the person, and
(b) workers whose activities in carrying out work are influenced or directed by
the person,
while the workers are at work in the business or undertaking.
(2) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of
other persons is not put
at risk from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking.
32 Failure to comply with health and safety duty—Category 2
A person commits a Category 2 offence if:
(a) the person has a health and safety duty, and
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty, and
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury or
elements of the s 32 offence for failure to comply with a health and safety duty
under s 19(1) were set out by Scotting DCJ in
SafeWork NSW v Poletti
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 491
The defendant was conducting a business
or undertaking;
The defendant owed a health and safety duty to
ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, the health and safety of;
(i) workers engaged by it or workers whose activities are influenced or directed
by the defendant;
(ii) while the workers were at work in the business or undertaking;
The defendant failed to comply with its health
and safety duty; and
The failure exposed an individual to a risk of
death or serious injury.”
relevant sections of the
provide as follows:
(1) The main object of this Act is to provide for a balanced and nationally
consistent framework to secure the health and safety
of workers and workplaces
(a) protecting workers and other persons against harm to their health, safety
and welfare through the elimination or minimisation
of risks arising from work
or from specified types of substances or plant, and
(b) providing for fair and effective workplace representation, consultation,
co-operation and issue resolution in relation to work
health and safety, and
(c) encouraging unions and employer organisations to take a constructive role in
promoting improvements in work health and safety
practices, and assisting
persons conducting businesses or undertakings and workers to achieve a healthier
and safer working environment,
(d) promoting the provision of advice, information, education and training in
relation to work health and safety, and
(e) securing compliance with this Act through effective and appropriate
compliance and enforcement measures, and
(f) ensuring appropriate scrutiny and review of actions taken by persons
exercising powers and performing functions under this Act,
(g) providing a framework for continuous improvement and progressively higher
standards of work health and safety, and
(h) maintaining and strengthening the national harmonisation of laws relating to
work health and safety and to facilitate a consistent
national approach to work
health and safety in this jurisdiction.
(2) In furthering subsection (1)(a), regard must be had to the principle that
workers and other persons should be given the highest
level of protection
against harm to their health, safety and welfare from hazards and risks arising
from work or from specified types
of substances or plant as is reasonably
practicable.
5 Meaning of “person conducting a business or undertaking”
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person conducts a business or
undertaking—
(a) whether the person conducts the business or undertaking alone or with
others, and
(b) whether or not the business or undertaking is conducted for profit or gain.
(2) A business or undertaking conducted by a person includes a business or
undertaking conducted by a partnership or an unincorporated
association.
(3) If a business or undertaking is conducted by a partnership (other than an
incorporated partnership), a reference in this Act
to a person conducting the
business or undertaking is to be read as a reference to each partner in the
partnership.
(4) A person does not conduct a business or undertaking to the extent that the
person is engaged solely as a worker in, or as an
officer of, that business or
undertaking.
(5) An elected member of a local authority does not in that capacity conduct a
business or undertaking.
(6) The regulations may specify the circumstances in which a person may be taken
not to be a person who conducts a business or undertaking
for the purposes of
this Act or any provision of this Act.
(7) A volunteer association does not conduct a business or undertaking for the
purposes of this Act.
(8) In this section, volunteer association means a group of volunteers working
together for one or more community purposes where
none of the volunteers,
whether alone or jointly with any other volunteers, employs any person to carry
out work for the volunteer
association.
7 Meaning of “worker”
(1) A person is a worker if the person carries out work in any capacity for a
person conducting a business or undertaking, including
(a) an employee, or
(b) a contractor or subcontractor, or
(c) an employee of a contractor or subcontractor, or
(d) an employee of a labour hire company who has been assigned to work in the
person’s business or undertaking, or
(e) an outworker, or
(f) an apprentice or trainee, or
(g) a student gaining work experience, or
(h) a volunteer, or
(i) a person of a prescribed class.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a police officer is—
(a) a worker, and
(b) at work throughout the time when the officer is on duty or lawfully
performing the functions of a police officer, but not otherwise.
(3) The person conducting the business or undertaking is also a worker if the
person is an individual who carries out work in that
business or undertaking.
8 Meaning of “workplace”
is a place where work is carried out for a
business or undertaking and includes any place where a worker goes, or is likely
while at work.
(2) In this section,
(a) a vehicle, vessel, aircraft or other mobile structure, and
(b) any waters and any installation on land, on the bed of any waters or
floating on any waters.
16 More than one person can have a duty
(1) More than one person can concurrently have the same duty.
(2) Each duty holder must comply with that duty to the standard required by this
Act even if another duty holder has the same duty.
(3) If more than one person has a duty for the same matter, each person—
(a) retains responsibility for the person’s duty in relation to the
matter, and
(b) must discharge the person’s duty to the extent to which the person has
the capacity to influence and control the matter
or would have had that capacity
but for an agreement or arrangement purporting to limit or remove that capacity.
17 Management of risks
A duty imposed on a person to ensure health and safety requires the
(a) to eliminate risks to health and safety, so far as is reasonably
practicable, and
(b) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate risks to health and safety,
to minimise those risks so far as is reasonably
practicable.
The incident giving rise to the charge
defendant’s Notice of Motion proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Tender
Bundle (Exhibit A), including an Agreed Statement
of Facts, together with other
documentary material. It also included CCTV footage of the defendant’s
warehouse on 12 October
2022 which included events in the lead up to the
incident, as well as the incident itself (Exhibit B).
the Agreed Statement of Facts for the Motion record that the defendant operated
a transportation and logistics business in
New South Wales. The
defendant’s business included receipt of consignments delivered by various
transport companies, unloading
those consignments and storing them in its
warehouses for subsequent delivery by its own fleet of trucks. The defendant had
yards in Batemans Bay, Pambula and Nowra.
incident occurred at the defendant’s Batemans Bay yard on 12 October 2022
(the yard). Mr Lincoln Glendenning was the director
of both the defendant and a
related entity, South Coast Transport Management Pty Ltd. He oversaw the
day-to-day running of the yard.
defendant and Freight Specialists Pty Ltd (Freight Specialists), a transport
company based in Wetherill Park, were parties to
a Subcontract and Delivery
Agent Service Agreement (Service Agreement). The Service Agreement provided that
Freight Specialists would
pick up pallets from and deliver pallets to the
defendant on a daily basis. In order to fulfil the Service Agreement, truck
from Freight Specialists were required to attend the yard to deliver
palletised goods. Mr Skinner was an employee of Freight Specialists.
drivers arrived on site at the yard, the defendant would instruct them where to
park and provide general information concerning
the process for their
were only three of the defendant’s workers at the yard overnight on
11–12 October 2022. They were Mr Glendenning
and two casual warehouse
employees, Mr Luke Riding and Mr Bradley Roberts. Mr Riding was a licensed
forklift operator. He went home
shortly after Mr Roberts, who was not a licensed
forklift operator, commenced his shift.
Skinner arrived at the yard with his truck at approximately 2.40am on 12 October
2022. He saw that another truck was being unloaded
and waited until it had
finished. He then drove his truck to the south yard and parked in the same
position that he had done for
previous deliveries.
instruction from Mr Glendenning, Mr Skinner opened the curtains of his truck so
that unloading could commence. He understood
that he was to supervise the
unloading to ensure that the content of the load was not damaged in the process.
Mr Roberts unloaded
the truck using a forklift. His speed of travel in the
forklift was frequently excessive. As the truck was being unloaded, Mr Skinner
was progressively opening and gating various parts of the truck and unstrapping
the load. Mr Skinner was in close proximity to the
forklift and walked through
its line of travel, as required, to access the truck.
3.15am, Mr Roberts’ forklift narrowly missed hitting Mr Skinner who was
attending to straps at the rear of the trailer while
Mr Roberts lifted another
pallet from the trailer in proximity to him. Mr Skinner continued to work around
the truck while Mr Roberts
was unloading it with the forklift. At one point, Mr
Skinner moved a second forklift that was parked in the yard to create more space
in which Mr Roberts could work. At 3.29am, when Mr Skinner was standing to the
right of the forklift as it collected a load, Mr Roberts
reversed the forklift
and turned to the right, striking and running over Mr Skinner. Mr Skinner
sustained a serious right leg injury,
requiring surgery. He was discharged from
hospital 49 days after his admission.
was a significant amount of guidance material available to the defendant at the
time of the incident which addressed measures
that the defendant could have
implemented to avoid the incident. Following the incident, the defendant made a
number of changes to
the way that they operated. This included the
implementation and documentation of a driver safety zone in each of the three
bays. Forklifts were not permitted to operate until the truck drivers
were in the driver safety zone.
The defendant’s
to the defendant’s argument were the particulars at paragraph 7 of
Annexure A to the Amended Summons, which reads as
“On 12 October 2022, Mr Skinner was a worker engaged, or caused to be
engaged, by the defendant in accordance with paragraph
19(1)(a) of the Act, in
that he was carrying out work in any capacity for the defendant and as an
employee of Freight Specialists,
a contractor to the defendant. Further, and in
the alternative, Mr Skinner’s activities in carrying out work were
and/or directed by the defendant whilst he was working at the site,
and he was therefore a worker within the meaning of s 19(1)(b)
paragraph was the subject of the prosecutor’s amendment, as referred to
above. As originally pleaded, paragraph 7 read
as follows:
“On 12 October 2022 Mr Skinner was engaged or caused to be engaged by the
defendant in that he was carrying out work for the
defendant as an employee of
Freight Specialists, a contractor to the defendant. Mr Skinner’s
activities in carrying out work
were influenced and directed by the defendant
whilst he was working at the site.”
defendant relied on the decision of Scotting DCJ in
Honour held at [98]:
“The section 19(1) duty is owed to persons that can satisfy 3
requirements:
(1) they are a ‘worker’ as defined by section 7 of the Act; and
(2) either:
(i) they have been engaged (or caused to be engaged) by the PCBU; and/or
(ii) their work is controlled or influenced by the PCBU; and
(3) they are at work in the business or undertaking.”
dealing with the construction of s 7 of the
, Scotting DCJ made
the following findings at [99]–[100]:
(1) The term “worker” is defined in s 7 and should be given its
defined meaning in s 19, unless a contrary intention
appears; and
(2) In s 7, a person is a worker if they carry out work for a person conducting
a business or undertaking (PCBU) and the capacities
listed in s 7 relate to that
same PCBU for whom the work is carried out.
DCJ concluded at [103] that the final reference to “business or
undertaking” in s 19(1) refers to “the
business or undertaking using
workers in the way contemplated by s 19(1). This requires the workers to be
carrying out work for the
defendant’s contention was that, when read together, ss 7 and 19(1) relate
to a worker as defined in s 7 who, at the relevant
time, was carrying out work
for the s 19(1) duty holder PCBU. That is, to be a worker to which s 19(1)
relates, the worker had to
have been carrying out work for the s 19(1) duty
holder while at work in the business or undertaking of that PCBU.
defendant pointed to the analysis of s 19(2) by Scotting DCJ in
SafeWork NSW
v NSW Bricklaying Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDC 160
Bricklaying
) as being consistent with its position:
“The term ‘other persons’ when used in section 19(2) is a
reference to persons other than ‘workers’
who are provided for by
section 19(1):
SafeWork New South Wales v Rawson Homes Pty Ltd
S Kidman & Co Ltd v Dr John Lowndes CM and Director of
Public Prosecutions (NT)
[2016] NTCA 5
. This can include any person
on or near a workplace.
Mr Tran was present at the site as a carpenter. He did not come within the
definition of a worker provided for in section 7 of the
Act because he was not
performing work for the defendant or working in furtherance of the business or
undertaking of the defendant:
SafeWork NSW v Poletti Corporation Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 491
defendant’s position was that the prosecution could not establish any of
the three limbs of s 19(1) as addressed by Scotting
Firstly, Mr Skinner was not a worker for the purposes of s 7 in relation to the
defendant, because he was not performing work for
the defendant when he
delivered the consignment to the yard. Rather, he was employed by Freight
Specialists and the work that he
did at the yard was in furtherance of Freight
Specialists’ business or undertaking. He did not carry out work in any
for the defendant while in attendance as an employee of Freight
Specialists.
there was no material before the Court which demonstrates that the defendant
engaged Mr Skinner, or caused him to be engaged,
under s 19(1)(a) of the
. Rather, Mr Skinner was engaged by Freight Specialists as an employee.
As part of that engagement, Freight Specialists required Mr
Skinner to attend
the defendant’s yard to deliver palletised goods and to facilitate
delivery by removing curtains and removing
or rolling up straps to enable the
defendant’s forklift to collect the palletised goods.
as to whether Mr Skinner’s work as a driver for Freight Specialists was
influenced or directed by the defendant under
s 19(1)(b) of the
the defendant relied on the decision of Macfarlan JA (with whom Hamill and
Cavanagh JJ agreed) in
HD Projects Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2022] NSWCCA
HD Projects
), as set out below, in support of a submission
that whether or not that were so, it was insufficient to bring him within the
of a s 19(1) duty for the defendant:
“In reliance on the reference in s 19(1) of the WHS Act to persons who
could be ‘influenced or directed’ by the
person conducting a
business or undertaking, HD Projects submitted that it was s 19(1) and not s
19(2) that imposed a relevant duty
on it, because, it said, HD Projects was able
to influence or direct the scaffolding employees and Messrs Graff and Sitauti
therefore ‘workers’ in its business and not ‘other
persons’. Whether or not that was so, the submission is
answered by the
fact that the reference in s 19(1) to influence or direction is to the
activities of the person carrying out work
in the relevant business or
undertaking: the closing words of s 19(1) (see [24] above) confines the workers
referred to in the subsection
to those ‘at work in the business or
enterprise’. The scaffolding company employees were not carrying out work
Projects’ business but in that of Erectus.”
defendant submitted that the evidence was that the conduct of Mr Skinner at the
yard on 12 October 2022 was not directed by the
defendant. Specifically, the
following aspects of Mr Skinner’s work on 12 October 2022 were not
directed by the defendant:
(1) Mr Skinner’s decision to wait outside until another truck had been
(2) Mr Skinner’s decision to park where he had parked on previous
(3) Mr Skinner’s approach to Mr Glendenning to find out whether he would
like him to open the curtains;
(4) Mr Skinner’s decision to supervise the unloading of the truck by Mr
(5) Mr Skinner’s instruction to Mr Roberts that the whole trailer load was
to be unloaded;
(6) Mr Skinner’s opening of the truck with Mr Roberts and preparing it for
(7) Mr Skinner’s decision to get the paperwork and sit out of the way
while Mr Roberts was unloading the truck; and
(8) Mr Skinner’s ongoing role in unstrapping and ungating the truck as the
unloading continued, at times with the assistance
of Mr Roberts.
the extent that there was any evidence that the defendant was able to influence
or direct Mr Skinner, the defendant submitted that
it was limited to the ability
to instruct drivers who came on site as to where they should park and provide
general information about
the unloading process, together with occasional verbal
instruction to be aware of operating trucks and forklifts. The defendant
that this was not sufficient to create a s 19(1) duty, particularly as
the defendant would exercise a degree of influence over anyone
who came into the
yard, including by restricting their access to certain areas.
Mr Skinner was not working in the defendant’s business as required by s
19(1) of the
. Each of the tasks that he undertook while at the
yard were part of or incidental to his duties as a truck driver for Freight
Specialists
and done in furtherance of its business. The fact that he was
performing work at the yard and able to be influenced or directed by
defendant in the conduct of its business was not sufficient to bring him within
the scope of the s 19(1) duty.
defendant urged the Court to find that Mr Skinner was therefore not someone to
whom a s 19(1) duty was owed. Rather, he was an
“other person” to
whom the defendant owed a duty pursuant to s 19(2) of the
that event, the prosecutor’s evidence, taken at its highest, left the
prosecutor unable to prove either the second or third
element of the offence
under s 32 of the
with which the defendant had been charged,
namely that the defendant had the pleaded s 19(1) health and safety duty with
to Mr Skinner and failed to comply with it.
prosecutor’s case
essence of the prosecutor’s case was that it sought to hold the defendant
responsible for permitting Mr Skinner to be involved
in its business or
undertaking. The prosecutor pointed to the fact that Mr Skinner gave direction
to Mr Roberts concerning the placement
of pallets that he had removed from the
truck and, on one occasion, drove a forklift away from the path of the unloading
The prosecutor contended that Mr Skinner had gone beyond the boundaries
of work activities for Freight Specialists and that, by virtue
of his conduct,
he had become a person working in the business or undertaking of the defendant.
The allegations in the Amended Summons
were said to include steps that should
have been taken by the defendant to exclude Mr Skinner from its business.
prosecutor’s contention was that, for a PCBU to owe a duty to a person
under s 19(1) of the
, the person must:
(1) be a worker as defined in s 7 of the
(2) fall within one or both classes of workers defined in subss 19(1)(a) and (b)
(3) be at work in the business or undertaking of the PCBU duty holder.
prosecutor submitted that it was clear that Mr Skinner was a worker as defined
by s 7 of the
, as he was an employee of Freight Specialists.
prosecutor relied on
SafeWork NSW v Cosentino Australia Pty Ltd
) to submit that the two limbs of
s 19(1) were distinct and that a worker need only fall within one of them to
bring themselves within
the benefit of the section. The prosecutor’s
primary submission was that Mr Skinner was a s 19(1)(a) worker who was therefore
working in the defendant’s business.
Mr Skinner was engaged
or caused to be engaged by the defendant
prosecutor submitted that the question of whether a worker is
“engaged” or “caused to be engaged” by a
PCBU is not
simply determined by reference to contractual arrangements, but by assessing and
drawing appropriate inferences from
the evidence. In support of that submission,
the prosecutor relied on the decision of
SafeWork NSW v Activate Fire Pty
[2017] NSWDC 66
Activate Fire
) in which Scotting DCJ considered
the meaning of the terms “engaged” or “caused to be
engaged”, and cited
with approval at [73] the decision of
Roofing Pty Ltd
(2004) 11 VR 187
[2004] VSCA 215
ACR Roofing
(emphasis added):
“The words ‘engaged’ and ‘caused to be engaged by’
are not defined in the Act. In
R v ACR Roofing Pty Ltd
[2004] VSCA 215
(2004) 11 VR 187
the Victorian Court of Appeal decided that the term ‘engaged’ has a
number of meanings according to the context in which
it is used. In the
legislation, ‘engaged’ was not used lightly and it was clearly
intended to have a meaning different
to the word ‘employ’ that was
also used in the legislation.
The definition of ‘engage’ includes
‘to secure or obtain the services of’ whether or not there is some
contractual
arrangement between the provider of the services and the person who
makes use of them
: per Ormiston JA. Nettle JA (as his Honour then was) with
whom the other members of the Court agreed, said at [54]:
‘I consider that it would make little sense to interpret ‘engaged
by’ so as to restrict the operation of the section
to contractors with
whom the employer is in contractual relations. It does, however, make evident
sense, and in my view it was intended
that the expression include the engagement
of any contractor in relation to matters over which the employer has control,
under a contract entered into between the contactor and the employer;
or (b) under a contract entered into between the contractor
and some other
person. Thus in my opinion a contractor could just as well be regarded as
engaged by the employer in relation to matters
over which the employer has
control if the contractor were engaged directly by the employer under a contract
with the employer, or
by another contractor under a sub-contract, or by a
sub-contractor under a sub, sub-contract, or under a sub, sub, sub-contract or
some remoter species of sub-contract; regardless of the layers of contractual
relations that might separate the contractor from the
employer.’”
prosecutor further noted that Scotting DCJ’s decision in
SafeWork NSW
Pendle Ham and Bacon Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 63
held at [363] that
“the phrase ‘cause to be engaged by’ is a wider concept by
reference to the ordinary meaning
of those words”.
prosecutor asserted that the evidence, taken at its highest, established that Mr
Skinner was a s 19(1)(a) worker who was engaged
or caused to be engaged by the
defendant, because:
(1) The defendant’s business included the receipt, unloading and storage
of consignments delivered by various transport companies.
(2) The defendant was in control of the yard and had oversight of all work
undertaken there, including the receipt of deliveries.
(3) The defendant was in a contractual relationship with Freight Specialists.
(4) Mr Skinner was an employee of Freight Specialists.
(5) The contract between the defendant and Freight Specialists required Freight
Specialists to deliver pallets to the defendant on
a daily basis and, to fulfil
the agreement, truck drivers from Freight Specialists were required to attend
(6) The effect of the agreement between the defendant and Freight Specialists
was to secure the services of a truck driver to attend
the defendant’s
business and undertake work by facilitating the unloading of consignments.
prosecutor’s contention was that the work undertaken by Mr Skinner at the
yard on 12 October 2022 was therefore in furtherance
of the business of the
defendant, making him a worker carrying out work “in any capacity”
for the defendant and as an
employee of a contractor. This was said to be
reflected in paragraph 5 of the Statement of Agreed Facts which reads as
“...truck drivers from Freight Specialists were required to attend the
yard to deliver palletised goods and to facilitate the
delivery, including by
removing curtains and removing/rolling up straps to enable forklifts to collect
the palletised goods.”
the prosecutor submitted that the effect of the agreement between Freight
Specialists and the defendant was to cause Mr
Skinner to be engaged by the
defendant. The prosecutor submitted that if this argument is successful, there
can be no debate that
Mr Skinner was at work in the business or undertaking
because he was engaged, or caused to be engaged, by it.
Skinner’s work activities were influenced or directed by the
prosecutor asserted that the proper construction of s 19(1)(b) of the
imposes a duty on a PCBU to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable,
the health and safety of any workers that they have the
capacity to influence or
direct in carrying out work. The worker is therefore able to carry out work
activities for a PCBU other
than the relevant PCBU duty holder whilst also being
influenced or directed by the PCBU duty holder the subject of the charge. This
was said to be supported by the use of the indefinite article in the s 7
definition of a worker as someone who carries out work in
any capacity for
“a” PCBU, including in one of the capacities listed in the
non-exhaustive list in that section. To fall
within the ambit of s 19(1)(b), it
was said that the worker need only be influenced or directed by the duty holder
PCBU while carrying
out their work activities as a s 7 worker (for the same or
another PCBU).
prosecutor submitted that a requirement that the work be carried out for the
PCBU that is the subject of the charge would render
s 19(1)(b) otiose. It was
also said to be inconsistent with the provision in s 16 of the
for more than one person to have the same duty. Further, the prosecutor
submitted that the defendant’s division of the workers
exemplified in s
7(1) as “s 19(1)(a) workers” (s 7(1)(a)–(c)) and “s
19(1)(b) workers” (s 7(1)(d)–(i))
could not be sustained as there
were workers in that second group, such as volunteers or apprentices, who could
equally be workers
who were “engaged or caused to be engaged”, and
thus fall within s 19(1)(a) of the
prosecutor contended that its construction of s 19(1)(b) gives effect to the
principle that legislation concerned with industrial
safety should be construed
“so as to give the fullest relief which the fair meaning of its language
will allow”:
Bull v Attorney General
[1913] HCA 60
(1913) 17 CLR 370
[1913] HCA 60 (Isaacs
J). In support of its submission, the prosecutor
relied on the “Explanatory Memorandum – Model
Work Health and Safety
” published by Safe Work Australia in 2023. Save for numbering, the
relevant portions of that document are in identical terms
to the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Work Health and Safety Bill 2011
(Cth), which reads as
Clause 19 - Primary duty of care
19. Clause 19 sets out the primary work health and safety duty which applies to
20. The PCBU has a duty to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of workers that are:
directly engaged to carry out work for their business or undertaking
placed with another person to carry out work for that person, or
influenced or directed in carrying out their work activities by the person,
while the workers are at work in the business or undertaking.
21. Duties of care are imposed on duty holders because they influence one or
more of the elements in the performance of work and
in doing so may affect the
health and safety of themselves or others. Duties of care require duty
holders—in the capacity of
their role and by their conduct—to
ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health and safety of any
workers that they
have the capacity to influence or direct in carrying out
Primary duty of care not limited to physical ‘workplaces’
22. The primary duty of care is tied to the work activities wherever they occur
and is not limited to the confines of a physical
workplace.”
prosecutor asserted that the evidence, taken at its highest, established that Mr
Skinner was a s 19(1)(b) worker whose work was
influenced or directed by the
defendant, because:
(1) Mr Skinner was a s 7 worker because he was carrying out work for Freight
Specialists as one of its employees.
(2) Mr Skinner was carrying out that work in a place where he was required to go
while at work, namely, the yard.
(3) Mr Skinner attended the yard to conduct a work activity in his capacity as a
Freight Specialists employee performing work (facilitating
the delivery of a
truckload of palletised goods).
(4) The defendant was in control of the yard and had oversight of all work
undertaken there.
(5) The industry guidance material demonstrates that the defendant had a high
capacity to influence and control work and risks at
its workplace.
(6) Prior to the incident, Mr Skinner had delivered consignments to the
defendant’s yard regularly – approximately five
nights per week over
five months.
(7) The defendant had the capacity to influence or direct the way in which Mr
Skinner performed his work.
Mr Skinner was working in the defendant’s business or
undertaking
the prosecutor contended that whether Mr Skinner was a s 19(1)(a) or s 19(1)(b)
worker, the evidence, when taken at its highest,
established that he was a
worker in the business of the defendant on 12 October 2022. The prosecutor
submitted that the words “at
work in the business or undertaking”
should be given their ordinary meaning, rather than meaning “for the
business or
undertaking”. Further, this issue was said to arise only if
the Court rejected the prosecutor’s primary argument that
Mr Skinner was a
s 19(1)(a) worker, it being self-evident that a person engaged or caused to be
engaged by the duty holder PCBU was
a worker in that business.
prosecutor submitted that Mr Skinner could be at work in the business or
undertaking of both Freight Specialists and the defendant.
In support of that
submission, the prosecutor pointed to the common scenario on a building site of
the employee of a subcontractor
being at work in the business or undertaking of
both their employer (as a s 7(1)(a) worker) and the principal contractor (as a s
7(1)(c) worker). In submitting that “in” was a relational term, the
prosecutor relied on the decision of French CJ in
The Queen v Khazaal
(2012) 246 CLR 601
[2012] HCA 26
(footnotes omitted):
“Relational terms such as ‘connected with’ appear in a variety
of statutory settings. Other examples are: ‘in
relation to’;
‘in respect of’; ‘in connection with’; and
‘in’. They may refer to a relationship
between two subjects which
may be the same or different and may encompass
activities, events,
persons or things. They may denote relationships which are causal or temporal or
relationships of similarity or
difference. The task of construing such terms
does not involve the resolution of ambiguity. They are ambulatory words and may
designed to cover a variety of subjects and a variety of relationships
between those subjects.
The nature and breadth of the relationships they
cover will depend upon their statutory
context and purpose. Generally
speaking it is not desirable, in construing relational terms, to go further than
is necessary to determine
their application in a particular case or class of
cases. A more comprehensive approach may be confounded by subsequent
prosecutor submitted that there was no issue concerning whether Mr Skinner was a
worker, as he was plainly an employee of Freight
Specialists. The prosecutor
contended that a worker of one PCBU could be at work in the business or
undertaking of another PCBU if
there was sufficient connection between their
work and the work activity controlled by the PCBU that was the relevant duty
This was said to be consistent with the express words of s 19, the
objects of the
in s 3 and the Explanatory Memorandum. The
contrary position was said to be contrary to the plain meaning of ss 7 and 19,
and inconsistent
with s 16, which recognises that more than one person can have
the same duty.
sufficient connection between Mr Skinner and the work activity of the defendant
such that Mr Skinner was at work in the defendant’s
business or
undertaking was said to arise from the following matters:
(1) Mr Skinner was in attendance at the yard, assisting with the unloading of
(2) The work that Mr Skinner was doing was integral to the work activity of the
defendant and the two were interrelated in that the
defendant could not unload
the truck without Mr Skinner being present and facilitating the delivery,
including by opening the trailer
(3) Mr Skinner was not excluded from the work activity by any direction or
instruction from the defendant.
(4) Mr Skinner actively participated in the defendant’s work activity, for
example, by directing the placement of pallets and
moving one of the
defendant’s forklifts that was impeding the delivery process, and
therefore progressed the defendant’s
business and acted within its
(5) The defendant had the capacity to direct Mr Skinner not to be involved in
its work activity, such as by directing him to stand
somewhere which removed him
from the unloading process. In failing to do so, the defendant permitted Mr
Skinner to be involved in
its work activity and therefore its business.
prosecutor contended that to the extent that Scotting DCJ found in
that the phrase “in the business or undertaking” means
“for the business or undertaking”, it was wrong and
should not be
followed. The prosecutor pointed to the alternative charge laid in that matter,
with the result that little turned
on that aspect of Scotting DCJ’s
decision. The prosecutor further contended that both
should be distinguished on the facts, in that there was no
contractual relationship in those matters between the entity employing
injured worker and the defendant.
the prosecutor contended that the defendant’s submissions failed to have
regard to the ability of more than one PCBU
to concurrently have the same duty.
Further, and consistent with the submission made about the defendant’s
interpretation of
s 19(1)(b) itself, it was said that to read “in the
business” as “for the business” would render s 19(1)(b)
prosecutor’s ultimate submission was that, because the evidence
established that Mr Skinner was a worker as defined in either
or both of subss
19(1)(a) and 19(1)(b), the defendant’s Motion should be
Defendant’s reply
defendant submitted that the prosecutor’s construction is inconsistent
with the text of the section and its context within
the legislative scheme of
Part 2 of the
. The defendant contended that to fall within either
of the two classes of workers to whom a s 19(1) duty is owed, a worker has to
carry out work in any capacity for the duty holder PCBU (s 7) and be at work in
the business or undertaking of that PCBU. The defendant
pointed to the emphasis
in the Explanatory Memorandum, in respect of both sets of workers, that they
were carrying out work for the
duty holder PCBU.
defendant submitted that it did not take steps to secure or obtain the services
of Mr Skinner. Rather, it was Freight Specialists
who took steps to secure or
obtain the services of the defendant by engaging it as a subcontractor Delivery
Agent. Freight Specialists
also took steps to secure or obtain the services of
Mr Skinner as an employee in its business or undertaking. Further, the defendant
submitted that the prosecutor’s position that it is sufficient for a
worker to be at work in a PCBU if there is sufficient
connection between its
work activity and the business of the duty holder PCBU is contrary to the
principles set out in
HD Projects
Bricklaying
oral submissions, the defendant submitted that it would be a perverse outcome if
a worker’s actions in engaging themselves
in the activity of another PCBU
created a s 19 duty for that other PCBU. The effect of the prosecutor’s
argument was that Mr
Skinner created a s 19(1) duty by his actions and the
defendant failed to comply with it because they did not prevent him from
that duty. The defendant contended that the duty has to exist before
the work activity is undertaken and cannot be created part way
through the work
defendant further contended that the position of the prosecutor fails to address
the purpose of s 19(2) and pointed to the scheme
recognises that a PCBU owes a duty, not just to its workers, but also to other
persons who interact with it. Finally, the defendant
pointed to the connection
between the meaning of worker in s 7 and its usage in s
Consideration
What is in issue
are two central issues of contention between the parties. The first is the
interrelationship between ss 7 and 19(1) of the
, and whether the
reading of those sections together requires a s 7 worker to be carrying out work
for the s 19(1) PCBU duty holder
in order to have the benefit of a s 19(1) duty.
The second and related point of contention is whether Mr Skinner was a worker to
whom the defendant owed a duty under s 19(1) of the
, or whether
he was an “other person”, and therefore fell within the scope of s
19(2) of that Act.
The scheme of the WHS Act
relevant sections of the
have been set out above at [
sets out its purpose. In short, it is to provide for a
nationally consistent framework to secure the health and safety of workers
workplaces. The
seeks to protect workers and other persons from
harm to their health and safety through the elimination or minimisation of risks
arising from work. It provides that workers and other persons should be given
the highest level of protection against harm to their
health and safety from
hazards and risks arising from work as is reasonably practicable.
principal duty holder under the
is a PCBU. Consistent with the
object of the
, s 5 defines a PCBU in very broad terms.
consistent with the object of the
is the broad definition of a
worker in s 7(1). A worker is a person who carries out work in any capacity
a PCBU, including in any of the capacities listed in the provision.
It is clear both from the terms of the provision itself and the
Explanatory
Memorandum that the types of workers enumerated in the section are illustrative
only and are not intended to be exhaustive.
broad and consistent with the object of the
is the definition of
a workplace in s 8 of that Act. The term “workplace” is a place
where work is carried out for a
business or undertaking and extends to any place
where a worker goes, or is likely to be, while at work.
16 provides that two persons can hold the same duty. This is commonly seen on
construction sites where employees of subcontractors
are workers for their
direct employer (s 7(1)(a)) and for the principal contractor who has engaged
their employer to work on the
site (s 7(1)(c)).
requires a person upon whom that Act imposes a duty to
ensure health and safety to eliminate risks to health and safety so far as
reasonably practicable. Where elimination of the risk is not reasonably
practicable, s 17
requires the duty holder to minimise those risks so far
as is reasonably practicable. The scheme of the
therefore requires a
duty holder to anticipate potential risks to health and safety presented by
their business or undertaking, including
by taking steps to identify any such
primary duty of care is set out in s 19 of the
. Section 19(1)
creates a positive duty on a PCBU to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable,
the health and safety of
workers. When read together with s 7, s
19(1) creates a positive duty for a PCBU to ensure, so far as reasonably
practicable, the
health and safety of two groups of people.
first group, identified in s 19(1)(a), consists of persons carrying out work in
any capacity for a PCBU that has engaged them
or caused them to be engaged while
they are at work in the business or undertaking of
PCBU. I accept
the submission of the prosecutor, consistent with the authorities set out above
upon which it relies, that the term
“engaged” is broader than
“employed” and that the persons captured by the term “caused
to be engaged”
is broader still. Examples of persons in this group would
include an employee of the PCBU, a contactor or subcontractor of the PCBU
person employed by such a contractor or subcontractor. It could also include an
apprentice or trainee. It would extend to persons
engaged quite remotely, such
as an employee of a sub, sub, subcontractor:
ACR Roofing
at [54] (Nettle
JA, with Ormiston JA agreeing at [1] and Vincent JA agreeing at [2]).
second group, identified in s 19(1)(b), consists of persons whose activities in
carrying out work in any capacity for a PCBU while
they are at work in the
business or undertaking of
PCBU are influenced or directed by
PCBU. This group might include a student gaining work experience or
an employee of a labour hire company assigned to work in the
duty holder
PCBU’s business or undertaking. It might also include a volunteer.
to fall within the ambit of a s 19(1) worker, it is apparent that the person to
whom the duty is owed must, in some capacity,
be carrying out work
the PCBU duty holder while at work in their business or undertaking. To so find
is not to read the final words of s 19(1) as “for”
rather than
“in” the business or undertaking. Rather it is because, by virtue of
the definition in s 7, a person can
only be a “worker” of a PCBU if
they carry out work, in some capacity, including in the various capacities
that PCBU. The requirement that the worker be at work
in the business or undertaking of the duty holder PCBU operates as a limitation
on the PCBU’s duty to its worker, namely to when the worker is at
persons whose health and safety may be impacted by the work carried out by the
PCBU are protected by s 19(2) of the
. The PCBU has a duty to
ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the health or safety of such
persons is not put at risk
from work carried out as part of the business or
undertaking. Section 19(2) applies to persons who do not come within the ambit
a s 19(1) worker:
SafeWork NSW v Rawson Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWDC 237
Accordingly,
to the extent that the prosecutor submits that the protection of a person as a
worker under s 19(1) applies to a person
carrying out work for a PCBU other than
the duty holder PCBU, but in the business or undertaking of the duty holder PCBU
the subject of the charge, I reject that submission. When viewed in the
context of the scheme of the
as a whole and because of the
definition of “worker” in s 7, the worker referred to in s 19(1)
must be carrying out work,
in some capacity, for the duty holder PCBU.
construction of the provision is consistent with the object of the
as set out in s 3. That object distinguishes between
“workers” and “other persons” and provides that the
purpose of the
is to protect both groups from risks arising from
work. That is, this construction does not exclude a person in Mr Skinner’s
position from the protection of the
and so does not undermine
its object. Such persons have the benefit of protections under s 19(2) of the
does the rejection of the prosecutor’s contention render s 19(1)(b)
otiose. The examples that I have listed at [
] above illustrate that there are persons who
undertake work activity
a PCBU who are not engaged or caused to be
engaged by that PCBU. Therefore, absent the operation of s 19(1)(b) of the
, they would fall outside the s 19(1) protection afforded to
workers notwithstanding their inclusion in the definition of a
in s 7 of the
. Such an outcome would be
perverse. The irresistible conclusion is that the two-limbed definition of
“worker” in subss
19(1)(a) and 19(1)(b) has been formulated to
capture the breadth of persons who fall within the definition of a worker as set
am fortified in my view as to the interrelationship between ss 7 and 19(1) of
by considering the application of the facts in this matter to
the construction of the legislation for which the prosecutor advocates.
that exercise that I now turn.
The facts of this matter
was uncontroversial that in an application of this type, the Court considers the
evidence taken at its highest:
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v Elskaf
[2012] NSWSC 21
was also uncontroversial that, to attract the duty of care owed to a worker
under s 19(1), a person need only fall within one of
the limbs of s 19(1):
at [184]–[194];
Steel Construct Australia Pty Ltd v
[2021] QDC 124
set out above, the health and safety duty created by s 19(1) is for the benefit
of two groups of people: those encompassed by s
19(1)(a) and those encompassed
by s 19(1)(b) of the
. Accordingly, the critical question is
whether Mr Skinner falls within one (or both) of those two
Was Mr Skinner a worker who was engaged or caused to be
engaged by the defendant?
is an agreed fact that Mr Skinner was an employee of Freight Specialists. In
addition, the Tender Bundle contains Mr Skinner’s
pay records as an
employee of Freight Specialists in the period from 10 September 2022 to 28
October 2022. It is agreed that Freight
Specilaists employed Mr Skinner as a
truck driver and had done so for approximately five months prior to the
incident. It is also
an agreed fact that in the course of that employment, Mr
Skinner made deliveries to the defendant approximately five nights per
to paragraph 7 of the Amended Summons, Freight Specialists was not a contractor
to the defendant. The position was in fact
the reverse. It was Freight
Specialists who engaged the defendant. Freight Specialists was performing a
service delivering freight
for its clients. It serviced clients on the South
Coast by engaging the services of the defendant. Freight Specialists engaged the
defendant to take delivery of the freight that it was contracted to deliver at
the yard, to store that freight at the yard and then
to deliver that freight
from the yard to the destination required by the contract between Freight
Specialists and its client.
Agreed Tender Bundle included an extract from the website of Freight Specialists
which stated, among other things:
“We make full use of a network of service providers that are fully
integrated into the businesses operating, service, and training
and compliance
This means that we go where no other company currently goes. It’s not a
problem for us to reach even the furthest corners of
the country...”
the heading “Wherever Your Business Needs to Be, We Can Be There
Too”, the Freight Specialists website states, “Our
services operate over a unique regional network which allows us to serve
customers in regional locations throughout Australia
and New Zealand”. The
defendant was part of this regional network.
Subcontractor and Delivery Agent Service Agreement within the Agreed Tender
Bundle was between Freight Specialists as the principal
contractor and the
defendant as the subcontractor/delivery agent. Mr Glendenning signed that
document to confirm that “I have
read and understand the Subcontractor or
Delivery Agent service agreement conditions provided by Freight Specialists and
adhere to these at all times. I am authorised to sign on behalf of the
Subcontractor or Delivery Agent”. While I will not set
out further
details, it is clear from the terms of that Agreement that the defendant was a
subcontractor of or delivery agent for
Freight Specialists and undertaking work
at the direction and control of Freight Specialists.
reject the submission that Mr Skinner was engaged or caused to be engaged by the
defendant and was therefore a worker in its business.
Contrary to paragraph 7 of
the Amended Summons, Mr Skinner was not working for the defendant. As submitted
by the defendant, it did
not require anybody in particular to drive the Freight
Specialists truck. It did not engage Mr Skinner to drive the truck. Freight
Specialists engaged Mr Skinner to drive the truck. The frequency with which Mr
Skinner was required by Freight Specialists to attend
the defendant’s yard
and facilitate the unloading of his truck, enabling the defendant to meet its
contractual obligations,
did not make him a person whose services the defendant
had engaged or caused to be engaged by virtue of its contract with Freight
Specialists. Nor did the defendant engage Freight Specialists. Accordingly, Mr
Skinner was not a worker to whom a work health and
safety duty was owed under s
19(1)(a) of the
Was Mr Skinner a s 19(1)(b)
stated above, in the event that Mr Skinner was found not to be engaged or caused
to be engaged by the defendant, the prosecutor’s
position was that Mr
Skinner, while carrying out work as an employee of Freight Specialists, was
sufficiently influenced in his work
by the defendant that he attracted the duty
under s 19(1) of the
That is, he was a s 7 worker (because he
was an employee of Freight Specialists), he was carrying out work (because
Freight Specialists
had directed him to undertake the delivery to the defendant)
and he was conducting that work in the business or undertaking of the
because he was carrying out his work activity at the yard which was controlled
by the defendant. Further, the performance
of his work activity in the yard
meant that the defendant had a degree of ability to control or influence his
work activity.
have already set out my reasons for finding that Mr Skinner could not be a s
19(1)(b) worker unless he was carrying out work for
the defendant in some
capacity. Accordingly, the above argument must fail. However, that does not
entirely resolve the matter. The
defendant’s contention was that Mr
Skinner had gone beyond the boundaries of work activities for Freight
Specialists and that,
by virtue of his conduct, had become a person working in
the business or undertaking of the defendant. Arguably, if Mr Skinner were
working in that capacity, he was, to that extent, carrying out work for the
is no doubt that the defendant had some degree of influence over the work
activities undertaken by Mr Skinner at the yard. As
submitted by the prosecutor,
the geographic location of his activity was a relevant factor. However, the
weight of the evidence was
that, as a contractor to Freight Specialists, the
defendant was performing work to meet the requirements of Freight Specialists,
directed to an extent by Mr Skinner. The agreed facts record that Mr Skinner had
control of the truck and provided the defendant’s
workers with access to
the load. Mr Skinner advised the defendant’s workers about the content of
the truck which needed to
be unloaded, and supervised that work. Further, as
submitted by the defendant, some (but not all) of the matters in connection with
which the defendant exercised control over Mr Skinner could apply to anyone who
might attend the yard.
the decisions of
HD Projects
NSW Bricklaying
demonstrate, the ability of a PCBU to influence or direct someone’s work
activity is not sufficient to make them a worker in
the business or undertaking
conducted by that PCBU. The defendant’s position differs factually from
those authorities, all
of which concerned construction sites, because Freight
Specialists had a direct contractual relationship with the defendant.
Nonetheless,
that contractual relationship, and the activities which flowed from
it, do not establish that Mr Skinner was undertaking work in
some capacity for
the defendant.
note reliance by the prosecutor upon the fact that the work which Mr Skinner was
doing was integral to the work activity of the
defendant, and interrelated in
that the defendant could not unload the truck without Mr Skinner being present
and facilitating the
delivery, including by opening the trailer doors. The
prosecutor points to the defendant’s capacity to direct Mr Skinner not
be involved in its work activity, such as by directing him to stand somewhere
which would remove him from the unloading process.
The prosecutor asserts that
by failing to do so, the defendant permitted Mr Skinner to be involved in its
work activity and therefore
its business.
had the defendant done what the prosecutor alleges that it should have done in
the measures articulated in subss 12(b), (d)
and (f) of Annexure A to the
Amended Summons, set out at [
] above, and told Mr Skinner to park and open his
truck and then move to a driver safety zone
so that he did not involve
himself in and was excluded from the defendant’s work activity
defendant would have been unable to undertake its work without Mr Skinner
engaging in many of those same work activities: parking
and opening the truck,
unstrapping the load and directing the defendant as to the content of the truck
that needed to be unloaded.
submitted by the defendant, the effect of the prosecutor’s argument is
that a person who would otherwise not be a worker
for the purposes of s 19(1)
could, by their conduct, transform themselves from an “other person”
to a worker to whom
a s 19(1) duty is owed. That cannot be the effect of s
19(1)(b), forming as it does, part of a legislative scheme which casts a
strict criminal liability in terms of its ability to anticipate and
take action to eliminate or minimise risks to health and safety.
Further, while
s 19 of the
creates a primary duty of care both to workers and to
other persons, consistent with the object in s 3 of that Act, the duty to
is a positive duty (ensuring their health and safety to the extent
reasonably practicable), whereas the duty to other persons is
a negative one
(ensuring to the extent reasonably practicable that their health and safety is
not put at risk).
I do not accept that, by undertaking a very small number of tasks which were
incidental to his role as a Freight Specialists
employee and from which he was
not excluded by the defendant, such as moving a second forklift out of the path
of the forklift being
used to unload his truck, and directing Mr Roberts about
where to set down some pallets, Mr Skinner was someone working for the defendant
in its business. Accordingly, I cannot accept the prosecutor’s submission
that Mr Skinner was a s 19(1)(b) worker for the defendant.
further matters deserve mention. The first is that, as noted above, the
prosecutor contended in oral submissions that there could
not be any debate that
Mr Skinner was a worker as defined by s 7 of the
because he was
plainly an employee of Freight Specialists. However, the defendant asserted that
Mr Skinner was not a worker
for the defendant
when he delivered the
consignment to the yard on 12 October 2022 and therefore did not meet the first
limb of the test in [98] of
. The relevant question is whether the
worker works for the PCBU which is the duty holder PCBU. This was acknowledged
in [103] of
and was achieved by reading “in the business or
undertaking” as “for the business or undertaking”. However,
for the reasons that I have explained above, that is the result of the operation
upon s 19(1) of the definition of a worker in s
I note that it was an agreed fact that, on the night in question, Mr
Glendenning, Mr Riding and Mr Roberts were the defendant’s
only workers at
the yard. The prosecutor submitted that this was not inconsistent with its
position. However, it is difficult to
see how that can be reconciled with the
particulars in paragraph 7 of the Amended Summons.
I have found that Mr Skinner did not come within subss 19(1)(a) or (b) of the
, he was not someone to whom the defendant owed a duty under s
19(1) of the
yesterday afternoon, my chambers received correspondence from the prosecutor
requesting that, in the event that the judgment
was adverse to them, I refrain
from entering final orders. The prosecutor sought this course to allow it time
to consider the judgment
and the merit of any application under the
Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) or the
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
a result of receiving that correspondence, I consulted with the parties as to
the appropriate orders to be made today.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
(1) I find that Mr Skinner is not a worker for the purposes of s 19(1) of the
(2) I stand the matter over to 10am on 8 September 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (389 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter