URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Qoreishi v B2C Delivers Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 63; (5 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Qoreishi v B2C Delivers Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPICPD 63
Sadi Qoreishi
FIRST RESPONDENT:
B2C Delivers Pty Ltd
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Fleets Flyers Pty Ltd
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W25549/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
5 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 13 December 2024 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – definition of worker under
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
construction of written contract and whether the appellant was an employee or an
independent contractor –
Construction,
Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 1
Operations Australia Pty Ltd v Jamsek
[2022] HCA 2
considered and applied
18 August 2025
REPRESENTATION:
Mr J Trainor, counsel
Walker Law Group
Respondents:
Mr D Stiles, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Qoreishi v B2C Delivers Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWPIC 699
Mr A Halstead
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
13 December 2024
INTRODUCTION
Sadi Qoreishi (the appellant) signed a document entitled ‘Independent
Contractor Agreement’
with B2C Delivers Pty
Ltd (the first respondent) dated 30 September 2020. Under the contract, the
appellant was inter alia required
to supply his own vehicle and be available to
perform the services, which involved the delivery of goods, usually household
appliances.
I set out below in greater detail the terms of the contract. Under
the contract, the appellant was required to take instruction from
‘ANC’, which is a business name for Fleets Flyers Pty Ltd (the
second respondent).
11 March 2022, the appellant suffered injury whilst performing his contractual
duties for the respondents. The appellant claims
weekly compensation and the
payment of medical treatment expenses. The appellant claims that notwithstanding
the contract, he was
in fact a worker.
respondents resist the appellant’s claims, asserting that he was not a
worker but rather his status was that of an independent
contractor.
the Member the threshold issue for determination was whether the appellant was
in fact a ‘worker’, as defined in
injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act),
at the time he was injured.
Member found that the appellant was not a worker and accordingly entered an
award in favour of the respondents. It is from this
decision that the appellant
matter was heard by me on Monday 18 August 2025.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE EVIDENCE
starting point for the consideration of the evidence is the documents comprising
a letter and the contract. The contract comprises
the contract, a cover letter,
the ANC Codes of Conduct, and the Contractor Business Application. I set out
below the relevant extracts
from the contract and the ‘covering
letter’ dated 30 September 2020, which is specifically incorporated
in the contract
except where it is inconsistent with the
Covering letter
Covering letter is set out in the following way:
“Dear Driver,
Your appointment as an Independent Contractor with B2C Delivers Pty
B2C Delivers Pty Ltd is a transport company providing services to ANC and
their clients.
We appreciate that you are interested in conducting deliveries for the
Company. We look forward to building a strong relationship
with you and working
together in the future.
These are the key terms that we would like to offer you:
Start date: 01 Oct 20 approx
Availability for Work:
You are required to be available to provide the
Services between 6.00am to 6.30pm each day from Monday to Friday, and on
if requested or other times by mutual agreement. The start time will be
based on our client and their requirements to ensure a smooth
loading time at
their relevant sites.
Equipment you must provide:
You must supply your own vehicle, smart
phone for using the FMS delivery software, and all delivery equipment to ensure
conveyance and manual handling of each consignment. Such equipment
would include trolleys, ropes, appropriate tie-downs, restraints,
tarpaulins,
blankets, rugs and carpet lengths for floor protection as appropriate to each
Equipment the Company will provide:
The Company will provide you with
ANC signage, 2 ANC polo shirts, 2 pairs of trousers and 1 ANC cap.
Termination:
The agreement can be terminated by either party giving
two weeks’ notice.
More detailed terms of our engagement are set out in the attached Independent
Contractor Agreement. Please read the agreement and
seek your own independent
legal advice. If you would like to discuss or propose amendments to any terms,
please outline any proposed
amendments in writing for consideration. If you
would like to accept the terms, please sign the agreement at the end and return
parties to the contract are described as the “Company” (first
respondent) and the “Contractor” (being
the appellant). The contract
then goes on to specify a number of terms. I set out the terms that are
germane to the issues contested
in this matter.
Letter dated 30 Sep 20
1.1 The terms of
the attached cover letter form part of this agreement.
1.2 If there is
any inconsistency between the cover letter and this agreement, the terms of this
agreement will prevail.
Business Application dated 30 Sep 20
2.1 The Contractor has
read, completed, and understood the Contractor Business Application.
2.2 The Contractor warrants that all details provided in the Contractor
Business Application are correct.
2.3 The Company’s Contractor Business Application includes the
‘ANC Chain of Responsibility’ document, the ‘Important
to Contractors regarding your rights and obligations as insurance policy
holders’ and other documents provided by the
Company to the Contractor
from time to time.
2.4 The Contractor Business Application forms part of this agreement.
of Conduct – Drivers & Offsiders dated 14 Sept 20
The ANC Code of Conduct – Drivers & Offsiders has been read and
understood by the Contractor.
3.2 The ANC Code of Conduct – Drivers & Offsiders forms part of
this agreement.
4.1 The Contractor will perform the Services for the
(a) of goods as requested by the Company or ANC;
(b) at locations and times requested by the Company or ANC,
(c) and any other related tasks as reasonably requested by the Company or ANC.
4.2 The Contractor must cooperate with the Company or ANC to successfully
complete all deliveries.
4.3 If the Contractor does not successfully complete a delivery, the
Contractor must rectify the delivery at their cost. If the Contractor
rectify the delivery, the Company will arrange for the delivery to be rectified
and the rectification cost will be charged
to the Contractor.
4.4 The Contractor must provide the Company or ANC with a signed proof of
delivery for every consignment (unless the contract of
carriage has an authority
to leave) and any other information requested by the Company or ANC.
4.5 The Contractor will be available to work at the times set out in the
cover letter.
4.6 If the Contractor will not be available to work at the times set out in
the cover letter (including where the Contractor goes
on holidays), the
Contractor must:
(a) notify the Company at the earliest opportunity; and
(b) where possible supply an employee or agent to perform the Services in
accordance with clause 15.
4.7 When not available for work, the Contractor can work elsewhere.
4.8 If the Contractor works elsewhere, the Contractor must not hold
themselves out as representing the Company or ANC or use equipment
4.9 The Company has an absolute discretion in relation to the amount and
no guarantees or
representations about the amount or type of work it will provide.
Contractor’s
Obligations
5.1 The Contractor must:
(a) successfully complete all inductions and all annual online refresher
(b) comply with ANC’s Code of Conduct – Drivers & Offsiders;
(c) perform the Services in a professional, competent and conscientious
(d) use all reasonable care to ensure goods are carried safely;
(e) carry out all lawful requests of the Company in accordance with the Company
and ANC’s customer requirements;
(f) at all times use the FMS delivery software on a smart phone while
performing the Services for the Company;
(g) notify the Company immediately if:
(i) they are unable to provide the Services including not being able to carry
out a contract of carriage;
(ii) an accident or injury occurs while performing the Services;
(iii) the goods to be carried are dangerous or hazardous;
(iv) the goods to be carried are not packed or wrapped in a proper and secure
manner or are in a damaged or unsafe condition;
(h) maintain proper accounts and records in relation to the Services;
(i) use the techniques set out in the safe handling and lifting technique
contained in documentation provided by the Company and
ANC to the Contractor
from time to time;
(j) comply with all policies and procedures of the Company and ANC, all safe
work practices and all safety instructions contained
in documentation provided
to the Contractor from time to time;
(k) comply with all laws and regulations, including health and safety
legislation relevant to the State of the performance of the
Services in the
Commonwealth of Australia.
to the Contractor
6.1 The Company will pay the Contractor the
fee set out on the Company Cover Letter for each delivery completed
successfully. This
amount includes GST and fuel levy (if applicable).
6.2 In order to be paid the Payment set out on the Company Cover Letter, the
Contractor must:
(a) use their smart phone at all times with the most up to date version of the
FMS delivery software;
(b) provide ANC with a signed proof of delivery for each delivery (unless the
contract of carriage has an authority to leave); and
(c) If a Recipient Created Tax Invoice (RCTI) is not provided by the Company to
the Contractor, then a valid Tax Invoice is to be
provided at the end of each
6.3 The Company will pay the Contractor within 14 days of receiving a valid
tax invoice or within 14 days of the Company issuing
the RCTI to the Contractor.
The Company will deposit the payment into a bank account nominated by the
Contractor.
6.4 Payment by the Company of any Top-up amount is specified in the Company
Cover letter is subject to the following conditions:
(a) the Contractor must be available to provide the Services at the times
specified in the Company Cover letter and must log in
by 7:00am on each of those
(b) if the Contractor is not available to provide the Services or does not log
in as required on any day, the Top-up amount will
not be paid to the Contractor
for that day.
6.5 The Company may continue to pay Top-ups after the period specified in
the Company Cover letter at the absolute discretion of
the Company, and the
Company may cease paying the Top-up amounts at any time.
6.6 The Company may review and change any amounts payable to the Contractor
with one weeks’ notice.
Created Tax Invoice
7.1 At the end of each calendar week period
that the Contractor provides the Services, the Company may provide the
Contractor with
a Recipient Created Tax Invoice (RCTI) for that period.
7.2 The Contractor must notify the Company of any inaccuracies in a RCTI
within 14 days of receipt. If no notice is received within
14 days, all
payments will be deemed correct and no further corrections will be made.
and Equipment
8.1 The Contractor will use their own vehicle at
their own cost to provide the Services.
8.2 Each vehicle provided by the Contractor:
(a) is subject to inspection and approval by the Company prior to use;
(b) must be suitable for the work to be done by the Contractor; and
(c) must be white in colour, unless otherwise agreed by the Company.
8.3 The Contractor must display on the vehicle any reasonably signage
directed by the Company.
8.4 The Contractor may substitute an alternative vehicle, but only if;
(a) the vehicle so specified is unable to be used due to breakdown or accident;
(b) the alternative vehicle is fit for the purpose of providing the Services;
(c) the Company agrees that the Contractor may use the alternative vehicle.
8.5 The Contractor must at all times have a current:
(a) driver’s licence sufficient to operate the vehicle;
(b) vehicle registration;
(c) compulsory third-party insurance;
(d) comprehensive motor vehicle insurance; and
(e) Public liability insurance
and will provide the Company with evidence of these as requirements and
relevant certificate of currency upon requested by the Company.
8.6 If any of these insurances cease to be current the Contractor must tell
the Company immediately.
8.7 The Contractor must ensure the vehicle is at all times:
(a) mechanically sound and in roadworthy condition;
(b) in a suitable condition for the safe carriage of the goods being delivered;
(c) kept clean and presentable inside and outside;
(d) fully equipped with all equipment necessary to perform the Services;
(e) fully equipped with personal protective equipment, first aid supplies and
fire protection equipment.
8.8 The Contractor must ensure that any person who operates the vehicle is
properly qualified, experienced, and fully licensed to
operate the vehicle, has
completed all relevant online induction courses and has the necessary skills to
8.9 The Company will not be liable for any costs associated with the vehicle
or any equipment associated with the vehicle.
8.10 The Contractor must supply all necessary delivery equipment, such as
manual handling equipment, ropes, tie-downs, and tarpaulins.
8.11 The Contractor must supply a smart phone compatible with the FMS
delivery software to be used at all times.
to Suspend Allocation of Services
9.1 The Company may not
issue a request to the contractor to provide the Services (Allocation) if:
(a) The Contractor’s vehicle is declared un-roadworthy, or, in the
reasonable opinion of the Company, is not in a safe or
roadworthy condition;
(b) The Contractor or any employee or agent of the Contractor ceases to hold
any necessary licence as required within this agreement;
(c) The Contractor’s vehicle does not meet the Company’s reasonable
requirements concerning appearance; or
(d) The Contractor is in breach of any term of this agreement.
9.2 During any period of suspension, where the Contractor is not providing
the Services, the Contractor is not entitled to any minimum
payment; and
9.3 The Company will re-commence the Allocation of services to the
Contractor as soon as practicable after the Contractor has provided
evidence to
the Company that the breach has been remedied.
9.4 Nothing in this clause removes the right of either party to terminate
this agreement in accordance with clause 20 (Termination
of this Agreement).
and Indemnities
14.1 The Contractor must maintain all
insurances required by law.
14.2 The Contractor will effect and maintain on terms acceptable to the
Company a public and products liability insurance covering
liability arising out
of any injury to or death of any person or any loss of or damage to any
property, including any loss of use,
in the amount of at least $20,000,000 in
respect of any one occurrence. Such policy shall cover the Company and ANC for
any liability
arising out of any injury to or death of any person or any loss of
or damage to any property caused by the Contractor or its employees
14.3 The Contractor will be responsible for and will indemnify the Company
and ANC against liability for all loss, damage or injury
to persons or property
(including company owned equipment) caused by the Contractor or its employees or
agents while providing services,
and the amount of all claims, damages, costs
and expenses which may be paid, suffered or incurred by the Company or ANC in
to any such loss, damage or injury shall be made good at the
Contractor’s expense and may be deducted from any Payment due
Contractor.
14.4 The Contractor will comply with any obligations to take out a
worker’s compensation policy for the Contactor, and any
employees or
agents of the Contractor under the relevant State or Territory Workcover
Legislation.
15.1 The Services under this agreement may be done
by the Contractor as a sole trader or an employee or agent of the Contractor,
provided that the employee or agent:
(a) is given prior approval by the Company;
(b) has the necessary qualities, accreditation, competence, and skills to
perform the Services;
(c) has disclosed to the Company their medical conditions and previous injuries
or claims relevant to the provision of the Services;
(d) The Company has the right to refuse their approval to allow the Contractor,
or the employee or agent of the Contractor to perform
the Services if any of the
above requirements are not provided to the satisfaction of the Company.
15.2 Each Contractor or their employee or agent must:
(a) adhere to the terms of this agreement; and
(b) comply with the requirements of the Company’s Contractor Business
Application as applies to the provision of the Services
by the employee or
(c) at all times hold a valid driver’s licence sufficient to perform the
15.3 The Company may direct the Contractor to cease providing the Services
or using any employee or agent if the Contractor employee
or agent fails to
comply with any provisions of this agreement.
15.4 Where possible, when a Contractor or their employee or agent becomes
unavailable to perform the Services, the Contractor must
supply a replacement
employee or agent to perform the Services in accordance with this clause. The
Company is not responsible for
any Payment to the Contractor or to a Contractors
employee or agent during any period of non-performance of Services from the
Contractor’s
employee or agent.
15.5 Prior to an employee or agent starting work, the Contractor must
provide the Company with all details and documents requested
by the Company in
relation to that person.
15.6 The Contractor will be fully responsible for and will meet all
obligations in relation to all employees or agents, including:
(a) payment of fees, wages, allowances, leave payments, redundancy payments and
any other similar entitlements under any industrial
instrument, law or
(b) income tax deductions and payroll tax;
(c) superannuation contributions unless the Contractor is exempt under the law;
(d) workers compensation and any other applicable insurance requirement.
15.7 The Contractor must provide to the Company on request any documentation
requested by the Company in evidence that these obligations
are being met.
15.8 The Contractor will be responsible for and will indemnify the Company
against all liability incurred by the Company in respect
of any employee or
agent who provides the Services on behalf of the Contractor under this
agreement. This includes any payments in
respect of tax, wages, salary,
allowance, or superannuation incurred or payable to any person or authority.
15.9 All acts by the Contractor’s employees or agents will be deemed to
be acts of the Contractor. Any breach by an employee
or agent of the Contractor
pursuant to this agreement will be deemed to be a breach by the Contractor of
this agreement.
of Contractor
16.1 The Contractor is engaged as an Independent
Contractor and will not be an employee, partner, or joint venture partner of the
16.2 The Contractor will not make any claims that they are an employee,
partner, or joint partner of the Company.
16.3 Where the Contractor is unable to provide the Services due to temporary
absence, the Contractor is not entitled to any Payment
from the Company for that
period of non-performance of Services.
16.4 The Contractor will use their own expertise and equipment to perform the
16.5 The Contractor will pay their own tax, superannuation workers
compensation insurance, public liability insurance and any other
16.6 The Contractor has no authority to incur any obligations on behalf of
the Company without the written authority of the Company.
The Contractor must
not represent to anyone that they have such authority.
16.7 The Contractor must not represent that they have any interest of any
kind in the Company or its goodwill.
16.8 The Contractor will be responsible for and will indemnify the Company
against any liability incurred by the Company as a result
of a breach by the
Contractor of the obligations set out in this clause.
21.1 This agreement is personal and may not be
assigned without the written consent of the other party.”
contract also specifies terms which prohibit the appellant having any conflict
of interest with the first respondent’s
which protect the first
respondent’s confidential
information
and protecting the
first and second respondents’
The contract also
contains a number of other clauses dealing with termination (clause 20), waiver
(clause 22), invalidity (clause
23), changes to the agreement (clause 24),
governing law and entire agreement (clauses 25 and 26 respectively).
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member initially directed himself to the definition of “worker” as
provided in s 4 of the 1998
Member noted that as there was no claim by either party of an existing training
contract, the task before him was to consider
whether the appellant had entered
into or worked under a contract of service with the respondent, noting the onus
was on the appellant
to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that he was
a worker under s 4 of the 1998 Act.
Member noted the essential elements of a valid contract before directing himself
to the authorities noting
Stevens v Brodribb
Sawmilling Company Pty
Malivanek v Ring
Group Pty Ltd
Operations Australia Pty Ltd v
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel
Contracting Pty Ltd.
Member considered the contract at reasons [19]–[21], noting there was no
dispute that the appellant had entered into a contract
with the first respondent
on 30 September 2020 and there was an associated cover letter referring to the
appellant as an “independent
contractor”. The contract stipulated
that the cover letter formed part of the contract.
Member noted that throughout the contract the appellant was referred to as
“Contractor” and the first respondent was
referred to as “The
Company.” The Member noted that although the contract recorded the
appellant was “engaged as
an Independent Contractor and will not be an
employee, partner, or joint venture partner of the Company,” that label
in itself determinative, what was relevant was how the parties viewed
the relationship.
Member considered the appellant’s submissions that despite the contract
referring to the appellant as contractor or sub-contractor,
the nature of the
arrangement was one of employment and thus satisfied the definition of
“worker” as provided by s 4
of the 1998 Act. The appellant cited
factors that were indicia of an employment relationship, referring to the
control exercised
by the respondents over the appellant, being subject to the
second respondent’s Code of Conduct, having been provided with
having to work during fixed hours, and the requirement to wear a
Member noted the appellant’s submission that although it was not the
appellant’s responsibility to identify the correct
employer, the appellant
had nonetheless believed the first respondent was the appropriate employer as it
was the contractual counterparty
and paid the appellant as per the contract
terms. The appellant submitted that “it is clear from the contractual
control of the [appellant] was with the second respondent in a manner
not dissimilar to a labour hire
arrangement.”
respondents submitted that the appellant was an independent contractor, relying
on the contract terms noting he was required to
provide his own equipment,
including his own vehicle to deliver the goods, had his on ABN, and was
registered for GST. The respondents
also submitted that there was no exclusivity
of service, the appellant was required to have his own business insurances and
was responsible
for paying his own tax and superannuation contributions. The
respondents also argued the appellant employed an “off-sider”
delivery work, the appellant’s tax returns confirmed he was operating a
business, and he had also applied for the government
COVID-19 grant as a
business for financial support.
Member noted that the parties had accepted the terms of the relationship were
contained within the written contract, cover letter
and the “Chain of
Responsibility” document, however the appellant had challenged the
interpretation to be given to the
agreement based on the
Member acknowledged that while some specific terms of the contract extracted by
the appellant could, on their own, be capable
of establishing an employment
relationship, those extracts did not have full regard to the contract as a
Member rejected the appellant’s submission that there was
‘exclusivity of service’ noting the contract expressly
stated to the
contrary. The Member also considered that there was flexibility in the contract
for the appellant to work outside the
set hours to increase his income and
furthermore, the respondents could not be said to have significant control over
the delivery
and installation service provided by the appellant. The Member
noted these facts resembled those considered in
where it was held
an employment relationship did not
Member noted it was evident from the contract that the appellant was not
required to undertake the work personally and could employ
other persons and
that “[s]uch an arrangement could not usually, if ever, be accepted as an
employment relationship.”
Member noted the contract provided for the appellant to structure his business
in a way to obtain workers compensation insurance
and other various insurances.
Member was of the view that clause 15 of the contract was central to the
relationship of the parties, noting it was open for the
appellant to engage his
own employees or sub-contractors and was permitted by the terms of the contract
to conduct a business more
broadly than in his own capacity as an individual.
The Member viewed the arrangement extending “far beyond the confines of
contract of service.”
Member considered that the control mechanisms as argued by the appellant were in
fact parameters to ensure compliance with the
respondents’ business
requirements and were not personal to the appellant but rather applied to him if
he chose to perform
the delivery work. In circumstances where the appellant had
employed other persons, the appellant was obligated to ensure those employees
complied with the respondents’ business
requirements.
Member was ultimately satisfied that the evidence did not establish a contract
of service but rather a contract for services.
The Member said, “In
circumstances where there was no contract of service, the [appellant] cannot
have been a “worker”
for the purposes of s 4 of the
Certificate of Determination issued on 13 December 2024
“1. The [appellant] was not a worker for the purposes
of s 4 of the
Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
for the respondent[s].”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant advances the following five grounds of appeal:
- That the Member’s failure to find ‘exclusivity of
service’ was an error of fact and, or, an error of law.
- That the Member’s finding that the Contract did not
apply to the appellant ‘as an individual’ was an error of
or, an error of law.
Ground Three
- That the Member’s construction of clause 15 of
the Contract was an error of fact, and,
or, an error
Ground Four
- The Member erred in law in that he failed to consider,
or alternatively, failed to provide any reasons for rejecting, the
appellant’s
submissions regarding the control exercised over the appellant
by the respondent; an error of fact, and,
error of law.
Ground Five
- That the Member’s finding that the appellant was a
contractor was an error of law, and, or an error of fact, and, or a mixed
of fact and law.
NATURE OF APPEAL
this appeal was filed, a five-member bench of the Court of Appeal delivered
judgment in
State of New South Wales v
considered the nature of an appeal under s 352(5) of the 1998 Act,
disapproving what had been the leading authority of
Raulston v Toll Pty
on this question. The
Court of Appeal rejected what it described as the ‘narrow’ view of
the appellate function under
s 352(5) of the 1998 Act that
had decided, instead stating the following:
“Future appeals
under s 352 should apply the approach in
Warren v Coombes
. Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their
findings are based on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member
hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the
an inference was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member
were a jury and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential
Member, after making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the
member, would reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she
should not shrink from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member
will be dismissing
an appeal without fully addressing whether there is an error
of fact, law or
discretion.”
the decision in
was published, I issued a Direction to the
parties inviting submissions on this authority.
Appellant’s submissions
appellant provided further submissions specifically addressing
dated 30 July 2025. The appellant submits that
can no longer be
considered good law but to the extent that
is relevant, it is
only relevant to appeals based on an error of fact. The appellant says that the
is to widen the scope of an appeal, thus making an
appellant’s task significantly easier.
appellant submits the following in relation to this
“The appellant’s submissions in chief challenged
various findings of fact by the Member (see [7.1], [7.2], [7.3], [7.4]
of the submissions in chief). He did so on the basis that he had to satisfy the
Presidential Member that those challenged
findings of fact were, in accordance
, not open to the Member (see [11], [12], [15] and [17] of
the submissions in chief). In light of
, the appellant no longer
has to satisfy the Presidential Member that this is so; as a result of
, the Presidential Member is now required to consider the evidence
relating to the factual matters complained of afresh and reach
conclusion as to what are the correct factual findings, totally independently of
the non-Presidential Members factual
Respondents’ submissions
respondents say the following about the application of
“Given the direction provided by Justice Leeming in
paragraphs [91] of
, and noting the specific reference to
paragraph 55 of the High Court’s decision in
Lee v Lee; Hsu v RACQ
Insurance Limited; Lee v RACQ Insurance Limited
[2019] HCA 28
, it is the
First and Second Respondents’ submission that the proper application of
section 352 of the 1998 Act causes no controversy
in relation to the
determination of the current appeal. That is, there were no findings of the
Member that were affected by impressions
witnesses as a result of seeing or hearing them give evidence. Indeed, no oral
evidence was
given in this matter and there was no real controversy raised
regarding the facts. The issues raised on Appeal predominantly relate
Member’s analysis of the written contract of employment, rather than
evidence of any witnesses.
In the First and Second Respondents’ submission, the Presidential
Member appointed to determine the Appeal would be in as good
a position as the
Member to decide on proper inferences to be drawn from any facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed,
were established by the findings of
the Member in his original
determination.”
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1998 Act defines “worker” as:
means a person who has entered
into or works under a contract of service or a training contract with an
employer (whether by way
of manual labour, clerical work or otherwise, and
whether the contract is expressed or implied, and whether the contract is oral
or in writing).”
Some principles about the determination of a person having the
status as a ‘worker’ under the 1998 Act
is necessary to set out the relevant principles by which it is determined
whether the appellant is a worker. Under s 4 of the 1998
‘worker’ is a person who has entered into or works under a contract
of service.
two 2022 decisions,
Court by majority stated the correct approach to deciding the question as to
whether an individual was an employee or an
independent contractor.
I summarise these principles as follows:
parties have comprehensively committed the terms of their relationship to a
written contract the validity of which
is not in dispute, the characterisation
of their relationship as one of employment or otherwise proceeds by reference to
and obligations of the parties under that contract. Where no party
seeks to challenge the efficacy of the contract as the charter
of the parties'
rights and duties, on the basis that it is either a sham or otherwise
ineffective under the general law or statute,
there is no occasion to seek to
determine the character of the parties' relationship by a wide-ranging review of
the entire history
of the parties' dealings. Such a review is neither necessary
nor appropriate because the task of the court is to enforce the parties'
and obligations, not to form a view as to what a fair adjustment of the parties'
rights might require.
In this respect, the principles governing the interpretation of a contract of
employment are no different from those that govern the
interpretation of
contracts generally. The view to the contrary, which has been taken in the
United Kingdom
, cannot stand
with the statements of the law in
High Court said this about how the parties characterise the
relationship:
“To say that the legal character of a
relationship between persons is to be determined by the rights and obligations
established by the parties' written contract is distinctly not to say
that the ‘label’ which the parties may have chosen
to describe their
relationship is determinative of, or even relevant to, that
characterisation.
Subject to statute, under the common law the parties are free to agree upon
the rights and obligations by which they are to be bound.
But the determination
of the character of the relationship constituted by those rights and obligations
is a matter for the court.
As a matter of principle, however, it is difficult to see how the expression
by the parties of their opinion as to the character of
their relationship can
assist the court, whose task it is to characterise their relationship by
reference to their rights and duties.
Generally speaking, the opinion of the
parties on a matter of law is irrelevant. Even if it be accepted that there may
be cases where
descriptive language chosen by the parties can shed light on the
objective understanding of the operative provisions of their contract,
where the parties' description of their status or relationship will be helpful
to the court in ascertaining their rights
and duties will be
this case, the appellant made much of the element of ‘control’ said
to be exercised over him by virtue of the contract
terms. The High Court said
the following:
“Like the ‘own business/employer’s
business’ dichotomy, the existence of a right of control by a putative
employer over the activities of the putative employee serves to sensitise one to
the subservient and dependent nature of the work
of the employee, so as to
assist in an assessment of whether a relationship is properly to be regarded as
a contract of service rather
than a contract for
a corollary to the appellant’s control argument, much reliance has been
, both before the Member and on appeal. In
Contracting
, the following was stated about
and another High
Court decision of
Hollis v Vabu Pty
the extent that it has been supposed that a departure from the
long‑standing approach predating, but exemplified in,
was required by this Court’s decisions in
, that understanding is also not correct. In neither
did this Court suggest that, where one person has done work
for another pursuant to a comprehensive written contract, the court must
a multifactorial balancing exercise whereby the history of all the dealings
between the parties is to be exhaustively reviewed
even though no party disputes
the validity of the contract.
, Mason J said that ‘it is the totality of the
relationship between the parties which must be considered’. But this
was made in the context of a discussion the point of which was to
emphasise that the right of one party to control the work of another
‘not ... the only relevant factor’
. It was not an invitation to broaden the inquiry beyond the
contractual rights and duties of the parties. Importantly,
was not a case where the parties had
committed the terms of their relationship to a written contract. In this
stands in obvious contrast to cases like
– and the present case.
, the ‘contractual relationship’ pursuant to
which Vabu ‘imposed’ its work practices upon couriers was partly
oral and partly in writing. The terms of the relationship between the parties
had not been committed comprehensively to a written
agreement. Moreover, there
was no suggestion in any of the judgments in
that their Honours entertained any misgivings as to the statements of
principle in
. Indeed, in
Mason J (with whom Brennan J agreed) and Wilson and Dawson JJ
referred to
with evident approval
. It is also noteworthy that
Gleeson CJ, who followed
Connelly v Wells
, was a party to the plurality judgment in
As has been correctly observed,
‘does not alter or even
challenge the orthodox principle that courts are not concerned with what has
‘actually occurred’
in a relationship, but rather with ‘the
obligations by which the parties [are]
embarking upon a consideration of the various appeal grounds, it is important to
note the following about this matter. Firstly,
nowhere does the appellant assert
that the contract was a sham arrangement. The appellant confirmed this position,
namely that there
is no allegation that the contract was a sham, when the appeal
was heard before me.
Rather, the
argument is that the ‘label’ attached to the agreement is not
determinative and when examined, it in fact
reveals an employment relationship.
The appellant in particular points to various contractual provisions which he
says reveal significant
amounts of control being exercised by the respondent.
Secondly, and unlike
, the parties in this matter had reduced the
terms of the relationship to a written contract. I have extracted the contract
above and in my view it is comprehensive.
appellant puts great emphasis on the “overarching
respondent could exercise over the appellant by virtue of various terms in the
contract and that I should thus be satisfied
that the relationship was in fact
one of employment. The appellant accepts however that in approaching this task
of weighing the
contract terms, I have to consider the entirety of the
in assessing the true
characterisation of the
relationship.
appellant quite properly made the following remark at the hearing: “It is
conceded that this is a case which falls outside
the zone that comfortably would
conform with one or the other of those
definitions”,
referring to
the definitions of independent contractor and employee. However the appellant
stated that once the contract had been
examined, I would be satisfied that the
appellant was in fact an
would also make the following remarks which fall from a consideration of the
recent Court of Appeal decision in
. No viva voce evidence was
heard by the Member in this matter. Rather, counsel for both parties addressed
the Member on the evidence
and the decision was then reserved. This is a very
common occurrence in the Commission given the way the rules and procedural
govern the way disputes are framed and heard. There is no presumptive
right for a party to call oral evidence, leave must be sought
and granted by the
Member for this to occur.
Consequently, the advantages that a first instance decision maker would have
over an appellate body, having heard such evidence,
has limited resonance in
this appeal. The evidence germane to the issues before me on appeal are the
various statements and the contract
which were before the Member. What this
means is that I am in as good a position as the Member was to consider the
evidence and to
draw what I consider to be are the correct inferences or
conclusions if I decide that the Member was in error. In other words, I
perpetuate a demonstrated error as referred to in
Warren v Coombes
discussed in
. What this does not mean is that I would merely
substitute my preferred view of a particular factual outcome; error must be
for an appeal to succeed.
As to Gound One
appellant takes issue with the Member’s finding at reasons [31] which
reads as follows:
“... I do not accept the [appellant’s]
submission (which was also refuted by the respondents) that there was any
exclusivity
of service. The contract expressly states the contrary: ‘When
not available for work, the [appellant] can work elsewhere’.”
appellant says that this reasoning fails to read the contract as a whole. The
appellant points to clauses 4.5 and 4.7 of the contract
and an extract from the
cover letter, which three provide as follows:
Contractor will be available to work at the times set out in the cover
“4.7 When not available for work, the Contractor can work
elsewhere.”
Availability for Work:
You are required to be available to
provide Services between 6:00am to 6:30pm each day from Monday to Friday
appellant says the only conclusion open to the Member was that the appellant was
required by the contract to provide exclusivity
of his service. The appellant
says that the part of clause 4.7 of the contract, upon which the Member’s
finding was based,
“should logically have been read as being subject to
both clause 4.5 and the cover letter, which the Member failed to
response, the respondents state that the appellant’s submission is based
upon selective extracts from the contract and fails
to consider it as a whole.
The respondents also point to other paragraphs of the reasons where the issue of
exclusivity of service
In answer to this ground
generally, the respondents rely on the High Court decisions in
Contracting
as requiring primacy to be given to the
contract terms.
its reply submission, the appellant submits the following:
recurrent theme throughout the respondents’ Submissions is that the
appellant, both in addressing the Member, and by
his Primary Submissions was
‘selective’ in his construction of the Contract. Instances of this
can be seen at paragraphs
[1], [8], [11], and [14] of the respondents’
Submissions. Lest his silence on this matter be construed as acquiescence, the
appellant says this: In the context of a contest as to whether a contract is for
service or for services, identifying those
within the Contract
that suggest the former is a legitimate forensic exercise. That this is so is
seen by the fact that course of
the Arbitration undertaking this task [sic], the
appellant made reference to clauses 3.1 and 3.2 of the Contract, clause 4.1,
4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9 and 5.1 of the Contract; and indeed by the
Member’s Decision, which makes reference to two, and
only two, provisions
in the Contract, namely clause 4.5 and clause
appellant submits the respondents’ submission fails to address what the
appellant says about the Member not addressing clause
4.5 of the contract or the
covering letter. This, the appellant says, was the gravamen of its complaint in
its primary submission.
the appellant responds by stating that the respondents’ submissions fail
to answer the appellant’s submissions
Consideration
the following reasons, I do not accept the appellant’s arguments in this
ground. A consideration of the contract terms as
a whole reveal that the
appellant did not contract to provide any exclusivity of his own service to the
respondents.
contract provides the following. Clause 4 is entitled “The Work”. It
describes how the contract work will be performed.
It starts with clause 4.1
noting that the appellant will perform the work. There is a general promise in
clause 4.5 that the appellant
will be available to work at the times set out in
the cover letter. However, clauses 4.6 and 4.7 then make provision for what will
happen if the appellant was not available to work. He could have his employee or
agent perform the work
the appellant was not available, he could work
I do not read
clause 4.7 as being subject to clause 4.5 and the cover letter as the appellant
has submitted. Rather these provisions
deal with two separate circumstances, the
first when the appellant is available to work, the second when he is not
available to work.
I would also note that clause 4.9 states that there is no
guarantee regarding the amount and type of work being offered to the appellant.
Under the contract, the appellant is only paid for work
This is to be
contrasted with an employment relationship where the obligation at common law is
to pay an employee’s wages whether
work is supplied or not. Whilst this
was acknowledged by the appellant, he submitted that this aspect of the contract
was “hardly
factor arising from the contract in favour of an independent contractor
relationship. It also militates against exclusivity
as there is no guarantee of
work and as described above, the appellant may work elsewhere.
15 then specifically sets out that the contract services may be provided by the
appellant as a “sole trader” or
“an employee or agent of the
[appellant]” and then provides the scheme by which such employees or
agents can perform
the services. In particular, clause 15.4 provides that if the
appellant, his employee or agent are not available to perform the work,
appellant must supply a replacement employee or agent. The appellant is
responsible for all payments to his employees or
fact that the contract work can be performed by persons other than the
appellant, an employee, agent or replacement, compels the
conclusion that the
appellant had not agreed that the contract services supplied would be
exclusively his.
the contract does not allow the assignment of the contract without the consent
of the other party, and it is expressed to be
personal to the
this provision deals
with the contract. It does not deal with how the services under it may be
performed which are set out in other
contractual terms. It is apparent that the
contract contemplates that the work may be performed by the appellant, or by his
or agent or by replacements of either. If the appellant was not
available to work for the respondents, he could work elsewhere. None
reveals any exclusivity on the part of the appellant. This finding is a factor
which suggests the relationship is that of
an independent contractor.
Member’s finding at reasons [31] was correct. Ground One is
As to Ground Two
appellant takes issue with the Member’s construction of the contract at
reasons [32]. At this section the Member found that
the contract did not confine
itself to the appellant as an individual, finding that he could expand his
business. Specifically, the
appellant states that the Member found that he had a
right under the contract to operate ‘vehicles’ (plural) and engage
an unspecified number of employees. The appellant says that this is not the
correct construction of the contract. The appellant says
that the contract
refers to a ‘vehicle’, that is the singular and not the plural. In
terms of the appellant retaining
‘employees’, the appellant points
to section B of the Background to the contract as well as clauses 5 and 21 as
the contract terms to the appellant personally. The appellant says
that the appellant’s ‘right’ to retain employees
‘qualified’ right under clause 15 of the contract.
appellant filed supplementary
submissions
after receipt of the
transcript of the hearing before the Member. The appellant advanced the
following two arguments to add to its
prior submissions. Firstly, the appellant
says that clause 4.1 of the contract, which says that “[the appellant]
will perform
the Services for the [respondent]” contradicts the
Member’s finding about exclusivity. Secondly, the appellant alleges
the Member’s “comment” at reasons [32] involved a denial of
procedural fairness. The comment says, “the
contract does not confine
itself to the [appellant] as an individual”. Having reviewed the
transcript, the appellant says that
this proposition was never stated and the
appellant thus had no opportunity to respond. The appellant says that the
finding that the contract did not apply to the appellant as an
individual was central to his reasoning process.
response, the respondent says the appellant is selectively highlighting clauses
of the contract, noting that while the contract
cannot be assigned, there is a
contractual ability to assign duties and tasks under clause 15 of the contract.
The respondent says
the Member found as much at reasons [34].
terms of the appellant’s supplementary submission, the respondent says
while the submission might not have been framed in
the manner decided by the
Member, the position had been put that the appellant could employ other workers
and that this was not consistent
with an employment
relationship.
The Member’s
decision, the respondent maintains, is consistent with the position argued by
the respondent.
reply, the appellant argues that the respondents’ submission about the
later ownership of the vehicle is contrary to what
the High Court said in
Personnel Contracting
Both decisions highlight that
conduct subsequent to the entering of the contract is irrelevant when
characterising the relationship.
the appellant states that the respondents’ reliance on clause 21 of the
contract does not answer the arguments advanced
The appellant further
submits that the “heavily circumscribed right of the appellant to retain
an offsider”
inconsistent with an unfettered right of the appellant to employ whomever he
response to the procedural fairness issue the appellant says the
“9.1 The respondents seek to excuse the denial of
procedural fairness on the basis that while it did not argue the proposition
that that the Contract did not apply to the appellant ‘as an
individual’, it did argue that the appellant was, under
the Contract, able
to employ other workers. There are several difficulties with this.
9.1.1 At a literal level, the proposition that the Contract did not apply to
the ‘appellant as an individual’ if [sic,
is] distinct from the
Contract allowing the appellant being able to employee employees [sic].
9.1.2 Further to 9.1.1. at the Arbitration, in response to the
respondent’s argument, the appellant argued that the right created
clause 15 did not allow the appellant to employ persons ‘in his own
right’, but rather as the agent of the respondents.
The fallacy in the
respondents’ reasoning is seen in that that those [sic] submissions by the
appellant made at the Arbitration
would not go to the proposition as to whether
the Contract applied to the appellant ‘as an individual’.”
the appellant says that the respondents’ response is either non-responsive
to the argument or only responds in a
limited manner.
Consideration
appellant takes issue with reasons [32] which reads as follows:
“It is evident that when read in its entirety the contract
does not confine itself to the [appellant] as an individual. It anticipates
situation where he was at liberty to conduct and expand his business to have
multiple employees and vehicles operating to make
deliveries across a wider
area. That is, it was clearly open to the [appellant] to have employed other
persons to do the work for
which he was contracted, he was not required to do
that work personally. Such an arrangement could not usually, if ever, be
as an employment relationship.”
the reasons I have expressed in answer to Ground One, I do not accept the
appellant’s submissions about the appellant’s
obligation to provide
exclusivity of service under the contract. As I have found above, clause 21
makes the contract personal to
the appellant in terms of not being able to
assign the rights and obligations under the contract without consent of the
respondents.
This is different from the performance of the work under the
contract, which contemplates that the appellant, an employee, agent
appellant, or a replacement of both, could perform the work.
the appellant takes issue with the Member’s finding that the appellant
could utilise “multiple employees and vehicles
In terms of the
appellant’s ability under the contract to retain an employee or agent,
this the appellant says is heavily circumscribed.
Even if I accept this
proposition, that is no answer to the fact that under the contract, the
appellant can have the contract work
performed by an employee or agent (or a
replacement of either) if he is not available. The net result of these
provisions is that
the appellant can use a variety of persons to perform the
contract work – an employee, an agent or a replacement for either.
Further, I do not read the contract as putting any limitation on the
appellant’s employees or agents in terms of number, provided
otherwise comply with the requirements of clause 15.
terms of the ability of the appellant to use vehicles, plural, to perform the
contract work, the appellant submitted the following
to me in the hearing. The
appellant acknowledged that while the introductory phrase in clause 8.2 could be
read in two ways, one
suggesting the singular, the other the plural, a
consideration of the contract terms as a whole leads to a conclusion that the
‘vehicle’ is used in the singular
accept this submission. If one reads clause 8, whatever the infelicity of the
language at the commencement of clause 8.2, the clause
reflects the ability of
the appellant to utilise a vehicle in the singular sense. The Member did not at
reasons [32] explain in terms
how he reached the conclusion that multiple
vehicles could be used by reference to any contractual terms. This was an error.
error was used in part to support the Member’s statement in reasons [32]
that the appellant could expand his business under
the contract.
my opinion, the key point is that the contract provides that the appellant will
use his own vehicle at his own cost in accordance
with the terms of clause 8. In
short, the vehicle was not supplied under the contract by the respondents as
would be the case in
an employment relationship. The supply of the vehicle
(singular) by the appellant is a factor that supports the respondents’
assertion that the relationship was that of an independent contractor.
I have found that the Member’s description of vehicles (plural), deployed
to support the Member’s opinion that
the appellant could expand his
business, was an error, the error must have affected the
In my view this error
does not affect the result because the key point is that the contract requires
the appellant to use or supply
his own vehicle. This is a factor which militates
against the existence of an employment relationship.
error has been shown in this ground in part, for the reasons set out above, it
has not affected the result.
Two is dismissed.
As to Ground Three
appellant takes issue with what the Member said at reasons [34]. Reasons [34] is
as follows:
“I consider clause 15 of the contract to be
central to the relationship. It provides for ‘Employees and Agents’
and makes clear the obligations and requirements of the contract are not
personal to the [appellant], they may be delegated by him
to an employee or
agent (which presumably refers to something like a sub-contractor for practical
purposes). It was open to the [appellant]
to conduct a business with his own
employees or sub-contractors making deliveries where his role was to manage and
coordinate the
operations. He would bear ultimate responsibility to ensure
performance on the contractual arrangements but was undoubtedly permitted
terms of the contract to conduct a business considerably broader than his
personal physical capacity would allow as an individual.”
appellant says that the Member’s descriptor of clause 15 as being
‘central to the relationship’ is a “gross
overstatement”
as to the significance of the clause to the operation of the contract. The
appellant says that this indicates
that the Member has misconstrued the
contract, noting that the language of the clause is “permissive”.
The appellant
states that the right for the appellant to retain employees or
contractors under clause 15 is qualified and required the respondent’s
approval. The appellant states the construction of clause 15 is an error of fact
response, the respondent says that clause 15 is central to the relationship and
makes clear that the contractual obligations are
not personal to the appellant
and may be delegated, which the appellant did do in this matter.
his reply, the appellant says that the respondents’ submissions do not
engage with the appellant’s arguments under
this ground.
Consideration
do not consider that the Member has misconstrued clause 15. As I have discussed
in my reasons in Ground One above, clauses 4 and
15 need to read in tandem.
Clause 4 contemplates two scenarios, the first where the appellant does the
work, the second where the
work is done by the appellant’s employee or
agent. Clause 15 then sets out the contractual terms that apply to the
appellant’s
employees, agents, or
replacements
if they perform the
contract work. One matter that is abundantly clear from clause 15 is that the
relationship is between the appellant
and his employee or agent. The respondents
are not part of that legal relationship. The fact that the appellant is
responsible for
payments to any employee or agent is indicative of the appellant
being an independent contractor. Such an arrangement would not be
a part of any
employment relationship between the appellant and the respondents.
appellant has described the language in clause 15 variously as
“permissive” in this ground or “heavily circumscribed”
in Ground Two. As I found above, even if I accept this characterisation, this
does not alter the fact the provision enables the contract
work to be performed
by an employee or an agent of the appellant or their replacement. Such a
capacity to have persons other than
the appellant perform the work does not lead
to a conclusion that the appellant was an employee of the respondents. Rather
the conclusion
is that the relationship is that of an independent contractor.
appellant criticises the Member’s description of clause 15 as being
‘central to the relationship’ as a gross
“overstatement”, and that this reveals a misconstruction of the
contract thus constituting an error of fact and law.
I do not accept this
submission. Firstly, the fact that the contract enables the appellant to use the
services of an employee or
agent is a powerful indicator that the relationship
with the respondents is not an employment relationship. Secondly, the
appellant’s
description of clause 15 as qualified or permissive does not
detract from or deal with its essential purpose, which is to enable,
persons other than the appellant to undertake the work. For the controversy the
Member was called upon to decide, grappling
with clause 15 was essential. Whilst
the descriptor ‘central to the relationship’ may place the clause
too highly, it
is still an important provision as it represents the agreed
scheme by which the performance of the work, which is the whole point
contract, may be carried out by persons other than the appellant.
has not been established. Ground Three is dismissed.
As to Ground Four
appellant submits that, notwithstanding
Contracting
, the nature and extent of control exercised by the putative
employer remains fundamental in determining whether the relationship
employment. The appellant points to a number of the contractual provisions which
he says reveal a substantial amount of
control being exercised by the respondent
which is consistent with
employment.
appellant further states that the Member in fact circumscribed the indicia of
control by saying the following at reasons [36]:
“The measures that have
been argued by the [appellant] as employer control mechanisms ... are in effect
parameters to ensure
compliance with the respondents’ business
requirements, including in the context of a contractor who potentially engages
to perform the work. When the contract is viewed from that
perspective, the strictures it ... contains are not personal to the [appellant],
but merely applied to him if he chose to perform the delivery work.” The
appellant develops his argument regarding this aspect
which the appellant
says, for various reasons, is wrong at law.
appellant also repeats what he says is the Member’s error that the
contract did not apply personally to the appellant.
appellant also filed a supplementary submission which went to this ground, which
is the argument advanced in Ground Two that the
Member’s finding that the
contract did not apply to the appellant as an individual denied the appellant
procedural fairness.
reply, the respondent states as follows:
“It appears the
Appellant is critical of the fact that the Member did not deal with submissions
made on behalf of the Appellant
in relation to the control test that is referred
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Company Limited
[1986] HCA 1.
again, the Respondents submit that the Member had proper regard to the
Appellant’s submissions and dealt with them appropriately.
In particular,
the Member noted at paragraph 14 of the Statement of Reasons for Decision that
the multi-factor test, and the consideration
of various indicia that indicate
employment, was required. However, the Member went on to acknowledge, at
paragraph 16 and 17, that
more recent High Court authority required
consideration of the terms contained in the contract entered by the
respondent says that the Member dealt with indicia of employment and gave
primacy to the contract. The respondent maintains its
argument that the
appellant is selectively quoting from the contract.
appellant filed a reply submission which made the following points. The
appellant says that
Personnel Contracting
do not have
the effect of overruling control as an essential consideration in the
determination of the proper construction of the
relationship.
The appellant says
that the Member did not balance the various indicia, rather submitting that he
excluded considering control and
exclusivity of service by virtue of his
construction of clause 15 of the contract.
appellant once more asserts that the respondents’ submissions fail to deal
with their arguments.
Consideration
essential argument prosecuted by the appellant, both before the Member and
before me on appeal, was that the level of control
authorised by the contract
over the appellant was of such a degree that the inevitable finding is that the
appellant was an employee
of the first respondent. Before me the appellant
submitted that “the crucial thing in this contract is the overarching
that was exercised by the respondent over the [appellant] and we say
when you look at that on a day-to-day basis the only conclusion
that you would
be comfortable drawing is that it was, in substance, in effect, a contract of
employment.”
The appellant
ended by submitting “the control in terms of the indicia is the first
amongst equals. It’s
preeminent.”
The appellant
pointed to various contractual provisions as substantiating what he maintained
exercised, for example clauses 4, 8, 9,
10, 14, 15, and the requirement to be available to work up to 60 hours per week
and on weekends.
appellant alleges that the Member did not deal with the control element
appropriately having regard to what was said at reasons
[36], which had the
effect of circumventing the indicia of control. The appellant also says that he
was not afforded procedural fairness
with respect to the finding that the
contract did not apply personally to the appellant.
the following reasons the Member was right not to find the element of control as
being decisive in this matter. Undoubtedly, there
are aspects of the control
which evidence the respondents exercising control over the appellant which are
emblematic of an employment
relationship. For example, the obligation to comply
with the Code of Conduct (clause 5.1.(b)), how the vehicle is presented (clauses
8.3 and 8.7) and the termination provision (clause 20). But consistent with
Personnel Contracting
, it is the entirety of the
contract that must be weighed in the balance in deciding the true nature of the
relationship. This is
the effect of what the Member said at reasons [29] and
contrary to what was submitted to me, the appellant was not required to work
“in excess of 60 hours a week”.
In terms of weekend work, the
appellant says this requirement to be available on weekends was not for
negotiation.
stated that the appellant
between 6 am and 6.30 pm Monday to Friday and on
weekends if requested or at other times by
mutual agreement
. This needs
to be read in conjunction with clause 4 of the contract, which as I have
explained above contemplates circumstances where
the appellant is not available
to work. Namely the appellant can work elsewhere or utilise the services of an
employee or agent to
perform the work. Additionally, there is no guarantee about
the supply of work, or its type, under the
Patently under the
contract, if the appellant is not supplied work, he is not
I would also remark that
the availability to work at other times by mutual agreement does not bespeak the
exercise of control by
the respondent over the appellant. The terms of the
agreement prevail over any inconsistency with the cover
I turn to clause 16.4 which provides as follows: “The [appellant] will use
their own expertise and equipment to perform
the Services.” This provision
is not consistent with control being exercised by a putative employer over the
actual duties
being performed by the
the work being performed under the contract involves the appellant providing a
vehicle and undertaking deliveries at the
request of the respondents. The
contract does not specify or control how this work is carried out. This is the
effect of the Member’s
finding in the final two sentences of reasons [31],
which contain observations with which I agree for the following reasons. Clause
4.1 sets out in general terms various aspects of the services, namely the goods
to be delivered at the locations and times requested
by the respondents. Whether
the work is done by the appellant or his employee or agent, none of these
persons is, in the performance
of the services, under any supervision of the
respondents. I have been taken to no clause in the contract which specifies a
of control held by the respondents over the actual work of delivering the
contract services. It is trite to say that if the appellant
is using the
services of an employee or agent, as envisaged by clause 4 if he was not
available, there can be no suggestion that
the appellant himself is under the
respondents’ direction and control (under the contract) while the contract
services are
being performed.
I do not accept that the payment provisions, clauses 6 and 7, represent the
respondents exercising control over the services.
Rather these provisions
specify the agreed process to facilitate payment to the appellant for the
performance of the contract work.
the appellant points to what he says is the “granular level” of
represented by the
provisions in clause 5, in particular sub clauses (i) and (j). Clause 5(i), (j)
and (k) are health and safety
provisions. For the purposes of the health and
safety laws (
Work Health and Safety Act (NSW) 2011
(the 2011 Act)), the
respondents are a person conducting a business or undertaking
and as such have
obligations under that legislation which are not
transferable.
I do not see that
the compliance with such statutory duties constitutes evidence of control for
the purposes of this dispute. I would
remark that in any event, the appellant as
a PCBU is himself covered by those duties under the 2011 Act.
I deal with the complaint about the Member’s finding at reasons [32] that
the contract did not apply to the appellant
as an individual. I have in Grounds
One and Two above dealt with this argument. I do not accept, for the reason I
have expressed,
that there was any exclusivity of service imposed on the
appellant. I have stated in paragraph [67] of this decision that while I
the obligation regarding non assignment of the contract is personal to the
appellant, this is different to the performance
of the contract services. These
services are not required, under the contract, to be exclusively performed by
the appellant.
the appellant complains that the Member failed to deal with his submission based
. The Member described
at reasons [14]. At
reasons [30], the Member said the following: “The various terms of the
contract as identified by the [appellant]
are certainly capable of being indicia
of employment according to
. Those terms do appear to establish an
employment relationship, they have however been selectively extracted by the
[appellant] and
read without full regard to the complete document.” While
control is undoubtedly an important factor to weigh, indeed this
is the effect
of what the High Court said in
Personnel Contracting
at [73], it is not
the only factor to be weighed. The Member considered the control submission and
was not persuaded that it had
the effect the appellant submitted. For the
reasons I have set out in answer to this ground, I agree with the Member’s
of the appellant’s control argument.
a result of these reasons, Ground Four fails.
Four is dismissed.
As to Ground Five
Five is a general complaint about the Member’s finding on the ultimate
issue. The appellant says that the Member’s
reasoning process was wrong
for the reasons identified in Grounds One to Four. The appellant repeats his
complaints about how the
Member treated the appellant’s contractual
ability to retain employees or contractors to perform the contract work.
respondent says that the Member’s approach was consistent with High Court
authority. The respondent submits:
“19. On any view of the
evidence in this matter, the indicia of employment are not suggestive of an
employee/employer relationship.
The Appellant was operating a business and it is
clear from the tax and financial records contained in the Application to Resolve
a Dispute (see pages 359 and 465–468) that he was claiming tax benefits
associated with the business. He was not paid a salary
and received payments
pursuant to an invoice that was calculated on the basis of each item he
delivered. He provided and maintained
his own equipment (his own truck and
trolleys) and was able to advise the First Respondent that he did not want to
work and was in
a position to work elsewhere when he was not working for the
First Respondent. There is no evidence that income tax was deducted
from any of
the payments that were made to him, and he was also paid GST in relation to the
services he rendered. He was claimed
business deductions and, as was highlighted
by the Member, he was in a position to delegate work. Indeed, we note he did
employ others
to undertake work with him.
is therefore the Respondents’ submission that an analysis of the contract,
as well as the various indicia of employment,
lead to the same conclusion in
this matter – that the Appellant was an independent contractor and not a
within the meaning of s 4 of the 1998
appellant filed a reply submission which argued that the respondent failed to
deal with the effect of
and that the Member failed to consider
indicia of both control and exclusivity of service as required by
. The appellant repeats its earlier submission that the Member did
not consider the indicia of control and that the Member’s
contravened
terms of paragraph [19] of the respondents’ submission, which I have set
out above, the appellant replies in the following
While it is conceded that there were factors indicative of a contract of
service present, that is not the point, as there
were also indicators suggestive
of a contract of services, including exclusivity of serve [sic, service] and
most importantly, control.
The fact that various indicia may alternatively
suggest alternative types of contractual relationship is not decisive; indeed,
multi-factor test described in
arises because of this
ambiguity, and calls for the various indicia to be balanced. In so far as the
respondents assert that ‘on
any view’ of the evidence, the indicia
of employment are not suggestive of an employee/employer relationship is a
self-serving
opinion and of no relevance.
18.2 In so far as the respondents’ Submission seeks to catalogue those
indicia indicating a contract for service, this is not
relevant for two reasons.
As indicated at paragraph [18.1] it is not disputed that certain indicia
supported the respondents’
case, the issue is whether the Member’s
decision contains error. Second, in so far as the respondents’ seek to
these matters, to do so is to place the President in the position of a
primary finder of fact which is specifically excluded by section
352(5) of the
Consideration
Five is effectively a broad complaint that the Member’s finding on the
ultimate question, namely that the appellant was
a contractor, was an error due
to the errors argued in Grounds One to Four.
the reasons I have set out above, Grounds One to Four have not been established
and as a necessary result of these decisions,
Ground Five also must fail.
matter involved the weighing of various contractual terms, some of which were
suggestive of an employment relationship while
other were suggestive of an
independent contractor relationship. For the reasons I have expressed above, the
finding made by the
Member that the relationship was that of an independent
contractor is supported by a dispassionate review of the entirety of the
contract terms. I agree with the Member’s assessment of the nature of the
relationship. In particular, it is striking to me
that the contract services can
be performed by persons other than the appellant and that payment is made by tax
invoice issued by
the appellant. No tax is deducted by the respondent, the
putative employer. I am also persuaded, notwithstanding the appellant’s
submissions about the “overarching control” exercisable under the
contract, that the delivery of the actual contract
services was not subject to
the respondent’s supervision or control for the reasons I have expressed.
relationship between the appellant and respondent is that of a contractor and
the Member was correct so to find.
Certificate of Determination dated 13 December 2024 is
Judge Phillips
5 September 2025
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp
Contract clauses
1.1 and 1.2, ARD, p 112.
Contract clause 17, ARD, p
Contract clause 18, ARD, p
Contract clause 19, ARD,
pp 119–120.
v B2C Delivers Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWPIC 699
(1980) 30 ALR
[1986] HCA 1
NSWWCCPD 4.
[2022] HCA 2
Personnel Contracting
Reasons, [31].
[2025] NSWCA 157
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
Appellant’s submissions dated 30 July 2025,
Respondents’
submissions dated 28 July 2025,
Contracting
Contracting
, [59]–[60],
per Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelmann JJ
(Gordon and Steward JJ agreeing).
Contracting
, [63], [64] and [66], per Keifel CJ, Keane and Edelmann JJ. See
also Gageler and Gleeson JJ at
Contracting
[2001] HCA 44
Personnel Contracting
18 August 2025 (T), 30.
Contracting
24.34–25.2.
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
; Procedural Direction PIC1
Appellant’s
submissions dated 6 January 2025, [12].
The respondents rely on
reasons [31], [32] and [34].
Appellant’s submissions in reply dated 21 February 2025,
Contract clause 4.6,
ARD, p 113.
Contract clause
4.7, ARD, p 113.
clause 6 & 7, ARD, pp
clause 15.6, ARD, p 118.
Contract clause 21, ARD, p
Appellant’s
supplementary submissions dated 17 January
Referencing T27 and
Relying upon paragraph
[15] of the appellant’s submissions dated 6 January
Appellant’s
submissions in reply dated 21 February 2025,
[2005] NSWCA 333
Contract clause 15.4,
ARD, p 118.
Appellant’s submissions dated 6 January 2025, [18].
Appellant’s
submissions dated 6 January 2025,
Respondents’ submissions dated 2 February 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions in reply dated 21 February 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions in reply dated 21 February 2025, [15].
in the cover letter, ARD, p
Contract clause 4.9,
ARD, p 113.
See contract
clauses 6 & 7, ARD, pp
See contract
clause 1.2, ARD, p 112.
Personnel Contracting
Section 5 of
the 2011 Act.
Section 14 of
the 2011 Act.
Appellant’s submissions in reply dated 21 February 2025, [17].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.77 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter