URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bennett v SAS Trustee Corporation [2003] NSWCC 16 (25 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Bennett v SAS Trustee
Corporation [2003] NSWCC 16
Kevin Bennett
Trustee Corporation
CASE NUMBER: 17674 of 2002 of
CATCH WORDS: Statutes & Delegated
Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage
DATES OF HEARING: 25/07/03
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT: Mr J Klarica
instructed by Walter Madden Jenkins.
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr T Ower instructed by
Brian Matthews.
1. This is an appeal by Kevin Bennett against the SAS Trustee Corporation
brought under s 31 of the Police Regulation (Superannuation)
Act 1906 ("the
Act") against a determination of the respondent that the appellant Mr Bennett is
entitled to an increase in his superannuation
pension to 77 per cent of his
salary of office at the date of his discharge from the Police Service. The
appellant in his Application
for Determination (which was possibly an incorrect
way of commencing these proceedings, but no point is taken as to that by the
respondent)
seeks simply that I determine an annual superannuation allowance in
a percentage above 77 per cent of his salary of office as at
the date of
2. The issue kindly defined for me by Mr Ower for the respondent is simply
the entitlement of the appellant to any such increase,
but Mr Ower made it clear
at the commencement of the proceedings that he proposed to argue that an appeal
of this kind is a hearing
in which I am free to decrease as well
as increase the superannuation pension granted to the appellant by the
respondent, against
the determination of which he now appeals. I shall deal
with that question after considering the facts in this case.
3. The appellant gave evidence, and he struck me as a witness of truth and
indeed the contrary was not suggested by Mr Ower in his
submissions, and I
accept the appellant’s evidence wherever relevant.
4. The appellant is 61 years of age and was born on 14 February 1942. He
joined the Police Service on 28 October 1963. He was what
" policeman for 37 years. He was discharged as a result of an
" within the meaning of the Act on 6 January 2000. That
infirmity is the subject of Exhibit 3, a certificate under s 10B(3)(a) of
Act by which the Commissioner of Police decided that the appellant suffered from
the infirmity of "
lumbodiscalpathology
" as specified in a certificate of
the Police Superannuation Advisory Committee dated 28 September 1999, and that
this infirmity was
the result of the appellant being hurt on duty on 21 December
5. The appellant left the Police Force as an incremental (second class)
sergeant. He always did frontline policing work, if I may
so call it, following
his own description, and it was physically demanding.
6. The appellant suffered injury as alleged in the Application for
Determination, and as is not contested by the respondent (obviously
of the Commissioner’s certificate on 21 December 1993, although 23
December 1993 is erroneously stated in the Application
for Determination as
being the correct date of injury). In fact the circumstances of injury are more
particularly described in the
medical reports to which I shall come in a moment,
although in view of the nature of the issues in this case the appellant did not
describe it to me in detail in his evidence. Apparently a wheeled office chair
on which he was sitting on the day in question slipped,
and he fell heavily onto
his buttocks and suffered a back injury.
7. Two recurrences occurred in 1994 and 1996 in which I apprehend the
appellant suffered further back pain. In fact he had first
suffered back pain
in 1989 while a member of the Tactical Response Group. Eventually he was
retired medically unfit in circumstances
described above, before which time he
was performing work for some time on restricted duties of a clerical kind for
four hours per
day. Before he was put on these restricted duties by his doctor
he was working as a duty officer with the rank of inspector. The
duties of that
office were not described to me in his evidence but it was agreed in submissions
by Mr Ower and Mr Klarica, who appeared
for the respondent and the appellant
respectively, as I understood them, that these duties involved some degree of
clerical and supervisory
work, as well as active police work of a more physical
kind. One way or the other, the appellant was performing these duties at
time when he was retired medically unfit, if I may so put it, from the Police
Service, as described above.
8. Intercurrently the appellant came to operation for his back injury, and I
shall describe that surgery when dealing with the medical
reports. It was not
dealt with in the appellant’s evidence, but there was no need for that as
the medical reports adequately
set it out, and there is no contest as to its
nature, and that it left the appellant with significant continuing residual
on the open labour market.
9. Since leaving the Police Service the appellant has not worked. He has
been approached by his son, who runs a security firm, to
work with him, but
apparently the work involves obtaining a security licence and what is called
"static work"
involving standing for long periods. The appellant does
not think that he could perform such work. He told me that he had in fact
inquired at his local bowling club to which he belongs for a job as a doorman
when I suggested to him that such work may be within
his capacity, and he said
he was informed that, at that club at any rate, one had to have a security
licence and to be able to grapple
with unwanted entrants to the club, and he
felt himself unable to do this.
10. The appellant says that he informed himself principally as to the nature
of the work he was considering after discharge by inquiring
of friends who were
doing the work, and that is how he acquired his information as to what was
required in security work, apart from
what his son told him. He has not applied
for clerical work of any kind, but he considers that he could not do it because
it involves
computer work in which he has no skills. He says that in any event
he has been discouraged from applying for such work because in
his opinion a
person of his age with a previous back injury, which he would have to disclose,
would be most unlikely to obtain employment.
11. The appellant still suffers significant back and right leg pain which
restricts him in many extracurricular activities. Now he
only plays golf on the
basis of nine holes at a time, and even then only occasionally, whereas before
he was injured he used to play
18 holes regularly. He assists his wife around
the house, but finds that if he does such things as mowing the lawn he pays for
the next day in the form of increased symptoms. He does most of the cooking
in the house and is well able to do that. He generally
assists his wife
wherever he can, nevertheless he says whenever he does anything strenuous he
pays for it the next day, as he put
it. This seems to be a reasonable statement
in view of what he has said in the medical reports about the nature of his
and the operative means by which his treating surgeon has sought to
fix it without, it would appear, complete success.
12. The appellant was cross-examined by Mr Ower ably for the respondent, and
I hope I will be excused if I do not cover every aspect
cross-examination but only those which particularly affect my determination of
the appellant’s rights.
13. The appellant conceded that he would be able to work for up to 30 hours
per week if he could find a suitable job of a clerical
kind, in which, as I
understood him, he did not have to stand or sit for excessive periods or bend or
lift heavy objects. He conceded
that he had made little attempt to find such
work, if any at all, because of his apprehension that he would be unlikely to
it in view of his age and previous injuries, once disclosed. He was not
prepared to concede that he could do security work if it
involved standing for
long periods. He conceded to me that he could work as a club doorman provided
that he did not have to grapple
with offenders and could sit or stand as he
liked. He conceded that he had some clerical skills from his work in the Police
involving such things as filing, counter work, preparing reports and
typing on a typewriter, but he denied having computer skills
and there is no
reason to suggest that he has any, although he conceded to me that if somebody
showed him how to work a simple word
processing program he may well be able to
14. The appellant said in re-examination that the clerical work he did in the
Police Service involved opening files and some degree
of lifting and bending,
and that he is restricted as to that and was only doing clerical work for four
hours a day, as noted above,
in the last two years of his police service. He
said that even after his operation he was restricted in bending and similar
activities.
15. Coming to the medical evidence, Exhibit A is the applicant’s
medical reports, and the first document in it is a report of
Dr John Douglas,
orthopaedic surgeon dated 19 December 2000, Dr Douglas having examined the
appellant for his solicitors. Dr Douglas
traced how the appellant was hurt on
duty, as indeed has been found by the Commissioner of Police, when a wheeled
office chair slipped
and he fell heavily on his buttocks, and how as a result he
came to operation for a lumbar disc injury at the hands of Dr John Cummine,
whose reports I shall deal in a moment. Dr Douglas felt that the appellant was
partially incapacitated for work outside the
police force but fit for sedentary
work in an office with freedom to move around when necessary. He thought he
be able to do that for eight hours a day but certainly would be able
to work for four to six hours per day. He said the appellant
undertake an occupation requiring long periods of standing, repeated bending or
lifting, long distance walking, pulling
or pushing or twisting his back. He did
not think the appellant’s condition would improve. He said that he had to
his answers because the appellant’s age was 58 (at the time he saw
him, the report being dated 19 December 2000) and he had
worked for many years
in the police force and had no experience of other work, but said nevertheless
that general office work of
a simple nature would be available to the appellant,
and that he may need some rehabilitation to bring him up to date on computer
work. Assessments of permanent loss in relation to the back and legs were made,
which do not need to concern me at this stage as
they do not translate readily
to ability to work.
16. Dr Shone, the appellant’s treating general practitioner, who also,
I observe, is according to his letterhead a Fellow of
the Royal College of
Surgeons of Edinburgh, wrote a report of 19 September 2000, also part of the
exhibit. After tracing the same
matters as Dr Douglas did in relation to the
appellant’s injury and treatment, Dr Shone expressed the view that the
was not totally incapacitated for work outside the police force and
was capable of most forms of office, clerical and sedentary work
avoiding heavy
lifting, improper bending, squatting, rising and prolonged standing and sitting.
17. Dr Brian Stephenson, orthopaedic surgeon, again qualified by the
appellant’s solicitors, wrote a report tracing the same
matters as Dr
Douglas and Dr Shone had in relation to the appellant’s injury and
treatment and expressed the view, as at 2
September 1999, the date of the
report, that the appellant has work related disability as regards the back and
the right lower limb
as a result of being hurt on duty as described above, and
was not fit for frontline police work and fits within the category of
incapable from infirmity of body of discharging the duties of his
." Dr Stephenson thought the appellant may be able to do lighter
work, such as office work or light clerical work or light supervisory
management work, should he continue in employment, and may need some
rehabilitation assistance in that respect and is certainly
not fit for frontline
police work. He too made some back and leg loss assessment which do not need to
concern me here for reasons
already indicated above.
18. Last in the exhibits were a number of reports from Dr John Cummine, the
appellant’s treating orthopaedic surgeon. Dr Cummine,
in a medico-legal
report of 1 August 2000 to the appellant’s solicitors, summarises his
previous treating reports, which are
also in the exhibit, and states that he saw
the appellant and subjected him to various investigations, and eventually
performed on
2 February 1999 a right L5 laminectomy with decompression of the
L5/S1 nerve roots on the right side. He said the post-operative
uncomplicated but nevertheless felt as at the date of the report, 1 August 2000,
that the appellant was partially incapacitated
for work outside the Police
Service as a result of infirmities but capable of most forms of office, clerical
and sedentary work,
light and selected duties avoiding activity that involves
prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, heavy lifting, repetitive lifting
repeated bending, stooping, squatting and rising.
19. Exhibit 1 was the respondent’s medical evidence and the first
report in it was from Dr James Vote, orthopaedic surgeon,
dated 31 July 2001.
Dr Vote, after tracing the same matters as the other doctors did in relation to
the injuries and their treatment,
opined that the appellant would be incapable
of performing heavy work or work that involved running, jumping or twisting or
physical effort with regards to his back. He thought that given the
opportunity, the appellant would be able to perform light to
moderate manual
work on the open labour market, either part-time or full-time, if such were
available, and that ideally this should
be part ambulatory and part sedentary
and not involving any major physical stress.
20. Last in the exhibit was a report of Dr Tim Anderson, a specialist
consultant occupational physician dated 27 May 2003, and after
tracing the same
matters as Dr Vote did, he expressed the view that the appellant is not able to
previous occupation as a police officer, but is
able to work in a sedentary or semi-sedentary office based occupation, and that
should be easily able to work at least 30 hours a week, providing this starts
off gradually.
21. There is little disagreement between the doctors, as can be seen on the
recitation of their opinions set out above. I think Dr
Cummine was perhaps,
with great respect, infected with a degree of surgical optimism when he
expressed his opinion about the appellant’s
ability to work. Dr Douglas
and Dr Anderson on both sides of the record seem to agree that some degree of
restriction of the appellant’s
work hours is appropriate, and I am
inclined to agree, as I am with the views of most of the other doctors, as I
understand them,
that sedentary or semi-sedentary office work without
significant computer work and without bending, heavy lifting or other stress
strain on the low back is appropriate. How that translates to an entitlement in
this case is something I shall trace in a moment
after dealing with the legal
22. Mr Ower’s submission that the hearing is a
first be dealt with. He bases this on s 21 of the Act. Subs (1) deals with the
entitlement of a person aggrieved by a
decision made by the present respondent
inter alia to appeal within six months to this Court. Subss (2) and (3) deal
with machinery
matters and subs (4) reads:
The Compensation Court, after considering an application under this
section, may make a determination that the decision of STC or
the Commissioner
of Police, as the case may be, in respect of which the application is
(a) be confirmed, or
(b) be set aside and replaced by a different decision made by the
Compensation Court.
23. Subs (5) reads:
The Compensation Court shall not make a decision referred to in subs
(4)(b) unless STC or the Commissioner of Police, as the case
may be, could
pursuant to this Act make that decision.
24. Subs (6) reads:
Where the Compensation Court makes a decision referred to in subs (4)(b),
that decision shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed
to be made by STC
or the Commissioner of Police, as the case may be, and shall be carried into
25. This provision seems to me to be analogous to that dealt with in a
decision to which I drew the attention of the parties,
R v Longshaw
(1990) 20 NSWLR 554.
Mr Ower’s submission is, of course, that the
statutory provisions quoted above mean that this Court is to hear the matter
and make its own decision and that, provided within s 21(6) it
does not make any decision which could not have been made relevantly
present respondent, it has complete jurisdiction to make such decision as to it
seems fit in relation to the subject matter
of the appeal, the level of the
appellant’s superannuation pension as a result of being hurt on duty. Mr
Klarica argued faintly
to the contrary effect but eventually conceded that Mr
Ower was probably right.
what was being considered was s 131AB of the
as it then stood. At 557-558 of the reasons of Gleeson CJ, with whom
the remainder of the Court of Criminal Appeal agreed, the relevant
provision, s
131AB, as set out in subs (1), gave a right of appeal to the Director of Public
Prosecutions to appeal to the District
Court against any sentence imposed by a
justice or justices in a Local Court, and subs (2) read:
The District Court may, in its discretion, do any one or more of the
(a) confirm, quash, set aside or vary the sentence;
(b) impose such sentences may seem proper to the District Court;
(c) exercise, by order, any power which such justice or justices might
have exercised.
27. Subs (3) read:
Any such sentence varied or imposed by the District Court, or any such
order made by the District Court, shall have the same effect
and be enforced in
the same manner as if it had been imposed or made by such a justice or
28. Subs (4) read:
The District Court may not -
(a) vary a sentence so that the sentence as varied could not have been
imposed by the justice or justices concerned; or
(b) impose a sentence that could not have been imposed by the justice or
justices concerned.
29. Subss (1) and (2) of s 131AC dealt with machinery matters and subs (3)
On an appeal, new evidence or information may be given with leave of the
District Court but may only be given by the prosecution in
exceptional
circumstances.
30. In those circumstances the Court of Criminal Appeal held that a full
was empowered and that s 131AB(2) quoted above empowered
the District Court in its discretion not only to confirm, quash, set aside
vary any sentence or impose such sentence as may seem proper, but also to
exercise any power which the justice or justices could
have exercised.
31. This decision seems to me to give helpful guidance as to how the present
provision, s 21 of the Act and in particular subs (4),
should be interpreted.
It is cast in very similar terms to the provisions under consideration in
and the same applies to subss (5) and (6) to which I have
referred. I hold that the present hearing is a
one in which I am
empowered to decrease the appellant’s superannuation pension as well as
increase it if I see fit. An important
difference from the situation in
is that there was no previous hearing with evidence called when
the respondent made its determination, so the parties are not here
the evidence available to the respondent at that time.
32. Mr Klarica submitted that the procedure usually followed in the District
Court when persons convicted by justices appealed against
a sentence, and the
Court was minded to increase it, namely what is called a
whereby an appellant is given time to obtain obstructions to withdraw the
appeal, should be followed in the event of my
considering that the
appellant’s pension should be decreased. I have not come to that view, so
there is no need to consider
that question, but one would have thought that
ordinary procedural fairness requires such a direction or opportunity, even
the liberty of the subject is not involved in the present statutory
33. I now proceed to consider the appropriate quantum of the
appellant’s superannuation pension. The applicable provision is
of the Act which relevantly reads:
Subject to this section, the annual superannuation allowance for a
disabled member of the police force is -
(a) an amount that is equal to 72.75 per cent of his salary;
(b) except that where par (c) applies, an additional amount that
(i) not more than 12.25 per cent of his salary of office; and
(ii) commensurate, in the opinion of the Board, with his incapacity to
work outside the police force ...
34. Helpfully, this provision was recently considered by the Court of Appeal
Lembcke v SAS Trustee Corporation
[2003] NSWCA 136
where Santow JA,
with whom the remainder of the Court agreed, resolved a conflict of authority in
this Court by agreeing with the
decision of Curtis J in that case. Curtis
J’s approach, with which his Honour agreed (the remainder of the Court of
in turn agreeing with him) is set out at par [16] of the reasons of
35. The steps required are firstly to determine the percentage diminution of
work capacity looking at that
by reference to capacity for work
outside the police force (subpara (i))and then (subpara (ii)) to multiply that
figure by 12.25
per cent. Subparagraph (iii) sets out a step the parties do not
here require me to take, namely to apply that percentage to pre-injury
I am told by Mr Ower that the respondent will attend to that in the event of the
appeal succeeding, and Mr Klarica is content
with that approach. The final
subparagraph, subparagraph (iv) Santow J then refers to adding the result of the
calculation to the
base rate of 72.75 per cent to derive the total pension,
referring obviously to subparagraph (a) in subs (1A) of s 10, to which I
already referred.
36. Applying that approach to the medical evidence, it is my opinion that
solely by reference to capacity for work outside the police
force, the appellant
has a 60 per cent diminution of his work capacity. I was at first inclined in
argument with counsel to the
view that such diminution should be set at 50 per
cent, which in Mr Ower’s submission was the very highest figure
appropriate,
but Mr Klarica pointed out with some force something I had earlier
overlooked in my exchanges with counsel, which was that the appellant
advice was only working for four hours per day in clerical work when he left the
police force medically unfit, even though
various doctors talk about his being
able to work for up to six hours a day, in particular Dr Douglas, who however
qualifies his
remarks in this respect by talking about "
four to six hours a
", and Dr Anderson.
37. Mr Ower urges that I simply translate a work capacity of six hours per
day, which he says is proper in the circumstances, taken
over a full week, to
diminution of work capacity and find either that it amounts to 25 per cent
diminution thereof, as he initially
submitted, or at the most 50 per cent. He
says that 60 per cent would be inappropriate and would overlook the views of the
generally, and in particular the views of those who consider that while
the appellant could not work a full day, he could work for
up to six hours per
38. Mr Klarica submits that the clerical work the appellant did before
leaving the police force was rather restricted, and draws my
attention to the
fact that on medical advice (not contradicted in any way by evidence from the
respondent, although it comes only
from the appellant’s mouth) he was only
working for four hours per day in that clerical work. I do not think the work
appellant did before leaving the police force by itself should determine
what I do in this case, but it is a relevant piece of evidence,
alongside the
remainder of that of the appellant as well as the medical opinions in evidence
on both sides of the record.
39. I have come to the conclusion, giving that last mentioned piece of
evidence some but not crucial weight, that it should, along
with all of the
medical evidence and the appellant’s own evidence, require a determination
that the appellant has a diminution
of work capacity slightly over 50 per cent
on the open labour market. I must of course consider his age in that regard,
it is a relevant circumstance although it is not a crucial one. After
all any man out of work at the age of 60 or thereabouts is
likely to experience
resistance from employers hoping to find younger workers, and that is not
something in any way unique to injured
persons generally or to the appellant in
particular.
40. As against that, having been hurt on duty during his police service the
appellant is more disadvantaged as a result of being so
hurt than a younger
person would be, with perhaps more inherent capacity to attract employers on the
open labour market for that
reason alone. He says, and I accept, that from time
to time, if he did obtain a job, he would from time to time be unable to turn
for work for one or even a few days because of back pain. It is true that he
has had periodic exacerbations of his back pain
in the Police Service, and I see
no reason why he would not have them in any other job, if he obtained one, in
the future. The medical
reports certainly talk about activities in which he
should not engage which are quite numerous, and it may well be that at some time
the appellant, if he obtains employment, overreaches himself and does suffer
back pain again, so that he is unable to attend and
perform work which is
otherwise suitable for him for a few days.
41. The approach I find most helpful in this case is that of Drs Douglas and
Anderson, and implementing those which talk specifically
and in particular Dr Douglas’ view that four to six hours per day for five
days a week is the appellant’s
true capacity to perform selected light
duties, I think 60 per cent diminution of the appellant’s capacity for
work on the
open labour market is an appropriate view, and I so find.
Multiplying that number by 12.25 per cent as required by the subsection
discussed above results in a product of 7.35 per cent. Adding that to the
appellant’s present pension of 72.75 per cent results
in a total pension
entitlement of 80.10 per cent.
42. Exhibit 2 is the respondent’s notification to the appellant of the
result of his application to it for an increase in his
pension by which the
entitlement against which he presently appeals, 77 per cent of his salary of
office at the date of discharge
payable from the date of application 10 May
2001, was conveyed to him. The respondent by its counsel Mr Ower quite properly
that any increase I may order in the appellant’s pension should
operate from the date on which he applied to the respondent
for increase as set
out in Exhibit 2, namely 10 May 2001.
43. I make the following orders:
1. Appeal upheld.
2. Determination of appellant’s pension by respondent of 77 per cent of
his salary of office at date of discharge set aside.
3. Such determination is replaced by a determination that such pension be
increased to 80.1 per cent of appellant’s salary of
office at date of
discharge from date of application to respondent for increase in such pension,
namely 10 May 2001.
4. Respondent to pay appellant’s costs.
Mr J Klarica instructed by
Walter Madden Jenkins appeared for the applicant.
Mr T Ower instructed by
Brian Matthews appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter