URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v O'Connell [2000] NSWFTT 20 (8 November 2000)
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v O’Connell
(8 November 2000)
File No. BU 2000/3761
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Director-General, Department of Fair
: O’Connell
APPLICATION
APPEARANCES
: Mr. Davie of Counsel for Applicant
Mr. William O’Connell for Respondent
: 16 October
Legislative Provisions:
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
Building Act 1989
Disciplinary action
against licensed builder
Cases cited:
Director-General,
Department of Fair Trading and Gary Samuel Leonard Cohen
BU 1999/1600,
Fair Trading Tribunal of New South Wales
, Home Building Division, Judge
KP O’Connor, Chairperson
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
proved and penalty determined.
, penalty, disciplinary process, builder
The particulars in the Notice of Show
Cause dated 24 March 2000 have been
established.
Licence 35413 of Mr.
O’Connell be cancelled and Mr. O’Connell be disqualified from
holding a Building Licence for a period
of 18 months commencing 16 October
That Mr. O’Connell also be
disqualified for a period of 18 months commencing 16 October 2000 from being a
member of a partnership,
or an officer of a corporation that is a member of a
partnership, that is the holder of a licence; and from being an officer of a
corporation that is the holder of a licence.
Respondent to pay the Applicant’s
Exhibits to be returned after 28
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
The Director-General, Department of Fair
Trading (“the Applicant”) filed an Application dated 24 March 2000,
the Fair Trading Tribunal to hear and determine, a Show Cause action
against Mr. O’Connell (“the Respondent”) under
Annexed to the Application is a Notice to
Show Cause also dated 24 March 2000 (“the Notice”) requiring the
to show cause why he should not be dealt with under Part 4 of the Act
in respect of the matters identified in Annexure A to the
The Respondent has held a builder’s
licence under the Act since the 8 May 1984.
On or about August 1996, the Respondent
entered into a contract with Mr. McMahon and Mrs. McMahon (“the
owners”). after
being introduced by Collings Homes Pty Ltd
(“Collings”).
The contract provided for the Respondent
to construct a new dwelling for the owners at Bowral (“the
premises”). The building
work commenced on or about the 16 September 1996
and ceased on or about August 1997. At that time the foundations, piers and
frame were complete.
This building work was covered by the
statutory insurance scheme then in place under the Act. On or about 19 May 1998
made a claim under that insurance scheme. They received a payment of
$100,000, (the maximum amount payable under the scheme) for
rectification of the
dwelling as constructed by the Respondent. Their actual loss was calculated at
The Notice states that the Respondent did
not construct the footings, the brick piers and the concrete pad footings to the
in a proper and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the plans and
specifications set out in the contract and that this constitutes
conduct under sections 51(1)(c) and 51(1)(d) and 51(2)(a) of the Act. (The
Notice was later amended to delete the reference
to section 51(1)(d)).
The matter came before the Tribunal,
constituted by the Deputy Chairperson, Mr. McDonell and Ms. Paull, Member on 16
October 2000.
The Applicant was represented by Mr.
Davie of Counsel. The Respondent was represented by his father, Mr. William
(“Mr. O’Connell Senior”).
Mr. Davie submitted a “Statement
Of Agreed Facts and Contentions” at the commencement of the proceedings
with the consent
of the Respondent.
The Applicant’s Case
The Applicant relied on the bundle of
documents described in the Applicant’s List of Documents numbered, 1-74
and filed 30 June
2000, the “Statement of Agreed Facts and
Contentions” and on Mr. Davie’s oral
submissions.
In short, Mr. Davie submitted that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the matter under the Act. He drew the
attention to the specific breaches listed in the Notice and the
Respondent’s reply, as documented in the “Respondent’s
to Show Cause”, filed on 29 August 2000 (the Respondent’s Reply) and
the “Statement of Agreed Facts and Contentions”.
Mr. Davie submitted that the matters set
out in the Notice amount to a failure by the Respondent to comply with the
statutory warranty
imposed on him under section 18B(a) of the Act. Further,
that the Respondent, without reasonable cause, breached the contract between
himself and the owners, to do the work he is licensed to do. Thus he is guilty
of improper conduct, as defined under sections 51(1)(c)
and 52(2)(a) of the Act.
The Tribunal’s attention was drawn
to the statement by John Algie, Chartered Professional Engineer, which described
the subject
piers as “childlike” and the Applicant’s
photographic evidence of these piers.
Counsel for the Respondent submitted
that even if, as the Respondent continued to assert, he contacted Politha SW
Jensen & Associates
Pty Ltd (the engineer) before pouring the concrete, this
did not exculpate him. The Respondent had no right to breach the contract
did by constructing the piers and footings in the way that he did. In
particular, the discontinuous strip footings were inappropriate,
whatever the
engineer may have told the Respondent.
It was argued on behalf of the Applicant
that the Respondent’s attempt to lay blame with the owners, Collings, and
the engineer
is irrelevant. The Applicant does not take issue with the design
of the engineer’s drawings. The Applicant’s case rests
on the fact
that the strip footings were built in breach of the ASA Standards, and did not
allow equal uniform bearing pressure of
100 kpa on firm natural ground, in
accordance with the drawings. On the material before the Tribunal, there is
nothing to excuse
the Respondent, on the basis of any role played by the
engineer. In addition, the Respondent’s own case did not put the matter
as high as saying that the engineer had actually seen and approved the
On the question of penalty, the
Applicant submitted that the Respondent should be disqualified for 5 years from
holding a licence
individually, as a member of a partnership or an officer of a
company. He also referred to the Applicant’s intention to apply
carpenter’s licence.
The Applicant acknowledged that there
was no evidence before the Tribunal of any repeat offence and that these
proceedings concern
only one site. He stressed, however, that what was at issue
were footings and piers which pose peculiarly serious problems as they
structural integrity of a dwelling and raise concerns of safety.
Although in this case, the owners had
located the problem at an early stage, generally, problems with footings and
piers are difficult
to detect and difficult to rectify. From this, the
Applicant sought to infer that similar problems may exist undetected, in other
dwellings constructed by the Respondent. This was a particular concern for the
Director-General, whose charter is to look to the
protection of the
Counsel for the Applicant conceded that
there were no other disciplinary proceedings, either past or pending, against
the Respondent.
He also conceded that this was not a matter involving fraud or
dishonest intent.
He pointed to the Respondent’s
record of interview, indicating a failure by the Respondent to realise at that
time, that he
had done anything wrong. He hoped that the gravity of the
allegations were now apparent to the Respondent. Counsel for the Applicant
suggested that this record of interview showed that the Respondent was not fully
aware of his obligations to homeowners under the
Although the owners received the maximum
payment under the relevant statutory insurance scheme, the payment did not cover
cost of rectification. In addition the homeowners had suffered
inconvenience.
The Respondent’s Case
The Respondent was represented by Mr.
O’Connell Senior, at the hearing. However, the Respondent had legal
representation when
the matter came before the Tribunal for preliminary
directions. The Respondent’s solicitor prepared the
“Respondent’s
Reply”, the Respondent’s Statement, dated
15 August 2000 and the Respondent’s Submissions as to Penalty, which
O’Connell Snr presented to the Tribunal.
At the hearing, Mr. O’Connell Snr
submitted that the owners had in their possession a geotechnical report by
Golders Associates
(“Golders”) dated 1995 and were therefore on
notice that a geotechnical report was required, when the time came to construct
the dwelling. The Respondent however, had no knowledge of the existence of this
report at the time he carried out the work.
Further, it was the responsibility of
Collings to present accurate drawings (as is evidenced at page 10 of the
contract). The
drawings prepared by the engineer and given to the Respondent
to construct the footings, did not accord with the geotechnical report.
The Respondent relied on the Davis
Goetechnical Report of 22 June 1998 in support of the allegation that the
engineer’s drawings
did not accord with the geotechnical report by
Golders, prepared in 1995. He also alleged that neither Collings nor the
had visited the site prior to construction.
Mr. O’Connell Senior addressed the
state of the house at the time the statutory insurance payment was made. He
relied on the
facsimile of 30 July 1998 and the letter of 29 July 1998, from
Rickards & Partners to submit that demolition was not
He went on to contend that the
deterioration of the frame and associated parts of the house, stemmed to some
extent from the owner’s
failure to meet the payments under the contract,
which resulted in construction delays.
Mr. O’Connell Senior pointed to
the Respondent’s use of an 8 tonne excavator, in order to determine
whether the rock was
solid. He noted that Mr. Algie who carried out the
rectification work, used the same method but with a 20 tonne excavator.
He conceded that the construction of the
piers, constituted a breach of the implied warranty under the Act to do the work
in a proper
and workmanlike manner.
On the issue of penalty, Mr.
O’Connell Senior emphasised the Respondent’s work history as
outlined in the “Respondent’s
Written Submissions as to
Penalty”. In response to questions from the Tribunal, he advised that
this work mainly occurred
around the period 1986, 1987 and early 1990s.
Mr. O’Connell Snr took issue with
the Applicant’s submission that there was an inference to be drawn that
similar problems
to those in question, may exist in other buildings constructed
by the Respondent.
It was the Respondent’s submission
that at the time of making his record of interview he was unfamiliar with that
He now fully accepts that a penalty must be imposed on him.
In reply, reference was made to the
Respondent’s past practice, to wait until the “frame stage”
before obtaining
a certificate of compliance from the engineer.
The Legislation
Part 4, Divisions 1 to 4 of the Act,
puts in place a complaint handling and disciplinary scheme, which may culminate
in a Show Cause
hearing such as is now before this Tribunal.
The scheme is effectively triggered when
the Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading (so far as is relevant in
this case),
serves on an individual holder of a licence, a Notice to Show Cause,
under section 63 of the Act.
The service of such a Notice by the
Director-General may, in turn, (though need not necessarily) be triggered by a
complaint from
any person, on one of the grounds under subsection 55 of the Act.
These grounds, so far as is pertinent to this matter, include the
licence holder
being guilty of “improper conduct” (section
The definition of “improper
conduct” (once again so far as is relevant in this instance) is set out in
sections 51(1)(c)
and 51(2)(a) of the Act which
Improper conduct: generally
A holder of a licence who is
authorised by the licence to contract to do residential building work or
specialist work, or a holder
of a supervisor or registration certificate, is
guilty of improper conduct if the
...............................................................
(c) breaches
a statutory warranty,
................................................................
(2) The holder of a licence is guilty of improper conduct if the
(a) without reasonable cause, breaches a contract to do any
work that the licence authorises the holder to
contract to do,
For the purposes of this Decision, a
breach of a statutory warranty includes the warranty under 18B(a) which reads as
Warranties as to residential building
The following warranties by the holder of a licence, or a person
required to hold a licence before entering into a contract, are
implied in every
contract to do residential building work:
(a) a warranty that the
work will be performed in a proper and workmanlike manner and in accordance with
the plans and specifications
set out in the contract,”
It is not expressly stated that the
Director-General, having issued the Show Cause Notice, must then proceed with a
show cause action.
Nor is there any stipulated time frame, within which the
action must be initiated. It is implicit, however, that service of the
Cause Notice, leads to the show cause action.
Section 66 of the Act, gives this
Tribunal jurisdiction to hear and determine any show cause action.
The next ‘step’ in the
scheme is section 74 which is set out in full
74 Determination after hearing
After considering the evidence given and produced at a hearing, the
Tribunal may make any one or more of the following determinations
which to it
seems proper:
(a) determine to take no further action against the respondent,
(b) caution or reprimand the respondent,
(c) make a determination requiring the respondent to pay to the
Administration Corporation, as a penalty, an amount not exceeding
(d) impose a condition on a licence or a supervisor or registration
certificate held by the respondent,
(e) if the respondent is the holder of a licence, or a supervisor or
registration certificate, suspend the licence or certificate
for a period not
exceeding its unexpired term,
(f) if the respondent is the holder of a licence or a supervisor or
registration certificate, cancel the licence or certificate
and, if it thinks it
appropriate, disqualify the respondent, either permanently or for such period as
may be specified in the determination,
from being any one or more of the
(i) the holder of any licence, or supervisor or
registration certificate (or of a licence, or supervisor or registration
certificate,
of a specified kind),
(ii) a member of a partnership,
or an officer of a corporation that is a member of a partnership, that is the
holder of a licence,
(iii) an officer of a corporation that is the holder of a
(g) if the respondent is:
(i) a member of a partnership,
or an officer of a corporation that is a member of a partnership, that is the
holder of a licence,
(ii) an officer of a corporation that is the holder of a
make any determination authorised by paragraph (a), (b)
or (c) in respect of the respondent or disqualify the respondent, either
permanently or for such period as may be specified in the determination, from
being any one or more of the licence or certificate
holders, members and
officers specified in paragraph (f) (i), (ii) or (iii).”
The Tribunal may decide to treat as void
any determination, if satisfied that the person served with the Show Cause
Notice was unaware
of the Notice, did not have reasonable opportunity to make
submissions and adduce evidence or was not aware of the hearing date (section
82(1) of the Act).
Matters for Determination
In light of the matters raised before
the Tribunal there are two issues which must be determined. Firstly, has the
Applicant shown
that the Respondent’s conduct amounted to improper conduct
as alleged in the Notice? Depending on the answer to this question,
what is the
appropriate determination for this Tribunal to make under section 74 of the Act?
Burden of Proof
In proceedings such as these, it is
accepted that the burden of proof on the Applicant is the
“Briginshaw” test; which
requires that facts necessary, to reach a
conclusion, be proven to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal, consistent
nature and consequence. Being disciplinary proceedings, the Tribunal
must be comfortably satisfied in reaching conclusions on disputed
questions of
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading and Gary Samuel Leonard
BU 1999/1600,
Fair Trading Tribunal of New South Wales
Building Division, Judge KP O’Connor, Chairperson).
Before proceeding to the substantive
matters, the Tribunal will deal briefly with some threshold issues.
As stated above, the Tribunal is given
cause of action
initiated in this Tribunal by the Director-General of Fair
Trading, following service of a Show Cause Notice.
The Show Cause Notice must state the
grounds on which a Respondent is required to show cause (section 64 of the
It appears that such a Notice is issued
by the Director-General, following his investigation of residential building
work done or
of a holder of a licence (section 62 of the
On the evidence presented, this Tribunal
is satisfied that the Notice relates to residential building work (as defined by
done by the Respondent, who is licensed under that Act. Further, that
the Notice was served following the Applicant’s investigation
Respondent and the relevant residential building work. The Notice states the
grounds on which the Respondent is required
to show cause. The Tribunal is
therefore satisfied that it has jurisdiction to determine this matter under
section 66 of the Act.
The Tribunal is also satisfied that the
Respondent had notice of the matters raised in the Notice and of the hearing and
had sufficient
time to respond. Thus satisfying the stipulations of section
82(1) of the Act.
Reasons for Decision
Turning to the substantive matters,
pivotal to the Applicant’s case are the footings, the brick piers and the
concrete pad footings
referred to in the Notice.
In relation to the brick piers, the
Respondent’s Reply to the matters set out in the Notice, is as follows
(a) it is admitted that some piers exceeded the
acceptable height.
it is admitted that some piers
were out of vertical
Admitted that the
piers did not comply with the AS1640 brickwork
This reply amounts in part, if not in
whole, to a concession by the Respondent, to the matters alleged.
In addition there is the photographic
evidence of the piers in question, the report from Adams Thomas & Brown
Consulting Engineers,
and the statement of John Algie, Engineer, all of which
support the Applicant’s case and remain unrefuted.
There is then the construction of the
concrete pad footings. The Notice states that the concrete pad footings the
Respondent constructed,
were only 100mm in depth, not 400mm x 400mm square and
600mm deep, in accordance with the approved drawings.
The Respondent’s Reply is that
excavation was carried out with an 8 tonne excavator and as far as the
Respondent is aware,
were dug to a depth of 600 mm.
This reply is more akin to an
explanation. The Respondent does not directly refute that the depth was only
100mm. He puts the matter
no higher than that as far as he was
“aware” the 600mm depth was achieved. He presented no evidence to
support this.
Nor is there any evidence that use of an 8 tonne excavator is
standard or accepted practice, or should have been sufficient, to
achieve the
required depth, on the relevant site.
Turning then to the footings, the Notice
states that they were not constructed to have an allowable equal uniform bearing
of 100 kpa on firm natural ground. The Respondent’s Reply is
that the footings were “
constructed as a strip footing and where some
rock was evident the footings were bridged over the
In response to the allegation in the
Notice that the footing foundation material was not approved for the specified
bearing capacity
before reinforcement was placed, the Respondent’s Reply
had contacted the engineer and believed that his engineer and
(sic) inspected the foundation and footings prior to pouring the
The Notice states that “
walls to the dwelling were built off footings of unequal bearing capacity in
that they were bearing on concrete footings in some
places on boulders
(floaters) in others
”. The Respondent’s Reply states that he
endeavoured to remove the rocks with an 8 tonne excavator and believed
the rock which remained was solid and not floaters
In response to point 5(d) of the Notice
the footings were not continuous but interrupted by boulders
” the Respondent’s Reply is that “
positions where the footings were interrupted by rock the builder bridged over
Once again the Respondent does not take
direct issue with the matters raised in the Notice. Namely, that the footings
were not constructed
to allow equal uniform bearing pressure of 100 kpa, that
the walls were built off footings of unequal bearing capacity, and that
footings were not continuous and were interrupted by boulders.
The only material before the Tribunal,
being that relied on by the Applicant, supports the matters raised in the Notice
(See the Statement
of Peter Rand Mitchell, Andrew Elliott, John Algie and the
letter of Gleeson Consulting Pty Ltd dated 7/9/98).
The Respondent’s reply as to
whether the foundations were approved before reinforcement was placed, brings
into question the
role played by the engineer.
The evidence of the engineer’s
examination of the footings is curious. Following receipt of the
Respondent’s Statutory
Declaration, (to the effect that concrete footings,
excavations and reinforcements were done in accordance with the relevant
the engineer confirms the footings as structurally adequate
“based on the information given to us”. The Respondent himself
the matter no higher than that be “believed” the engineer inspected
the footings. In his Record of Interview he
states that it was his usual
practice to be on site when the engineer made these inspections. Both the
Respondent’s Statement
and his Record of Interview make it clear that this
practice was not followed in this instance.
This evidence fails to satisfy the
Tribunal that the engineer carried out the inspection and further brings into
focus the issue of
failure to properly supervise the
Findings of Improper Conduct
In light of the matters canvassed above,
the Tribunal finds that the brick piers, the concrete pad footings and the
footings to the
dwelling were not constructed in a proper and workmanlike manner
and in accordance with the plans and specifications set out in the
This finding constitutes a breach of the
statutory warranty imposed on the Respondent under section 18B(a) of the Act.
Breach of this statutory warrant renders
the Respondent guilty of improper conduct under section 51(1)(c) of the
The Respondent is also guilty of
improper conduct under section 51(2)(a) of the Act if, without reasonable cause,
he breaches a contract
to do any work he is licensed to do. This allegation is
made in the Notice.
The Respondent’s Reply is
that if the contract was breached in relation to the footings, he
believes that the footings had been inspected by his
For the reasons given above, this
Tribunal is not satisfied that the Respondent took reasonable steps to ensure
that proper procedures
were observed in obtaining the engineer’s approval
nor indeed that such approval was actually obtained, nor that there was
supervision generally.
The Tribunal therefore finds that the
Respondent without reasonable cause, breached the contract with the owners and
so is guilty
of improper conduct, under section 51(2)(a) of the
Having considered the evidence at the
hearing and found the Respondent’s conduct to be “improper”
as defined under
the Act, it is this Tribunal’s task to decide upon the
“proper” determination under section 74.
The determinations set out in section 74
are wide ranging. At the lightest end of the scale, the Tribunal may determine
further action, or to caution or reprimand a Respondent. At the
other end, it may permanently disqualify a Respondent from holding
In view of the seriousness of the
matters which have been proven, which resulted in demolition of the building
work and the owners
being compensated the maximum amount payable, under the
relevant statutory insurance scheme, it is this Tribunal’s view that
period of disqualification must be imposed.
The matter to be determined is, what is
the appropriate period? The Respondent submits 12 months and the Applicant, 5
In considering the appropriate period
the Tribunal is gravely troubled by the standard of the Respondent’s
building work, in
particular, the construction of the piers and the apparent
failure to supervise and direct rectification of shoddy work.
The Tribunal is also concerned at what
can only be viewed as the Respondent’s tardiness in supervising the work
and arranging
the engineer’s inspection.
At the hearing Mr O’Connell Senior
stressed the responsibility of Collings and the engineer to provide accurate
drawings that
complied with the Golder’s geotechnical report. He also
pointed to the fact that the Respondent had no knowledge of the existence
this report at the time he did the work.
The Tribunal is not persuaded by these
arguments. Firstly, the Draft Davies Geotechnical Pty Ltd Report of 22 June
1998, whose author
had the benefit of both the Golders Report and the engineers
drawings, does not go so far as to state that the drawings were inaccurate
In any event, this is not a case of the
Respondent being blamed for constructing footings in accordance with inaccurate
drawings. This case rests on the Respondent failing to carry out his
contractual and statutory obligations to do the work, in accordance
drawings and in a proper and workmanlike manner. This Tribunal has found that
the Respondent failed to meet these obligations.
Further, while the Respondent may not
have had actual knowledge of the Golder’s Report, it is difficult to
accept that he was
not aware, or at least, should not have been aware, that a
report of this kind was necessary for the relevant location. In his own
statement and Record of Interview he concedes that he lives and works in the
area and that prior to entering into the contract, he
constructed his
brother’s home, which is closely located to the premises.
The fact that the owners sustained a
loss which resulted in the maximum payment and that this payment did not meet
the owner’s
assessed loss, must also be seriously considered.
Mr. O’Connell Senior pointed to
the statement of Mr. Rickard, that demolition was not necessary. The reality
is, however,
that an assessment of the loss was made by the Fair Trading
Administration Corporation which this Tribunal cannot assume was made
Indeed, on the evidence before the Tribunal the Corporation took steps, being
the Gleeson Report of 7/9/98, to deal with
the conflicting views of Mr. Rickard
and the report obtained by the owners, from Adams Thomas and Brown.
The Respondent submits that the Gleeson
report is based on the Adams Thomas and Brown Report, which is written by Mr.
alleges Mr. Morton is not a structural engineer. This allegation is
not substantiated. In any event, the Gleeson report quite clearly
states that
the author has both the Adams and the Rickard Reports. Further, the Gleeson
report was prepared following a site visit.
Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded
by the Respondent’s submissions as to the role of the owners. Irrespective
they delayed construction, demolition was required as a result of the
Respondent’s building work, not from deterioration of
that work due to
Offset against these factors, however,
is the undisputed evidence that the Applicant has held a licence under the Act
for 16 years
and this is the first time he has faced proceedings of this nature.
What is more, while the matters in issue
are serious, they relate to one property only.
Most importantly, over two years have
elapsed since the owners discovered the matters in issue. During that time the
Respondent has
continued to work under the licence he holds. There is nothing
before this Tribunal to suggest that there has been any further adverse
that would affect this Tribunal’s decision.
The Applicant submitted that the
particular building work in issue, gives rise to the inference that there may be
similar, undetected
problems in other dwellings the Respondent has
constructed. There is no evidence to support this inference. It is not given
weight by this Tribunal.
The Tribunal notes in passing, that
given the period of time that has elapsed between this matter coming to the
Applicant’s
attention and its initiating this action, the Applicant has
had more than sufficient opportunity to present any such evidence and
Finally, the Respondent, through his
co-operation in the hearing of these proceedings, (evidenced by the
“Statement of Agreed
Facts and Contention”) has not only saved the
public expense of a lengthy hearing, but has shown contrition.
To conclude, therefore, given the
Respondent’s prior good record, that this is a “one off”
offence with no evidence
of any similar conduct, that the Respondent is a 43
year old man with a family to support and that this Tribunal is being asked to
impose a penalty at the most severe end of the scale under section 74, which
will deprive him of his livelihood, it is the Tribunal’s
view that it is
appropriate to disqualify the Respondent from holding a licence for 18
In making this determination, the
Tribunal is cognisant of the fact that it is not the intent in such proceedings
to punish the Respondent
but rather to protect the public, see
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201. The Respondent has
worked for over two years since the owners first discovered the matters in issue
and over three years
since he did the relevant work. There is no evidence to
suggest that there has been any other improper conduct either since or before
At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Tribunal advised the Respondent of its intent to impose a disqualification. He
was cautioned
against entering into any further contracts, in particular a
pending contract the Respondent was then negotiating. In view of this
appropriate to back date the disqualification period from the hearing
Under section 76 of the Act the
Tribunal’s power to award costs under the Fair Trading Act
“extends” to awarding
costs in a show cause hearing. This provision
seems “at odds” with the relevant Fair Trading Tribunal Act
which regulate costs according to the monetary amount in dispute.
The words “empowering the Tribunal to award costs”
would suggest,
however, that the intent of section 76 is to allow for costs in these
proceedings.
Determination
The particulars in the Notice to Show
Cause dated 24 March 2000 have been
established.
Licence 35413 of Wayne James
O’Connell be cancelled and Wayne James O’Connell be disqualified
from holding a Building
Licence for a period of 18 months commencing 16 October
That Wayne James O’Connell also
be disqualified for a period of 18 months commencing 16 October 2000 from being
a member of
a partnership, or an office of a corporation that is a member of a
partnership, that is the holder of a Building Licence; and from
being an officer
of a corporation that is the holder of a
Respondent to pay the
Applicant’s costs.
Exhibits to be
returned after 28 days.
Ian McDonell Christine Paull
Deputy Chairperson Member
Fair Trading Tribunal Fair Trading Tribunal
Date : 8 November 2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (88.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter