URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v WOODS (No 2) [2013] NSWCHT 2 (21 May 2013)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
CHIROPRACTIC TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
PAUL STEWART WOODS
MATTER NUMBER: CH04/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
CHI0001403142
REASONS FOR DECISION
(AS TO ORDERS AND COSTS
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
_________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v WOODS (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms E Brus of Counsel instructed by Ms F Westwood, Solicitor,
Health Care Complaints Commission.
Paul Stewart Woods
(Respondent) represented by Mr G Farmer of Senior
Counsel instructed by Ms N Brown, Solicitor, of Meridian Lawyers.
FILE NUMBER: CH04/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Sue-Ellen McKelvey (Chiropractic
Dr John Thompson (Chiropractic Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 6 and 7 May 2013
DATE OF DECISION: 21 May 2013
FINDINGS (in summary): Having found Particulars 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7(i),
7(ii), 7(iii), 8(i) and 8(ii) established and found to be unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Particular 8(iii) established and found that Particulars
1, 2 and 3 (considered together), 7 (noting that the
Tribunal considered 7(iii)
alone to constitute professional misconduct) and 8 to be professional misconduct
the Tribunal made Orders
suspending the Respondent for a period of three months,
reprimanding the Respondent and placing conditions on the Respondent’s
registration for a minimum period of two years once he returns to practise.
Costs awarded in favour of the HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: Health Practitioner - Chiropractor – unsatisfactory
professional conduct – professional misconduct –
boundary violations
– complaints by four female patient re inappropriate comments, touching,
text messaging - lack of consent.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – s139B(1)(a) and (l), s139E,
s226(3), schedule 5D – clause 7
CASES CITED:
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR
HCCC v King
6 February 2013 Medical Tribunal of New South
Buttsworth V Walton
(19/01/1991 NSWCA 40487496
Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
34 NSWLR 408
King v HCCC
Enfield v Regina
[2010] NSWCCA 87.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(AS TO ORDERS AND COSTS ONLY)
Introduction
document deals with ‘phase two’ of an Inquiry into a Complaint made
by Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC)
dated 21 October 2011 in
relation to a registered chiropractor, Paul Woods (the Respondent).
Inquiry proceeded as a ‘two phase’ process as a result of the
submissions of both parties. The Tribunals decision
with respect to the
Particulars and the Complaint (phase one) is set out in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Complaint related to four female patients. Three patients being members of the
same family (Patient A, Patient B, and Patient
C). The fourth female patient was
unrelated and unknown to the other three women.
to phase one the Respondent admitted that some of the conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. He did not admit
all of the Particulars nor
that the conduct amounted to professional misconduct.
Tribunal received a significant number of documents, mostly references, from the
Respondent for the purpose of ‘phase two’
of the Inquiry.
The Complaint
Complaint is set out in full in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes.
submissions of the parties (set out in part below) provide details of some of
the relevant law to be considered by the Tribunal
with respect to the decision
as to what Orders are appropriate having regard to all of the evidence.
Suppression Orders
phase one of the Inquiry the Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression
Order in accordance with Schedule 5D Clause 7 of
the Act in relation to the name
of Patients A, B, C and D and others associated with them as indicated in the
schedule annexed to
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
The Tribunal
extended this Suppression Order to the large number of patients that provided
references (apart from those that provided
character references as a direct
result of a request from the Respondent’s legal advisers). Any information
beyond that contained
in this Reasons document or in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
which may identify them is also not to be published.
documents received into evidence from the Respondent were marked as exhibits R1
– R88. There was no written statement from
the Respondent. Medical records
and a report from the Respondent’s former treating GP were provided. A
statement from a registered
chiropractor who undertook a locum role in the
Respondent’s practice was provided (Dr Danielle Gregory). A statement from
Kelly (chiropractor) was also provided. An internet print out of two articles
that appeared in the media in January 2013 was provided
to the Tribunal. Photos
indicating the current arrangement of the treatment table etc in the
Respondent’s practice referred
to by the Respondent in his oral evidence
were also provided. A receipt dated 30 April 2013 from ‘Davaar
Consulting’
in the amount of $110 for a course titled
internet tool: Professional Boundaries – Being Close whilst being
formed exhibit 85 and details of this organisation formed
exhibit 87. A copy of a letter from the Health Professional Councils Authority
(HPCA) to two of the Respondent’s referees also came into evidence. It
appears this letter was written by the HPCA as a result
of reference being
forwarded to the office of the Minister for Health. The letter from the HPCA
resulted in the referees writing
a further letter by way of clarification of the
first reference. The Undertaking made by the Respondent after the Tribunal made
findings in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
formed exhibit 88.
One colleague, Dr Mathew Hall of Tamworth provided a reference as did the
Respondent’s receptionist (who
had given evidence during phase one).
balance of the documents fell into two categories. A small number of character
references were provided to the Tribunal which
had resulted from a request from
the Respondent’s legal advisers and their names had been provided by the
Respondent for this
purpose. The remaining references were provided after the
media reports and were not as far as the Tribunal is aware a result of
from the Respondent’s legal advisers. Many of these references were
written from married couples or family groups.
In total they represented over 80
patients (including 35 female patients).
John Kelly, Dr Mathew Hall and the Respondent were all called to give evidence
before the Tribunal for ‘phase two’.
Mrs Woods was present
throughout the Inquiry.
Evidence before the
is evident from the details of the documents received in evidence from the
Respondent, the Respondent provided a very large number
references/testimonials. Some of the evidence from ‘phase one’, in
particular parts of the oral evidence of the Respondent
is in some respects
relevant to ‘phase two’ of this Inquiry and has been recorded in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Evidence of Dr
Kelly had provided peer review evidence in ‘phase one’ of the
Inquiry. For the purpose of ‘phase two’ Dr
Kelly conducted a 35
minute teleconference with the Respondent on 10 April 2013 at the instigation of
the Respondent’s legal
representatives for the purpose of providing a
statement dated 16 April 2013, addressed
‘To whom it may
Kelly gave evidence that he had received a subsequent telephone call from the
Respondent on 4 May 2013 and the conversation ran
along the same lines as the
teleconference that had been arranged on 10 April 2013. This subsequent
telephone conversation was also
approximately half an hour in duration. The
Respondent indicated to Dr Kelly that he initiated this second telephone call as
to clarify in his own mind the matters that were discussed in earlier
telephone in preparation for the Tribunal hearing he was trying
to express in
the earlier telephone conversation in preparation for the hearing.
substance of Dr Kelly’s report reads as follows:
During this teleconference I had the opportunity to discuss with Mr. Woods
his current frame of mind and recent reflections in relation
to the issues
pertaining to this matter.
It is clear that he now understands and appreciates the inappropriateness
of some of his communications particularly those delivered
by SMS and he has
already taken steps to ensure that all future SMS communication with patients is
performed through his staff whenever
He also appreciates that communication with patients regardless of the
form taken must be couched in terms which leaves nothing unclear
(as far as is
possible) or open to be misconstrued and he recognises that the onus of this
responsibility lies with him.
Whilst I could not find anything technically wrong with the application of
his adjusting procedures I have discussed with him that
some patients may
require modification of technique in order to provide appropriate personal space
whenever this is considered necessary
and he both appreciates and acknowledges
this issue.
Mr. Woods’s demeanour throughout the 35 minutes of our recent
teleconference was one of subdued introspection and this matter
has certainly
caused him to refocus on his clinical and interpersonal approach with patients.
He has clearly had an informal manner
in his clinical practice and dealings with
patients and this has required revision towards a more professional and less
chatty approach.
I do not sense that he feels the need to fight the system but instead
recognises the need to work within a more responsible framework
of clinical
communication and patient interaction. This is a necessary thing for all young
practitioners to accept and acknowledge
as part of their daily modus operandi.
oral evidence Dr Kelly clarified that the SMS messages referred to by the
Respondent as being inappropriate were the ones he had
made comment about in his
reports for ‘phase one’. Later in his evidence he confirmed that
these were the messages sent
to Patient C and Patient D (the first one in time).
Dr Kelly’s understanding of the Respondent’s reason for considering
that the SMS messages were inappropriate was that they were unprofessional. The
Respondent did not indicate to Dr Kelly that the
SMS messages were inappropriate
due to the content being sexual and/or personal.
asked how he assessed demeanour during the course of telephone conversations Dr
Kelly indicated that he relied upon the Respondent’s
manner and tone as
much as he did on the words spoken by the Respondent.
Kelly understood from speaking to the Respondent on the phone that his focus had
changed as a result of the Tribunal’s proceedings
as he had taken
‘on board’ the seriousness of the issues.
Kelly gave evidence that he structured the assessment criteria of the
teleconference by focusing on seven particular areas. These
The feeling of
the Respondent regarding the proceedings
The manner in
which the Respondent will communicate with patients in the future
The need for
caution to be exercised when communicating with patients to avoid mixed
The appreciation
the Respondent had for his current circumstances being a result of his own
Changes in his
chiropractic techniques for some patients
Respondent’s angst and contrition
The need to be
less informal with patients
general terms the focus of the conversation was on the SMS messages, patient
positioning during treatment and the issue of observing
personal space with
Respondent told Dr Kelly that he had become more formal and careful with the
manner in which he communicated with patients.
Kelly was asked about his comments regarding the sense that he had that the
Respondent did not wish to engage in ‘fighting
the system’ on the
basis that he sensed no angst to ‘yell back’ from the Respondent
during the two telephone conversations.
Dr Kelly stated that the Respondent
became emotional and expressed regret during the conversation. Further the
Respondent appeared
to be keen to make sure that this situation did not happen
Kelly stated that he had no knowledge of how long the Respondent had practiced
as a chiropractor and in his view a ‘young
practitioner’ was one
that had practised for less than 10 years.
Kelly also stated that he would expect every registered chiropractor to be aware
of the contents of the Code of Conduct and that
the general areas covered by the
code are covered during the training of a chiropractor.
Mathew Hall
Hall provided a reference dated 6 March 2013. Dr Hall is a registered
chiropractor. The reference states that he had undertaken
some observation of
the Respondent in his practice when Dr Hall was a recent graduate in early 2005.
The observation was of
‘how different chiropractors worked and managed
their practices’
for the purpose of having a better idea of how he
would eventually manage his own practice. Dr Hall states that he has kept in
a close friend. Dr Hall had
‘also consulted Dr Woods as a chiropractor,
Hall stated that he had read the Tribunal’s ‘summary
transcript’ being the Reasons for Decision document found
on the internet
site, AustLII. Dr Hall stated that in spite of the findings of the Tribunal he
considered that the actions were out
of character for the
Respondent.
reference indicates that he had observed that the Respondent was extremely
professional and appeared deliberate and proficient
with his techniques.
reference included the following paragraph:
I understand that every act of communication (verbal and non-verbal)
requires one person to convey the message and another to receive
it, and that
interpretation is made at each stage. On first hearing of the allegations, I had
assumed that a misinterpretation had
been made. As such, I assumed that this
would be sorted out prior to these allegations reaching the Chiropractic
Tribunal. Unfortunately
this has not been the case.
Hall noted that the Respondent had made
‘significant’
to his practice since the allegations that included keeping the door open during
consultations.
Hall stated he had come to know that the Respondent was a deeply religious
‘holds himself to the highest moral and ethical
standards’.
The manner in which the Respondent had handled the
allegations had increased Dr Hall’s professional and personal respect for
the Respondent as he considered the Respondent had conducted himself in an
exemplary fashion
his oral evidence Dr Hall stated that he believed that he had been asked to
provide a character reference by the Respondent. The
reference had taken him a
week or so to draft and he altered the draft after reading
HCCC v Woods (No
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
He had also spoken to Ms Brown (the Respondent’s
solicitor) to gain guidance regarding what information the Tribunal would
pertinent. Dr Hall gave evidence that he was not fully aware of disciplinary
processes provided for in the National Law.
respect to the paragraph set out above Dr Hall indicated that he thought there
must have been a misunderstanding between the
Respondent and the people making
the complaints based on his knowledge of the Respondent’s character. On
further questioning
Dr Hall stated that it would be difficult to interpret the
two SMS messages other than the way that the Tribunal had done in
Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Hall stated that he had regular contact with the Respondent and they discussed
matters such as particular cases (observing client
confidentiality) and business
matters. Dr Hall stated he had formed the view that the Respondent was a very
honest and professional
person while he undertook observation of the
Respondent’s practice during 2005 and this opinion had not altered since
time despite having discussed the allegations subject of the Complaint.
The Respondent – written evidence
Respondent did not provide a written statement to the Tribunal for the purpose
of ‘phase two’.
The Respondent – oral
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal over the two days of the
‘phase two’ Inquiry.
Respondent displayed significant levels of distress whilst giving evidence. The
evidence given by the Respondent and his distressed
emotional state raised
concerns regarding his mental wellbeing. The Tribunal specifically notes the
Respondent stated he had made
an appointment to see a psychologist as he wished
to ‘make sure he had got everything right within his own head’ to
this process (presumably the complaint, investigation and Tribunal
processes) had not affected him. The Respondent thought that he
had decided to
make the appointment with the psychologist himself rather than it being a result
of a suggestion from his legal representative.
However, later in his evidence he
mentioned that he had attended this psychologist on a couple of occasions in or
around November
2010 and his wife had spoken to the psychologist recently and
their conversation appears to have prompted the appointment. The Respondent
cannot recall if the psychologist indicated to him in 2010 whether or not she
considered that he was fit to return to work prior
to his return on a part time
basis in February 2011. The current appointment is part of a GP Mental Health
Care Plan put in place
by his current treating GP.
Respondent stated that Dr Briddon, his general medical practitioner, had
diagnosed him with Ross River Virus in the later part
of 2010 but that a follow
up blood test recommended by the pathologist to confirm this diagnosis was never
undertaken. The Respondent
reported that his health had not been good in the
later part of 2010 and that he had taken some time off when he could not manage
to go to work or to complete a whole work day. After the interview with the HCCC
on 11 November 2010 he had not returned to work
until 7 February 2011. The
Respondent stated that he was physically and mentally exhausted, that he
‘fell apart’,
that he had
‘nothing left to
‘devastated’.
7 February 2011 he commenced part time work (three days a week, 9.30 am– 2
pm) although he was still physically tired, having
lost significant strength in
his right arm due to the pain of shingles in his shoulder area. During this
period his wife acted as
a chaperone and scribe for his clinical notes.
June 2011 he commenced working five days a week with the usual hours being 8am
to 3pm and he had been physically well since that
time. The Respondent now sees
approximately 35 patients a day and takes a lunch break during the day. The
Respondent gave evidence
that the reduced hours had resulted in some people not
being able to consult him due to their own work commitments. Prior to October
2010 the Respondent stated he had been working 8 am to 6 or 6.30 pm and rarely
was able to have a proper lunch break.
locum was employed in the practice from November 2010 to July 2011.
Respondent gave evidence that his legal adviser had made arrangements for him to
have a teleconference with Dr Kelly. This had
occurred on 10 April 2013.
Subsequently, on the week-end prior to the phase two hearing the Respondent had
telephoned Dr Kelly to
have a further conversation.
Respondent gave evidence that when he returned to work in January 2011 he
continued to use the same treatment room he had used
previously. However after
his return to work his wife was present in the room during consultations and the
door of the room also
remained open during consultations. This arrangement
continued until June 2011 when he returned to full time work and his
receptionist
took over the role from his wife. His wife (and then after June
2011 his receptionist) would record what the Respondent verbalised
examination as to his findings and treatment provided regarding each patient so
that there was a record made by the person
scribing the clinical notes that he
could check at the end of each consultation. The Respondent stated that he felt
this procedure
had taken the pressure off him significantly. Further, the space
used to record these notes was not limited to ‘one square’
printed on the clinical record cards he used. He was able to check that all
relevant information had been recorded for each
consultation. Later in his
evidence the Respondent stated that there was no plan in place to cover the
situation when his wife and
receptionist were not available and that it had not
in fact occurred.
Respondent had also made changes to the manner in which he obtained consent.
When a treatment of a new area was required he would
provide a full explanation
to the patient and obtain a further consent form from the patient. Previously
the Respondent had assumed
consent on the basis that the patient was prepared to
have the treatment after he had provided them with advice. He had also
implemented
a process where a new consent was required for all patients every
two years. He had also introduced a new initial patient information
changes the Respondent implemented in his practice from February 2011 were the
withdrawal of all ‘
casual comments’.
Rather he was focussed
on verbalising his adjustments to the scribe/chaperone and concentrating on the
adjustments. The Respondent
gave evidence that he made no personal comments and
accepted that he had made
‘social comments’
previously for
the purpose of showing his patients that he was caring and friendly.
Respondent also stated that he no longer made contact with the skin of patients
when he provided treatment; rather, he used a
towel. A towel was also used if
any part of the patient had to be exposed.
Respondent gave evidence that he had not sent any texts to any patients since
May 2010. Rather he left communication with patients
to his wife or receptionist
and only spoke to patients on the telephone when it was absolutely necessary and
while his wife or receptionist
were still listening.
a number of occasions the Respondent confirmed that the introduction of a
chaperone occurred in February 2011 when he returned
major change had been the Respondent’s move of residence and subsequent
change in the main place he transacts all personal
business to a larger town.
This was undertaken to decrease the likelihood of having dealings with his
patients. The Respondent stated
that this move had caused him financial
detriment. Later in his evidence the Respondent provided details of the
distances, travel
times and road conditions between his previous residence and
his practice location and his current residence and the practice location
well as the distance into the town where he and his family now transact most of
their business.
Respondent was questioned about the reason why he had not made mention of these
changes when he gave evidence before the Tribunal
in May 2012, in particular the
chaperone arrangement. Various transcript references from ‘phase
one’ were provided on
behalf of the Respondent after the conclusion of
‘phase two’. The Tribunal notes however that the changes referred to
by the Respondent during ‘phase one’ included
’being more
and more prudent to take as many notes as he can’
(T380.36), having
his wife work with him
‘within the last year’
working four days a week until 3.00 pm (T402.29), moving his place of residence
and transacting personal business (T402.29
and T423.11).
considerable questioning the Respondent was not able to explain to the Tribunal
why he had not mentioned changes to his practice
such as the
‘chaperone’ arrangement and the changes to the manner in which
clinical notes were made. The Respondent gave
evidence that the changes to his
practice were all ‘his idea alone’.
Respondent conceded that the SMS message to Patient C was ‘extremely
complimentary’/ ‘an over the top compliment’
but did not
accept that there was any sexual intent. The Respondent gave evidence that he
would not now give any patient such a compliment
and had never done so
previously.
respect to the SMS message sent to Patient D (subject of Particular 8(ii)) the
Respondent accepted that it was a breach of boundaries,
that it was wrong and
unacceptable but maintained that it was taken out of context. The Respondent
gave evidence that he would not
be repeating this conduct.
respect to contact with patients the Respondent stated that he was very
thoughtful and careful about what he said in order to
maintain his distance.
With hindsight he accepts that he did have an issue with boundaries. The
Respondent also stated that he was
now very conscious of the need for health
professionals to be self-aware regarding their own mental and physical health.
The Respondent
gave evidence that he had reached this view over a period of
Respondent gave evidence that he rarely performed the ‘wing lift’
that was involved in Particular 7 (ii) even though
it had been his practice to
ordinarily perform this adjustment at the end of most treatments prior to the
complaint. If he now needs
to perform it he uses a modified technique which he
finds is too uncomfortable for him to perform frequently.
Respondent gave evidence that in the first few years of practising as a
chiropractor he had the benefit of a mentor who was a
senior member of the
profession. Due to particular circumstances this did not continue. From around
2003 there had been an active
local peer group that met for conferences on a six
monthly basis. This group had operated for about three years and he could recall
attending at least three of the meetings. Since that time the only ‘peer
in the form of a couple of
locums and one other practitioner, Dr Mathew Hall. Although he had attended some
conferences most of his
continuing professional development (CPD) was undertaken
on line or through self-directed learning. His focus had been on areas he
interested in although he was only able to give the Tribunal one example of CPD
he had recently undertaken. In general, the Respondent
had focussed on technique
CPD (rather than professional conduct/ethics CPD). The Respondent gave evidence
that CPD in the area of
professional boundaries will be at the forefront of his
Respondent stated that his portfolio was not of a quality that it could be (with
respect to what is required for a portfolio,
reference should be made to the
Chiropractic Board of Australia document ‘Continuing Professional
development registration
standards’ available on the AHPRA website).
Respondent also stated that there were only two other chiropractors in town,
however, there were a number of chiropractors in
the surrounding towns.
respect to the large number of references, the Respondent stated he played no
part in prompting them. The Respondent stated he
provided his legal
representatives with the names of a number of people after phase one (see a
summary of their references below)
but was aware that a number of people spoke
to both his wife and receptionist. The only exception to this was when one of
a minister of religion (also a patient), had telephoned him after the
media coverage to check on the Respondent’s wellbeing
and asked him a few
questions. The Respondent gave evidence that he had not read these references.
Respondent provided information regarding the on-line ethics course he had paid
for but not yet completed. This is a course that
he is able to commence at any
time and complete at his own pace. The Respondent understood that there was a
possibility that a workshop
would be run building upon this course in June 2013
depending on the level of interest. The Respondent confirmed that he had not
made active enquiries regarding courses of this nature but had been looking
through the professional association materials he received
and would continue to
’an eye out’
Respondent extended the apology he had already made to two patients to the other
two patients for allowing poor communications
to be taken out of context. He
further accepted that it was totally his responsibility to ensure communications
were not taken out
of context.
References of Pauline Welch,
Annabel Doust, Deborah Baxter, Subramanian Sivanathan
Tribunal was informed by those acting for the Respondent that these people had
been asked to provide a character reference after
the Respondent provided their
names to his legal adviser. This request was made at a time after the Inquiry
had occurred but prior
to the handing down of the Reasons for Decision. An
example of the letter that was sent to these witnesses was provided to the
(exhibit 49(b)). Due to the timing of the letter it spoke of
allegations having been made by four complainants. The letter also states
‘different allegations’
were made by each of the
complainants. The letter indicates that the complaints could be grouped into
four categories. The first
related to inappropriate physical contact which
closely approaches the conduct described in the Particulars. The second refers
the making of inappropriate personal comments and gives the example of
‘you make my heart race’
. The third category is merely
described as ‘
Inappropriate sending of text messages to the
. This can be read as having sent text messages in
inappropriate circumstances rather than sending text messages with inappropriate
content. The fourth category related to the patient feeling the
Respondent’s penis touch her back during an appropriate chiropractic
adjustment and further advised that the peer reviewer had agreed that
inadvertent contact could be made during this type of
adjustment.
letter from the Respondent’s legal representatives further indicates that
the Respondent concedes that the text messages
’clearly open to
misinterpretation’
but the Respondent denied any inappropriate
intention behind the messages. The letter indicates that the reference should be
‘To Whom it May Concern’
and provides a brief
outline of areas to be considered.
Welch is a massage therapist (who may have additional qualifications; however
the CV referred to in the Reference was not
provided to the Tribunal). She
provided a reference dated 27 June 2012 (exhibit 48). Ms Welch has consulted the
Respondent since
2002 and in her experience she has found the Respondent to be a
highly committed professional with
‘outstanding diagnostic
Ms Welch gives the opinion that the allegations outlined
‘are clearly not typical behaviours of Dr Woods, nor evident in any of
my consultations with him’.
Welch had found the Respondent to be
‘patient, kind and very
professional’
when delivering chiropractic services. Ms Welch has
‘frequently recommended’
the Respondent to her clients,
friends, family, colleagues and acquaintances and will continue to do so despite
the allegations. Ms
Welch commends the Respondent as having
‘outstanding moral qualities’.
Ms Welch states that she had
spoken to the Respondent and as a result she
believed that
‘he had no case to answer’.
Ms Welch is of
the opinion that the Respondent’s conduct was
‘unquestionable’.
Doust’s reference dated 10 July 2012 (exhibit 49) records that she had
known the Respondent initially in her role as
a high school teacher when the
Respondent was a high school student in her mathematics class. Later in time the
Respondent had become
a patient of the Respondent.
Doust reports that the Respondent was a
quiet, extremely well-mannered and
respectful, honest, reliable and conscientious student’.
considered the Respondent was an example of
‘a typical Australian
“quiet achiever”.
Ms Doust states that she has never found cause
to question the Respondent’s integrity and notes he is a well-respected
of the local community.
Doust concludes her references as follows:
I am completely astonished by the allegations that have been made against
Dr Woods and I have seen absolutely nothing that would lend
them any credence
whatsoever. My opinion of him is certainly unchanged by the knowledge of these
allegations because I am confident
that my assessment of him as a man of
integrity is one hundred percent correct.
Deborah Baxter also provided a reference dated 10 July 2012 (exhibit 50). Ms
Baxter is an optometrist. Her reference indicates
that she had been informed of
allegations regarding the Respondent’s conduct during the provision of
chiropractic treatment.
Ms Baxter and her children have been patients of the
Respondent since 2003. In relation to consultations she and her children had
with the Respondent she formed the impression that the Respondent was
‘someone who is committed to the well-being of his patients and to
providing the highest quality care’.
Her perception of the Respondent
was as being
‘respectful, diligent, thorough, and focussed’
Ms Baxter stated that the alleged behaviour was not consistent with her
experience of the Respondent’s behaviour and had never
felt any improper,
prolonged or unprofessional contact. Ms Baxter stated that the Respondent had
never sent her a text message.
Baxter concluded by stating that the allegations did not alter her high opinion
of the Respondent’s professionalism or character.
Ms Baxter then
Since these allegations have been made I have observed that Dr Woods has
taken measures which I assume are for the purpose of reducing
misunderstandings regarding his intentions – he now keeps the consultation
room door open at all times, and it seems to
me that he is even more detailed
and careful with his explanations with regard to some of the procedures he
a further reference from Ms Baxter dated 9 April 2013 (exhibit 51) she reports
‘When I consulted him in February 2013 he had relocated his consulting
room to the reception area of the building and his receptionist
was in the room
at all times’
. Ms Baxter also stated that she understood that finding
had now been made against the Respondent. Ms Baxter states that she considers
the conduct of the Respondent to be out of character and that the findings do
not alter her high opinion of the Respondent’s
professionalism or
character. Relevantly, Ms Baxter then makes the following
In the past six months I have observed that Dr Woods has taken measures
which I assume are for the purpose of reducing any misunderstandings
his intentions. During the consultations I had with him from August 2012 he had
relocated his consulting room to the reception
area of the building, and his
receptionist was in the room at all times. It also seems to me that Dr Woods is
even more detailed
and careful with his explanations with regard to some of the
procedures he performs. Again I emphasise that I do not feel that his
or communication prior to these changes was in any way inappropriate or
requiring change.
Subramanian Sivanathan provided a reference dated 22 June 2012 (exhibit 68) and
he is a general practitioner who has been a patient
of the Respondent’s
for eight years. Dr Sivanathan states that he is aware of the allegations
against the Respondent and he
has no hesitation in referring family and friends
to the Respondent. His reference concludes:
I feel that these allegations will significantly impact on his future
practice and his health. I am also concerned about the adverse
effects this may
cause on his family and friends.
Other references
Respondent provided a total of 78 character references from 59 clients. Amongst
the 78 references were 19 items of further correspondence
(subsequent
references) providing additional advice to the effect that some of the comments
in the writers’ previous references
were based on a lack of knowledge of
the Tribunal process and that no disrespect was intended towards the Tribunal.
Tribunal heard evidence from the Respondent that, of these 78 references, 6 were
from persons nominated by him. These have been
majority of the references indicate that the writer/s have a high opinion of the
Respondent’s character and his superior
skills as a chiropractor. A
significant proportion also attest to the Respondent’s
‘professionalism’ and ‘integrity’.
A large proportion
of the references advise that the loss of the Respondent’s chiropractic
services would have a significant
impact on the local
Tribunal noted that the consistent style of many with around 50% of the writers
using the same or very similar wording in the
opening paragraphs of their
initial reference. These writers stated that
‘I am fully aware of the
findings made against Paul Woods made by the Tribunal, notwithstanding the
finding...’
significant proportion (16) of the 19 subsequent references indicating that the
writers were unfamiliar with the Tribunal and legal
processes, also included
the same form of words to clarify the writers’ opinion that the nature of
the behaviour was ‘out
of character’ for the
Respondent.
6 references made mention of the article in the local
similar number of writers (7) raised issues regarding the ‘family of
complainants’ or offered views regarding the relationships
Patients A,B and C, with Patient D. The Tribunal notes that neither of the two
media items made mention of a connection
between the complainants.
exhibits 5,37, 43, 44, 54, 62 and 69).
referee who provided exhibit 14 records that he noticed that the Respondent
....a lot more careful and professional in his approach to us his patience
(sic). In the fact that he speaks more of the treatment
and general things such
as the weather etc, rather than that which is personal.
author of the reference that formed exhibit 34 draws attention to her
appointment on 24 January 2013 and describes her treatment
with the receptionist
present in the room. Further, she states
(meaning the
Respondent)
explained each process to me before he put his hands anywhere
near me and I feel as though he limited the contact he had with me to
did not feel uncomfortable’
. At exhibit 35 the same referee
elaborates that
‘On this particular day (24 January 2013) I found Paul
to be extra cautious and in my opinion it was not necessary. He explained
treatment in detail more so than he or any other chiropractor I have been
treated by before’
referee (exhibit 77) states that:
Because of these accusations he has chosen to rearrange his surgery layout
so that treatments are carried out in the presence of his
receptionist. While
this raises the issue of privacy between doctor and patient it is considered the
lesser of evils in protecting
both the patient and the doctor from claims of
impropriety.
Other documentary evidence
Tribunal was provided with a copy of articles published on 22 January 2013
(exhibit 83). One of these media reports was not entirely
an accurate account of
the Tribunal’s findings in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Tribunal was provided with three photographs depicting the change in arrangement
of the use of room within his professional premises
(exhibit 84).
Tribunal was provided with a copy of a receipt for the sum of $110 from Davaar
Consulting Training and Development. This receipt
was for the course
‘Being for the course Access to internet tool: Professional Boundaries
– Being Close whilst being
distant’. The Tribunal also received
information regarding this organisation that is publicly available on the
internet (exhibit
85 and 87).
noted a specific reference in one of the ‘subsequent’ references
(exhibit 61) to a letter having been received
by the authors from the
‘HPCA’ which provided an explanation of the Tribunal process and
‘now understand that findings have been made against
There were inferences to this effect in other
‘subsequent’ references that they had also received information from
source subsequent to writing their initial reference. The Respondent
produced to the Tribunal a copy of a letter forwarded by the
Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) to the authors of exhibit 61. The letter from the HPCA
formed exhibit 86.
final document that came into evidence was a copy of the Undertaking made by the
Respondent after the Tribunal handed down the
decision in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
but prior to phase two of the Inquiry. Although there was
agreement on 21 January 2013 in principle that an undertaking would be
final terms and entering into the Undertaking did not ultimately occur until 4
March 2013. The Tribunal notes the conditions
in the Undertaking included not
dealing with female patients in any manner without a chaperone.
Submissions
Submission made by the
written submissions of the HCCC dated 7 May 2013 was provided to the Tribunal.
HCCC supplemented these written submissions orally.
Tribunal accepted the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the principal
function of the Tribunal. Paragraph 1.1 of the HCCC
submission included the
following statement ‘
One of the principal functions of the Tribunal is
to promote and maintain the highest standards of professional conduct and ethics
in the chiropractic profession. The paramount role of the Tribunal is to protect
the public’
. Paragraph 1.2 made the significant point that the purpose
of the orders made by tribunals of this nature was protective and not
This is also accepted as well settled law.
respect to the submission that the nature of chiropractic is intimate, the
Tribunal accepts that this is one manner in which
the relationship could be
described. There is a degree of intimacy involved in the provision of care by
all registered health practitioners.
The profession of chiropractic involves the
touching of a patient’s body to undertake adjustments and as such is
While it may not be the degree of intimacy referred to in matters such
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 or
HCCC v King
2013 Medical Tribunal of New South Wales it can nevertheless be properly
referred to as intimate.
Tribunal accepts the submission made in paragraph 1.4 that it has made a
determination that the Respondent engaged in a number
of acts of professional
misconduct and in so doing clearly abused the trust reposed in him by his
patients and failed to maintain
the standards expected of him.
HCCC submitted that the Tribunal may have regard to the following matters when
determining protective orders (paragraph 1.5):
(1) the seriousness of the conduct;
(2) admissions made by the practitioner;
(3) contrition and responsibility; and
(4) the risk of re-offending.
this point the Tribunal notes that the Respondent submitted correctly that this
was not an exhaustive list of matters the Tribunal
may have regard to for the
purpose of determining appropriate orders.
paragraph 1.6 the HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should disregard subjective
‘such as the Respondent’s personal ordeal’
Buttsworth V Walton
(19/01/1991 NSWCA 40487496 at [15] and
Litchfield at 637-638. The Tribunal accepts this submission. Whilst it may be
that the personal
ordeal of the Respondent with respect to both the
investigation and inquiry process together with the public media reports are
by the Tribunal to have had a significant impact on the Respondent in
particular his mental and physical wellbeing, it is these very
consequences and
the Respondent’s reaction thereto that have allowed the Tribunal to form
some degree of comfort with respect
to the issue of re-offending. The Tribunal
accepts that these are not matters that are determinative of the actual
protective orders
HCCC makes the following submission in paragraph 1.7:
In this matter, it is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal cannot be
comfortably satisfied that such conduct would not recur.
The evidence before the
Tribunal demonstrated Dr Woods engaged in a pattern of improper conduct over an
extensive period of time.
In doing so, Dr Woods disregarded the well-being of
his patients and the boundaries as set out in the Chiropractors Code of Conduct.
The respondent has provided no evidence to the Tribunal which would indicate
that he has any or sufficient insight into the gravity
of his actions or that he
now recognizes that his conduct was unacceptable. The Tribunal
on the side of caution and proceed to make an order or orders which provides the
public with protection and also serves to act
as a general and specific
deterrent to other members of the profession.
Tribunal would not be able to be satisfied that the conduct would not recur if
the matter of the Respondent’s insight was
the only consideration. The
Tribunal has been able to be comfortably satisfied as to there being a very low
likelihood of repeat
conduct given the evidence regarding the changes to the
Respondent’s manner of contacting patients and the actions of both
wife and/or his receptionist during consultations.
Tribunal does accept that the Respondent engaged in a pattern of improper
conduct. At a superficial level the conduct involved
a breach of professional
boundaries with female patients. At a slightly deeper level it mostly involved
inappropriate communication
or conduct with female patients. In these
circumstances the Tribunal accepts the HCCC submission that there was a pattern
Respondent’s conduct. As to the submission regarding the insight of
the Respondent the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s
into the gravity of his conduct really only extends at this time to the impact
that it has had upon himself, his practice
and his family. While the Tribunal
has heard that the Respondent now says his conduct was inappropriate, a depth of
appreciation
of this was not demonstrated. The Tribunal could point to numerous
aspects of the Respondent’s evidence in this regard but
his failure to
make arrangements for any ethical training until such a late stage and his
failure to provide details of the curriculum
of the course is
significant.
Tribunal notes with approval the submission made in the final sentence of
paragraph 1.7 of the HCCC submissions. It is only the
balance of this factor
against the obligation for the Tribunal to put in place the least restrictive
conditions, which the Tribunal
is comfortably satisfied it will protect the
public in light of their finding of the unlikelihood of recurrence that has
in the orders made by the Tribunal.
respect to the submission made in paragraph 1.8 that the Respondent’s
conduct is sufficiently serious to warrant removal
from the register the
Tribunal concurs. Certainly by making a finding of professional misconduct the
Tribunal was of the view that
the conduct was sufficiently serious to justify
suspension or removal from the register. The Tribunal also notes the reliance on
the matter of
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
paragraphs 1.8 and 1.9 of the submission. The Tribunal accepts that there is a
role for deterrence when considering appropriate
orders. In this matter, the
Tribunal is of the view that the Orders made will provide adequate deterrence.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made in both of the paragraphs numbered 1.10
and paragraph 1.11 which read as follows:
It is noted that Dr Woods has submitted a number of letters
supporting his continued practice as a chiropractor. It would seem that
highly regarded for his clinical skills by many of his patients. Were this a
complaint/s regarding only Dr Woods clinical skills
such testimonials may carry
some weight. However the matters before the Tribunal are not about Dr Woods
clinical expertise as a chiropractor.
This Tribunal, unlike most, if not all of
the letter writers, has had the opportunity to consider the evidence about the
which formed the complaints. Misinformed opinions about the merits of
the complaints and/or the honesty of the complainants should
not be given any
consideration by the Tribunal in determining appropriate protective orders.
Kelly has provided evidence that he is of the view that Dr Woods now appreciates
“ ... the inappropriateness of some of his communications particularly
those delivered by SMS.”
This commentary by Dr Kelly attempts to
isolate the SMS messages from Dr Woods conduct towards the patients during
treatment sessions.
It became apparent in Dr Kelly’s evidence that he did
not specifically canvass the other matters which formed the Tribunal’s
findings of professional misconduct and as such, his observations about Dr Woods
contrition about his conduct must be considered
with great caution.
it is true to say that the SMS messages standing alone were inappropriate, the
evidence in the Phase 1 hearing clearly showed
that Dr Woods could provide no
credible explanation for his use of phrases such as “you are just sooooo
sexy”. The Tribunal
will recall that Dr Woods insisted that these text
messages were entirely innocent and in no way demonstrative of a sexual or
inappropriate
interest by him in his patients. The fact that Dr Woods has
apologized to those patients who received his text messages is admirable,
however the continued characterization of these texts as misunderstandings or
poor communication on his part ignores the nexus between
his conduct when
treating the patients and the subsequent text messages.
respect to the submission made in paragraph 1.12 the Tribunal accepts that the
admission made by the Respondent and his explanation
for the content of the SMS
messages is ’highly qualified’ and demonstrative of
‘limited insight into his conduct’.
the Tribunal notes that the submission of the HCCC regarding the
Respondent’s engagement in ethical training made in paragraph
1.13 altered
after hearing the balance of the Respondent’s evidence (the written
outline having been prepared after the first
day’s evidence) nevertheless
the Tribunal accepts that the enrolment in the on-line course was extremely
belated and the evidence
bereft of detail as to what the course content would
Tribunal notes that the HCCC submitted that the conduct of the Respondent was
sufficiently serious to warrant removal of the name
of the Respondent from the
register, for a period of two years to be fixed before which he could reapply
for registration and a prohibition
order be made. If the Tribunal had not been
satisfied as to the Respondent’s clinical competence and the unlikelihood
recurrence of the conduct this is the course that the Tribunal would have
answer to questions from the Tribunal by way of clarification of the submissions
both parties accepted that there was a material
difference between character and
reputation.
Tribunal noted that ultimately the parties were in agreement that costs of the
HCCC should be paid by the Respondent. The Tribunal
clarified with the parties
that the submission made by the HCCC was for the totality of the costs, not just
those costs relating
to Particulars pursued by the HCCC and not admitted by the
Respondent as had been submitted by the Respondent.
Respondent’s Submissions
7 May 2013 the Respondent handed up a written document which included a summary
of factual matters relating to the health of the
Respondent, details of his
absences from work, changes in the Respondent’s practice, a
‘summary’ of the findings
of the Tribunal with respect to the
Particulars and the Complaints as well as an outline of
submissions.
Respondent’s submission correctly states that the role of the Tribunal in
‘phase two’ is to make appropriate
protective orders in the
circumstances where a finding of professional misconduct has been made.
Respondent’s submissions provide reference to Medical Tribunal decision in
which the principle that the jurisdiction exercised
was protective rather than
punitive, that deregistration does not automatically follow a finding of
professional misconduct even
where the conduct is sufficiently serious to
justify it, but deregistration may be required in order to minimise the risk of
and to act as a deterrent to other practitioners. These are all
principles that have fallen from Court of Appeal cases that are considered
precedents for this Tribunal to follow.
was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the Tribunal would be satisfied
that the conduct would not occur again having regard
to all of the circumstances
including the nature of the misconduct and the consequences arising from them.
The Tribunal has already
indicated in response to the HCCC submissions above
that it considers there was a pattern to the Respondent’s conduct, however
it is the consequences arising from the Respondent’s actions (including
the involvement of his wife and receptionist) that
has allowed the Tribunal to
be comfortably satisfied that the conduct is unlikely to occur in the future. .
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submission that although he maintains his
denials in relation to certain matters alleged
(and found proven by the Tribunal
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2)
he has nonetheless recognised
that his previous
‘somewhat casual, approach to his dealings with
patients was unprofessional and likely to cause distress to some
The submission continued:
He has reflected on these
matters, both in relation to the patients and his practice as a
chiropractor’
Respondent’s submission notes that he has apologised to each of the
patients (the Tribunal notes that the apology to Patient
C and Patient D was
made in the evidence before phase one and to Patient A and Patient B during the
Respondent’s oral evidence
in phase two).
Respondent’s submission continues:
He has made significant, and substantial, changes to his practice to
ensure the delivery of consistent, professional health services.
He is blessed
with the support of [his receptionist].
That he is capable of continuing to do so is clearly reflected in the
references tendered in support of him, including those who made
statements tendered during Phase 1. It must be acknowledged that those
references come from a broad cross-section of the
community – from
parents, in relation to themselves and their children, including babies, to
young women, male members of the
community and elderly members of the community.
They include other health professionals in the community.
Respondent’s submissions state that the referees were each aware of the
findings of the Tribunal. This is not, in the Tribunal’s
view evident from
the contents of the references when regard is made for numerous comments
indicative of a lack of understanding
of the matters set out in
HCCC v Woods
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
Tribunal is able to accept that the majority of the references speak of the
conduct being out of character for the Respondent.
As indicated elsewhere in
this document the Tribunal has no doubt as to the Respondent’s clinical
competence or of his reputation
as a chiropractor and a member of the community.
Respondent’s submissions rely upon the decision of
HCCC v Stoker
to the effect that the findings of professional misconduct
would not result in the Tribunal concluding that the Respondent was lacking
the quality of good character required as a condition of fitness to practice.
The Tribunal considers that it is important to note
at this point that the
National Law applies the test of suitable person as a requirement for
registration. While good character is
no doubt an element to be considered,
there may well be other factors that will also impact on the question of
suitability to be
registered as a health professional.
Respondent assertively submitted that the continued assertion of innocence in
the face of prior convictions does not constitute
conclusive proof of a lack of
the necessary moral character to merit reinstatement. The superficial response
to this submission would
note that this is not a matter involving a
reinstatement. However, the Tribunal accepts that failure to acknowledge guilt
necessarily result in an order for de-registration, although it
certainly is a matter that may contribute to the question of insight
contrition when an Inquiry has been held as a two phase
Respondent’s submission detailed the professional response made by the
Respondent to the findings. It is submitted that
the continued denial of the
Respondent of aspects of the findings does not mean that he has no insight into
his conduct or that he
is lacking in judgment. Further, it is submitted that
‘introspection’
the Respondent has realised the need
for a more formal professional interaction with patients and the responsibility
for changes rested
with the Respondent.
submissions point to the review of the Respondent’s techniques, a
refinement and alteration to the method of obtaining informed
consent and
limiting his conversations by excluding the possibility of personal discussions.
Respondent also submitted that these practical matters had been extended by the
Respondent when he sought ‘professional
counselling’ from Dr Kelly.
It was further submitted that Dr Kelly confirmed that the Respondent’s
professional development
had commenced and was ongoing. Another practical matter
pointed to in the submissions was the Respondent’s enrolment in the
course and his appointment to see a psychologist.
Respondent submitted that:
He accepts that he displayed a lack of awareness that his conduct did
cause, or could cause, his patients discomfort, or violated,
has been well and
truly reinforced. He has realised the shortcomings of being too informal, too
touchy, (T412; 415) and too liberal
in his comments or discussions. He
understood that an informal/touch feely approach may cause some patients to feel
uncomfortable,
regardless of his state of mind at the time.
Equally, however, it must be remembered that he was hard-working (perhaps,
too hard) conscientious, enthusiastic and believed fully
devoted to the many
aspects of health.
The respondent accepts that he has shown a lack of judgment, but that
nonetheless, the Tribunal can be satisfied that such lapses
Respondent’s submissions set out a summary of the nature of the conduct
subject of the findings against the Respondent.
Further the submission is made
that no part of the pleadings refer to sexual misconduct. The submission relies
upon this matter contrasting
with the findings in
King v HCCC
The Tribunal does not see the current matter is in contrast to this
precedent. The Tribunal is of the view that a finding that the
conduct of the
Respondent, in particular the SMS message to Patient C had sexual connotations
is consistent with the findings made
This is also a matter where
the sexual nature of the conduct is evident on the basis that there is no
clinical basis for the words
used in the SMS message and the words being overtly
sexual in nature (just as the type of physical contact made with the patient
was manifestly sexual in nature).
final substantive matter that the Respondent made was a submission regarding the
consideration of extra-curial punishment. The
Respondent submitted that the
publishing of the article in the local newspaper which misstated the facts has
resulted in the Respondent
suffering a form of extra-curial punishment. This
punishment was direct with respect to the incorrect summary of the findings and
indirectly in relation to the references to his wife and
receptionist.
Respondent submitted that this extra-curial punishment was relevant to the
question of the determination of appropriate protective
orders. The Respondent
relied upon the decision of
Einfield v Regina
[2010] NSWCCA 87
providing a useful summary of extra-curial punishment.
Respondent submitted that there were certain conclusions that could be drawn
from the references provided. The Tribunal is able
to accept that the references
support a finding that the Respondent has generally been providing appropriate
chiropractic care to
his patients, that he has a large client base, that a
number of members of the local community would consider it a loss if the
was unable to practise, that a number of patients consider that the
conduct of the Respondent was completely out of character and
contrary to their
interactions with the him.
Respondent conceded in his submissions that costs should be awarded in favour of
the HCCC save for any costs associated with the
particulars that were admitted
or otherwise not pursued.
Consideration of the Evidence
Tribunal rejects the submission made by the Respondent that extra-curial
punishment is a matter that is an appropriate consideration
for this Tribunal to
have regard to when fixing protective orders. This is not a jurisdiction that
punishes a person for their conduct.
Rather, it is a jurisdiction that primarily
acts to protect the public. As indicated elsewhere, the Tribunal is of the view
in this particular case the media exposure has acted as a significant
deterrent for this Respondent so much so that he is very unlikely
to repeat the
Tribunal notes that no written statement was provided from the Respondent for
the purpose of phase two of the Inquiry. During
his oral evidence the Respondent
stated that he had made progressive changes to the manner in which he conducted
his practice from
the time he returned to work in February 2011. The Respondent
stated that he had instigated a ‘chaperone’ arrangement
time whereby initially his wife would be present whenever he treated female
patients and would also take notes during the
consultation which he would check
at the conclusion of the session. When he returned to full time work in June
2011 this role was
taken by the receptionist. The Tribunal notes in relation to
this evidence that no statement was provided by either Mrs Woods or
receptionist detailing these matters. Further, there were no references made to
these specific alterations to his practice during
phase one of the Inquiry (May
2012). The Tribunal notes that Dr Hall gave evidence that the Respondent had
informed him that he had
adopted the practice of leaving the door to the
treatment room open unless otherwise requested by the patient. The Respondent
the re-arrangement of the use of rooms within his practice said to have
taken place in January 2013. He provided photos showing the
treatment table
being in what used to be the waiting room and the treatment room now being
utilised as the waiting room. The room
containing the treatment table still
contains the reception desk in addition to a desk said to be used by the
receptionist to record
details in the clinical notes at the direction of the
Respondent.
lack of consistency and verification of these matters is of concern to the
Tribunal. In this regard the Tribunal notes that while
Ms Baxter records changes
she assumes the Respondent has made in response to the allegations she makes no
mention of the ‘chaperone’
arrangement which included both the
presence of another person (the Respondent’s wife or receptionist) and the
fact that they
attended to the record keeping even though this reference was
written in July 2012 although she does carefully record the fact that
changes and what those changes were.
is no doubt that the conduct of the Respondent was serious in nature, caused
distress to a number of his patients, brings the
profession into disrepute and
had the potential to diminish the trust placed by members of the public in
members of the profession.
regard to the evidence before the Tribunal, the Tribunal is particularly
concerned about the Respondent’s lack of insight.
While the Tribunal
accepts that the Respondent is very unlikely to repeat conduct of the nature
complained of again in the future,
this is largely due to the discomfort and
distress suffered by the Respondent as a result of the allegations being
investigated,
the matter coming before a tribunal, the media reports and the
other consequential matters. The Tribunal also appreciates from the
that it is very likely that the Respondent is being closely monitored and
assisted by both his wife and receptionist so
that there is no real opportunity
for such conduct to occur again in the future. The comfort that the Tribunal
finds it has that
the Respondent is unlikely to repeat the misconduct is not due
to a finding that the Respondent has at this time developed insight
that would prevent recurrence.
The Tribunal Orders
the nature of the misconduct found by the Tribunal the only appropriate orders
available either include de-registration or a
period of suspension followed by
conditions designed to address the deficits of professional conduct and
character evident from the
proven misconduct.
Tribunal has approached this decision with regard to the obligation placed upon
bodies of this nature to put in place the least
restrictive conditions that will
fulfil the functions of tribunals exercising protective jurisdiction, primary
amongst these functions
being the protection of the public safety.
orders also serve to maintain the confidence that the public is entitled to
repose in registered health professionals.
recorded above, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent will
not commit misconduct of this nature again. However,
the lack of insight on the
part of the Respondent must be considered, as insight is an essential element of
professional practice.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent has revealed flaws in
the Respondent’s character. The Tribunal
is not of the view that these
flaws have rendered his character to be such that he is no longer a suitable
person to hold registration
as a health professional. However these flaws will
need to be addressed in an assertive manner least the flaws continue to manifest
themselves in inappropriate conduct. The orders made herein are designed to
allow the Respondent to have sufficient time to reflect
on these matters and to
have a structured approach to remediation.
Tribunal has also noted that the subject matter of the proven misconduct did not
raise any concerns regarding the Respondent’s
clinical competency. There
was further evidence that a large number (albeit a small percentage of the
patients said to be on the
Respondent’s ‘books’) of patients
have no complaints regarding the Respondent, have found the treatment he
to be beneficial and found the misconduct to be out of character for
the Respondent. While the Tribunal ultimately finds there is
no issue with the
Respondent’s clinical skills (nor was this ever suggested by the
Complaint) this is not to say that the improvements
in record keeping the
Respondent said he has instigated are not considered appropriate. The Tribunal
observed that many entries for
different patients followed an identical or near
identical pattern of note taking. The Respondent told the Tribunal that this has
now changed, as has his practice regarding usually performing a
‘wing-lift’ adjustment at the end of each consultation.
balance the Tribunal considers that it can fulfil its protective jurisdiction by
imposing a period of suspension followed by conditions.
The period of suspension
should allow the Respondent time for reflection which may assist with the
development of insight. The Respondent
will also have time available to put in
place the various requirements that will allow him to return to working as a
chiropractor
once the suspension is lifted.
Tribunal has had regard to the evidence such as that of the Respondent regarding
the state of his heath, his busy work schedule,
his acceptance that a mentor may
assist him in professional practice, his desire to ascertain how this process
may have affected
his ‘mind’, the obvious and significantly
emotional distress of the Respondent while giving evidence before the Tribunal
and acknowledgment of his continued questions and personal concern regarding
professional conduct and the ethics of healthcare
practitioners.
Tribunal also notes that the steps taken by the Respondent to speak to a senior
colleague (Dr Kelly), to undertake some sort of
training regarding
ethics/boundary issues and his engagement with a psychologist have all come very
late in the piece. This is unfortunate
as had these matters been properly
addressed by the Respondent the need for such extensive conditions on
registration would have
been significantly diminished. While there was a period
of about four months from the time the Respondent was informed of the 20
December 2012 decision the Respondent only took action in these matters in the
few weeks prior to the hearing. Further, this appears
to be substantially a
result of the intervention of the Respondent’s legal advisers (which in no
way suggests such intervention
was inappropriate, rather, these actions would
have provided more weight in consideration of the matter had they been
at the volition of the Respondent at an earlier point in time.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Dr Kelly that he would consider a practitioner of
less than ten years standing to be a ‘young’
practitioner. While the
Tribunal is not necessarily of the view that a practitioner with less than ten
years of experience would
not be able to fulfil the role of Approved Mentor for
the purpose of the Orders the Tribunal can indicate to the Council that in
circumstances of this matter the Respondent will no doubt benefit from having an
Approved Mentor who has been practising for
at least ten years in a contemporary
manner and who is fully aware of all current requirements for professional
practice. Expertise
in ethical matters including professional boundaries will no
doubt be an advantage.
Tribunal has very little information regarding the course the Respondent has
enrolled in with the ‘Davaar’ organisation.
The Respondent did not
provide the Tribunal with the course outline and was unable to access this
information while he was giving
evidence before the Tribunal as he did not have
the relevant access password with him. In any case the Tribunal has looked at
information that has been provided, in particular the receipt which
indicates the cost of the course is $110 and the Respondent’s
that he estimates that it will take him about two weeks to complete the course
and that he expects to receive a certificate
of completion. This is not, in the
view of the Tribunal, a course which has the potential to adequately address the
deficits in the
Respondent’s knowledge and appreciation of ethical and
professional conduct matters. The possibility of a face to face workshop
offered by this same organisation has potential, but is uncertain at this point.
The Respondent gave evidence that he had
benefited from his two (30 minute)
telephone conversations with Dr Kelly and agreed that he could engage in more
interactive face
to face CPD (as opposed to the mostly on line or self-directed
activities he had been engaged in). As this area of professional conduct
ethics of healthcare practitioners is of grave concern to the Tribunal it is
appropriate that the Respondent undertakes some
further training in this area.
The condition regarding ethical training is designed to address the evident
deficits in the Respondent’s
appreciation of ethical matters, in
particular professional boundaries and such further training may also provoke
the development
of insight.
Tribunal will also therefore order that the Respondent undertake a formal
educational course in ethics. This may be satisfied
by undertaking a unit within
a university course which includes a formal assessment component (i.e. mere
attendance does not satisfy
the requirements for satisfactory completion of the
course) or by engaging the services of a suitably qualified registered health
professional to design an educational program by setting readings, undertake
discussions and being formally assessed by way of an
essay (no shorter than 2000
words – references and footnotes not to be included in this word count).
The name of the suitably
qualified registered health practitioner and details of
the educational program must be submitted by the Respondent to the NSW
Chiropractic
Council for its approval before commencement of the program. The
Respondent is also responsible for forwarding to the Council documentation
indicates satisfactory completion of the university course or written
confirmation from the suitably qualified registered health
professional of
satisfactory completion of the educational program including a copy of the
essay. The Tribunal has fixed a period
of time for completion of this course but
has also given discretion to the Council to extend this time up to three years
date hereof should it be satisfied that the Respondent has made a
concerted effort to comply with this condition and the delay has
been caused by
factors beyond the control of the Respondent. Any application for an extension
of time is to be made in writing by
the Respondent to the Executive Officer of
the NSW Chiropractic Council giving appropriate notice of the matter. If the
has not complied with this requirement after the three year period
the Council should consider that the Respondent is in breach of
this order and
act accordingly. Once the Respondent indicates to the Council that he has
satisfactorily completed this course of
study he may be called upon by the
Council to attend before the Council and present his essay and answer questions
regarding the
understanding and insights he has gained from engagement in this
education process.
conditions on registration ordered by the Tribunal are designed to address the
deficits identified by the conduct subject of the
Tribunal’s findings and
as highlighted in the evidence from the Respondent. Given the lack of insight
consistently demonstrated
by the Respondent the conditions are comprehensive and
only strict compliance with these conditions will allow satisfaction that
public safety will be protected.
Tribunal also issues a reprimand to the Respondent. The nature of the misconduct
is such that it has brought the reputation of
the profession into disrepute and
it is reprehensible. The Tribunal is of the view that this is not an appropriate
matter for the
National Board to exercise the discretion granted to it by virtue
of section 226(3) of the National Law. The reprimand will provide
a flag to the
public and a reminder to the Respondent which should ensure public safety
continues to be protected.
summary, the Tribunal has reposed a considerable amount of trust in the
Respondent, substantially as a result of the finding that
he is unlikely to
re-offend and the certainty that his clinical skills are at an appropriate
level. It is apparent that the Respondent
will be supported in his practice by
his wife, his receptionist and a significant number of patients. The imposition
of a period
of suspension followed by conditions on registration is, in effect,
a second chance for the Respondent to demonstrate he can develop
insight and
practise within professional boundaries.
Tribunal is of the view that despite the submission made on behalf of the
Respondent that there should be some apportionment of
costs such that there
would be no costs awarded with respect to any Particular not pursued or
established that there is no basis
for the Tribunal to exercise its discretion
in this regard. The Tribunal is of the view that all Particulars of the
Complaints were
properly placed before the Tribunal. Further, the Tribunal notes
that the Respondent’s admissions only extended to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and not professional misconduct. The Tribunal also notes
there was not disentitling conduct on the part of the
HCCC. Having regard to all
the circumstances the Tribunal is not satisfied that there should be any
departure from the usual order
of costs in favour of the successful party, being
If the Respondent moves into
another jurisdiction within Australia the relevant body to monitor these
conditions will be the Chiropractic
Board of Australia rather than the
Chiropractic Council of New South Wales. The Tribunal Orders (the Respondent is
referred to hereafter
as the Practitioner) noting that some of the conditions
only apply to the Practitioners Registration once his name is restored to
Register after the period of suspension imposed:
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he must provide a
copy of the Reasons for Decision documents in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
to any person working in
his practice providing a health service (
Health Care Complaints Act
), or to any employer should he work in an employed capacity, whilst any
conditions imposed in
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
remain on his
Registration. Within 14 days of the engagement of a new health care provider
employee, including a locum, or entering
into a new practice relationship or
entering into new employment, the Practitioner is to forward written
confirmation to the Council
from the health care provider or employer that they
have received and read the Reasons documents,
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2.
This Condition is to
remain on the Practitioner’s registration until such time as all other
Conditions on Registration (except
for the reprimand) are lifted by the
Chiropractic Council of NSW, in accordance with these Orders.
a minimum period equivalent to two years of full time employment (FTE) once the
Practitioner resumes work as a chiropractor in
accordance with the conditions in
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
it is a condition on the
Practitioner’s Registration that the Practitioner is to undertake at his
own cost individual supervision/mentoring
with a Council Approved Mentor. The
Practitioner is to forward the name, contact details and relevant details of a
proposed registered
chiropractor (not being any registered chiropractor that
gave evidence in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
HCCC v Woods
[2013] NSWCHT 2)
to be the Approved Mentor. Approval of the proposed
mentor is at the discretion of the Chiropractic Council of NSW and such approval
will be indicated in writing. For the initial six weeks after the Practitioner
returns to practicing as a chiropractor contact is
to be for a minimum period of
one hour per week. For the following six months contact is to be for a minimum
of two hours per month
and thereafter for a minimum of one hour per month. The
actual frequency of contact over these defined minimums is to be determined
the Approved Mentor as he/she sees fit. Supervision/mentoring is to include face
to face contact and the Approved Mentor is to
make at least two site visits to
the Practitioner’s treatment rooms during the two years. Once the
Practitioner receives confirmation
of the Council’s approval of the
Approved Mentor the Practitioner is to authorise and direct in writing the
Approved Mentor
to forward reports as to the progress of the mentoring to the
Chiropractic Council of NSW every four months after the Practitioner
work as a chiropractor (following his suspension and compliance with the
pre-conditions set out in the Orders made in
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
The Approved Mentor must also be authorised and directed in writing to
advise the Council if at any stage concerns regarding the
Practitioner’s
compliance with Conditions on his Registration or his practice generally arise.
The Practitioner must forward
a copy of this written direction and authorization
accepted by the Approved Mentor to the Council. The Practitioner is to put in
place appropriate arrangements for the Mentor to make on-site visits (including
financial provisions for travel, accommodation and
meals allowance) and to allow
the Approved Mentor to have access at any time to clinical notes and any other
records requested by
the Approved Mentor. The mentoring undertaken and reported
upon by the Mentor is to include all of the following areas:
Legal, ethical
and professional conduct
Professional
practice procedures
Professional
boundaries during the whole clinical encounter ( the patient experience from
walking in the practice door to leaving
the premises, including the
administering of chiropractic services)
communication with patients during consultations Professional boundaries in
particular regarding communication with patients
Professional
boundaries regarding the provision of information and explanation to patients
prior to undertaking treatment
Advice regarding
interactions with chiropractic colleagues
Advice regarding
appropriate and relevant continuing professional development (CPD)
Advice regarding
the proper creation and maintenance of a portfolio of evidence of his CPD
activities in accordance with clause 5
of the Continuing professional
development registration standard published by the Chiropractic Board of
The Practitioner is to provide the name, contact details and relevant details
of another registered chiropractor in the event approval
is not granted by the
Council of NSW or if the Approved Mentor is unable or unwilling to continue
acting in the role at any time.
After the minimum two year period the
Practitioner may write to the Council seeking the lifting of this condition
providing evidence
that he has complied with this condition and worked for a
minimum period of two years FTE and indicating the progress made towards
addressing the professional deficits in his practice identified in
Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
resulting from the interactions with the
Approved Mentor.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comply with all
directions made by the Approved Mentor in accordance
with the Conditions made in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2.
This Condition may be lifted by the
Council at the time the Condition requiring mentoring of his practice by an
Approved Mentor is
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s registration that he completes a
formal educational course in ethics either by way of
completion of a course or
arrangement with an approved and appropriately qualified registered health
professional. The Practitioner
is to propose an educational course in ethics to
the Council in writing for approval. The Council can be guided by comments made
by the Tribunal in
HCCC v Woods (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
when considering approval of the course, in
particular something more than mere attendance must be required for satisfactory
of the course and a minimum of 10 hours of study. The Practitioner is
to forward to the Council documentation that indicates satisfactory
of the formal educational course to the Council. The course is to be completed
within 18 months of the date of
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2.
However the Council has the discretion to extend this time up to three years
from the date of
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
should it be
satisfied that the Practitioner has made a concerted effort to comply with this
condition and the delay has been caused
by factors beyond the control of the
Practitioner. Any application for an extension of time is to be made in writing
by the Practitioner
to the Executive Officer of the Council giving appropriate
notice of the matter. If the Practitioner has not complied with this requirement
after the three year period the Council should consider that the Practitioner is
in breach of this Condition
to the lifting of the conditions on the Practitioner’s Registration the
Practitioner is to attend before the Council (or
its delegates) to make a
presentation regarding the insights he has gained into professional practice as
a result of the Mentoring
and ethical training.
Practitioner is to provide a self-report on his practice every four months for a
minimum of the equivalent of two years of full
time employment (FTE) from the
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
and thereafter at a frequency
and for a duration determined by the Council. This Condition may be lifted by
the Council at the time
the Condition requiring mentoring of his practice by an
Approved Mentor and those requiring CPD and an ethics course are removed
some later date as determined by the Council.
is a Condition on the Registration of the Practitioner that he is not to provide
professional supervision to any other registered
health practitioner for a
minimum period of two years and then not until such time as the Council lifts
this Condition.
is a Condition on the Registration of the Practitioner that he is to employ at
least a receptionist or a chiropractic assistant
for at least the hours he is
consulting patients and for this person employed to fulfill the role of
receptionist or chiropractic
assistant to be present at all times that the
Practitioner is attending to patients. This Condition may be lifted by the
at the time the Condition requiring mentoring of his practice by an
Approved Mentor and those Conditions requiring CPD and an ethics
removed or at some later date as determined by the Council.
is a Condition of the Practitioner’s Registration that he submit all
complaints (formal and informal) regarding his professional
practice and conduct
to the Approved Mentor. This Condition is to remain in place whilst the
Condition requiring an Approved Mentor
remains on the Practitioner’s
Registration and may thereafter be lifted by the Council.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comply with any
request made by the Council to attend before the
Council (or its
representatives) during the period that the Condition requiring an Approved
Mentor remains on the Practitioner’s
Registration. This Condition may be
lifted by the Council when the Condition requiring an Approved Mentor is lifted.
Practitioner is ordered to bear all the costs associated with compliance with
the Conditions placed upon his Registration in
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
Practitioner is to pay the reasonable costs of the HCCC as agreed or if
agreement cannot be reached as assessed by the Tribunal.
Both parties have leave
to re-list the matter before the Tribunal for determination of
Registration of the Practitioner is suspended for a period of three months from
21 days after the date of the Reasons for Decision
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2.
When the Practitioner’s name is restored to the
Register he is not entitled to practice until the following matters have been
acknowledged in writing by the Council:
the Practitioner’s treating psychologist has provided the Council with a
report stating that in his/her opinion the Practitioner
is mentally fit to
practise chiropractic
the Practitioner’s treating GP has provided the Council with a report
stating that in his/her opinion the Practitioner
is physically and mentally fit
to practise chiropractic
the Council has received a copy of the Authority and Direction from the
Practitioner to his treating psychologist authorising
and directing the
psychologist to provide reports to the Council and to inform the Council of any
matters that he/she considers
may affect the Practitioners ability to practise
chiropractic and that he/she has received a copy of this Authority and
the Council has received a copy of the Authority and Direction from the
Practitioner to his treating general practitioner authorizing
and directing the
general practitioner to provide reports to the Council and to inform the Council
of any matters that he/she considers
may affect the Practitioner’s ability
to practise chiropractic and that he/she has received a copy of this Authority
and Direction
the Council has received a copy of the Authority and Direction to the Approved
Mentor to provide reports to the Council in accordance
with the Orders in
HCCC v Woods (No 2)
[2013] NSWCHT 2
and to inform the Council of any
matters that he/she considers may affect the Practitioners ability to practise
chiropractic and
that he/she has received a copy of this Authority and
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in the terms of Annexure A to
HCCC v Woods
[2013] NSWCHT 2.
Publication
this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Chiropractic Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office)
5) The Chiropractic Council of New South Wales.
Dated: 21 May 2013
___________________
___________________
Sue-Ellen McKelvey
___________________
John Thompson
___________________
Sandra Everett
Annexure A – Reprimand
Paul Stewart Woods, as a registered Chiropractor, you are hereby formally
reprimanded by this Tribunal in relation to findings of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct in your treatment of
Patients A, B, C and D.
You have not satisfied the Tribunal that even
now you have a full appreciation of the magnitude of your actions. Your partial
to some of the Particulars, being only those where documentary
evidence (SMS messages) were available in the evidence and your steadfast
denials of the obvious overt and contextual intent of these messages indicates
to the Tribunal your lack of insight.
Further particulars clearly linked
to the said SMS messages cannot be taken in isolation. Your continued denials
and guarded contrition
as exhibited before the Tribunal demonstrated significant
failings in the application of professional boundaries and deficits in
professional judgment.
You consistently gave evidence to the Tribunal
which was found to be implausible in the extreme.
The conduct of which
you have been found guilty violates the acknowledged patient trust that is
imperative in delivering patient care.
Further, by your conduct, you have
brought into disrepute the Chiropractic Profession and diminished the collective
ethical standing
of your Chiropractic colleagues.
In handing down this
reprimand, the Tribunal seeks to enforce the seriousness of the proven
allegations made against you and is determined
to act out its role of protection
of the public.
The Tribunal also acknowledges its role in maintaining the
standards within the Chiropractic Profession. To this end, the Tribunal
that the conditions placed upon you will not only protect the public but give
you the opportunity to develop as a health professional,
your interpersonal
skills and resolve your own perceived inadequacies.
The Tribunal
commends to you full engagement in the process of addressing all the issues
raised in the Conditions on your Registration
and explore further mechanisms and
advice beyond its recommendations, as directed by your Mentor or through your
ethics course.
The Tribunal notes that at no time was your clinical
competence as a Chiropractor called into question and many of your patients
supportive of you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (698 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter