URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V AKAL KAUR KHALSA (No 1) [2013] NSWNMT 20 (16 October 2013)
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V AKAL KAUR KHALSA (No 1)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 046/2012
AN INQUIRY BY THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL CONSTIUTED UNDER
SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
(“THE NATIONAL LAW”) INTO COMPLAINTS REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER
SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER SECTION 167,
NON-PUBLICATION ORDERS APPLY
Pursuant to Clause 7 of
Schedule 5D of the
Law, the Tribunal has made a non-publication
order in respect of the name of the respondent’s patient, husband and
on 3 January 2011.
Complainant
: Health Care Complaints Commission
: Akal Kaur Khalsa
Mr Ian Newbrun (Deputy Chairperson)
Ms Tania Andrews (Midwifery Member)
Ms Leigh Schalk (Midwifery Member)
Mr John Davies (Lay Member)
Date and place of hearing:
March, 2-3 May 2013 at Sydney
Date of Reasons for
16 October 2013
Representation
Complainant: Ms C Spruce of Counsel instructed by Ms J Dinihan , Health Care
Complaints Commission
Respondent: Ms N Rudland of Counsel instructed by Ms L Alexander, NSW Nurses
and Midwives’ Association
Complaint against a midwife-management of baby
following birth and failure to make proper clinical records- unsatisfactory
professional
conduct –midwife’s subsequent provision of second set
of clinical notes to HCCC which were false and misleading-professional
misconduct-non-publication order-stage one findings and reasons for findings
Legislation cited
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
Cases cited
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1980) 104 CLR 186
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Pillai v Messiter (No 2)
16 NSWLR 197
Johnson Tiles v Esso Australia Pty Ltd (2000) 104 FCR 564
CFMEU v Hadgkiss
[2007] FCAFC 197
(2008) 248 ALR 169
Murphy v Farmer
(1988) 165 CLR 19
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the following complaints alleged against
Ms Akal Kaur Khalsa (“the midwife”)
set out in the Amended Complaint
Complaint One,
Particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3; findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct were made in respect
of each of these complaint
particulars
Complaint Two; a
finding of professional misconduct was also made in respect of Complaint One,
Particular 3.3
Tribunal made a non publication order. This order precludes publication of the
name of the child, and his mother and father referred
to in the material before
the Tribunal.
Tribunal acceded to the Complainant’s request for a second stage hearing
and to receive submissions as to the appropriate
consequential orders following
these findings. In accordance with directions made on 3 May 2013, the midwife
and the HCCC may now
make submissions within 2 weeks of being notified of these
reasons, or relist the matter before the Tribunal, in respect of suitable
protective orders to be made by the Tribunal.
Introduction
Reasons for Decision relate to an Inquiry into Ms Akal Kaur Khalsa’s care
and management of a baby born shortly after
8pm on 3 January 2011 at the home of
the baby’s mother. The baby was born prior to the arrival of Ms Khalsa,
who had only been
informed at 7.25pm that the mother was in labour. Ms Khalsa
arrived at the home at 8.15pm. Following the birth, the baby had two
problems: a
below normal temperature and an inability to feed. The Inquiry related to a
Complaint made against Ms Khalsa that she
failed to properly care and manage the
baby after the birth and up to the time that the baby was admitted to hospital
at about 10.30am
the following morning. The Inquiry also related to a Complaint
that Ms Khalsa failed to make proper clinical records during that
later submitted a second set of clinical records that were false and/or
misleading.
convenience only in these reasons the Tribunal refers to the persons and
entities who feature in the Inquiry as follows:
Ms Akal Kaur
Khalsa as “the midwife”;
The Health Care
Complaints Commission as “the HCCC”;
The Nursing and
Midwifery Council as “the Council”;
New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives’ Association as “the Association”;
The mother of
the baby as “Patient A”;
mother’s husband as “Patient A’s husband”;
Ms Susan Henry,
doula, as “Ms Henry”;
Jennifer Fenwick, Professor of Midwifery and Clinical Chair at the Gold Coast
Hospital and Griffith University, as “Prof
Ms Catherine
Adams, midwife and Clinical Midwifery Consultant, formerly employed by the
Northern Sydney Central Coast Area Health
Service, as “Ms
midwife first became a Registered Nurse in 1967 following the completion of her
General Nursing training at the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital. She registered as
a midwife in 1969 following the completion of midwifery training at the Royal
Hospital for Women, Paddington.
Until January 2011 she had been in private
practice as a midwife for over 34 years. She was currently employed as a
Registered Nurse
on a casual basis at the Royal Hospital for Women. She had been
on the casual nursing pool for about 10 years. She had not worked
shift since October 2012.
A, in about May or June 2010 engaged the midwife to act as her midwife in
relation to the management of her pregnancy, including
the delivery of her baby,
anticipated in about early January 2011. She also engaged Ms Henry, then a
trainee doula, to assist with
the birth. Patient A had an uneventful pregnancy.
On 3 January 2011 Patient A was visited at her residence by the midwife at about
3pm. The midwife noted in the Pregnancy Notes that Patient A “Feels
“ready” having a few light contractions. Advised
them to call me if
anything eventuates." The midwife returned to her own home. Patient A then went
to the beach with friends. Whilst
at the beach Patient A began to experience
strong contractions and returned home. At about 7:25pm Patient A’s husband
Ms Henry and the midwife. He informed the midwife that Patient A was
having contractions and had been having light contractions
since about 6:30pm.
The midwife told him that she would immediately leave her residence to attend.
During this conversation a birthing
pool was in the process of being filled.
Patient A’s membranes ruptured spontaneously shortly after this telephone
call, whereupon
she entered the birthing pool although the water was still "a
little bit cool". At about 8pm Ms Henry arrived and at about 8.10pm
the baby was
born with Ms Henry handing the baby to Patient A.
midwife arrived at Patient A’s residence at 8.15pm. The midwife thereafter
proceeded to manage the care of the baby and
Patient A. Shortly after arriving,
the midwife noted that the baby felt cold. The midwife then recorded the
baby’s temperature
as 33.2°C. The midwife encouraged Patient A to
leave the birthing pool with the baby. At this time, the midwife noted that the
baby’s umbilical cord had "snapped" near his umbilicus. The midwife then
placed a clamp on the cord stump to securely seal
the blood vessels. In the
following hours, the midwife noted that the baby’s temperature was
persistently below normal and
that the baby was unable to breast feed. At
approximately 11:20pm, the midwife "weighed and checked” the baby. The
remained overnight at the residence of Patient A and retired to sleep at
to wake her if they
needed her. The next morning, on 4 January 2011, when the baby was still unable
to breast feed and had a temperature
of 36.2°C, the midwife, Patient A and
Patient A’s husband took the baby to Manly Hospital. They arrived at
10:30am, whereupon,
after a medical examination, the baby was found to be
hypothermic, hypotonic with negligible blood sugar levels, low oxygen and
features. The baby was lethargic, pale, poorly reactive, dehydrated
and poorly diffused. After a period of stabilisation, he was
later that day
transferred to the intensive care unit of Westmead Children's Hospital where he
remained for several weeks.
Notification (complaint) dated 11 January 2011, was completed by Ms Helen
Eccles, Director of Nursing and Midwifery, Manly Hospital,
in respect to the
midwife’s involvement with the care of the baby between 3 and 4 January
2011. In that document, Ms Eccles
stated that she had concerns about the
midwife’s professional standards, specifically the “lack of
responsiveness to
patient needs". In Section D of the document Ms Eccles
described her concerns as, "Non-recognition of unwell neonate and delay in
referral for medical treatment”. As to, "What type of treatment was
received during the event", Ms Eccles stated, "unknown,
minimal documentation
available". There was attached to the Notification (complaint) a 2 page typed
report of Ms Catherine Adams,
being a “NSCCAHS Clinical Midwifery
Consultant", dated 11 January 2011.
Notification (complaint) was received on 18 January 2011 by the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency of NSW. Thereafter,
the Nursing and
Midwifery Council on 3 March 2011 resolved to impose certain conditions on the
midwife’s registration as a
midwife pursuant to section 150 (1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (“the National
. These conditions included conditions that the midwife only
practice midwifery within a hospital setting and that she must practice
the direct supervision of another registered midwife who does not have
conditions on their practice. Accordingly, the midwife
has not worked as an
independent midwife since this episode of care of the baby the subject of this
Inquiry in January 2011.
The complaint and commencement of the
Tribunal Inquiry
Complaint, dated 14 September 2012, was filed by the HCCC in the Nursing and
Midwifery Tribunal
Two separate complaints were pleaded in the document
filed. The first complaint, alleging unsatisfactory professional conduct,
9 separate particulars. In summary it alleges that the midwife failed
to provide appropriate post partum management of the baby up
until the baby was
transferred to hospital; failed to recognise the need for emergency medical
care; failed to make proper clinical
records in relation to the baby’s
care; and provided a second set of clinical notes to the HCCC which were
inadequate and false
and/or misleading. The second complaint, alleges
professional misconduct, and repeats the particulars referred to within the
complaint. At the commencement of the proceedings on 5 March 2013, the
HCCC, by consent, filed in the Tribunal an Amended Complaint
substantially in
the form of the original Complaint. For ease of understanding of these reasons,
a copy of the Amended Complaint,
which became exhibit A before the Tribunal, is
annexed to these reasons and marked as Annexure “A”.
(a) the object and guiding principle in NSW
3 of the National Law sets out the objectives and guiding principles of the
law, and in particular the registration scheme.
3A of the National Law sets out the objectives and guiding principle to be
applied by a Tribunal in New South Wales hearing
an inquiry and, if appropriate
to do so, when making protective orders. The relevant parts of s3,
for the purposes of this hearing,
are as follows:
objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme are--
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent
and ethical manner are registered; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and .......
(3) The guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation
scheme are as follows--
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient,
effective and fair way;
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality.
3A, which has particular relevance in the circumstances of this matter,
provides as follows:
In the exercise of functions under a
NSW provision, the protection of the health and safety of the public must be the
paramount consideration.
is relevant at this point that the Tribunal points out that protective orders
made at the end of a hearing are not intended to
punish the practitioner, but to
protect the public (see
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1980) 104 CLR 186).
burden and standard of proof
onus or burden of proof lies on the HCCC. It is well established, due to the
protective nature of the jurisdiction, and the seriousness
of the complaints, if
established, both for the practitioner and the public, that the standard of
proof, is on the balance of probabilities
but to the level of satisfaction
described by the High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
(c) unsatisfactory professional conduct
One asserts the midwife is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within
the meaning of s139B of the National Law.
The relevant provisions of that
section for the purposes of this matter are as follows:
(1) "Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following—
............
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(d) professional misconduct
Two asserts the midwife is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning
of s139E of the National Law. The relevant
provisions of that section for the
purposes of this matter are as follows:
For the purposes of this
"professional misconduct"
of a registered health practitioner means-
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
Pillai v Messiter (No 2)
16 NSWLR 197
the NSW Court
of Appeal was dealing with an appeal from a decision of the Medical Tribunal of
NSW. The Medical Tribunal had found
a medical practitioner should be removed
from the register for “misconduct in a professional respect” (the
then relevant
statutory provision). At the time of the hearing of the appeal
against the Medical Tribunal’s decision a new legislative provision
been enacted dealing with “professional misconduct”. The new
provision was inapplicable to the appeal. His Honour
stated, without deciding,
that the new statutory test for “professional misconduct” “may
introduce for consideration
a wider class of conduct than has hitherto been
regarded as relevant”.
the appeal, Kirby P stated that relevant “misconduct” may include:
“gross negligence ....particularly
if accompanied by indifference to, or
lack of concern for, the welfare of the patient”. His Honour further
stated at 200:
“Departures from elementary and generally
accepted standards, of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be heard to
that he or she was ignorant could amount to such professional misconduct.
But the statutory test is not met by mere professional
incompetence or by
deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more is required. It
includes a deliberate departure
from accepted standards or such serious
negligence as, although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an abuse of
the privileges
which accompany registration as a medical practitioner.”
Evidence before the Tribunal-an outline
discussing the particulars of the complaints, we now outline aspects of the lay
evidence before the Tribunal, including the
expert evidence.
Prof Fenwick
Fenwick was qualified by the HCCC to provide a written report in relation to
aspects of the midwife’s management of the
baby before his admission to
the Manly Hospital on 4 January 2011. Prof Fenwick was specifically requested to
comment, inter alia,
as to whether any conduct of the midwife fell below the
standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training and
experience and, if such conduct did fall below the standard, whether the
departure from the standard was significantly below that
standard or otherwise.
She also gave oral evidence to the Tribunal. Again, Professor Fenwick is the
Professor of Midwifery and Clinical
Chair at the Gold Coast Hospital and
Griffith University. She stated that she was also the Clinical Leader for
midwifery group practice.
HCCC provided Prof Fenwick with certain documentary material. One document was
a copy of some notes made the midwife as photocopied
by staff at the Manly
Hospital on 4 January 2011; these notes were described by the midwife in her
evidence as her “rough notes”
and contain about one half of a page
of handwriting-exhibit FF at page 79. For ease of reference the Tribunal refers
to these notes
in these reasons as the “rough notes”. Prof Fenwick
was also provided with a copy of the midwife’s clinical records
midwife supplied to the HCCC on 2 May 2011, through the Association-exhibit T.
Part of exhibit T was purported clinical
notes of the midwife, relating to the
midwife’s management of the baby from 3 January 2011 to 4 January 2011,
being a document
containing about one and a half pages of handwriting, headed
“Labour Notes”. For ease of reference the Tribunal refers
Labour Notes in these reasons as the “Labour
Fenwick stated that the rough notes, if they were to be considered the only
record of postnatal care documented between birth
and admission to hospital,
invited strong criticism as they fell significantly below the standard expected
of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or experience. Prof Fenwick
stated that if the rough notes were solely being used to assess the
care of Patient A and the baby, then there could be no other
finding than that the management of the baby fell significantly below
standard required and which again invited strong criticism.
Fenwick stated that the Labour Notes, although more reflective of the
midwife’s concern about the baby's well-being, also
invited strong
criticism because, inter alia, they failed to clearly document the
decision-making process, recommendation for care
and/or ongoing management of
Prof Fenwick stated that given the scenario documented in both the rough notes
and the Labour Notes it was not reasonable for the
midwife to delay making a
clear recommendation to the baby's parents that he be transferred to hospital
for further assessment during
the evening of 3 January 2011. As a result, the
assessment and ongoing care the baby required was delayed beyond what was
reasonable.
Prof Fenwick stated that this fell below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience and
invited criticism.
Fenwick, at the conclusion of her report, provided as a reference to her report,
National Midwifery Guidelines for Consultation and Referral
), Australian College of Midwives, 2008, Canberra, Australia
which became exhibit U.
Fenwick gave oral evidence on a number of different topics including:
the significance
of a low temperature in a newborn baby in the hours immediately after birth
the steps that a
midwife would take in the care of a newborn baby in the face of a low
temperature
the significance
of the baby presenting as pale at birth with a low temperature and following a
ruptured umbilical cord
the significance
of observations of the baby in the first few hours after birth
necessary action
by the midwife in the face of a baby’s failure to improve in condition,
including low temperature and failure
the content and
timing of a neo-natal examination where the baby’s condition is not
midwife’s need to make contemporaneous notes “as you go, as full as
the midwife
should have recommended that the baby be transferred to hospital by 11.30pm on
the evening of the birth by reason of the
persisting low temperature and
inability to feed
her opinion that
the standard of monitoring and the assessment process of a newborn baby born in
hospital or in a homebirth are essentially
her opinion that
it was not reasonable for the midwife, at around 11.30pm and following, to
attribute a low temperature in the baby
to the cool water into which the baby
tribunal found Prof Fenwick to be a very impressive witness.
Adams prepared a report dated 11 January 2011 at the request of Ms Helen Eccles,
Director of Nursing and Midwifery. This report
had been annexed to the
Notification (complaint) of Ms Eccles dated 11 January 2011. Ms Adams stated in
her report that the purpose
of her review of the case history of the baby was to
determine whether there were any concerns with the care provided by the midwife.
She stated in her oral evidence to the Tribunal that her written report had
provided comment on the medical records of the Manly
hospital which included the
rough notes of the midwife. She did not have access to the Labour
Adam’s occupation was that of midwife. She stated that she was a
Registered Midwife of 30 years and had worked as a clinical
midwife and
Midwifery Educator. For the last 12 years and currently she was working as a
Clinical Midwifery Consultant, which she
had worked for the last 12 years,
whilst concurrently working as a privately practising midwife.
Adam’s report noted, inter alia:
There was no
documentation by the midwife of the usual neonatal examination that considers a
head-to-toe examination
There was no
documentation by the midwife of a management plan and no continued observations
of the baby were recorded overnight
documentation reviewed there was either non-recognition of several abnormal
conditions with the baby or delay in appropriate
treatment/management of the
baby. In either circumstance, the baby required additional care than it received
from the time of birth
until transfer to hospital at 10:30am, approximately 15
hours after birth.
midwife’s documentation was below the expected standard.
Adams gave oral evidence, and she was cross-examined, on a number of different
topics including:
Steps to take to
increase the temperature of a newborn baby experiencing a less than normal
temperature including feeding the baby
The level and
nature of monitoring of a baby with a less than normal temperature
The need for a
management plan of the baby and the nature of such a plan
The nature of
the usual neonatal examination of the baby and its timing
The required
nature of the clinical notes to be made by the midwife and noting of the delay
in entries in the rough notes
Observation and
monitoring of a baby with unstable vital signs
final addresses to the Tribunal, after oral evidence from all witnesses
including the midwife had been given, the midwife’s
counsel submitted that
the Tribunal should not regard Ms Adam’s evidence as expert evidence but
as evidence given from a very
experienced midwife. The Tribunal considers that
Ms Adam’s midwifery qualifications, extensive experience over some 30
including private midwifery practice experience, amply qualified her to
give opinion upon the midwifery issues that were raised with
her at the Inquiry.
The tribunal also found Ms Adams to be a very impressive
her written statement, Ms Henry referred to, inter alia:
Steps taken to
raise the baby’s temperature
Steps taken to
assist the baby to breast feed
An examination
of the baby by the midwife
Observations
made by her of the midwife writing and looking at a midwifery book
Her lack of
recollection of any conversation by the midwife with Patient A or Patient
A’s husband about a possible transfer
of the baby to
Ms Henry also gave oral evidence.
Patient A, the mother of the
her written statements, Patient A referred to, inter alia:
circumstances of the birth of the baby
Steps taken to
raise the baby’s temperature
Steps taken to
feed the baby
After the birth,
her lack of recollection of any conversation by the midwife with her about a
possible transfer of the baby to hospital
on 3 January
Her discussions
with the midwife on the morning of 4 January about the baby and transfer to
Patient A also gave oral evidence. She referred to, inter alia:
Her discussions
with the midwife in the lead up to the birth about hospital attendances
Her discussions
with the midwife after the birth about the snapping of the umbilical cord
After the birth,
her lack of recollection of any conversation by the midwife with her about a
possible transfer of the baby to hospital
on 3 January
The midwife not
checking on her or the baby during the night after the midwife had retired to
Her surprise in
the morning of 4 January when the midwife discussed
Patient A’s husband, the father of the
evidence covered similar topics to Patient A’s evidence,
After the birth,
his lack of recollection of any conversation by the midwife with Patient A or
himself about a possible transfer of
the baby to hospital on 3 January
His recollection
that the only conversation that he had with the midwife about hospital transfer
occurred on the morning of 4 January
Documentary evidence
is helpful to refer to aspects of the documentary evidence tendered before the
24 February 2011 the Association wrote to the Council, responding to the
latter's letter of 11 February 2011, stating, inter alia,
that the midwife had
provided “the following instructions” and then set out various
factual matters relating to the midwife’s
management of the baby. The
letter referred to a decision being made by the midwife at 23:30 hours on 3
January to keep the baby
wrapped and with Patient A overnight and reassess him
in the morning. The letter stated that the midwife checked the baby and Patient
A several times overnight but did not wake them. There is no reference in the
letter to any discussion on 3 January by the midwife
with the baby's parents
midwife’s discussion with the
parents on 4 January about the baby’s
need to be checked by a Doctor.
30 March 2011 the HCCC by letter requested the midwife to provide copies of her
clinical records for Patient A and the baby within
2 May 2011 the Association provided the HCCC "a copy of RM Khalsa’s
records relating to (Patient A).” The records included
the Labour Notes.
Association, by letter dated 28 September 2011, wrote to the HCCC stating, inter
“RM Khalsa intentionally did not disturb (the baby)
overnight to give him the best chance of improving his body temperature.
Khalsa’s main concern was to keep (the baby) wrapped and warm....It was RM
Khalsa’s observation that (the baby) was
not deteriorating overnight. She
recognised she had to observe his temperature closely because it was
8 March 2012 the HCCC wrote to the Association referring to the Labour Notes
“provided to the Commission as Ms Khalsa’s
contemporaneous
notes” which “records significantly more detail” than the
rough notes. The HCCC requested a submission
from the midwife in relation to,
inter alia, the inconsistencies between the two clinical
2 April 2012 the Association wrote to the HCCC stating, inter
“RM Khalsa agrees with the "inconsistencies" between
Document A and Document B in so far as Document B contains more information
it was written on RM Khalsa’s return to her home after she left (Patient
A) at Manly Hospital. This was when, as per her
custom and practice, RM Khalsa
wrote a more complete version of the events of the preceding hours for before
and after she had arrived
at (Patient A’s) home and took her and her baby
to Manly Hospital."
The Respondent’s evidence
midwife’s written statement, exhibit 1, inter alia, expands upon the
detail contained within the Labour Notes. She elaborates
upon the discussions
that she maintains that she had with Patient A and Patient A’s husband on
3 January about a possible transfer
of the baby to hospital for assessment in
view of her concern about the baby’s temperature and his failure to feed
(paragraphs
23-24) and which are referred to in the Labour
midwife’s statement refers to her agreement with Patient A and Patient
A’s husband that she should stay overnight
and stated, in paragraph 27,
"Whilst I was concerned about the baby I did not consider his condition to be
serious or that it was
urgent that a doctor see him at that time. While it is
not my practice to remain at the home after the baby has been born I chose
stay on that night because I was concerned enough about the baby to remain in
case I was needed overnight."
paragraph 31, the midwife stated, in relation to her recommendation on 4 January
that the baby be reviewed by a doctor, "Both Patient
A and her partner agreed
and after Patient A showered and they both had breakfast we went to Manly
Hospital. While I considered that
there was insufficient improvement in the baby
and transfer was now required, I did not consider that the baby's condition was
deteriorating.
I was also concerned not to cause the parents undue
paragraph 45, the midwife agreed that she failed to monitor vital signs of the
baby half hourly from delivery to transfer, “but
mother and baby slept and
it was my judgment to let them sleep rather than to wake the baby and unwrap him
every 30 minutes to take
vital signs. I made this judgment on the basis that I
believed his low temperature was because of the cold water in which he was
delivered.”
paragraph 50, the midwife stated that the baby was warmer but still would not
attach and feed. That led her to the opinion that
medical support should be
sought. She stated that she had stressed the importance of the need for the baby
to attend hospital for
review, but she did not want to unduly alarm the parents
because she believed that it was not a situation that required emergency
paragraph 54, the midwife stated that she did not take any observations of
Patient A or the baby after 23:20 hours because they
were sleeping; she had
formed the opinion that the baby's low body temperature was a result of the very
cold water into which he
had been delivered.
paragraph 58, the midwife denied that the Labour Notes were false and/or
misleading. She again stated that her usual practice was
to write notes in full
"post delivery when I had returned home."
her oral evidence, the midwife conceded that the Labour Notes were misleading in
that they suggested they were written contemporaneously
when in fact they were
written some time later and taken from her rough notes and her memory. The
midwife agreed to the suggestion
that when she made the Labour Notes she was
doing her best to record what she believed actually happened. In her later
submissions
she stated that she did not have any intention to mislead when
providing the Labour Notes to the HCCC.
midwife gave further extensive oral evidence to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
refers to aspects of her oral evidence later in these
reasons. The midwife also
tendered in evidence various references from previous clients.
Submissions and Tribunal Findings
HCCC and the midwife’s legal representatives filed and served submissions
and summaries of evidence documents after the
oral hearings, including:
HCCC amended
outline of submissions dated 20 May 2013;
HCCC amended
summary of evidence in support of complaint;
outline of submissions dated 3 June 2013;
“Table: Complaint and Particulars-Response and Evidentiary
The Tribunal has considered all submissions,
summaries and outlines, including the oral submissions, together with all the
documentary evidence in the proceedings, before reaching its
Complaint One, Particular 1.1
complaint and particular is in the following terms:
practitioner failed to provide appropriate post partum management of the newborn
child in that she did not adequately assess,
monitor and/or manage the care of
Patient A’s baby in the period after his birth on 3 January 2011
until his transfer to hospital at 10:30am on 4 January 2011, in
1.1 The practitioner did not perform a thorough neonatal examination and/or
failed to adequately document the neonatal examination
undertaken on 3 January
midwife's statement, Exhibit 1, stated that she disagreed that she failed to
provide appropriate post partum management of the
baby and that she "provided
appropriate monitoring for an out of hospital birth." The midwife, stated that
she accepted that the
rough notes that she "used that night were not an adequate
record. That is because they were a summary of my notes to be written
full when I returned home."
midwife, in her submissions, stated that the evidence demonstrated that she
conducted the neonatal examination at the time that
she weighed the baby-around
11:30pm on 3 January 2011. The midwife did not admit that she failed to
adequately document the neonatal
examination undertaken on 3 January 2011 but
admitted that she did not record the information in her rough notes. She
referred to
a document recording a clinical examination of the baby, being the
document headed “Welcome” and containing within it
the notes of a
“Clinical Examination” of the baby-exhibit T at page 11; exhibit AA
at page 14. She submitted that there
was no evidence as to the notes in this
document being recorded other than after the baby was weighed and he and Patient
for the night.
Fenwick, in her oral evidence, elaborated on what comprises the usual neonatal
examination. She referred to a full head to toe
check on the baby. She referred
to thorough visual observations of the baby, checking the colour of the baby,
checking the breast
tissue to inform the right gestation of the baby, checking
the reflexes, checking the hips, turning the baby over, looking at the
counting the fingers and toes and looking at the bottom of their heels and
hands. She stated that if the midwife had an indication
that the baby was not
well, the examination would be done “straight away, in terms of getting
your whole picture, what are
all the things here that I need to know”. Ms
Adams stated that the examination should occur when the midwife notices the baby
A’s husband, in his written statement, stated that after the midwife had
noted that the umbilical cord had snapped she
"checked (the baby) over and took
his weight and temperature, which was when she said he was a bit cool, so she
wrapped him up in
a blanket."
Henry, in her written statement, stated that it was about two hours after the
baby was born that the midwife took the baby off
his mother's chest and had a
look at him. She saw the midwife pull up the baby's hands and then let them go.
She saw her measure
around the baby's head. She stated that she was not fully
focused on what the midwife was doing.
evidence before the Inquiry was a photograph of the baby lying naked on a towel
placed on scales-exhibit V. The photograph contains
the words in the margin
“30 MINS OLD”. The midwife’s written statement, at paragraph
25, states that the photograph
was taken on the scales, that she was the person
who weighed the baby and the first time was at 23:30 hours when he was about 3
old. She stated in oral evidence that the foot depicted in the photograph
is her foot. The Tribunal accepts this evidence of the
midwife initially stated, in her oral evidence, that she carried out a clinical
examination of the baby at 11:30pm on 3 January.
She stated that she knew she
did it at that time because that was when she weighed the baby (T163). In the
rough notes, which the
Tribunal accepts as a reliable history of what the
midwife did on 3 and 4 January 2011 in relation to the baby’s care and
management,
it is noted at 23:20 on 3 January that the baby was "weighed and
checked". The midwife stated later, in oral evidence, that she could
when she performed the neonatal examination (T240). At that time she also gave
evidence that weighing and checking the
baby included checking the head
circumference and length of the baby. She stated that at the time she weighed
and checked the baby
she "looked at the baby. The colour was good. The-you know,
everything was there that ought to have been there. I would have checked
heart rate." (T241)
midwife, in cross-examination, was taken to a document recording a clinical
examination of the baby, being the document headed
“Welcome” and
containing within it the notes of a “Clinical Examination” of the
baby-exhibit T at page 14.
By reference to the temperature reading recorded in
that document of 36 degrees, the midwife agreed that she “must have done
this neonatal examination on the morning of 4 January”. Despite this
apparent concession by the midwife, the Tribunal is not
satisfied, to the
requisite evidentiary standard, that the midwife failed to perform a thorough
neonatal examination on 3 January
2011; her initial oral evidence that she
carried out a clinical examination of the baby on 3 January is consistent with
evidence of Ms Henry and Patient A’s husband. The evidence is
conflicting as to exactly when the examination was carried out
on 3 January; the
midwife's initial oral evidence was that it occurred at 11:30pm but set against
that evidence is the lay evidence
of Ms Henry and Patient A’s husband that
it may well have occurred earlier.
to latter part of this particular complaint, namely that the practitioner
"failed to adequately document the neonatal examination
undertaken on 3 January
2011", the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams that a
midwife should document relevant
events as they occur. Prof Fenwick gave
evidence that it is “good clinical practice” and a midwife
“must keep contemporaneous
notes” “as you go” “as
full as you can”. Prof Fenwick stated, “So you try and write close
the time everything happens so that you’re demonstrating that
it’s to your best recollection, that you don’t make
a mistake, that
you’re able to put that down when it occurs.”
Adams gave evidence that the midwife’s documentation needs to be
contemporaneous and that the date and time needs to be clearly
written. Ms Adams
gave evidence as to the level of detail in the midwife’s clinical notes in
the period after the birth. She
stated, “Given that the midwife did not
observe the birth there would not be a lot of documentation in this case around
birth but more information provided about the temperature and about
management and more frequent observations. There is at times
three hours delay
in any documentation in the documents that I was given, that doesn't give any
information about what was being
done in between that time, what helped guide
the midwife to remain in the home, what discussions were had with the parents
the situation of the baby and any recommendations for consultation or
referral made there." Ms Adams stated that whether the birth
takes place at the
Fenwick had stated in her report that the midwife’s observations of the
baby, including observations such as colour, heart
rate, respiration, tone,
activity, should be recorded in her clinical notes. Prof Fenwick had stated that
regular temperature findings
including their times should be recorded in such
notes. Prof Fenwick had stated that the reference in the rough notes to the baby
being “weighed and checked” at 23:20 was not accompanied with any,
“comment as to what this “check”
(my assumption is that this
refers to the neonatal examination) revealed.” Prof Fenwick had stated
that, in the circumstances
of the baby being unwell, “it would have been
appropriate for (the baby) to have all his vital signs recorded at least every
30 minutes (if not more regularly). Heart rate, colour (central and periphery),
respirations, alertness and tone/activity (for example
crying) should have been
regularly recorded.”
Adams, in her report of 11 January 2011, observed that there was no
documentation of the usual neonatal examination that considers
a head-to-toe
examination.
Tribunal, accepting the above evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams, finds that
the midwife’s neonatal examination should
have been documented
contemporaneously with such examination being carried out by her. The rough
notes do not adequately record
any neonatal examination on 3 January.
the midwife submitted that she did document her examination of the baby in the
document headed “Welcome” and containing
within it the notes of a
“Clinical Examination” of the baby, and that there is no evidence as
to these notes being recorded
other than after the baby was weighed and he and
Patient A settled for the night on 3 January. The Tribunal does not accept that
this document was written by the midwife after the baby was weighed and he and
Patient A settled for the night, being on 3 January
and in the early hours of 4
Tribunal notes the oral evidence of the midwife that she did not write this
document on 3 January and that she could not recall
whether she wrote it on 4
January. At another point in her oral evidence she stated that there were no
other written documents recorded
by her on 3 and 4 January apart from the rough
notes. The Tribunal further notes that this document contains the pro-forma
“Admission to NNU?” (NNU is a reference to a neo natal
unit). The handwritten answer to this question is, "Yes", being
a reference to
the baby's admission to the Manly Hospital on 4 January. The Tribunal further
notes that the contents of exhibit FF-the
full records of the Northern Beaches
Area Health Service-do not contain a copy of this document, indicating that the
documentation
taken from the midwife by staff at Manly Hospital on 4 January did
not include this document. The Tribunal notes that a copy of this
document was
first provided to the HCCC on 2 May 2011 when the midwife forwarded to the HCCC
a copy of her records relating to Patient
A. The Tribunal finds that this
document was probably completed by the midwife at some time after the
baby’s admission to Manly
Hospital on 4 January.
Tribunal notes that the document headed “Labour Summary”, completed
by the midwife and forming part of exhibit FF,
and which contains references to
the baby’s APGAR scores, was brought to the midwife’s attention in
evidence; the midwife
was also unable to state when she completed this
Tribunal finds that the midwife failed to adequately document the neonatal
examination of the baby on 3 January 2011 and until
his transfer to Manly
Hospital at 10:30am on 4 January 2011 and is satisfied that this complaint
particular has been proven. In view
of the opinions of Prof Fenwick, inter alia,
that the neonatal examination of the baby was not adequately documented in the
notes and that the content of the rough notes fall significantly below the
standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or
experience and invite strong criticism, the Tribunal finds that proof of this
complaint particular constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct. (As to the
creation and integrity of the Labour Notes, the Tribunal refers to its findings
later in these reasons;
the tribunal notes that even those notes did not
adequately record any neonatal examination of the
Complaint One, Particular 1.2
complaint and particular is in the following terms:
practitioner failed to provide appropriate post partum management of the newborn
child in that she did not adequately assess,
monitor and/or manage the care of
Patient A’s baby in the period after his birth on 3 January 2011 until his
transfer to hospital
at 10:30am on 4 January 2011, in that:
1.2 Although the baby’s temperature was recorded as being very low
(33.2) when taken at 8.30pm on 3 January 2011, the practitioner
monitor the baby’s temperature on a regular basis up to and until his
transfer to hospital on 4 January 2011.
midwife, in her written submissions, did not admit that she failed to monitor
the baby's temperature on a regular basis during
the period from approximately
8:15pm until at least 11:30pm on 3 January but she admitted that she did not
record her observations.
It was admitted that she did not monitor the baby's
temperature from around 11:30pm until around 6am the following morning.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams that it was the
obligation of the midwife, in the circumstances pertaining
after the birth of
the baby, to regularly monitor the baby's temperature.
Fenwick stated that it would have been appropriate in the circumstances for the
midwife to have had all the baby’s vital
signs recorded at least every 30
minutes. Prof Fenwick gave evidence that in the circumstances pertaining to
Patient A’s baby
the midwife would be looking at the baby every 30 minutes
and making absolutely sure that she was, “really happy that you’re
moving forward and that the baby is looking well and healthy and the temperature
is coming up and everything else is looking good,
and so I can make that
assessment that I’ve got a healthy baby here.”
Adams gave evidence that monitoring of the baby’s low temperature
(including other vital signs such as respiratory and heart
rate) should have
been half hourly whilst strategies to increase the baby’s temperature were
being implemented. Ms Adams gave
evidence that if a midwife was required to stay
overnight to monitor, which is physical monitoring with observation of the baby,
"I would expect that she was observing or monitoring the baby and not sleeping
if the baby had not been stable at the time the decision
was made to stay or go
or to sleep or not."
the midwife's rough notes nor the Labour Notes record the regular monitoring of
the baby's temperature. (As to the creation
and integrity of these Labour Notes,
the Tribunal refers to its findings later in these reasons). Patient A’s
oral evidence
that the baby's temperature was taken "frequently" was later
diminished when she stated that she "couldn't say exact number”
how many times the temperature was taken. The Tribunal notes the midwife’s
oral evidence that she took the baby’s
temperature at “irregular
intervals”. The Tribunal finds that the baby's temperature was only taken
at irregular intervals.
Further, the Tribunal finds that the baby’s
temperature was not taken at all from around 11:30pm until around 6am the
Tribunal is satisfied that this complaint particular has been proven and,
accepting the evidence of Prof Fenwick that the frequency
of the midwife’s
recorded observations of the baby was inadequate and fell significantly below
the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience, finds that proof of this complaint particular
constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Complaint One,
Particular 1.3
complaint and particular is in the following terms:
practitioner failed to provide appropriate post partum management of the newborn
child in that she did not adequately assess,
monitor and/or manage the care of
Patient A’s baby in the period after his birth on 3 January 2011 until his
transfer to hospital
at 10:30am on 4 January 2011, in that:
1.3 The practitioner failed to observe all of the baby’s vital signs,
including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness
and tone/activity at least
every 30 minutes following her arrival at Patient A’s home shortly after
the baby’s birth
on 3 January 2011 and up to and until his transfer to
hospital on 4 January 2011.
the midwife’s written submissions she admitted this complaint particular,
stating, "It is respectfully submitted that her
basis for not doing so were
because of her focus on warming (the baby)." The midwife's statement, exhibit 1,
at paragraph 45, stated:
"I agree that I failed to monitor vital signs half hourly from delivery until
transfer-but mother and baby slept and it was my judgment
to let them sleep
rather than to wake the baby and unwrap him every 30 minutes to take vital
signs. I made this judgment on the basis
that I believe that his low-temperature
was because of the cold water in which it was delivered."
At paragraph 42, the midwife stated that she provided appropriate monitoring
for an out of hospital birth.
Tribunal refers to the evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams referred to above
under Complaint One, Particular 1.2.
the Tribunal accepts Prof Fenwick’s evidence that the frequency of the
midwife’s recorded observations of the baby
was inadequate and fell
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience.
Tribunal is satisfied that this complaint particular is proven and that proof of
this complaint particular constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Complaint One, Particular 1.4
practitioner failed to provide appropriate post partum management of the newborn
child in that she did not adequately assess,
monitor and/or manage the care of
Patient A’s baby in the period after his birth on 3 January 2011 until his
transfer to hospital
at 10:30am on 4 January 2011, in that:
practitioner did not develop a management plan, nor any recommendation
concerning ongoing assessment and/or care, should the
baby’s condition not
improve and his observations remain outside an acceptable safe range.
the midwife’s written submissions she did not admit this complaint
particular and stated, “however does admit that
she made no written record
of her management plan or any considered course of action." The midwife further
stated in her written
submissions, "Ms Khalsa admits that she did not have a
written management plan however she denies that she did not have a plan as
what would occur. It was submitted that the Tribunal would find that she did
have an unwritten plan in so far as she:
her concerns with (Patient A’s husband) and Ms Henry;
the possibility of medical review with Patient A on 3 January
to (Patient A’s husband) and Patient A that she stay
(the baby) in the morning of 4 January 2011 and made arrangements for medical
assessment.”
Fenwick’s report commented at length on the midwife’s management of
the baby by reference to the rough notes. She
notes the absence of any entry in
the rough notes between 23:20 on 3 January and 08:00 on 4 January; she states
that the rough notes
did not provide comment on conversations pertaining to a
plan of care before 08:00 on 4
January 2011.
Fenwick gave evidence in relation to the subject matter of this complaint
particular. She stated that after the baby’s
low-temperature was observed,
at about 9pm, the midwife should have documented some clear plan of management
regarding the baby’s
condition and such plan should have been discussed
with the parents. The midwife should have stated her concerns, informed the
as to what she thought should be done and made recommendations, and the
parent’s wishes would be documented.
Fenwick stated, "some clear plan around, you know, if this is going to happen
I'm going to wait this long, we’re going
to do this, then we’re
going to move on to that.” She stated, "If you think the baby’s okay
and-if the assumption
is that the baby was cold from the pool and that's why you
need the baseline-you know, all the baseline obs, observations, so then
say, right, okay this is what I think’s happening, I would expect to see
this, this and this happen in the next hour,
and you would document that and
then you would go back to the parents and say, okay well this is what's
happening now, this is my
recommendation, this is what I think-you know, this is
what I recommend should happen, and then you would document what the
parents-what
the discussions were around that and what the plan was if they
didn't want to do that plan, what plan is going to happen over the
next hour or
something, or next two hours.”
Adams stated, in relation to this issue, that it was “good practice, that
after-when anything is noted to be abnormal, then
that is noted plus the
interventions that are taken to resolve that variance and a forward plan about
what to do about that. So frequent
documentation, particularly if there is a
variance here. You know there would be a minimum frequency of documentation as
hour, for example, and after every intervention."
Tribunal finds, accepting the evidence of Patient A, Patient A’s husband
and Ms Susan Henry, and by reference to the midwife's
rough notes, that the
midwife probably related to Patient A and Patient A’s husband her concern
and non-feeding on 3 January. The Tribunal accepts
Patient A’s husband’s statement that the midwife told him that she
would stay overnight “to keep an eye on” the baby, and that he did
not have any sense of urgency about the temperature
or non-feeding issues. The
Tribunal finds that Patient A was informed by Patient A’s husband that the
midwife was staying the
night. The Tribunal accepts Patient A’s evidence
that she did not think too much about what was going to happen to the baby
the night and “just assumed that he would have a sleep and then he would
feed.” Patient A and Patient A’s
husband gave evidence that the
midwife had told them that she would “check on us at night’ and
“look in on us during
the night”, which evidence is
midwife, in her oral evidence, stated that she had stayed overnight because the
baby had not fed and because the temperature was
not normal. Yet she stated that
she did not check on the baby and Patient A between 12:30am and 6am with her
last visual check on
them being at 12:30am. She stated that she then slept. She
stated that before she went to bed she asked Patient A’s husband
her if anything occurred overnight and she was needed.
Tribunal does not accept that the midwife had any discussions with either
Patient A, Patient A’s husband or Ms Henry on
3 January about a possible
transfer of the baby to hospital (or indeed in the early hours of 4 January up
to the time that Patient
A and Patient A’s husband retired to bed). The
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A, Patient A’s husband, and Ms
Henry, that they did not have, or, in the case of Ms Henry, did not hear, any
conversations with the midwife about a possible transfer
of the baby to hospital
on 3 January. It notes the absence of any reference in the rough notes to such
discussions on 3 January (noting
that the rough notes do record the midwife
advising the parents that the “baby should be checked” at 08:00 on 4
The Tribunal notes that there was no mention in the
Association’s letter of 24 February 2011 to the HCCC of any such alleged
discussions on 3 January. The Tribunal notes that the midwife, in oral evidence,
admitted that she did not suggest at 9pm on 3 January
that the baby might need
to be transferred to hospital. The Tribunal notes the oral evidence of Patient A
that she was unpleasantly
surprised when the midwife told her on the morning of
4 January that she was going to call Manly Hospital about the baby's condition.
The Tribunal further notes the oral evidence of Patient A’s husband that
he was a bit shocked when he received the same information
Tribunal does not accept that the references in the Labour Notes to alleged
discussions by the midwife with Patient A and Patient
A’s husband about a
transfer of the baby to hospital on 3 January reflect what occurred on 3
January. The Tribunal finds that
the midwife first discussed the issue of the
transfer of the baby to hospital with Patient A and Patient A’s husband at
8am on 4 January. (The Tribunal also refers to its reasons and findings in
relation to the Labour Notes referred to below under Complaint
One, Particular
Tribunal finds that the midwife, on 3 January, had expressed her concerns to
Patient A and Patient A’s husband about the
baby’s low temperature
and non-feeding and had taken physical steps to increase the baby’s
temperature and have him feed
without success. She told Patient A and Patient
A’s husband that she would stay the night and check on the baby and
A during the night. She told Patient A’s husband to wake her up if
anything occurred overnight. The midwife, as events transpired,
having last
visually checked on the baby at 12:30am, then slept through the night. The
Tribunal finds that there was no discussion,
before Patient A and Patient
A’s husband retired to bed with the baby, about a possible transfer of the
baby to hospital.
Tribunal is of the view, in light of the evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams,
that the midwife did not develop an appropriate
or adequate management plan for
the baby (nor make any recommendation regarding the baby’s ongoing care),
at least for the
overnight period after Patient A, Patient A’s husband and
baby retired for bed. By the time that they had retired to bed, no
management plan had been articulated by the midwife to them about what the
content of any management of the baby’s condition
during the night would
constitute. The midwife was aware that the baby’s temperature and
non-feeding problems still existed
before everyone retired to bed but she did
not address how these problems should be managed during the night with Patient A
A’s husband.
is clear that by 8am on 4 January, when the midwife ascertained that the baby
was still not feeding and its temperature still not
optimal, that she made a
recommendation that the baby should be transferred to hospital.
Fenwick stated in her report that if the rough notes were solely being used to
assess the midwife’s care of Patient A and
the baby, then there could be
no other finding than that her management fell significantly below the standard
required and invited
strong criticism. The tribunal has found that the midwife
did not develop any management for the baby’s condition, at least
the night period after Patient A, Patient A’s husband and the baby and
retired to bed. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds
that proof of this complaint
particular has been established as constituting unsatisfactory professional
Complaint One, Particular 2.1
practitioner failed to recognise the need for emergency medical care and to
recommend and/or effect an appropriate and timely
transfer of the baby to
hospital for that care, in that:
practitioner failed to recognise the baby’s condition was deteriorating
and that he required immediate medical review
and/or possible
intervention
HCCC submitted that it was not necessary to strictly prove that the baby was
"deteriorating", in the sense of "getting worse",
“as opposed to not
improving to an acceptable level within a reasonable period, so as to require
urgent medical attention”.
It further submitted that, "It is clear that
the essence of what has been alleged against Ms Khalsa by Ms Eccles and the
of Proceedings is a failure to recognise that (the baby) was in poor
clinical condition, was not improving, and was in need of medical
Tribunal does not accept this submission. To accept this submission would raise
issues of procedural unfairness to the
midwife. It was always open to the HCCC
to amend this complaint particular but it did not seek to do so.
midwife admitted that she did not recognise that the baby's condition was
deteriorating from the time of her arrival at the home
until arrival at Manly
Hospital on 4 January 2011. However, as submitted by the midwife, the Tribunal
must first determine that in
fact the baby's condition was deteriorating-and
deteriorating prior to about 8am on 4 January 2011when the midwife recommended
Patient A and Patient A’s husband that the baby should be transferred
to Manly Hospital for assessment.
it is clear that the baby was unwell and had abnormal vital signs, the Tribunal
does not accept that it has been proved, to
the requisite evidentiary standard,
that the baby's condition was deteriorating prior to about 8am on 4 January
2011. For example,
whilst Prof Fenwick referred, in oral evidence, to the
baby’s condition getting “worse overnight”, she also referred
to the baby’s condition on arrival at hospital on 4 January 4011 as being,
“wasn’t well and potentially getting
worse” (T127). And the
baby’s temperature, by reference to the midwife’s rough notes, had,
on one view, improved
from being “still a little cool” at 23.20 on 3
January to 36.2 degrees at 8am on 4 January.
Tribunal does not accept the submission of the HCCC that the Tribunal can have
regard to the baby's poor condition when he arrived
at hospital “to draw
the inference that (the baby's) condition was deteriorating between birth and
8am on the morning of 4
January when Ms Khalsa finally recommended transfer to
hospital.” This would involve impermissible hindsight reasoning in the
absence of further evidence as to, inter alia, the condition of the baby before
transfer to hospital and possibly medical evidence.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that this complaint particular has been
Complaint One, Particular 2.2
practitioner failed to recognise the need for emergency medical care and to
recommend and/or effect an appropriate and timely
transfer of the baby to
hospital for that care, in that:
2.2 Prior to
8.30am on 4 January 2011 the practitioner failed to recommend to the parents
that the baby should be transferred for
assessment and/or treatment to an
emergency medical facility.
midwife, in her written submissions, admitted that she failed to recommend that
the baby be transferred to hospital before 8:30am
on 4 January 2011 but stated
that although she did not recommend it she did raise it as a possibility on the
evening of 3 January
relation to this complaint particular, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Prof
Fenwick that by 11:30pm on 3 January the midwife
should have recommended to
Patient A and Patient A’s husband that the baby be transferred to hospital
for assessment by reason
of the baby's continued low temperature and
non-feeding. Prof Fenwick stated that there was enough clinical indication by
"to say we need the baby to be reviewed now." She stated in her written
report that, "Given the unsuccessful attempts to raise (the
baby's) temperature
to this point in time it would have been appropriate to recommend to both
(Patient A and Patient A’s husband)
that (the baby) be transferred to
hospital for a consultation with a neonatologist/paediatrician and ongoing
assessment and monitoring
of his condition.”
Tribunal also notes that the
National Midwifery Guidelines for Consultation
and Referral
refers at page 28 to "Temperature instability" in a post partum
infant with a corresponding “C” notation; by reference
to Part 4 of
Guidelines,
it is recommended that the midwife undertake referral of
the infant to secondary or tertiary care (a medical practitioner or a team
providers in a specialised hospital) in such circumstance. It also refers to
“Temperature less than 36 C, unresponsive to
therapy” with a
corresponding “B” notation; by reference to Part 4 of the
it is recommended that the midwife consult with a medical or
other health care provider in such circumstance. Ms Adams also referred
when discussing, in oral evidence, the baby’s low
temperature.
oral evidence, the midwife conceded that in retrospect she would have to agree
with this opinion of Prof Fenwick. She stated that
by 11.30pm she believed the
baby was improving and not deteriorating. She stated that she believed that
because the baby's temperature
was not at normal levels that that was the cause
of the baby not feeding.
the Tribunal does not accept that the midwife had any discussions with either
Patient A, Patient A’s husband or Ms Henry
on 3 January (or indeed in the
early hours of 4 January up to the time that Patient A and Patient A’s
husband retired to bed)
stated previously in these reasons, the Tribunal does not accept that the
in the Labour Notes to discussions with Patient A and Patient
A’s husband about a transfer of the baby to hospital on 3 January
what occurred on 3 January.
the above findings, there is no sufficient expert evidence, or other relevant
evidence, that the midwife’s failure to
recommend to Patient A and Patient
A’s husband that the baby be transferred to hospital on 3 January
demonstrated that “the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the practitioner’s
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience”; Prof
Fenwick had
only stated in her report that this failure fell “
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience and invites criticism”.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds that proof of this complaint particular has not been
established as constituting unsatisfactory professional
Complaint One, Particular 3.1
practitioner failed to make and maintain proper clinical records in relation to
the baby’s care, in that:
clinical notes provided by the practitioner to the hospital on the baby’s
admission on 4 January 2011, provided inadequate
information in that they failed
to document:
3.1.1 temperature figures for the
baby with corresponding times;
3.1.2 the baby’s colour;
3.1.3 maternal observations and assessment of fundus;
3.1.4 circumstances of the snapping of the cord;
3.1.5 any observations of mother or baby after 2320 hours on 3 January
3.1.6 the baby’s weight figure;
3.1.7 amount of maternal blood loss;
3.1.8 conversations concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to
transfer before 0800 hours on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and
3.1.9 vital signs including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness
and tone/activityof the baby at least every 30 minutes;
3.1.10 a signature for each entry;
3.1.11 the decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or
ongoing treatment.”
is noted that the HCCC did not press, in relation to Complaint One Particular
3.2, the midwife's failure to record in her clinical
notes "3.2.2 circumstances
of the snapping of the cord" and “3.2.3 amount of maternal blood loss".
The Tribunal assumes that
the HCCC similarly do not press these particulars in
relation to this particular complaint (see “3.1.4” and
in the above particulars of this complaint
particular).
the midwife’s written submissions it is admitted that the rough notes
taken from her by staff at Manly Hospital were not
adequate records. The
midwife's submissions state that those rough notes were meant for her records
and were not given to Manly Hospital
for the purpose of being clinical records
as there was never a request from Manly Hospital for her clinical records.
was further submitted by the midwife that her experience was that she never
handed over her notes to hospital staff when transferring
a patient to hospital;
she always gave an oral handover; she only provided the records because Patient
A did not have her antenatal
card with her and the midwife’s notes were to
be copied in relation to the antenatal records; she gave a full oral handover
the doctors and nursing personnel on arrival; and she was unaware that Manly
Hospital had a copy of her rough notes subsequent
to being informed of the
complaint against her.
midwife’s statement, at paragraph 44, stated that she accepted that the
notes that she "used that night were not an adequate
record. That is because
they were a summary of my notes to be written out in full when I returned home."
midwife’s statement, at paragraph 46, provided:
"I know that
the purpose for making and keeping records is far reaching and there may be a
necessity for someone else to take over
the care of a client. I accept my usual
practice at that time of writing them in full once I returned home does not
provide for the
contingency of an emergency situation and the need for accurate
records to be available."
The Tribunal notes that the above statement by the midwife is consistent with
the evidence of Prof Fenwick (detailed clinical notes
can provide a “vital
picture” of what has occurred) and the
National Midwifery Guidelines
for Consultation and Referral
, which states, in its Introduction, "It is the
intention that the Guidelines be used to facilitate consultation and integration
care between midwives and doctors, thereby giving confidence to providers,
women and their families." These Guidelines refer to the
need for documentation
in various situations.
midwife’s statement, at paragraph 59, noted that she had been counselled
on her note taking on two previous occasions; this
counselling was confirmed in
the midwife’s oral evidence in chief at the Inquiry.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Prof Fenwick and Ms Adams as to the standard,
timing and content of clinical records required
to be made by a midwife in the
period following the birth of the baby. The Tribunal accepts their criticisms of
the rough notes made
by the midwife. The Tribunal accepts Prof Fenwick’s
view that the level of documentation in the rough notes was significantly
the standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience and invited strong criticism.
upon the oral evidence of the midwife, the Tribunal finds that the midwife
probably wrote all the entries in her rough notes
for 3 January, apart from the
opening words, "Would prefer no doppler", in the early hours of 4 January after
Patient A retired to
bed but before the midwife retired to bed. The Tribunal
finds that the entry marked “4/1” was probably written by the
midwife in one sitting on 4 January after her arrival at the
from the midwife's failure to observe and record all of the baby's vital signs,
including heart rate, colour, respirations,
alertness and tone/activity at least
every 30 minutes after the baby's birth and up to the baby’s transfer to
hospital on 4
January-see the Tribunal’s earlier findings regarding
Complaint One, Particular 1.3-the Tribunal finds that the rough notes
midwife did not document, or adequately document:
midwife’s temperature figures taken by her for the baby with corresponding
times, and, when recorded in the rough notes,
even then did not record them
adequately; for example, the entry at 20:30 in the rough notes stating, "Temp
slowly (increasing)”
and the entry at 23:20 stating "Baby checked-still a
little cool" are both inadequate
baby’s colour observations made by the midwife; for example, even the
midwife’s observation of the baby’s
colour as “good”,
was not recorded in the rough notes
any observations
of Patient A or the baby after 23:20 hours on 3 January and up to 08:00 hours on
weight; for example, the reference at 23:20 in the rough notes to "weighed and
checked" is inadequate
conversations
concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to transfer before 08:00 hours
on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and rationale. (The Tribunal
notes its finding that the midwife did not raise the issue of a possible
transfer of the
baby to hospital with Patient A or Patient A’s husband on
3 January. It also refers to its findings in respect to Complaint
Particular 1.4)
vital signs
including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness and tone/activity of the
baby at least every 30 minutes. (The tribunal
refers to its findings in respect
to Complaint One, Particular 1.3)
a signature for
each entry; there is only one signature appearing at the end of the rough notes
following the last entry for 4 January
decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or ongoing treatment. (The
Tribunal refers to its findings in respect to
Complaint One, Particular
Tribunal is satisfied that the midwife’s rough notes taken by Manly
hospital from her on 4 January did not constitute proper
clinical records and
that this complaint particular has been proven. In view of the opinions of Prof
Fenwick that the content of
the rough notes fall significantly below the
standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
and invite strong criticism, the Tribunal finds that proof of this
complaint particular constitutes unsatisfactory professional
Complaint One, Particular 3.2
practitioner failed to make and maintain proper clinical records in relation to
the baby’s care, in that:
3.2 On 2 May 2011, the
practitioner provided clinical notes to the Health Care Complaints Commission
which provide more detailed
information than those made available to Manly
Hospital on 4 January 2011 (“second set of clinical notes”). The
set of clinical notes were inadequate in that they failed to document:
3.2.1 the decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or
ongoing treatment;
circumstances of the snapping of the cord
amount of maternal blood loss
3.2.4 conversations concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to
transfer before 08:00 hours on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and
3.2.5 vital signs including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness
and tone/activity of the baby at least every 30 minutes;
3.2.6 a signature for each entry.”
the outset it is noted that exhibit T tendered in the Inquiry comprised a set of
documents provided by the midwife to the HCCC
on 2 May 2011 headed
“Maternity Notes” and which included:
information
checkup record
labour and birth
record and clinical examination in the first 24 hours (this is the document
headed “Welcome” referred to
earlier in these reasons)
the Labour Notes
Tribunal assumes that the reference to the “second set of clinical
notes” in this complaint particular is a reference
to the Labour Notes. In
the midwife’s written submissions it was admitted that these notes were
not adequate records.
Tribunal finds that the Labour Notes did not document, or adequately
decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or ongoing treatment.
At 21:00 in the Labour Notes it is stated, "Baby’s temp 34.5. Advised
(Patient A) that baby's temp improving. Attempt to breast
feed. Baby had a few
licks but did not attach. Baby’s temp primary concern. Disc hosp T/F
(Patient A) wants to wait and feed
baby first. Baby wrapped in warm blankets and
placed in (Patient A’s) arms”.
Prof Fenwick stated, in relation to these particular clinical note entries,
inter alia, “No further management plan is noted
and no recommendation for
further assessment and/or care is recorded...Given (the baby’s) abnormally
low and unstable temperature,
poor colour, tone and reflexes it would have been
appropriate for (the baby) to have all his vital signs recorded at least every
30 minutes (if not more regularly). Heart rate, colour (central and periphery),
respirations, alertness and tone/activity (for example
crying) should have been
regularly recorded.”
At 23:30 the Labour Notes stated, "Peri checked. Intact. Baby nuzzed at
breast. Baby weighed and checked. Advised (Patient A) T 35.2.
Talked to (Patient
A’s husband) re transfer. Decided they wanted to stay home. Advised them
that I would stay. (Patient A)
pleased with plan. Mum & bub settled to
Prof Fenwick stated in relation to this particular clinical note entry, inter
alia, “Given the unsuccessful attempts to raise
(the baby’s)
temperature to this point in time it would have been appropriate to recommend to
both (Patient A and Patient
A’s husband) that (the baby) be transferred to
hospital for a consultation with a neonatologist/pediatrician and ongoing
and monitoring of his condition. A detailed account of the
conversation between the midwife and parents should have been documented
the midwife clearly outlining the clinical indicators and rationale for this
decision. If such a recommendation was not supported
by the parents then it
would have been appropriate for RM Khalsa to document their response and/or
request that the parent write
in the notes themselves providing detail on the
decision-making process. If this was the case a plan for ongoing care and
should have also been documented."
The Tribunal accepts this evidence of Prof Fenwick.
conversations
concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to transfer before 08:00 hours
on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and rationale.
Again, the Tribunal accepts Prof Fenwick’s evidence.
vital signs
including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness and tone/activity of the
baby at least every 30 minutes
The Tribunal refers to its findings
above in relation to Complaint One, Particular 3.1.
A signature for
each entry.
The Tribunal refers to its findings above in relation to Complaint One,
Particular 3.1.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Prof Fenwick in her written report that,
“The (Labour Notes) are more detailed and at the
very least provide
evidence that (the baby’s) temperature was being monitored. However, this
should have occurred more regularly
and be accompanied by other observations
such as colour, heart rate, respiration, tone, activity. The (Labour Notes) also
to clearly document the decision making process, recommendation for care
and/or ongoing management. From this perspective the (Labour
Notes) fall
significantly below the standard required and invite strong criticism.”
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that proof of this complaint particular constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Complaint One, Particular
The second set of clinical notes was false and/or
misleading.”
the Tribunal assumes the reference in this complaint particular to the
“second set of clinical notes” is a reference
to the Labour
Tribunal notes the HCCC’s submissions in relation to the meaning of
“false and/or misleading” and the midwife’s
submissions not
challenging such submissions of the HCCC. The HCCC submitted in this respect
that conduct is misleading or deceptive
if it induces or is capable of inducing
error and refers to
Johnson Tiles v Esso Australia Pty Ltd (2000) 104 FCR 564
and the cases there cited. It submitted that the word "false" is a
word which has several different shades of meaning; it is capable
purposely untrue or, alternatively, objectively incorrect-both meanings are
included in the dictionary definition; the
HCCC referred to
CFMEU v Hadgkiss
[2007] FCAFC 197
(2008) 248 ALR 169
which in turn refers to
Murphy v Farmer
(1988) 165 CLR
midwife’s written submissions stated that the midwife admitted that the
Labour Notes were misleading in so far as they would
indicate, or give the
reader the impression, that they were written contemporaneously on or about 3
and 4 January 2011, when in fact
they were written some time later, taken from
her rough notes and her memory. However, it was submitted, she did not construct
for the purpose of misleading or providing a false account and she did not
have any intention to mislead. It was submitted that the
details contained
within the Labour Notes were an accurate record of what occurred on 3 and 4
January 2011 in respect of the post
partum care of the baby. The midwife’s
written submissions also stated that, “It is accepted by Ms Khalsa that
records to the HCCC knowing they are false and misleading insofar as
they indicate they were written on or about 3 and 4 January
is unethical or
improper conduct.” Similarly, in oral submissions, it was submitted that ,
“In relation to the provision
of the second set of notes, Ms Khalsa admits
that that is unsatisfactory professional conduct, and it was improper and
unethical.”
HCCC submitted that the Labour Notes purported to be contemporaneous clinical
records of events of 3 and 4 January 2011. It submitted
that those notes were
not contemporaneous records made by the midwife; the midwife knew this was the
case and therefore the notes
were plainly misleading. The HCCC submitted that
the midwife had admitted in evidence that there was no discussion about a
transfer to hospital of the baby at 21:00 hours on 3 January and
accordingly the reference in the Labour Notes to such a discussion
was false and
misleading. It submitted that the midwife had accepted in evidence that the
timeframe for events set out in the Labour
Notes was not accurate and that
accordingly such timeframe for events was inaccurate and misleading. It
submitted that the Tribunal
should not accept that the midwife's creation of the
Labour Notes was an honest attempt by her to recall what happened on 3 and 4
January 2011. Rather, the HCCC submitted that the tribunal should find that the
midwife’s aim was not to prepare a record to
the best of her recollection,
but rather to avoid criticism and give the HCCC the document that they would
the Tribunal sets out its findings, it is helpful to refer to aspects of the
evidence relating to events which led the midwife
to provide the HCCC with the
Labour Notes on 2 May 2011, including evidence relating to their creation date,
and relevant evidence
of the midwife.
11 February 2011 the Council wrote to the midwife imposing conditions on her
practice as a midwife having received the Notification
(complaint) from Manly
15 February 2011 the HCCC by letter advised the midwife that a complaint against
her had been received and that following consultation
with the Council the
matter was to be investigated.
midwife gave oral evidence that she made a decision to create the Labour Notes
after receiving the Council’s letter of 11
February 2011. She stated that
she wrote the Labour Notes after she had received the complaint from the HCCC
and that she had used
the information from her rough notes to complete them. She
stated that she had created the notes prior to receipt of the letter dated
March 2011 from the HCCC, which letter had requested her clinical records for
both the baby and Patient A, to facilitate its investigation
in respect to the
the Association’s letter dated 24 February 2011 to the Council it set out
the midwife’s instructions relating to the
initial Notification
(complaint). Those instructions, set out in the letter, do not contain the
extent or fully duplicate the factual
information contained in the Labour Notes
provided later on 2 May 2011; for example, the instructions only refer to 3
specific temperature
readings of the baby yet the Labour Notes refer to 6
specific temperature readings; the instructions refer to a temperature of 36.3
at 23:30 hours yet the Labour Notes record a temperature of 35.2 at that same
time; and, importantly, there is no reference in those
instructions to the
alleged discussions between the midwife and Patient A and Patient A’s
husband relating to a possible hospital
transfer of the baby on 3 January which
alleged discussions do appear in the Labour Notes. The midwife gave evidence
that the statement
in the letter that she "checked the baby and (Patient A)
several times overnight but did not wake them” was
2 May 2011 the Association provided to the HCCC “a copy of RM
Khalsa’s records relating to (Patient A)” which
included the Labour
Notes. The Labour Notes of the midwife appear on their face to be notes made
contemporaneously by her on 3 and
4 January 2011.
midwife gave evidence that by 15 February 2011 her memory of what happened on 3
and 4 January would not have been as accurate
as it was on 4 January. The
midwife stated that she probably knew, when she completed the Labour Notes, that
the “times”
in those notes might be inaccurate. She stated that the
“timeframes” were made by her because that was what would have
expected in notes from a hospital midwife. Later in evidence, she confirmed that
the “timeframes” were not accurate.
She stated that the purpose of
putting in the dates and times in the Labour Notes was to try and be consistent
with hospital practices,
since she was being judged on hospital practices.
midwife gave evidence that when she completed the Labour Notes she was just
working off her rough notes made on 3 January together
with her memory. She
agreed that when she made the Labour Notes the only purpose that she had in her
mind was the possible use of
the notes in legal or disciplinary proceedings.
midwife gave evidence, in examination in chief, that the basis for her writing,
in the 9pm entry in the Labour Notes, the words,
“(Patient A) wants to
wait and feed baby first”, was “because (Patient A) was very intent
on establishing breastfeeding”.
The midwife stated that she could not
recall having this discussion with Patient A but believed that it did occur.
Still in examination
in chief, the midwife was reminded that Patient A had given
evidence that there was no conversation with her on the evening of 3
after the baby had been born about a possible transfer of the baby to hospital.
The midwife then stated that she stood by
her evidence that she did have a
discussion about possible transfer on that evening. She stated that she was sure
that she had discussed
a possible transfer of the baby at 9pm on 3 January with
Patient A because “I am of the impression it was on my mind that this
eventuate”. She was asked , “What was it that was making you think
it might eventuate?” to which she responded,
“If the baby
didn’t warm up completely and didn’t suckle.” Later, in
cross-examination, the midwife conceded
that she did not suggest at 9pm on 3
January that the baby might need to be transferred to hospital in circumstances
when at 11pm
on 3 January she did not hold the view that the baby was
deteriorating. This change of position by the midwife did not reflect well
her credibility.
midwife gave evidence, in cross-examination, that she believed that she had a
conversation with Patient A about a possible transfer
of the baby to hospital at
11.30pm on 3 January. She then stated that she did not have any clear
recollection of suggesting at that
time that if there wasn’t any
improvement in the baby’s condition in the morning that hospitalisation
would have to be
considered.
midwife, when giving evidence, agreed that the Labour Notes were misleading
because nowhere in the notes was it recorded that
the entries were being made
retrospectively. She stated that it was her intention that a reasonable person
reading the Labour Notes
would form a view that they were a contemporaneous
Tribunal makes the following findings in relation to this complaint
particular:
midwife commenced to write the Labour Notes after she received the complaint
from the HCCC in its letter of 15 February 2011.
She completed the Labour Notes
at some time after 24 February 2011, and, giving the midwife the benefit of the
doubt, before the
HCCC’s letter to her of 30 March 2011 requesting her
clinical notes.
the midwife completed the Labour Notes she was just working off her rough notes
made on 3 January together with her memory. The
tribunal is of the view the
midwife’s likely ability to recall the details of matters, such as
timeframes, some 6 weeks after
the events in question, which details had not
previously been recorded in the rough notes, would have been negligible.
midwife knew, when she completed the Labour Notes, that the timeframes in those
notes were inaccurate. The midwife inserted such
timeframes in the Labour Notes
because that was what she viewed would have been expected in notes from a
hospital midwife.
found previously in these reasons, the midwife did not have any discussions with
either Patient A, Patient A’s husband or
Ms Henry on 3 January (or indeed
in the early hours of 4 January up to the time that Patient A and Patient
A’s husband retired
to bed) about a possible transfer of the baby to
hospital; as found previously, the references in the Labour Notes to such
discussions do not reflect what occurred on 3 January. The tribunal
should state that the midwife’s evidence to the Inquiry
in relation to her
alleged conversations with Patient A and Patient A’s husband on 3 January
2011 about a possible transfer
of the baby to hospital lacked credibility. The
tribunal, having observed the midwife carefully when giving her evidence on this
topic, found the midwife to be an unimpressive witness.
The Tribunal
further finds, and has no doubt, that the midwife, when she completed the Labour
Notes, knew that she had had no discussions
with Patient A or Patient A’s
husband on 3 January about a possible transfer of the baby to hospital.
Tribunal does not accept the midwife’s evidence that she was doing her
best to record what she actually believed happened
when she completed the Labour
Notes. The Tribunal finds that the midwife intentionally made false entries in
the Labour Notes and
such entries at least included:
above alleged discussions on 3 January 2011
timeframes appearing in the Labour Notes which do not appear in the rough
Tribunal finds that the midwife, when she provided the Labour Notes to the
did intend to mislead the HCCC by at least
representing:
the entries in the Labour Notes were the contemporaneous notes made by her on 3
and 4 January 2011 in relation to the baby, Patient
A and Patient A’s
had had discussions with Patient A and Patient A’s husband about a
possible transfer of the baby to hospital on 3 January
the timeframes appearing in the Labour Notes, which do not appear in the rough
notes, were accurate
tribunal is in no doubt that the midwife’s motive for such conduct was to
ward off any criticism of her management of the
baby’s condition when in
her care on 3 and 4 January 2011.
Tribunal finds that this complaint particular has been proven. It finds that
this conduct of the midwife amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct,
being improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of the midwife’s profession
s139B(1)(l)
Complaint Two
complaint provides that the midwife:
“is guilty of
professional misconduct under section 139E of the
National Law
the practitioner has:
i.engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration, or
ii.engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.”
Complaint Two, the particulars of Complaint One were repeated and relied upon,
individually and cumulatively.
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
the NSW Court of Appeal stated, “The gravity of professional
misconduct is not to be measured by reference to the worst cases,
extent to which it departs from the proper standards. If this is not done there
is a risk that the conduct of the delinquents
in a profession will indirectly
establish the standards applied by the Tribunal.”
Tribunal is of the view that the unsatisfactory professional conduct the subject
of Complaint One, Particular 3.3, namely that
the midwife provided the
“second set of clinical notes”, being the Labour Notes, to the HCCC
on 2 May 2011, which notes
were intentionally false and misleading to the
knowledge of the midwife, was conduct “of a sufficiently serious nature to
suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration”. Accordingly, pursuant to
the Tribunal is of the view that such unsatisfactory professional
conduct also constitutes professional misconduct.
midwife provided the Labour Notes to the HCCC on 2 May 2011 after the HCCC had
requested her clinical records for Patient A and
the baby to facilitate its
investigation of the earlier complaint against the midwife. The conduct of the
midwife in providing clinical
notes to the HCCC, which notes were intentionally
false and misleading, was dishonest. Such conduct obviously departed from what
was expected of the midwife, namely that such records provided to the HCCC would
be a truthful account by her of what had previously
Tribunal has considered whether its findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, “when the instances are considered
together, amount to conduct of
a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration”
so as to constitute professional
(s139E (b) of the National Law).
the Tribunal’s view, noting the overlapping of various findings, the
findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct which
are relevant for the
purposes of
s139E (b) of the National Law
monitor the baby’s temperature on a regular basis up to and until his
transfer to hospital on 4 January 2011 (complaint
particular 1.2)
observe all of the baby’s vital signs at least every 30 minutes following
her arrival at Patient A’s home shortly
after the baby’s birth on 3
January 2011 and up to and until his transfer to hospital on 4 January 2011
(complaint particular
develop a management plan, nor any recommendation concerning ongoing assessment
and/or care, should the baby’s condition
not improve and his observations
remain outside an acceptable safe range (complaint particular 1.4)
The clinical
notes provided by the practitioner to the hospital on the baby’s admission
on 4 January 2011 were inadequate (complaint
particular 3.1)
relation to complaint particulars 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 3.1, the Tribunal does not
view their proof, when considered together, as
constituting professional
misconduct, taking into consideration the Tribunal’s earlier references to
Kirby P’s comments
relating to professional misconduct in
Reasons for Decision do not consider consequential orders. In accordance with
directions made on 3 May 2013, the midwife and
the HCCC may now make submissions
within 2 weeks of being notified of these reasons, or relist the matter before
the Tribunal, in
respect of suitable protective orders to be made by the
Signed: 16 October 2013
Mr Ian Newbrun (Deputy Chairperson)
Ms Tania Andrews (Midwifery Member)
Ms Leigh Schalk (Midwifery Member)
Mr John Davies (Lay
APPENDIX “A”
IN THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY
TRIBUNAL NO. 046/2012 Of
CONSTITUTED UNDER SECTION
165 OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
In the matter of
Akal Kaur Khalsa
a person registered under
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
AMENDED COMPLAINT
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh
Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Nursing and Midwifery Council
of New South Wales
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
the National
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Akal Kaur Khalsa
(“the practitioner”) being a registered
midwife and registered nurse under the
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of midwifery is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of midwifery.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner has been a midwife in private practice since 1979. During
that period she has also been employed as a nurse or midwife
at a number of
hospitals and became an independent accredited midwife in 1991.
The midwife was engaged by Patient A from June 2010 to manage her pregnancy
by providing pre-natal services, and to manage her delivery
by attending and
assisting at the home birth of Patient A’s first child, (“the
baby”), who was born on 3 January
The baby was born shortly after 8pm on 3 January 2011 after a labour which
commenced at approximately 6.30pm that day. The baby was
born prior to the
arrival of the practitioner, who had been informed at 7.30pm that Patient A was
in labour, and arrived at the house
at 8.15pm. There was a doula present with
Patient A and Patient A’s husband at the time of the birth. At 10.30 on
the morning
after his birth (4 January 2011), the baby was taken to Manly
Hospital, whereupon, after a period of stabilisation, he was later
transferred to the intensive care unit of Westmead Children’s Hospital
where he remained for several weeks.
1.The practitioner failed to provide appropriate post partum management of
the newborn child in that she did not adequately assess,
monitor and/or manage
the care of Patient A’s baby in the period after his birth on 3 January
2011 until his transfer to hospital
at 10:30am on 4 January 2011, in
1.1 The practitioner did not perform a thorough neonatal examination
and/or failed to adequately document the neonatal examination
undertaken on 3
January 2011.
1.1 Although the baby’s temperature was recorded as being very low (33.2)
when taken at 8.30pm on 3 January 2011, the practitioner
failed to monitor the
baby’s temperature on a regular basis up to and until his transfer to
hospital on 4 January 2011.
1.2 The practitioner failed to observe all of the baby’s vital signs,
including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness
and tone/activity at least
every 30 minutes following her arrival at Patient A’s home shortly after
the baby’s birth
on 3 January 2011 and up to and until his transfer to
hospital on 4 January 2011.
1.3 The practitioner did not develop a management plan, nor any recommendation
concerning ongoing assessment and/or care, should
the baby’s condition not
improve and his observations remain outside an acceptable safe range.
practitioner failed to recognise the need for emergency medical care and to
recommend and/or effect an appropriate and timely
transfer of the baby to
hospital for that care, in that:
2.1 The practitioner failed to recognise the baby’s condition was
deteriorating and that he required immediate medical review
and/or possible
intervention;
2.2 Prior to 8.30am on 4 January 2011 the practitioner failed to recommend to
the parents that the baby should be transferred for
assessment and/or treatment
to an emergency medical facility.
practitioner failed to make and maintain proper clinical records in relation to
the baby’s care, in that:
3.1 The clinical notes provided by the practitioner to the hospital on the
baby’s admission on 4 January 2011, provided inadequate
information in
that they failed to document:
3.1.1 temperature figures for the
baby with corresponding times;
3.1.2 the baby’s colour;
3.1.3 maternal observations and assessment of fundus;
3.1.4 circumstances of the snapping of the cord;
3.1.5 any observations of mother or baby after 2320 hours on 3 January
3.1.6 the baby’s weight figure;
3.1.7 amount of maternal blood loss;
3.1.8 conversations concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to
transfer before 0800 hours on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and
3.1.9 vital signs including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness and
tone/activityof the baby at least every 30 minutes;
3.1.10 a signature for each entry;
3.1.11 the decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or ongoing
3.2. On 2 May 2011, the practitioner provided
clinical notes to the Health Care Complaints Commission which provide more
information than those made available to Manly Hospital on 4 January
2011 (“second set of clinical notes”). The second
set of clinical
notes were inadequate in that they failed to document:
3.2.1 the decision-making process, recommendations for care and/or ongoing
circumstances of the snapping of the cord
amount of maternal blood loss
3.2.4 conversations concerning a plan of care or recommendations as to
transfer before 08:00 hours on 4 January 2011 including clinical
indications and
3.2.5 vital signs including heart rate, colour, respirations, alertness and
tone/activity of the baby at least every 30 minutes;
3.2.6 a signature for each entry.
3.3. The second set of clinical notes was false and/or misleading.
COMPLAINT TWO
is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
in that the practitioner has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration,
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
As for Complaint One
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
The particulars of Complaint One are repeated and relied upon, individually
and cumulatively.
_______________________________
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (817 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter