URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v JARROLD [2011] NSWDT 1 (22 November 2011)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
ASHLEIGH EDWARD JARROLD
(AKA ASHLEY JARROLD)
MATTER NUMBER: DT01/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER: DE 0024528
N.B. No National Registration number issued
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION
ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Jarrold [2011] NSWDT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms B Tronson of Counsel instructed by Ms R Lewis, Solicitor,
Health Care Complaints Commission.
Ashleigh Jarrold
(Respondent) – No appearance at Inquiry -
represented by Mr J Anthony, Solicitor, (prior to commencement of Inquiry).
FILE NUMBER: DT01/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Kavita Lobo (Dentist
Prof. Anthony Blinkhorn (Dentist Member)
Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: 16 November 2011
DATE OF DECISION: 22 November 2011
FINDINGS (in summary): All Particulars established (Certificates of
Conviction in evidence) – Respondent convicted of eight
offences and
others on a Form 1 – not a suitable person to hold registration. Unlikely
to ever be a suitable person to hold
registration - Not to reapply for
registration until 16 February 2020 - Prohibition Order made – costs Order
CATCHWORDS: Dentist – conviction for eight criminal offences
following pleas of guilty – two counts of indecent assault
– section 81
(conduct in 1975) – three
counts of disseminate and produce child pornography –
section 91H(2)
Crimes Act 1900
(conduct in 2006 and 2007) – one count possess
child pornography –
section 91H(2)
in 2008) – one count groom child for unlawful sexual activity –
section 474.19(1)(a)(iii)
Criminal Code 1995 (Cth)
(conduct in 2006)
– not a suitable person to hold registration.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
(National Law – NSW) – 144(a), 144(b), 144(e),
145A, 149C(5)(a), 167;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
1995 (Cth) -
s474.19(1)(a)(iii)
Child Protection (prohibited Employment) Act 1998
Dental Practice Act 2001
, Schedule 1,
clause 26(1) and
clause 27(1);
Commission for Children and Young People Act
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
Director of Public Prosecutions v Losurdo
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v Australasian Meat Industry Employees’
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
; O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool &
Sons Pty Limited
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
; R v Jarrold
[2010] NSWCA 69
Dr Alex Simring
[2010] NSWMT 7.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Dental Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney on
16 November 2011 to conduct
an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 28 June 2011
in relation to a
previously registered dentist, Ashleigh Edward Jarrold (the Respondent).
the time the Inquiry convened the Respondent was an inmate at the Metropolitan
Remand and Reception Centre at Silverwater. The
earliest release date is 16
March 2015 and his sentence expires on 16 February 2017.
Complaint alleges the Respondent has been convicted of eight criminal offences
in New South Wales (section 144(a)
National Law
), that he is not a
suitable person to hold registration as a dentist (section 144(e)). The
Respondent made admissions with respect
to these two complaints and indicated
that he did not wish to appear before the Tribunal or be legally represented at
the Inquiry
(letter to HCCC dated 23 August 2011 – part exhibit 41). The
Respondent further consented to the cancellation of his registration,
of a time by the Tribunal before which the Respondent may not seek reinstatement
and to an order against him for costs
in the proceedings (letter to HCCC dated 2
September 2011 – part exhibit 41). In this same letter his legal
representative
advised that the Respondent had entered into bankruptcy on 16
August 2010. By letter dated 30 September 2011 to the HCCC the
Respondent’s
legal representative advised that the Respondent did not
oppose the making of a prohibition order pursuant to Section 149C(5)(a)
National Law
these concessions the HCCC advised the Respondent that it would seek to withdraw
Complaints 3 and 4 (being unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional
misconduct (section 144(b)).
the Tribunal was satisfied that none of the conduct, subject of the convictions,
set out in the Particulars of Complaint had
any nexus with the profession of
dentistry leave was granted for the withdrawal of these two Complaints. Even if
these two grounds
of Complaint were before the Tribunal there would not have
been, in the Tribunal’s view, any further Orders open to be made
above those made herein).
The Complaint
Complaint, as amended, alleges that the Respondent, being a person previously
registered as a dentist under the
Dental Practice Act 2001
COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner has been convicted of eight criminal offences in New South
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
16 October 2009 in Newcastle NSW, the practitioner was convicted of eight
offences, namely:
assault on a male on 1 January 1975 at Newcastle NSW, contrary to section 81 of
, following a plea of guilty on 9 October
assault on a male on 1 July 1975 at Bellbird NSW, contrary to section 81 of the
, following a plea of guilty on 9 October
Disseminate
and produce child pornography on 23 March 2006 at Hamilton NSW, contrary to
section 91H(2)
, following a plea of guilty on 29
September 2009
Disseminate
and produce child pornography on 6 October 2006 at Darlinghurst NSW, contrary to
section 91H(2)
, following a plea of guilty on 29
September 2009
Disseminate
and produce child pornography on 7 January 2007 at Hamilton NSW, contrary to
section 91H(2)
, following a plea of guilty on 29
September 2009
child pornography on 9 October 2008 at Hamilton NSW, contrary to
section 91H(3)
, following a plea of guilty on 29 September
a child for unlawful sexual activity on 10 August 2009 at Hamilton NSW, contrary
section 66EB(3)
, following a plea of guilty on
29 September 2009
carriage service to transmit child pornography on 18 May 2006 at Hamilton NSW,
contrary to s474.19(1)(a)(iii)
Criminal Code Act
following a plea of guilty on 29 September
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is not a suitable person to hold registration as a
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of Section139B of the National Law in that
engaged in other improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of dentistry.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT FOUR
The practitioner has been guilty of professional misconduct within
the meaning of Section139B of the National Law, namely, improper
or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of dentistry in that he
(i) Engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration;
(ii) Has engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory
professional conduct that, when the instances are considered together,
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
registration.
PARTICULARS OF
As per Complaint 1.
The Law – preliminary matters
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a civil
issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Prohibition Order
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 149C(5)
of the National Law. This sub-section states:
Tribunal suspends or cancels a registered health practitioner’s or
student’s registration and it is satisfied
the person poses a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a "prohibition
order") do any one or
more of the following-
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently;
(b) place specified conditions on the provision of health services or
specified health services by the person for the period specified
in the order or
permanently.
Section 10AK(1)
provides that it is an offence for a person to provide a health service in
contravention of a prohibition order.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in its meaning
depending upon the context in which it is used and the
subject matter in
relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions v Losurdo
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v Australasian
Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
at 348, Deane J observed
that the word “substantial” was not only susceptible of ambiguity,
but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of precision. In O’Brien Glass
Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty Limited
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447
referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and observed that, in selecting the word
“substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of section 149C(5) of the National Law the Tribunal is of the view
that ‘substantial’ requires something
more than a bare risk but is
less stringent than special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Appearances
per headnotes. By way of a brief teleconference, Mr John Anthony, Solicitor,
assisted the Tribunal to resolve the issue as to whether
or not any of the
victims of the offences committed by the Respondent subject of the Particulars
had been a patient of the Respondent.
letter dated 20 May 2011 to the Registry (exhibit 42) the Respondent’s
legal representative advised that the Respondent admitted
Complaints One and
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
victims and other persons in accordance with Schedule
5D Clause 7 of the Act as
indicated in the schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘D’. Any
information beyond that contained
in this Reasons document which may identify
them is also not to be published. Annexure D will only be attached to the
original Reasons
for Decision held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC became exhibits 1
– 42. No documents were relied upon by the Respondent.
witnesses were called during the Inquiry.
information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born on 1 April 1952. He completed a Bachelor of Dental Surgery
at the University of Sydney in 1975. He was first
registered on 17 December
1974. The Confirmation of Registration Status issued by AHPRA records that the
Respondent’s ceased
to be Registered on 31 December 2009
did not make an application for renewal of registration’.
there is documentation elsewhere before the Tribunal indicating that the Board
had resolved to advise the Respondent that
his name had been removed from the
Register as at 31 December 2009 (see exhibit 15 being a letter from the Board to
the HCCC). It
appears to this Tribunal that the Respondent’s name was
administratively removed from the Register by the Board as at 31 December
The Tribunal is of the view that the name of the Respondent should have formally
remained on the Register until such time as
the disciplinary proceedings that
were on foot had concluded. The Tribunal has no knowledge as to why the
Respondent’s Registration
did not transition over to the new National
Respondent had been a registered dentist for over 30 years as at the time of the
2008 charges. At this time he lived with his
partner (who also worked as the
practice manager) in a residence upstairs from his surgery. It appears that he
has substantially
practiced in the Newcastle area for his entire professional
Background of the Complaint
receiving notification from the Respondent on 13 October 2008 that he had been
charged with indecent assault offences, the Dental
Board of NSW (Board) held a
Section 72 Inquiry (see section 72
Dental Practice Act 2001
repealed) on 17 October 2008. The finding of this Inquiry (part exhibit 9)
recorded that the Respondent informed the
Delegates of the Board that conduct
the Inquiry that he apologised to the Board for not advising when he was
previously charged with
indecent assault on a minor male which had been
20 October 2008 the Board notified the HCCC that the Respondent had been charged
with 13 offences, that a
Inquiry had been held (exhibit 8). On 30
October 2008 the Board forwarded a Brief of Evidence to the HCCC (exhibit 9).
way of a letter dated 3 December 2008 the Respondent’s legal
representative (John Anthony, Solicitor) advised that the Respondent
subject of an additional charge of Possess Child Pornography. The letter stated
that the Respondent intended to ‘
strenuously’
defend this
charge on the basis that he did not
the relevant
DVD disc that contained the child pornography as he denied possession of the box
or the DVD (the residence in which
it was found being occupied by both the
Respondent and his partner). This letter also suggests conditions that may be
imposed upon
the Respondent’s registration pending the determination of
the criminal charges. One condition made reference to
‘assault matters
in about 1981’
of which the Board had been previously advised. The
letter recorded that proceedings in the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (ADT)
had not declared the Respondent a Prohibited Person (section 33B
for Children and Young People Act
). The Commissioner for Children and Young
People had appealed this decision and the ‘Court of Appeal’
dismissed the appeal
(the Tribunal notes that it was not the Court of Appeal it
was the Supreme Court – single judge).
decision of the ADT formed exhibit 11. The proceedings occurred before the ADT
in 2006. This document records that the application
was brought under the
Child Protection (prohibited Employment) Act 1998
. The decision recorded
that the Respondent was convicted on 5 January 1984 of an offence of committing
an act of indecency upon a
male (under section 81A of the
) in an incident that occurred on 25 September 1983. Three other similar
charges are recorded as being discharged or dismissed. The
conduct, subject of
the conviction consisted of the Respondent masturbating and having oral sex with
his adult male partner on a
bush track in front of a 12 year old boy.
Appeal from the ADT decision was in fact heard before a single judge in the
Supreme Court. The Appeal was dismissed. The judgment
(exhibit 12) noted that
the Respondent was sentenced to a three year sentence which was deferred on the
Respondent entering a good
behaviour bond in the sum $1,000. The judgment also
noted that the presence of the child when the indecent act occurred was at the
‘concurrence, if not at the instigation, of the
[Respondent]’.
judgment contains the following account given by the Respondent of the
“An indecent suggestion was made to the young person by me, he
agreed to the suggestion, I went and got my friend, came back
to the boy. The
boy then suggested that we go into the bush, led us to a side
He denied any touching. The applicant went on to say –
“... the boy seemed to give me the come-on, his penis was in a state
of erection. He then asked me whether my friend and I
did things together. I
replied, “Yes.” The boy then stated that he would like to watch. I
told the boy that I would
go and ask my friend and see what he said. I did so
and returned to the boy with my friend...I asked the boy where we could go and
he [showed us]...my friend and I then proceeded up the track, lowered our pants
and proceeded to masturbate ourselves. At this stage
the boy was about five
metres away and I noticed that he was watching us. The boy walked over towards
us, stood beside us watching.
I performed fellatio on
this stage the boy was just standing there rubbing his crotch. We didn’t
say anything to him and he didn’t say
anything to us. I then asked the
boy if he’d like to join us. He replied, “No” and walked back
turned, watched again for a few seconds and walked
further Inquiry was held by the Dental Board on 5 December 2008. The following
conditions were placed upon the Respondent’s
Registration as as a result
of this Inquiry:
dentist must only practice dentistry in his dental surgery rooms.
dentist must not provide treatment or consultation to any person under the age
of 16 years without the presence during the entire
treatment period, of the
parent, guardian or adult family member of the that person, and an adult female
dental nursing assistant,
approved by the Board.
dentist must not provide treatment or consultation to any person aged between 16
and 18 years without the presence during the
entire treatment period, of an
adult female dental nursing assistant approved by the Board.
“Conditions of Practice Sheet”, provided by the Board to the
dentist, will form a record for each of the patients under
18 years treated by
the dentist. It will record the patient’s name, address and date of
birth; the date, time and the treatment
provided; the name and signature of the
patient’s parent, guardian or adult family member and the name and
signature of the
adult female dental nursing assistant, certifying that they
have been present during the treatment period.
completed and signed “Conditions of Practice Sheet” must form part
of the patient’s records and be retained
pursuant to the provisions of the
Dental Practice Regulation. It is to be available for inspection by officers of
dentist’s practice manager
[[omitted] – the Respondent’s
is not an approved person under these conditions.
conditions will be effective from 5pm Friday, 5 December 2008, and be reviewed
at any time the Board is advised of any further
charges laid against the dentist
or when the charges are dealt with by the Court.
Board informed the HCCC of this outcome on 23 December 2008.
Board again wrote to the HCCC on 6 January 2009 advising that the
Respondent’s name was removed by the Board on 31 December
2009 pursuant to
Schedule 1, Part 5 Clause 26(1)
Dental Practice Act 2001
. This clause
read as follows:
26 Annual registration fee payable
(1) A registered dentist or registered dental auxiliary must, on or before a
date notified by the Board in writing to the dentist
or dental auxiliary at
least 1 month in advance, pay to the Board the annual registration fee
determined by the Minister in consultation
with the Board.
it appears that the reference should have been to Clause 27(1) which
27 Dentist’s or dental auxiliary’s name may
be removed from Register for non-payment
(1) The Board is to notify a registered dentist or registered dental
auxiliary who does not pay the annual registration fee on or
before the due date
that if the fee is not paid on or before a later date specified in the
notification the dentist’s or dental
auxiliary’s name will be
removed from the relevant Register.
Board therefore administratively removed the Respondent’s name from the
Register. His name was not cancelled off the Register
at that time.
HCCC wrote a
letter to the Respondent on 28 October 2009 advising
that a complaint had resulted from the sentenced imposed upon the Respondent
the Newcastle Local Court on 16 October 2009 (exhibit 16).
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence including
transcripts of various interviews/proceedings, police
records of interview with
both the Respondent and his victims in addition to reasons/judgment documents.
Police Statements/Interviews with victims
18 is a statement given to police by one of the Respondent’s victims. The
victim came to know the Respondent as the
Respondent and the victim’s
father had entered into a sexual relationship. Assaults upon this victim
occurred in the victim’s
bedroom at a time when he was under 16 years of
age. This victim also participated in a record of interview with the police. A
of this interview forms exhibit 21. The conduct involved indecent
touching of the victim and the watching of pornographic movies.
19 is a statement given to police by another of the Respondent’s victims.
He is the younger brother of the victim who
provided the statement which forms
exhibit 18. Assaults upon this victim occurred both in the victim’s
bedroom and at the Respondent’s
of age. The conduct involved indecent touching of the victim.
paragraph 27 of exhibit 19 the victim stated the following had occurred one
evening when his father hosted a barbeque at their
During the course of the evening I remember Doctor Ashleigh Jarrold
telling me he was Dentist up towards the top of town. He also
turned up in a
Brown 2 Door Jaguar, which I was very impressed with.
Police Statements/Interviews with the Respondent
22 is a record of an interview with the Respondent held in 2004. The Respondent
was questioned about alleged assaults on the
two victims mentioned above.
this interview the Respondent denied he had been in a relationship with the
father of the two victims and stated that he only
knew the Respondent from their
‘cathedral’. Later
in the interview the Respondent stated he had
been to the victim’s home on one occasion. The Respondent denied all of
the allegations
of indecent assaults made by the two victims stating that they
‘Totally untrue’
‘It didn’t happen at all’ or
in response.
Respondent stated he did not in fact remember whether or not he had met the two
victims, although he was aware that their father
had some children.
appears from the documentation before the Tribunal that police reinvestigated
these matters in 2008 (exhibit 23 and 24).
HCCC File Note
dated 16 April 2009
file note created by a HCCC Investigator recoded a telephone conversation with a
police officer who stated that charges of indecent
assault with which the
Respondent had been previously charged would now proceed as the witnesses were
now giving evidence (exhibit
Certificates of
Certificates
of Conviction issued by the District Court for the convictions detailed in the
Particulars form exhibit 32. As sentenced
by the District Court. The earliest
release date for the Respondent appears to the Tribunal to be 16 September 2012,
with the sentence
expiring on 16 September 2014. These sentences (apart from the
sentence for Count 6) were increased by the Court of Criminal Appeal
Crown Appeal. The details of his current sentence are set out elsewhere.
Proceedings on Sentence in the District Court
of the District Court proceedings formed exhibits 33, 34 and 35. From the
transcripts it would appear that the Respondent
was in custody by at least 13
October 2009.
transcript also reveals that the guilty pleas of the Respondent came
‘on the doorstep of the court’
(page 14 – T13/10/09).
details of count eight recorded by the District Court Judge should be recounted.
Pages 17 to 20 of T 16/10/09 record the following
I come now to count eight, which counts one and two are part with their
completely different sentence regime is unquestionably the
most serious of all
these matters. The facts in relation to count eight are as follows: On 6
August 2009 a police officer posing
as a fifteen year old boy and using a
particular pseudonym created an account on a website known as www.gaydar.com.
The police officer
logged into the site on 10 August 2009 and was contacted that
day by another user of that service who went by the name of
Ashmike in fact was the offender. The offender sent to
his correspondent (the police officer), a photograph of him, the offender,
his homosexual partner, MO, on that date, with a message, “Two guys, 45
and 57, into threesomes with young guys... If interested
message us back.”
The police officer sent a return message noting that he was new to such
activities but was happy to chat.
The offender replied that he was,
“Happy to help you learn all the fun things about MM sex.” I take
the description
of ‘MM sex’ to mean male to male sex. The offender
provided his hotmail e-mail address and invited [the police officer]
with him via the MSN system.
On 11 August 2009, the police officer participated in an MSN chat with the
offender. In that communication the offender listed the
sexual practices he
enjoyed and offered to introduce the police officer to such activities. In
subsequent MSN chats with the offender,
the police officer posed as a fifteen
year old school boy who lived with his parents near Wyong, on the Central Coast.
He gave the
date of his sixteenth birthday as 30 April 2010.
On 20 August 2009 the police officer uploaded a photograph of a young boy
to the “profile” that described him to other
users of the chat
service. The offender then chatted with the police officer on that line,
commenting on that same day, “Great
pic!”. The offender then
communicated with the police officer through online chat facilities constantly
between the first
communication on 10 August 2009 to 16 September 2009. These
chats occurred on the following dates in August 2009: tenth, eleventh,
twentieth, twenty-fourth, twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, twenty-eighth and
thirty-first; and in September 2009 on first, second, third,
sixth, eighth,
ninth, eleventh, fourteenth and sixteenth. During these chats the offender
initially discussed television, sport,
school and career options and so on with
the police officer.
On 26 August 2009 the offender told the police officer he was watching two
males masturbate via live webcam. On 28 August 2009 the
offender referred to
his social plans and told the police officer he wished he could take him with
him. He said he would take the
police officer to lunch or dinner and then to a
hotel room. The offender went on to suggest that the police officer needed a
teacher and that he, the offender, would love to show the police officer
how much fun he could have. The offender began addressing
his correspondent as
On 31 August 2009, while chatting on the internet with the police officer,
the offender changed his profile image to a photograph
of his own penis. This
photograph was transmitted to the police officer and visible to him for about
thirty seconds. The profile
image then reverting to a photo of the offender and
his homosexual partner, MO. That activity is reflected in the offence contained
on one of the forms one to count six.
Over ensuing chats the offender introduced the topic of sex with ... with
increasing frequency. In a chat of 2 September 2009, the
offender referred to
various sexual activities in which he had participated with a number of males
simultaneously and told the police
officer, “You would love it”, and
offered to help the police officer in his introduction to such things,
the time comes”. But, “One on one” at first
rather than in a group setting. At the end of the chat on that day
the offender
sent to the police officer an, “Emoticon”, which depicted two
computer generated figures engaging in fellatio.
On 3 September 2009 the offender told the police officer that he hoped to
get down to Terrigal, taking a room at the Crowne Plaza
Hotel in the near
future, with the intention of seeing the police officer. The offender went on
to say that the police officer could
meet him alone at the hotel, or “or
meet ‘both of us’.” Being a reference to his partner, MO.
they could participate in any sexual activity the police officer would
like. The offender described some of the activities to the
police officer,
including asking the police officer about the size of his own penis. The
offender indicated that he and the police
officer would need three hours
together at the hotel. The plan to meet the police officer was discussed in
subsequent communications
with the offender offering to teach the police officer
any sexual practice he wished to learn.
On 9 September 2009 the offender told the police officer that he had told
his homosexual partner, MO, about his plans to meet the
police officer in
Terrigal and that MO told the offender that he could not meet the boy due to the
offender’s own court cases
that were coming up in three weeks time (that
being a reference to the trial date fixed in relation to the 2008 charges).
On 14 September 2009 the offender said that he and the police officer
could meet after the court case. He addressed the police officer
‘baby’ and ‘sexy’ in that communication.
The final communication between the offender and the police officer took
place on 16 September 2009 and during that chat the offender
gave the police
officer some information about obtaining pornography from the internet and
described himself as masturbating while
thinking about particular sexual acts
with his imagined fifteen year old correspondent. The surveillance camera
lawfully installed
by police in the offender’s Hamilton home recorded the
offender masturbating as he chatted with the police officer during their
communications.
Transcript records that the Respondent did not give evidence before the District
Court. The Judge remarked upon the fact that
the Respondent appeared to consider
the sexual abuse of children, especially boys, as entirely acceptable and
desirable and had expressed
views to his internet correspondents that they
should do likewise. The Judge also commented that the Respondent had shown
’absolutely no remorse at all for these various offences’
The Judge further commented that as far as he could see the guilty pleas had
come from simple expediency rather than a sense of
Judge expressed the following view at page 23 of the transcript for 16 October
For a man who has been interested in this kind of aberrant sexual activity
for decades, in my view, his prospects of rehabilitation
are either nil or close
page 8 of the transcript for 16 October 2009 the Judge makes the following
comments with respect to Count 3:
[the Respondent]
described in detail encounters he said he had
had with male children and referred to such acts as smearing faeces upon
children, urinating
upon children, performing anal sex upon children, causing
pain to the extent that particular children screamed in pain. The offender
referred in these chats to the sexual pleasure he obtained from seeing children
screaming or whimpering in pain.
page 8 - 9 of the transcript for 16 October 2009 the Judge makes the following
comments with respect to Count 4:
On 6 October 2006 the offender had an extended conversation with this
[a person on line known as “King Pin”]
which the two exchanged photographic files including one the offender sent
depicting the offender’s homosexual partner,
a man who I will describe as
by his initials, MO, performing fellatio on the offender. During the
communication, the offender told
his correspondent that he liked young boys and
some internet chat ensued between the two of them as to how young boys were that
offender had had homosexual intercourse with. The offender replied,
“Fourteen”. “King Pin” asked the offender
this question,
“Do U rape them hard?” The offender responded on the internet,
“Oh yeah baby”.
page 9 of the transcript for 16 October 2009 the Judge makes the following
comments with respect to Count 5:
Count 5 is a similar kind of charge, again internet pornography chat. In
this instance the offender’s correspondent was a young
teenage male who
lived in England. This individual went by the user name of
“Ashes”’ and gave his age as sixteen
“Ashes” and the offender often exchanged live web cam images showing
each masturbating or performing other acts
and in that footage, according to the
facts, “Ashes” appears to be sixteen years old. Again, the
investigating police
found saved records of the offender’s communications
with “Ashes” on his computer hard drive at Hamilton and on
laptop at his Darlinghurst apartment. Some of the communications between the
offender and “Ashes” refer to the torture
of children causing
children to bleed by forceful intercourse and the pleasure both the offender and
“Ashes” took in
causing children to scream in pain during sexual
acts performed on them.
page 12 of the transcript for 16 October 2009 the Judge makes the following
comments with respect to Count 6:
Going then to count 6, another of the offender’s internet
correspondents was a male who identified himself as
communication of 18 May 2008 the offender told
offender’s own homosexual partner, M O, had had sexual intercourse with a
boy in a stairwell of an apartment block.
Referring to this same boy, the
offender told
that this boy came to lunch at the home of the
offender and M O a few weeks ago and, “Everyone here fucked him on the
He could barely walk the next day”. The offender offered to share
photographs he had of those sexual acts and transmitted a
number of picture
image files over the internet to
four of which show a boy who
was subsequently identified by police and interviewed by them, engaging in
sexual acts with the offender
and other adult males
Court of Criminal Appeal Decision
Crown appealed the District Court decision on the basis that the sentences were
manifestly inadequate. The Appeal was heard in
the Court of Criminal Appeal on 8
February 2010. The judgment,
R v Jarrold
[2010] NSWCA 69
was handed down
on 3 May 2010 (exhibit 36).
Appeal was allowed by the Court of Criminal Appeal, the sentences on seven of
the eight counts were quashed and the sentences
increased. The earliest release
date allowed by the sentences of the Court of Criminal Appeal is 17 March 2015
and the latest release
date being 16 February 2017. The following facts recorded
in the Court of Appeal decision:
Counts 1 and 2
11 Counts 1 and 2 related to offences committed against one of a pair of
teenage brothers in the late 1970s. There was also a matter
on a Form 1 that was
to be taken into account on count 1 that related to the other brother. The
offences were alleged to have been
committed between 1 January 1978 and 31
August 1979. The respondent was not charged with the offences until 2009. The
younger brother,
, was born on
1965. His elder
, was born on
1964. At the date of the
offending the respondent was aged 26,
12 The brothers lived with their father after their parents separated.
They resided in the Verger’s Cottage of Christ Church
Cathedral in
Newcastle. Their father was a homosexual and various men came to the cottage.
One of these was the respondent. On one
occasion the boys were sent to bed so
that the adults could watch pornographic movies. At one stage the respondent
entered AB’s
bedroom and crouched beside the bed. He invited the boy to
come to his house and watch pornography. He then asked, “Would you
to suck your dick?” and the child agreed. The respondent took down the
child’s pyjama pants and commenced to
suck his penis. He continued until
the boy ejaculated into the respondent’s mouth. This conduct gave rise to
13 Several days later
went to the respondent’s
apartment. The respondent played him a pornographic film and while it was
playing asked him, “Do
you want your dick sucked again?” The child
agreed and the respondent fellated him until he ejaculated into the
respondent’s
mouth. This conduct gave rise to count 2.
14 The relevant Form 1 matter referred to an incident that occurred with
. He awoke one evening to find the respondent lying in his bed
fondling his, the child’s, penis. He continued this activity
respondent ejaculated. He then left the room.
15 The police executed a search warrant on one of the respondent’s
premises in October 2008. An unmarked disk was found in a
box located in the
hallway. The disk was named “Ashleigh’s files” and contained
6,791 images of young men involved
in sexual activity either alone or in company
with others. There were 129 images of boys between the age of 8 and 15 years who
either in a sexual position or engaging in sexual activity with other boys
or men. Most of these images according to the COPINE rating
system have a rating
between 6 and 9.
16 Searches were made of computer items and discs found in the
respondent’s properties. These revealed that the respondent had
involved in “chat rooms” using the name Ashleigh.
17 The respondent was involved in Internet communications with a male who
was aged 17 when the respondent first came in contact with
communications continued until the male was aged 21. This male was also charged
with offences. Saved on the respondent’s
computers were texts dating
between 24 March 2006 and 16 April 2008 arising from these communications. In
them the respondent described
sexual activity between himself and children
including degrading acts and anal intercourse. He indicated the pleasure he
from seeing children screaming and whimpering with pain. The possession
of this material gave rise to an offence on the Form 1 in
connection with this
18 This count related to an offence arising from a conversation the
respondent had with a male on a “chat room” on 6 October
communication involved discussions about having intercourse with under-aged
males. The material rates 10 on the COPINE
scale. The respondent kept an
electronic record of this communication and this gave rise to an offence on a
Form 1 in connection
with this count.
19 The respondent communicated with a young male, who went by the name of
“Ashes”. The male stated his age as 16 and that
he lived in England.
They exchanged live web-cam images showing them each involved in sexual
activity. The respondent saved records
of these communications. Some of them
refer to the torture of children, and the pleasure they gained from children
screaming in pain
during sexual acts. The respondent urged Ashes to have
intercourse with any child born of his sexual activity with a 13 year old
There are references to sadistic acts. The respondent’s possession of the
record of these communications gave rise to
an offence on the Form1 related to
this count.
20 On 6 August 2009 a police officer posing as an under age child,
“M”, created an account on a website which was visited
respondent under the name “Ashmike”. In effect the respondent
commenced to groom the police officer, who had stated
that he was aged 15, to
homosexual activity through their communications in a “chat room”.
There were numerous communications
between the two from 10 August 2009 to 16
September 2009. On 31 August 2009 the respondent changed his profile image to a
of his penis. This was visible to “M” for a brief period
of time. This activity gave rise to the offence on a Form 1
related to this
count. The communication gradually became more related to sexual activity, the
respondent telling “M”
of homosexual activity in which he was
involved and telling “M” that he “would love
21 On 3 September 2009 the respondent told “M” that he hoped
to go to Terrigal with the intention of meeting him and that
he could engage in
any sexual activity that he wished with the respondent. He described some of
these activities. The respondent
in later communications offered to teach
“M” any sexual activity in which he was interested.
22 On 9 September 2009 the respondent informed “M” that his
partner had told him that he could not meet “M”
because of his
pending court case. That was a trial in relation to the charges in counts 1 and
2. On 14 September 2009 the respondent
told “M” that they would meet
after the court case. He referred to “M” as “baby” and
The final communication between the two occurred on 16
September 2009 when the offender gave “M” information about
pornography from the Internet. A camera lawfully installed by police
in the respondent’s residence showed him masturbating
when he was
communicating with “M”.
Decision also identifies that a number of other offences were taken into
consideration on a ‘Form 1’ basis in the
sentencing process.
Documentary evidence from the
Respondent wrote to the Dental Board of NSW (as it then was) on 13 October 2008
advising that he had been charged with the indecent
assault of a male under the
age of 16 years in 1975 (exhibit 3). This same letter also disclosed that the
Respondent again faced
charges relating to the indecent assault of two boys
(aged 14 and 16) around 1976/7 and that these charges had been dismissed
‘some years ago’.
The letter stated that he was
‘horrified by these allegations’,
that he denied the
allegations and would
‘fight them with the utmost vigour’.
Respondent’s solicitors wrote to the Board on 2 December 2008 advising
that a fresh charge of Possess Child Pornography
pursuant to
section 91H(3)
had been laid against the Respondent on 26 November 2008.
(exhibit 26).
Court Attendance Notice records that this charge relates to 60 images of male
children under the age of 16 years found to be in
the possession of the
Respondent on 9 October 2008 (exhibit 27). The Statement of Facts prepared by
the investigating officer noted
that the children depicted in the photographs
were aged between nine and fifteen years. The photographs had been rated
to the levels known as the ‘Full COPINE’. This rating
consists of 10 levels. The Statement of Facts included the
In review of the 60 images, Strike Force Georgiana investigators can
indicate that the images are of the categorisation of Level 4
to 9 with at least
one image of penetrative anal intercourse performed by an adult male upon a male
child. There is also an image
of a male child having penetrative anal
intercourse with another male child.
The children recorded in these images are under the age of 16 years. The
true identity of these children which are depicted in these
images is not known
to investigating police in NSW. A number of the images range from black and
white to colour. They appear to
date from the 1970’s to present day. In
2003 and 2004 investigations were conducted in the United States of America and
regarding the dissemination and possession of child pornography
originating in Russia. As a result, large amounts of child pornography
located and persons charged. Many of the images located by investigators upon
this disc appear to have originated from Russian
internet sites. The disc
properties show that it was last updated on 9 January 2004.
COPINE Scale is defined as follows (exhibit 28):
Level 1 indicates images of children in non erotic, non sexual of children
playing but where the collector indicates an inappropriateness
collection,
Level 2 indicates Nudist images of naked – semi naked children
inappropriate nudist settings,
Level 3 indicates Erotica – Surreptitiously taken photographs of
children in play areas and other safe environments showing
either underwear or
varying degrees of nakedness,
Level 4 indicates Posing – Deliberately posed pictures of children
fully- partially clothed or naked (where the amount –
context and
organisation suggest sexual interest),
Level 5 indicates Erotic – Deliberately posing pictures fully
– partially clothed or naked sexualised or provocative poses,
Level 6 indicates Explicit Erotic posing – emphasising genital areas
where child is either naked, partially or fully clothed,
Level 7 indicates Explicit Sexual Activity involving touching, mutual and
self masturbation, oral sex and intercourse by child, not
involving an
Level 8 indicates Assault – Pictures of children being subject to a
sexual assault, involving digital touching, involving an
Level 9 indicates Gross Assault – grossly obscene pictures of sexual
assault, involving penetrative sex, masturbating or oral
sex involving an
Level 10 indicates Sadistic & or Bestiality (a) pictures showing
children being tied, bound, beaten, whipped or otherwise subject
to something
that implies pain. (b) pictures where an animal is involved in some form of
sexual behaviour with a child.
Documents relating to the
Respondent’s history of criminal charges and convictions
records regarding various charges faced by the Respondent over time came into
evidence. In 2004 the Respondent was charged
with three counts of indecent
assault on a male and these charges were dismissed on the basis no evidence was
offered. The Respondent
faced two counts of common assault in 2008. These
charges are recorded as being dismissed (exhibit 5). On 9 October 2008 the
faced 13 counts of Assault Male and Commit Act of Indecency.
Other documents in evidence
Code of Ethics and Conduct Guidelines published by the Australian Dental
Association (developed in April 1997 with amendments
in October 1998) forms
exhibit 38.
39 is a collection of reports in the media regarding the Respondent, the actions
taken by the Board and the criminal proceedings.
not the subject of a Particular of Complaint there are two letters from the
mother of a young boy treated by the Respondent
written to the Board in October
2009 (exhibit 40). The letter details the writer’s concern that
restrictions were not placed
upon the Respondent’s Registration as a
dentist earlier. She then details a conversation she stated occurred after
restrictions
were placed upon the Respondent’s Registration wherein she
made an appointment for a seven year old boy to receive treatment
Respondent. When she queried whether or not there were restrictions on the
Respondent’s practice she records in the
letter that she was told that
there were no restrictions. After a media article reported that the Respondent
had informed a man that
he obtained sexual pleasure from children screaming or
whimpering in pain, the same writer wrote a further letter providing details
a consultation that had occurred 18 months earlier when her son was aged five
and a half and attended the Respondent for treatment.
The Respondent wanted to
extract a tooth from the young boy without the use of anaesthesia. The writer
had refused permission for
the procedure.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which were supplemented by oral
submissions, more in the nature of answering questions
raised by the Tribunal. A
copy of the HCCC submissions is annexed hereto and marked with the letter
‘B’. The Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC.
Respondent’s Submissions
outlined above, the Respondent did not appear before the Tribunal and therefore
no submissions were received on his behalf other
than the concessions detailed
above regarding his accession to various Orders being made by the Tribunal.
Findings re Particulars
Tribunal relies upon the Certificates of Conviction in evidence and finds all of
the Particulars of Complaint established to the
Findings re Complaints
HCCC made submissions regarding Complaint One in paragraphs 31 to 35 of its
submission (annexure B). As indicated above the Tribunal
accepts the submissions
of the HCCC and specifically paragraphs 31 to 35. The Tribunal finds Complaint
One established.
HCCC made submissions regarding Complaint Two in paragraphs 36 to 76 of its
submission (annexure B). As indicated above the Tribunal
accepts the submissions
of the HCCC and specifically paragraphs 36 to 76. The Tribunal finds Complaint
Two established.
Considerations relevant to
HCCC made submissions regarding appropriate Orders in paragraphs 77 to 86 of its
submission (annexure B). As indicated above the
Tribunal accepts the submissions
of the HCCC and specifically paragraphs 77 to 86.
Tribunal accepts the reasons given by the Medical Tribunal in the matter of
HCCC v Dr Alex Simring
[2010] NSWMT 7 regarding the relevance of certain
conduct that may occur in a person’s private life being relevant to the
of whether they are a suitable person to hold Registration as a Health
Professional. If a Health Professionals is granted the privilege
of registration
they have an obligation to ensure that there is no reason for the community to
doubt the high standards of a regulated
profession.
Tribunal was reasonably satisfied that the conduct of the Respondent detailed in
the Particulars occurred in his private life.
The Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent by reason of its very nature demonstrates an
absence of qualities
compatible with professional practice. The conduct engaged
in by the Respondent over a period of approximately 35 years is in so
incompatible with the practice of dentistry.
is the Tribunal’s view that the Respondent is not an appropriate person to
practice dentistry or provide any other health
service, Further it would be
contrary to the public interest to allow the Respondent to practise dentistry or
provide any other health
nature of the offences for which the Respondent is now serving a term of
incarceration are heinous and cruel. The conduct involved
self-gratification
without any regard whatsoever for the wellbeing, physical and mental of his
young victims. The conduct of the
Respondent demonstrated significant abuse of
the power of an adult over a child. This type of power imbalance is akin to the
imbalance that exists between a practitioner and a patient by virtue of
that relationship.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent breached clause 3.1 of the
Australian Dental Association Code of Ethics and Conduct
Guidelines.
Tribunal concurs with the comments made by the sentencing judge with respect to
the characterisation of the Respondent’s
conduct. The Judge remarked upon
the long period of time over which the offences occurred, noting that these were
not a ‘one-off’
situation. The Judge remarked upon the fact that the
Respondent’s aberrant sexual behaviour occurred over many decades. He
commented in strong terms about the unlikelihood of the Respondent ever being
rehabilitated. Given that this Tribunal is not
just looking at conduct in the
context of membership of the community but as membership of a trusted profession
the Tribunal adopts
and amplifies these views.
beggars belief that the Respondent committed further criminal acts involving
‘children’ while on bail for extremely
serious child sex offences. A
trial was looming
large yet he still took the time to groom a
‘child’ on the internet. This is demonstrative of a lack of insight
highest order.
whole matter is compounded by the total lack of remorse displayed by the
Respondent.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent is not a suitable person to hold
registration as a health practitioner and is never
likely to overcome the
deficits in his character revealed by the conduct subject of the convictions.
the Respondent’s name had transitioned to the National Register this
Tribunal would have made an Order cancelling his name
from the Register. This is
certainly a matter where cancellation is required.
the reasons set out above, the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent poses
a substantial risk to the health of members of
the public and therefore makes a
Prohibition Order to the widest extent allowed under the
National Law
is no doubt the Respondent will face difficulties with respect to Recency of
Practice requirements under the National Registration
scheme introduced on 1
Tribunal orders (the Respondent is referred to as the Practitioner for the
purpose of these Orders being applied to the Register):
the National Board is required to record the fact that the Tribunal would have
cancelled the Practitioner’s registration
in the National Register had he
been registered as at the date of the decision in
HCCC v Jarrold [2011]
Practitioner is disqualified from being registered as a dentist or review of the
Prohibition Order until 16 February 2020.
the Practitioner is prohibited from providing any health service as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
until 16 February 2020.
After the expiry of the period of three years the Practitioner is permitted to
provide these health services
on the condition that he gains registration as a
health professional, at which time the relevant registration authority should
the further continuation of the Prohibition Order and/or conditions on
registration.
reprimand is issued in the terms annexed to
HCCC v Jarrold [2011]
which should be entered upon the Register if the Practitioner is granted
Registration as a Dentist under the
National Law
Respondent is ordered to pay the costs of the HCCC.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
Respondent and his legal adviser,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Dental Board of
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Dental Council of
New South Wales,
6) As the Board and Council may consider
appropriate.
Dated: 22 November
___________________ ___________________
Muller Ms Jacqueline
___________________ ___________________
Prof. Anthony Blinkhorn
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Submissions of the HCCC
Annexure C - Reprimand
Annexure D – Schedule
of Names Suppressed
HCCC v JARROLD
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS
Complaint dated 21 March 2011
Evidentiary Certificate (to be provided)
Letter from Dr Jarrold to the Board dated 13 October 2008
Letter from John Anthony Solicitors to the Board dated 16 October 2008 with
the following attachments at tabs 5, 6 & 7
Copy of Court Attendance Notice for charge number H35478349 for Dr Jarrold
listing charge sequence numbers 001 to 013
Copy of Criminal History for Dr Jarrold
Document titled ‘Facts in the matter of Ashleigh Jarrold”
Letter from the Board to the Commission dated 20 October 2008 notifying the
Commission that Dr Jarrold had been charged with indecent
Copy of the decision of the Section 72 Inquiry held by the Board with Dr
Jarrold on 17 November 2008
Letter from John Anthony Solicitors to the Board dated 3 December 2008 with
attachments to be submitted during the Section 72 Inquiry
held on 5 December
2008 at tabs 11 & 12
Decision of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New South Wales:
[Citation omitted as decision subject of suppression order]
Decision of New South Wales Supreme Court: [Citation omitted as decision
subject of suppression order]
Copy of decision of the Section 72 Inquiry held by the Board on 5 December
2008 about Dr Jarrold where conditions were placed on his
registration
Letter from the Board to the Commission dated 23 December 2008 notifying
the Commission of conditions placed on Dr Jarrold’s
registration
Letter from the Board to the Commission dated 6 January 2009 advising that
Dr Jarrold’s name had been removed from the register.
Copy of letter from the Commission to Dr Jarrold dated 28 October 2009
outlining the Commisson’s proposal to refer the matter
to the Director of
Proceedings under s.39(1)(a).
Copy of s.40 response from Dr Jarrold dated 5 November 2009
Statement of Victim 1 dated 23 September 1997
Statement of Victim 2 dated 26 March 2003
Statement of Victim 2 dated 24 September 2003
Statement of Victim 1 dated 29 May 2004
Record of Interview with Dr Jarrold conducted on 18 August 2004
Statement of Victim 2 dated 24 June 2008
Statement of Victim 2 dated 17 July 2008
Statement of Victim 1 dated 23 July 2008
Letter from John Anthony Solicitors to the Board dated 2 December 2008 with
attachments at tabs 27 & 28
Copy of Court Attendance Notice for charge number H35478349 for Dr Jarrold
listing charge sequence numbers 005 to 014
Copy of three page typewritten document titled ‘Facts in the matter
of Ashleigh Jarrold”
Commission file note dated 16 April 2009 titled ‘Spoke to Sgt Faber
from NSW Police’
Copy of Court Attendance Notice for charge number H38331175 for Dr Jarrold
listing charge sequence numbers 001 to 049
Copy of document titled ‘Facts in the matter of Ashleigh
Copy of Certificate of Conviction
Transcript of sentence proceedings dated 8 October 2009
Transcript of sentence proceedings dated 13 October 2009
Transcript of sentence proceedings dated 16 October 2009
R v Jarrold
[2010] NSWCCA 69
(3 May 2010)
Crimes Act, 1900
, no. 40, Rape and similar offences
Copy of the Australian Dental Association Code of Ethics and Conduct
Guidelines dated October 1998
Various media reports relating to the charges against Dr Jarrold
Copy of a letter from [Name omitted] to the Board dated 1 October 2009 with
copies of media reports about Dr Jarrold
Bundle of correspondence regarding concessions made by the Respondent as to
Complaints and Orders and confirming his non-appearance.
Letter to the Registry from John Anthony Solicitors for the Respondent
dated 20 May 2011
Written Submissions of the HCCC
Introduction
proceedings concern four complaints brought against Dr Ashleigh Edward Jarrold,
a dentist. The complaints have been made by
the Health Care Complaints
Commission (
the Commission
) pursuant to s 144 of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
the National Law
summary, the complaints are that Dr Jarrold has been convicted of eight criminal
offences in New South Wales, that he is not a
suitable person to hold
registration as a dentist, that he has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct by reason of the
conduct the subject of his convictions and
that he has been guilty of professional misconduct by reason of the conduct the
of his convictions. The particulars for each complaint are the
Commission seeks the following orders:
cancellation
of Dr Jarrold’s registration with a period of time set before which an
application for reinstatement can be made;
prohibition order in relation to health services generally for an unspecified
period of time; and
of the proceeding in favour of the Commission.
Commission seeks leave to withdraw Complaints 3 and 4, which concern the
allegations of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct.
The respondent has consented to the withdrawal of these complaints and, on the
basis that those complaints
will be withdrawn, has consented to:
that Complaints 1 and 2 have been made out; and
orders sought by the Commission as summarised in paragraph
non-publication order is sought as regards the names of various witnesses, in
particular, the boys who were the victims of the offences
committed by
Dr Jarrold.
Commission notes that the names of these witnesses have been redacted in most
places where they occur in the materials before
the Tribunal, but not in every
place. In any event, a non-publication order will have the same effect as such
Public interests underpinning the jurisdiction
Tribunal’s jurisdiction must be exercised bearing in mind the need to
protect the public and to maintain high standards
in the profession (see eg
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 637-638. Added to this, as
recognised by Basten JA in
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
, are the following important but indirect effects of a disciplinary
order in respect of a professional which must be considered when
determining the
appropriate protective order:
order reminds other members of the profession of the public interest in the
maintenance of high professional standards;
order may give emphasis to the unacceptability of the kind of conduct involved
in the disciplinary offence; and
speaking to the public at large, the order seeks to maintain confidence in the
high standards of the profession.
question of fitness to practice must be determined at the date of the hearing:
A Solicitor v NSW Law Society
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
. In determining
the question of fitness the whole of the conduct of the practitioner should be
considered:
(2002) NSWCA 111
reason of the seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of the
consequences, the evidence for a finding that a complaint is
made out must be
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
, 362-3. This does not
alter the fact that the standard of proof is the civil standard, that is, that
the Tribunal must be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities.
Court of Criminal Appeal has cautioned against the use of the term
“comfortably satisfied”:
Gianoutsos v Glykis
(2006) NSWLR
, 548-549 [51] (applied by the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales:
Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1 [10]). The
principle applies
to the quality or sufficiency of the evidence available, as Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane and Gaudron JJ held in
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
, 450 (emphasis added, references omitted):
strength of the evidence
necessary to establish a
fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
of what it is sought to prove.
Thus, authoritative statements have often been
made to the effect that clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary
so serious a matter as fraud is to be found”. Statements to
that effect should not, however, be understood as directed to the
principle requires that the Tribunal not hold itself to be
satisfied on the balance of probabilities without evidence of sufficient
strength, given the nature of the proceedings and the potential consequences to
Dr Jarrold.
Absence of Dr Jarrold from the
at least 30 September 2011, Dr Jarrold was represented by John Anthony
Solicitors Pty Ltd.
by letter dated 23 August 2011, John Anthony Solicitors advised the
Commission that Dr Jarrold did not wish to appear at
the hearing set down
before the Tribunal on 16 and 17 November 2011 and did not wish to be legally
represented before the Tribunal.
is uncontroversial that the Tribunal generally has the power to proceed in
Dr Jarrold’s absence “
as long as [Dr Jarrold] has been given
notice of the inquiry or appeal
”: s 167C(3) of the National Law,
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
for the following reasons, it is not procedurally unfair in the present matter
for the Tribunal to so proceed:
hearing was set down for 16 and 17 November 2011 at a directions hearing on 26
May 2011, which was attended by Dr Jarrold’s
representatives;
accordingly,
it can be inferred that Dr Jarrold has been aware since approximately 26
May 2011, or very soon thereafter, that the
hearing would take place on 16 and
17 November 2011;
material on which the Commission seeks to rely was served on
Dr Jarrold’s then legal representatives on or about 1 July
letter dated 5 July 2011, John Anthony Solicitors, on behalf of Dr Jarrold,
informed the Tribunal that Dr Jarrold admitted Complaints
two letters dated 2 September 2011 and 30 September 2011, John Anthony
Solicitors, on behalf of Dr Jarrold, informed the Commission
Dr Jarrold’s instructions to consent to the orders sought by the
Commission, which are summarised in paragraph
of these submissions; and
November 2011, Leanne Turner of John Anthony Solicitors attended a directions
(via phone) hearing before the Chairperson of the
Tribunal, at which these
matters were ventilated.
Accordingly,
Dr Jarrold has had an ample amount of time to appreciate the
Commission’s case and respond to it. He has been legally
represented
throughout, although his legal representatives will not attend the hearing. It
can therefore be inferred that he has
made a deliberate and informed decision to
consent to findings that complaints one and two are made out and to the orders
by the Commission as summarised in paragraph
Tribunal can thus be satisfied that it is not procedurally unfair to proceed to
hear the matter as listed. Further, the Tribunal
can give weight to
Dr Jarrold’s consent. However, the Commission accepts that it
nevertheless bears the onus of proof to the
standard, and that
the Tribunal should not make the findings or orders sought unless it is
satisfied to that standard that those findings
and orders are
appropriate.
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence (Sch 5D, cl 2 and s 167B of the
National Law). The Tribunal is thus not confined
to admissible evidence but must
bear in mind that there must be a fair trial (see, for example, Young JA in
Lindsay v HCCC
[2010] NSWCA at [34]-[35]).
summary, the Commission relies on the certificate of conviction dated 27 October
2009, which is at tab 32 of the folder of documents
served by the
Commission.
relation to Complaint 2, the Commission also relies on the remarks on sentence
made by Judge Hosking SC on 16 October 2009, which
remarks are at tab 35 of the
folder of documents served by the Commission.
noted above, despite the absence of Dr Jarrold, the Tribunal may proceed
with the hearing.
[w]here necessary, the Tribunal is entitled to draw ‘the
unfavourable evidentiary inference which absence from the witness box
HCCC v Leung
[2008] NSWNMT 29
[39], referring
Bowen-James v Walton
(unreported, NSWCA, Samuels, Meagher and Handley
JJA, 5 August 1991). In particular, where there is some explanation or
information
which could only be provided by Dr Jarrold, the Tribunal is
entitled to draw an inference that the evidence he would or could give
relation to that explanation or information would be unfavourable to him. This
is especially important in the Tribunal’s
the exercise of its protective jurisdiction [is] not ...
frustrated by any failure on the part of [Dr Jarrold] to provide [his]
of the matters alleged or of [his] current circumstances or future
HCCC v Leung
[2008] NSWNMT 29
[39]. See also
HCCC v Brown
[2011] NSWNMT 1
light of the evidence available to the Tribunal, the Commission submits that the
Tribunal will be satisfied that the evidence is
strong enough to substantiate,
on the balance of probabilities, the facts the subject of the particulars of
each of the complaints.
While the Commission accepts an admission made by an
absent practitioner must be accepted with some caution, as discussed below,
Dr Jarrold was legally represented at the time he made the admission, and
the Commission submits that he must be taken to have understood
the implications
of the admission.
finding that the particulars are established necessarily requires a finding that
Complaint 1, that Dr Jarrold has been convicted
of eight criminal offences in
New South Wales, has been made out. Accordingly, the Commission submits that the
Tribunal will be satisfied
that Complaint 1 has been made out.
relation to Complaint 2, that Dr Jarrold is not a suitable person to hold
registration as a dentist, the Commission submits that
the nature of the
offences the subject of the particulars, combined with the lengthy period of
time over which those offences were
committed and the recency of some of them,
especially in light of the remarks on sentence made by the sentencing judge,
with Dr Jarrold’s admission, is such that the Tribunal will
be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that Dr Jarrold
suitable person to hold registration as a dentist.
Admissions by
Tribunal is not
to conduct an inquiry (that is, it may make
protective orders without conducting such an inquiry) into a complaint which has
admitted: ss 149(b) and 167(2) of the National Law. However, even where
there is an admission in writing, the Tribunal
conduct an inquiry:
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
[59]. It is particularly likely to do
so where there is some lack of clarity to the admission, or issues raised as to
some particulars,
and where the practitioner does not attend, and is
unrepresented at, the hearing:
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
has admitted the facts particularised in relation to each of the complaints and
has also admitted Complaints 1 and 2: letter
from John Anthony Solicitors on
behalf of Dr Jarrold to the Tribunal dated 5 July 2011. He was legally
represented at the time he
made these admissions, and in fact, the admissions
were apparently made by his legal representative on his instructions.
Accordingly,
Dr Jarrold may be taken to have understood the implications of
his admission. This provides a significant distinction from
would, in the Commission’s submission, permit the Tribunal to rely on the
admissions made by Dr Jarrold’s legal representatives
instructions.
it is relevant that Dr Jarrold pleaded guilty in relation to all of the
offences the subject of the particulars of the complaints
before the Tribunal,
and these pleas were accepted by the District Court of New South Wales. While
the issues before the Tribunal
are not entirely concomitant with the issues
before the District Court, the guilty pleas made by Dr Jarrold in the
District Court
nevertheless gives the Tribunal further comfort in relying on
Dr Jarrold’s admissions in the Tribunal.
the Commission notes that there is no direct evidence from Dr Jarrold as to
the admissions and that Dr Jarrold has chosen
to neither attend or be
represented at the hearing.
Accordingly,
the Commission will proceed on the assumption that the Tribunal will conduct an
inquiry into the complaints.
Complaint 1
The practitioner has been convicted of eight criminal
offences in New South Wales:
[particulars set out]
particulars of Complaint 1 set out a list of offences of which Dr Jarrold
was convicted on 16 October 2009.
Commission relies on the certificate of conviction dated 27 October 2009,
at tab 32 of the folder of documents served by the Commission,
of each of the particularised offences.
certificate of conviction is sufficient for the Tribunal to find that all of the
particulars, and so Complaint 1 itself, is made
out. Accordingly, the Commission
submits that the Tribunal should so find.
Commission also relies on the remarks on sentence of Judge Hosking SC dated 16
October 2009, at tab 35 of the folder of documents
served by the Commission
(from p 261, using the folder’s global numbering), discussed in greater
detail in relation to Complaint
2. These remarks on sentence provide context to
the convictions, which will inform the orders to be made by the
Complaint 2 – facts underlying
particulars
The practitioner is not a suitable person to hold
registration as a dentist:
[particulars set out]
noted above, the particulars in respect of Complaint 2 are the same as the
particulars in respect of Complaint 1. The same factual
finding as to whether
the particulars are made out should be made in relation to Complaint 2 as is
made in relation to Complaint
more than simply the fact of the convictions must be established in order for
the Tribunal to be satisfied that Dr Jarrold
is not a suitable person for
registration as a dentist. It is therefore necessary to have regard to the Judge
Hosking SC’s
remarks on sentence dated 16 October 2009, at tab 35 of
the folder of documents served by the Commission (from p 261, using the
global numbering) and to other material which sheds light on the
relation to particulars 1(a) and (b) of Complaint 2, the relevant part of his
Honour’s remarks on sentence is set out at
pp 4-5 (pp 264-265 using
the global numbering). In brief, the offences involved Dr Jarrold engaging
in fellatio with a teenage boy,
who was approximately 13 years old at the time.
Dr Jarrold was in some way in a position of trust in relation to this boy,
he was a friend of the boy’s father.
Commission also relies on parts of the witness statement made by the victim of
the offences on 26 March 2003: tab 19 of the folder
documents served by the
Commission. In particular, the Commission makes reference to pp 4-6 of the
statement (pp 76-78 using the
global numbering), [27]-[35]. In these
paragraphs, the witness sets out the circumstances of the offences the subject
of particulars
1(a) and (b) of Complaint 2. Given Dr Jarrold’s
admissions, and his decision to file and serve no evidence in the present
proceeding,
he should be taken to accept the witness’s account in this
relation to particulars 1(c), (d) and (e) of Complaint 2, the relevant part of
his Honour’s remarks on sentence is set out
at pp 7-12 (pp 267-272 using
the global numbering). In brief, each offence relates to a distinct online chat
between Dr Jarrold and
another person. Each online chat involved the description
of sexual acts committed with children, some involving the infliction of
It is worth noting that Judge Hosking SC found “
that as disgusting as
this material was, ... it was a fantasy or ... these were fantasies from
[Dr Jarrold’s] mind, rather than
actual acts that ever happened to
any actual child
”: at p 10 (p 270 using the global numbering).
However, this was found to be irrelevant by the New South Wales Court of
R v Jarrold
[2010] NSWCCA 69
[53] per Howie J, with whom
McClellan CJ at CL and Harrison J agreed.
Ultimately,
his Honour found the crux of the criminality to lie in the fact that
Dr Jarrold, “
in committing his perverted thoughts to print across
the internet, meant that those thoughts could have been saved by the receivers
onto a computer hard disc of their own and perhaps been further disseminated to
others interested in this perverted material, or
even worse, published generally
on the internet available to anyone who sought it out
”: at p 11 (p 271
using the global numbering).
relation to particular 1(f) of Complaint 2, the relevant part of Judge Hosking
SC’s remarks on sentence is set out at pp
14-17 (pp 274-277 using the
global numbering). In brief, this offence relates to “
[s]ome 129 ...
images contained in 115 files [which] depicted boys aged between eight and
fifteen years of age, either posing nude
in a sexualised stance or engaging in
sexual acts with other male children, boys, or with men
”: at p 15 (p
275 using the global numbering).
relation to particular 1(g) of Complaint 2, the relevant part of his
Honour’s remarks on sentence is set out at pp 17-20
(pp 277-280 using the
global numbering). The offence involved Dr Jarrold, over a course of about
five weeks, engaging in online interactions
with a police officer who was posing
as an underage boy. During the last three weeks of this period, Dr Jarrold
discussed sexual
matters with the police officer (pp 18-19, pp 278-279 using the
global numbering), sending sexual images to the police officer (p
using the global numbering) and making plans to meet the underage boy Dr Jarrold
believed the police officer to be (pp
19-20, pp 279-280 using the global
numbering).
is notable that Dr Jarrold engaged in this course of conduct while on bail
in relation to other sexual charges: at p 21 (p 281
using the global numbering).
This is of relevance to both the general finding the Tribunal is to make in
relation to Complaint 2,
as well as to the orders sought by the Commission.
relation to particular 1(h) of Complaint 2, the relevant part of Judge Hosking
SC’s remarks on sentence is set out at pp
12-13 (pp 272-273 using the
global numbering). In brief, this offence involved Dr Jarrold sending
“a number of picture image
files over the internet ..., four of which show
a boy ... engaging in sexual acts with [Dr Jarrold] and other adult
at p 12 (p 272 using the global numbering).
Honour held the following:
[T]he crown has submitted that the
criminality of this matter includes the fact that once [Dr Jarrold]
transmitted these images to
Dane, they thereby became available through internet
sharing or via internet download and hard copy distribution to any individual
likely to find that activity appealing. The crown has submitted, correctly in my
view, that the images are now electronically available
in an entirely
uncontrolled way and will remain so. The crown has submitted in addition,
correctly in my view, ‘it is impossible
to gauge the harm potentially done
to the boy whose photographs were disseminated by [Dr Jarrold].’
general, the Commission submits that Judge Hosking SC’s comments as to the
criminality of the various offences may be accepted
by the Tribunal, especially
in light of the decision of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, on an
appeal on sentence by
the Crown, to increase the sentences given to
Dr Jarrold in relation to all but one of the counts for which
Dr Jarrold was convicted:
R v Jarrold
[2010] NSWCCA 69
the folder of documents served by the Commission). In general, the reasons of
the Court of Criminal Appeal support the
remarks made by Judge Hosking SC
as to the level of criminality involved in the offences.
Commission notes that much of the material in the folder of documents served by
the Commission, including some of the matters
referred to by Judge Hosking SC in
his Honour’s remarks on sentence, relates to offences allegedly committed
by Dr Jarrold
in relation to which he has not been convicted and which are
the subject of the complaints before the Tribunal. The Commission
does not, and submits that the Tribunal would not, rely on the
facts relating to
those alleged offences.
“Suitable person”
factual evidence summarised above provides the groundwork in order for the
Tribunal to consider the substance of Complaint 2,
being whether Dr Jarrold
is a suitable person for registration as a dentist. It is also necessary to
consider other factors.
is the question of what is a “suitable person” in this context.
of the words “suitable” or “unsuitable” are defined in
terms in the National Law. However, reference
may be made to s 55 of the
National Law. Sub-section (1) of that provision relevantly
A National Board may decide an individual is not a
suitable person to hold general registration in a health profession if
(b) having regard to the individual’s criminal history to the extent
that is relevant to the individual’s practice of
the profession, the
individual is not, in the Board’s opinion, an appropriate person to
practise the profession or it is not
in the public interest for the individual
to practise the profession; or
(h) in the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other
(i) not a fit and proper person for general registration in the
profession; or
this provision does not provide a general definition of “suitable
person”, referring, as it does, to the opinion
of the relevant National
Board, it plainly provides guidance as to what it means to be a suitable person
in the context of the legislation
and accordingly may be used in the
Tribunal’s consideration of Complaint 2.
relation to s 55(1)(b) of the National Law, it is notable that the criminal
history of the practitioner must be “
relevant to the individual’s
practice of the profession
” in order for the Tribunal to find the
practitioner is not a suitable person to hold the relevant registration. In
HCCC v Dr Alex Simring
[2010] NSWMT 7, a case concerning the
conviction of the respondent of child pornography offences, the Medical Tribunal
of New South
Wales considered the authorities relevant to the question of where
criminal conduct “
” the practice of a profession,
and held that the offences constituted “
conduct ‘relating to the
practice of medicine’
”: at [75]-[76]. It is helpful to set out
those paragraphs of the Tribunal’s reasons:
The Tribunal is
of the view that the conduct of the respondent in accessing and possessing child
pornography, while done in his private
life, by reason of its seriousness and
reprehensible nature demonstrates an absence of qualities compatible with
professional practice.
The Tribunal further finds that the terms and effect of the legislative
conditions by which the respondent is now bound place restrictions
practice of medicine and is therefore conduct ‘relating to the practice of
the legislation which was considered by the Medical Tribunal in
was not the National Law, and the legislative test was not in precisely the same
terms as the test pursuant to s 55(1)(b) of the
National Law, the reasons
given by the Medical Tribunal are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration
of Complaint 2 in the
present matter.
while the legislative test is not in precisely the same terms as the test
pursuant to s 55(1)(b) of the National Law, its meaning
is much the same.
As a matter of plain language, conduct “
relating to the practice
” a profession must be conduct which is “
relevant to the
... practice of [a] profession
by drawing on a range of authorities relevant to a number of professions, as the
Medical Tribunal did, the reasoning is
plainly intended to reflect a test more
general than that applicable only to the medical profession or to the test
pursuant to the
Medical Practice Act 1992
Commission respectfully submits that the reasoning of the Medical Tribunal in
is correct and may be adopted by the Tribunal.
Accordingly,
the criminal conduct the subject of the convictions particularised in Complaint
2 meets the tests implicit in [75]-[76]
, set out above. In the
first place, it can be said that the conduct,
while done in [Dr
Jarrold’s] private life, by reason of its seriousness and reprehensible
nature demonstrates an absence of
qualities compatible with professional
” In other words, the criminal convictions are relevant to
Dr Jarrold’s practice of dentistry because they relate to such
serious and reprehensible conduct.
terms and effect of the legislative conditions by which the
respondent is now bound
” referred to Dr Simring’s
registration pursuant to the
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act
at [4]). It is possible, perhaps even likely,
that Dr Jarrold will be subject to registration pursuant to that Act upon
his release
from prison. It is also conceivable that the State of New South
Wales would apply for an extended supervision order pursuant to the
(Serious Sex Offenders) Act 2006
(NSW), which would result in further
conditions being imposed on Dr Jarrold.
Accordingly,
the Commission submits that, upon his release from prison, Dr Jarrold is
likely to be bound by legislative conditions
which place restrictions on his
practice of dentistry. Again, this supports the conclusion that his criminal
convictions are relevant
to his practice of dentistry.
Tribunal must then consider whether the convictions are such that
Dr Jarrold is not “
an appropriate person to practise
dentistry, or whether “
it is not in the public interest for [Dr
Jarrold] to practise
” dentistry. The Commission submits that the
Tribunal would be satisfied that either or both of these tests are met.
[2009] NSWNMT 18
is useful in considering the application of
those tests. Once again, although the case was heard by a different tribunal,
and considered
legislation that was not the National Law, it is nevertheless
useful in the application of the present legislative test.
, the relevant test was whether the criminal convictions of
Mr O’Grady rendered him “
unfit in the public interest to
practise nursing
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
s 44(1)(a).
Once again, while this test is not the same in its terms as the
test pursuant to
of the National Law, it has effectively the
same meaning.
were two aspects to the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal’s consideration of
Mr O’Grady’s fitness to practice
as a nurse: the nature of the
offence of which he had been convicted and his present response to that
conviction (it being necessary
to determine fitness as at the date of the
, [34]-[40].
relation to the former, the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal summarised the
circumstances of the offence significant to sentencing:
at [34]. Those included
the breach of trust, the offence being “
an exercise of
self-gratification
”, that he “
pursued his act regardless of
any psychosexual damage to his victim
”, that he “
insight even years later into the essence of his offending behaviour
and the fact that “
[h]is offence was an act of grooming
a disproportionate power play
” between an adult “
his mid-twenties, and a seven or eight year old
characteristics are exhibited in relation to the offences for which
Dr Jarrold has been convicted. In relation to particulars
1(a) and (b),
there was a breach of trust, in the sense that Dr Jarrold was a friend of
the victim’s father (although the Commission
accepts that the breach of
trust would not be as severe as in
, where the victim was
a young boy who idolised his adult cousin
”: [34(1)]). The
offences all appear to be “
an exercise of self-gratification
pursued ... regardless of any psychosexual damage to his
”. The latter is especially stark in relation to particulars
1(a), (b) and (h), in relation to the last of which the relevant
sentence are extracted at [
least one of Dr Jarrold’s offences was explicitly one of grooming
(particular 1(g)), and other offences exhibited aspects
of grooming. For
example, in relation to particular 1(b), the act of showing the teenage
victim a pornographic film might be seen
as grooming, and in relation to
particular 1(h), the suggestion that the victim portrayed in the photographs the
subject of the offence
was a regular visitor to Dr Jarrold’s home
also suggests some grooming behaviour.
the very nature of the offences committed against known boys involves
a disproportionate power play
(at [38]), “
the standing of the [dentistry]
profession and public confidence in it are at stake here and these are relevant
considerations when
determining the question of
” appropriateness to
practise dentistry or whether it is in the public interest that Dr Jarrold
practise dentistry. Further,
[t]he public has to be confident in the
standards of behaviour expected of [dentists] and [dentists] are entitled to
expect that only
those who meet those standards enter or remain in the
profession.
not conclusive proof, the news articles included at tab 39 of the folder of
documents served by the Commission indicate the
likely adverse effect on public
confidence if Dr Jarrold were permitted to continue to practice as a
an indication of how other dentists might view Dr Jarrold’s continued
registration as a dentist, reference may be made to
The Code of Ethics
and Conduct Guidelines
” issued by the Australian Dental Association
(New South Wales Branch) Limited in April 1997, with amendments in October 1998:
tab 38 of the folder of documents served by the Commission. In particular, the
following clause is relevant:
3.1 Dentists should act at all
times in a manner that will uphold and enhance the integrity and dignity of the
profession.
reflects and confirms the importance of the concept of public confidence
referred to in
Accordingly,
the Commission submits that, in all the circumstances, the Tribunal will be
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that, at least at the time of the
commission of the various offences, Dr Jarrold was not an appropriate
person to practise dentistry
or that it is not in the public interest for him to
practise dentistry.
is then necessary to consider whether the same can be said as to the present
appropriateness or otherwise of Dr Jarrold practising
as a dentist. The
Commission submits that the Tribunal will be satisfied that it can extrapolate
from the time of the offences to
the present time, for the following
offences took place over a very long period of time: from 1975 to 2009. This
suggests that the conduct is not a one-off, but a
more significant part of the
way Dr Jarrold has lived his life. As Judge Hosking SC found,
[f]or a man who has been interested in this kind of aberrant sexual
activity for decades, in my view, his prospects of rehabilitation
are either nil
or close to nil
”: tab 35 of the folder of documents served by the
Commission, at p 23 (p 283 using the global numbering). Accordingly, the
Tribunal can comfortably extrapolate from Dr Jarrold’s
appropriateness or otherwise to practice dentistry at the times of the
to the same question as at the present time.
Of particular
relevance, Dr Jarrold committed the offence the subject of particular 1(g)
whilst on bail in relation to charges for other sexual offences
circumstances did not cause him to reconsider committing such offences, the
Tribunal may be satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that, if at liberty at
present, he would not be an appropriate person to practise as a dentist or that
it would not
be in the public interest to allow him to so practise.
Dr Jarrold pleaded guilty to the criminal offences, and has made the
relevant admissions before the Tribunal, Judge Hosking
SC found that
[h]is pleas of guilty, as far as I can see, have not come from any
sense of remorse, but from simple expediency
”: tab 35 of the folder of
documents served by the Commission, at p 21 (p 281 using the global numbering).
Dr Jarrold will not
attend the hearing and, while he has made relevant
admissions, he has not “
put [an] explanation of his behaviour before
the Tribunal
at [39]. In
this was taken to be an indicator of the nurse’s lack of remorse. It is
open to the Tribunal (and the Commission submits the
Tribunal will be so
satisfied) to draw an inference that his admissions in the instant case, like
his pleas of guilty, “
have not come from any sense of remorse, but from
simple expediency
The Commission respectfully submits
that the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal was correct in taking lack of remorse
and attempts at
rehabilitation into account in
those factors may be taken into account by the Tribunal in relation to
Dr Jarrold. In particular, the Commission submits
that the Tribunal will be
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Dr Jarrold’s lack of
remorse or attempts at rehabilitation,
or failure to demonstrate remorse or any
attempt at rehabilitation (including a complete failure to adduce any evidence
the present proceeding), means it is not appropriate that he practise
as a dentist or that it is not in the public interest that
he so practise.
the alternative to the reasoning outlined above, the same reasoning can be used
to ground a finding that Dr Jarrold is not a suitable
person to practise as
a dentist because he is “
not a fit and proper person for general
registration
” as a dentist: National Law, s 55(1)(h)(i).
Accordingly, the Commission submits that the Tribunal will be comfortable
that Dr Jarrold is not a suitable person to practise as a
Appropriate orders
disciplinary powers of the Tribunal are contained in Pt 8, Div 3, Subdiv 6 of
the National Law.
149 of the National Law provides that the “
Tribunal may exercise any
power conferred on it by [the] subdivision
” if the matter is proved or
admitted in writing.
Commission submits that the appropriate order in this case, for the protection
of the public, is for the Tribunal to cancel Dr
registration as a dentist pursuant to s 149C(1) of the National Law on the basis
of either or both of the following:
Dr Jarrold has been convicted of eight criminal offences in New South Wales and
that the circumstances of these offences render
him unfit in the public interest
to practise as a dentist (para (c)); and
Dr Jarrold is not a suitable person for registration as a dentist (para
is a number of reasons why the imposition of conditions is inappropriate. In the
first place, Dr Jarrold is currently serving
a sentence of imprisonment.
His non-parole period will not expire until 16 March 2015:
[2010] NSWCCA 69
[78]. Presumably, he is unable to practise as a
dentist while in prison, and so, if conditions were imposed, he would be unable
practically demonstrate compliance with them.
imposition of conditions is further inappropriate given the absence of
Dr Jarrold and any representative from the Tribunal (and
so the inability
of the Tribunal to assess the appropriateness of any conditions).
all the circumstances, the only appropriate course is for the Tribunal to
de-register Dr Jarrold.
is also appropriate that the Tribunal make an order that Dr Jarrold not be
permitted to apply for re-registration for a minimum
period of at least five
years. As a result of the decision of the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal, Dr Jarrold will not be
eligible for parole until at least
16 March 2015, and there is no guarantee that he will be released on parole
on that date. It is
possible that he would not be released at all until the end
of his sentence, being 16 February 2017. It is appropriate that the period
relation to which any order is made that Dr Jarrold not be permitted to
apply for re-registration end after Dr Jarrold might be
released on
149C(5)(a) of the National Law permits the Tribunal, if it suspends or cancels a
practitioner’s registration, to prohibit
the person from providing health
services for a period to be specified by the Tribunal, if the Tribunal
is satisfied the person poses a substantial risk to the health of
members of the public
”. If the Tribunal makes the order, as sought by
the Commission, to cancel Dr Jarrold’s registration as a dentist, the
Commission submits that it is also appropriate to make an order pursuant to
s 149C(5)(a). The Commission notes Dr Jarrold’s
consent to such
Psychologists Tribunal of New South Wales has considered the relevant test
(albeit pursuant to
Psychologists Act 2001
but the test is in the same terms) in two cases:
HCCC v Moore
HCCC v Biersteker (No 2)
[2007] NSWPST 4
. Specifically, the Psychologists Tribunal has found that
substantial
” in this context “
requires something
more than a bare risk but is less stringent than special, exceptional or
Biersteker (No 2)
The Commission respectfully submits that this is the appropriate test and may be
applied by the Tribunal.
the circumstances of the present case, and particularly in light of
Dr Jarrold’s offending behaviour while on bail for other
offence charges (which suggests a certain lack of control), the Commission
submits that there is “
more than a bare risk
” to the health
of members of the public if Dr Jarrold were permitted to provide health
services. Accordingly, the Commission
submits that a prohibition order, for a
term to be specified by the Tribunal, is
appropriate.
Commission seeks its costs, in accordance with the reasons set out by the
Tribunal in
HCCC v Gower
[2011] NSWNMT 17
[65]-[76], with which the
Commission respectfully concurs.
Mr Ashleigh Edward Jarrold you have demonstrated by your behaviour and
subsequent criminal convictions that you are not a suitable
person to hold
registration as a dentist.
To be a dental professional carries with it both rights and responsibilities.
In particular, registration ensures that the community
will hold you in high
regard, be confident in your personal qualities and trust you to treat them
professionally with care and kindness.
The details revealed in your court case shatter the sense of trust any
reasonable person could expect from a caring dental professional.
You admit to
enjoying children screaming in pain during sexual acts.
In electronic texts you describe smearing faeces on children, urinating on
children, performing anal sex on children and causing pain
to the extent that
children screamed or whimpered in pain.
As a family general dental practitioner for over thirty years, you will have
treated many children. You thereby had every opportunity
to usurp your position
of trust and cause unnecessary pain to young patients.
Your behaviour in trying to groom an underage individual to engage in sexual
activity with you, whilst on bail in relation to charges
for other sexual
offences on children, demonstrates a significant lack of judgement and no
insight into your indecent, reprehensible
and shameful behaviour. It also shows
a lack of remorse and a cavalier attitude to the safety of young children.
It is profoundly disturbing to this Tribunal that a dentist admits to conduct
that amounts to the torturing of children and enjoyment
of their pain.
You have a long history of abusing children without any indication of
self-control. The Tribunal considers that you are not a suitable
person to hold
registration as a dentist and that you are unlikely to ever be a suitable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (827 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter