URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/271.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Huang v Champion Homes Sales Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 271; (30 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Huang v Champion Homes Sales Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 271
Hearing Date(s):
19 May and 18 July 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Appeal Panel
J Redfern PSM, Senior Member
D Goldstein, Senior Member
(1) The time for the appellant to lodge a Notice of Appeal
from the orders of the Tribunal made on 6 December 2024 is extended to
(2) To the extent leave to appeal is
required, leave is refused.
(3) The appeal is
(4) If a party to the appeal wishes to
make an application for costs, the following directions apply:
the party applying for costs (the costs applicant) must, within 14 days after
the publication of this decision, give the other
party (the costs respondent)
and the Registry any submissions and documents the costs applicant intends to
rely on in relation to
the application, including on the question as to whether
costs should be fixed or assessed;
(b) the costs respondent must,
within 14 days after receiving the submissions and documents of the costs
applicant, give the costs
applicant and the Registry any submissions and
documents the costs respondent intends to rely on in response to the application
(c) the costs applicant must, within 7 days after
receiving the submissions and documents of the costs respondent, give the costs
respondent and the Registry any additional submissions and documents the costs
applicant intends to rely on in response to the costs
respondent’s
submissions and documents;
(d) the parties are to include, in their
written submissions concerning the application for costs, their submissions
they consider that a hearing in relation to the application can be
dispensed with pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Catchwords:
APPEAL – Home Building – Australian Consumer Law claims –
claims about unconscionable conduct and unfair contract
terms – whether
Amended Grounds of Appeal raise questions of law – grounds not established
– appeal seeks to raise
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
(Commonwealth).
Contracts Review Act 1980
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulations 2000
Fair Trading Act 1997
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
Legal Professional Uniform Law 2014 (NSW)
NCAT Procedural
Direction 7 – Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (Gen AI).
Cases Cited:
ACCC v TPG Internet
[2013] HCA 54
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd v
Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
Bimson, Roads &
Maritime Services v Damorange Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 734
Collins v Urban
NSWCATAP 17
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
Dranichnikov v Minister
for Immigration and Migration Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
FVA v Commissioner for
Police, NSW Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAP 127
Jackson v NSW Land & Housing
Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP 22
John Prendergast & Vanessa Prendergast v
Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
Kostas v HIA Insurance
Services Pty Ltd
(2010) 241 CLR 390
[2010] HCA 23
Lettau v Artwork Transport
[2017] NSWCATAP 14
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 39
Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services v Smith
(2017) 95 NSWLR 597
[2017] NSWCA 206
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Yuen v Thom
[2016] NSWCATAP 243
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Pei Huang (Appellant)
Champion Homes Sales Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-represented)
Respondent (Mr Vardas, authorised
representative)
File Number(s):
2025/00005396
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Not applicable
Date of Decision:
06 December 2024
R Alkadamani, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2023/00373248
2023/00369998
REASONS FOR DECISION
appeal proceedings arise out of a decision of the Consumer and Commercial
Division of the Tribunal dated 6 December 2024 in
which the appellant’s
case was dismissed after a hearing.
appellant is the registered proprietor of land in a Sydney suburb (the
property). In 2021, she engaged the respondent to undertake
building work on the
property under a residential building contract. On 4 October 2023, the
respondent commenced proceedings for
$94,857 against the appellant for unpaid
variations and adjustments under the contract. On 26 October 2023, the appellant
proceedings against the respondent for $456,979, claiming she was not
required to pay $160,000 and seeking orders that the respondent
pay $76,979 and
a penalty of $220,000.
proceedings were heard together and were listed for hearing on 3 and 4 June
2024. Each of the proceedings was dismissed, with
no order as to costs with the
intent that each party pay their own costs.
appellant appealed the decision under
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act
(NSW) (NCAT Act). The appeal was lodged on 6 January 2025,
which was three days outside the 28-day time limit set out in the
Administrative Tribunal Rules
(NSW) (NCAT Rules) for instituting an
internal appeal. In the Reply to Appeal, the respondent accepted that the appeal
had not been
lodged within time but indicated it did not object to the Appeal
Panel extending time.
12 February 2025, the Appeal Panel made procedural directions and listed the
appeal for hearing on 19 May 2025. There were no directions
made about an
extension of time, and it is apparent that the parties assumed an extension had
been given prior to the hearing of
the appeal. This issue was not contentious,
and we have determined to give the appellant an extension of time to lodge the
for the reasons later outlined.
hearing was conducted on 19 May 2025 and was adjourned to 18 July 2025 to give
the appellant the opportunity to amend her Grounds
of Appeal and to file and
serve further documents in compliance with the original procedural directions.
The appellant represented
herself and Mr George Vardas, business manager and
authorised representative director of the respondent, appeared on behalf of the
respondent.
appellant filed Amended Grounds of Appeal, raising 16 grounds of appeal. She
contended that all grounds raised questions of law
and did not seek leave to
have dismissed all grounds of the appeal and have otherwise refused leave to
appeal. We refused the appellant leave to rely on
new evidence and have made
further directions in relation to the costs of the appeal. Our reasons
Background to the proceedings
30 September 2003, the appellant obtained a development consent from the
Paramatta City Council in respect of the property. A construction
certificate
was issued on 8 October 2003. Sometime in late 2007, six trees were removed from
the property. The trees that were removed
were marked in a landscape plan which
was part of the development consent.
December 2020, the appellant and the respondent commenced discussions concerning
the construction of a residential dwelling, being
a duplex, on the property.
Section 4.53
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(the Planning Act) provides when a development consent lapses after a specified
period. Given the period of time since the
development consent, an issue arose
as to whether the development consent had lapsed or whether the removal of the
six trees had
the effect of commencing operations under the development consent.
Regulation 124AA of the Environmental Planning and Assessment
Regulations 2000
(the Planning Regulations) was introduced to provide for the circumstances when
work was taken to be “physically
commenced” for the purposes of s
4.53(7) of the Planning Act. The removal of the trees raised the question of
whether work
had been physically commenced at that time.
the appellant’s behalf about whether
the development consent had lapsed.
The respective obligations of the respondent and the appellant in relation to
this issue was
the subject of dispute and findings in the proceedings. The
appellant contends that on 5 March 2021 she orally agreed with the respondent
that the respondent would provide legal advice and other services for the
appellant for a fee of $35,000, including advising in relation
proceedings to be commenced in the Land and Environment Court seeking
declarations about whether the development consent had
lapsed. The respondent
disputes this and contends that the $35,000 payment represented a non-refundable
acceptance fee which would
be credited towards the contract price.
March and September 2021 there were several tender documents submitted by the
respondent in respect of the construction of
the duplex. The appellant signed
tender documents in March and September 2021. While there is dispute about the
characterisation
of the $35,000, there is no dispute that the respondent
communicated with the Council on behalf of the appellant in relation to the
status of the 2003 development consent from March 2021 to June 2021. On 18 June
2021, the appellant entered into a residential building
contract for the
construction of a duplex on the property for $897,838.
late June 2021, the Council advised that it did not consider the development
application to be active.
appellant decided not to challenge this decision in the Land and Environment
Court, and new tender documents were submitted as
between the appellant and the
respondent in September 2021. On 22 January 2022, the respondent lodged a new
development consent with
the Council on behalf of the appellant. The development
consent was approved on 30 August 2022, notified on 20 September 2022, subject
to conditions, including demolition of the existing house on the property.
respondent issued invoices for variations to the appellant between December 2021
and August 2023. The appellant paid $26,611.64
in respect of one of those
variations but refused to pay other amounts claimed by the respondent under the
contract and on 12 September
2023, the respondent issued a breach notification
for non-payment of contract price adjustment invoices issued.
4 October 2023, the respondent commenced proceedings against the appellant for
recovery of the unpaid invoices. The appellant Disputed
the claim and
counter-sued on 26 October 2023, claiming that the respondent had engaged in
conduct that was misleading or deceptive
and that the contract was unfair.
respondent terminated, or purported to terminate, the contract on 20 November
Relevant legislation considered by the Tribunal
claims made by the parties in the proceedings at first instance raised several
legislative provisions. It is convenient to outline
these provisions before
examining the decision under appeal to give context to the appeal.
contract the subject of dispute was governed by the
(NSW) (HBA), which relevantly applies to “residential building
work”. Residential building work is defined in Sch 1,
cl 2 and includes
any work involved in the construction of a dwelling. Relevant to the claims made
in this case, “demolition
work” is excluded from the definition
(sub-cl (3)(j)). A “dwelling” means a building or portion of a
building that
is designed, constructed or adapted for use as a residence (Sch 1,
cl 3). The HBA contains provisions regulating residential building
specialist work, including provisions relating to the enforcement of building
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine any building claim in which the
amount claimed does not exceed $500,000:
HBA. There is no dispute that
this is a “building claim” as defined by
and that the claims
made did not exceed the prescribed amount. The Tribunal found, and we agree,
that the Tribunal had jurisdiction
to hear and determine claims
respondent’s claims were under the contract and the HBA. Both parties made
claims under the HBA.
appellant claimed that the building contract was unjust and should be set aside.
She relied on
of the HBA, which empowers the Tribunal to exercise the same
Contracts Review Act
(NSW) (Contracts Review Act in relation to a contract for residential
building or specialist work).
a contract or a provision of a contract is found to be unjust under
Contracts Review Act
, the Tribunal may refuse to enforce any or all of the
provisions or make an order declaring the contract void in whole or in part
it considers it just to do so, and for the purpose of avoiding, as far as
practicable, an unjust consequence or result.:
appellant also relied on s 92 of the HBA, which provides that a person must not
do residential building work unless they have
the appropriate insurance. The
appellant claimed “financial compensation” because the demolition
work was not insured,
however, because this work is excluded from the definition
of residential building work, the basis for this claim was not clear.
no breach of this section, as ultimately found by the Tribunal, however this
provision is nonetheless included for completeness.
appellant made multiple claims under the Australian Consumer Law. The Australian
Consumer Law is a reference to Sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth). Section 28 of the
Fair Trading Act
1997 (NSW) provides that
the text of the Australian Consumer Law (Cth) applies as a law of NSW (the
Australian Consumer Law (NSW),
referred to in this decision as the ACL). The
Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant to s 79J of the Fair Trading Act to hear and
a consumer claim, which includes consumer claims for a money order of
an amount that is less than the prescribed amount, being $100,000.
There is no
dispute that the Tribunal had jurisdiction over the claims under the ACL for
amounts up to $100,000.
appellant alleged that the conduct by the respondent was misleading and
deceptive, or likely to mislead and deceive, and was unconscionable
4 of the ACL provides that if a person makes a representation with respect to a
future matter and does not have reasonable
grounds for making the
representation, the representation is taken to be misleading. Under s 18, a
person must not engage in conduct
that is misleading or deceptive or is likely
to mislead or deceive and s 29(1)(b) provides that a person must not make a
misleading representation that services are of a particular standard,
quality, value or grade.
21 provides that a person must not in trade or commerce in connection with the
supply or possible supply of goods or services
engage in conduct that is, in all
the circumstances, unconscionable.
ACL also contains provisions dealing with unfair contracts. Section 23 provides
that the term of a consumer contract is void if
the term is unfair and the
contract is in a standard form contract. Section 24 provides that a term of a
consumer contract is “unfair”
if it would cause a significant
imbalance in the party’s rights and obligations, is not reasonably
necessary in order to protect
the legitimate interests of the party who would be
advantaged by the term and it would cause detriment to a party if it were to be
applied or relied on. In determining whether a term of a contract is unfair, a
court, or a Tribunal as the case may be, may take
into account such matters as
it thinks relevant, including the extent to which the term is
“transparent” and having regard
to the contract as a whole. Section
24(3) provides that a term is transparent if the term is expressed in reasonably
plain language,
legible, is presented clearly and is readily available to any
party affected by the term. Section 25 provides examples of unfair
27(1) provides that if a party to a proceeding alleges that a contract is a
standard form contract, it is presumed to be so
unless the other party to the
proceedings proves otherwise. Section 27(2) sets out the matters that a court or
Tribunal must take
into account in determining whether a contract is a standard
form contract. Those matters include whether one of the parties has
all or most
of the bargaining power relating to the transaction, whether one of the parties
has made another contract in the same
or substantially the same terms, whether
the contract was prepared by one party before any discussion between the
parties, whether
another party was required in effect to either accept or reject
the terms of the contract and whether the party was given the opportunity
effectively negotiate the terms of the contract.
for breach are set out in Part 5 of the ACL and include damages for breach and
pecuniary penalties for contraventions of
the unconscionable conduct and unfair
standard for contract provisions.
The decision of the Tribunal at
first instance
Tribunal decision is lengthy, comprising 76 pages and 255 paragraphs. In
summarising the decision, we refer to the appellant as
“homeowner” and the respondent as the “builder” as these
were the terms used by the Tribunal.
Amended Grounds of Appeal are extensive and because the appellant contends that
the Tribunal did not consider certain claims made
and material provided, it is
important to outline the decision of the Tribunal and the critical findings in
relation to the appellant’s
claims in detail.
Overview and
core findings of fact
Tribunal summarised the parties’ monetary claims at [2] and [3] noting
that the homeowner also claimed a refund of $41,979
for the amount already paid
to the builder. The Tribunal made findings about the matters set out above in
the background, which were
not in dispute. The Tribunal also made the following
factual findings relevant to the dispute between the parties:
(1) The homeowner contended that on 5 March 2021 she orally agreed with the
builder that for a fee of $35,000 the builder agreed
to provide legal advice,
representation to deal with the Council and preparation of a tender comprising a
complete costing for demolition
and construction. The builder disputed this. The
parties subsequently entered into detailed written agreements, and the Tribunal
was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the parties formed an
oral agreement whereby the builder agreed to provide
legal advice at [18].
(2) The builder corresponded with the Council after 5 March 2021 about whether
the development approval had lapsed and sent a letter
dated 10 March 2021 to the
Council, authored by Mr Vardas, setting out a reasoned argument to the effect
that the tree removals constitute
commencement of work for the purposes of the
development consent. There was dispute between the parties about whether this
was in fact sent and the homeowner contends she made enquiries of the
Council and they did not have a record of the letter. She further
contended that
on reading the letter she believed the prospects were positive. Weighing up the
available evidence, the Tribunal concluded
that the letter was sent at [41].
(3) By email dated 29 June 2021, the builder sought to walk away from the
obligations under tender documents signed on 19 June 2021,
refund the homeowner
$25,000 and retain $10,000, the basis for which was unclear, according to the
Tribunal at [82].
(4) On 1 July 2021, the homeowner discussed a way forward with the builder that
the builder would prepare new plans and designs and
seek development approval on
the basis of those plans (at [84]). The Tribunal concluded that, as at 1 July
2021, the homeowner was
aware of the substance of the Council’s position
as to whether the development consent was active, namely that it was not active
(at [77]). The arrangements which the homeowner had concluded with the builder
on their face provided the homeowner with the option
of bringing an application
to the Land and Environment Court to challenge the court’s position. The
action was to be managed
by the builder, and the costs were to be met from the
$35,000 paid by the homeowner to the builder. The tender document was silent
the liability of the party for costs in excess of $35,000 although the homeowner
believed the builder was required to meet all
costs in excess of this amount.
The Tribunal concluded that this was not necessarily the case: at [85].
(5) On 8 September 2021, the homeowner signed a new tender, which the Tribunal
found superseded the earlier tender at [97] and on
18 January 2021, the builder
lodged a new application for development consent for which consent was notified
on 22 September 2022:
at [98]-[103].
The builder’s claims
builder only pressed one claim, being a claim for Variation 7 in the sum of
$14,025 for steel plates to protect a petroleum pipeline
in the vicinity of the
property. The Tribunal found that the question of whether the contract had been
validly terminated was not
relevant to determining the builder’s claim for
the variation because determination of this claim was no different in principle
to any progress claim for work done by a builder: at [134]. It was not a step
that was necessary to the determination of any of the
parties’ remaining
claims for relief: at [135].
Tribunal found at [150] that the builder had not established, on the balance of
probabilities, that the steel plates were required
or necessary for the building
works and therefore the builder’s claim for the variation was dismissed:
at [152]. The builder
did not lodge an appeal in relation to the dismissal of
its claim and reference to these findings have been included for
completeness.
Tribunal then went on to consider the homeowner’s claims, noting that her
complaints were wide and varied − her submissions
were 46 pages in length.
The difficulty facing the Tribunal is outlined at [153] as follows:
The allegations and complaints included manipulative conduct, misconduct,
conflict of interest, provision of legal advice without
the required regulatory
permissions, “altering the contract”, underquoting,
“manipulation and coercion” (eg
[188], [193], [232], [241] and [263]). The evidence intended to support broad
allegations as
to the builder’s knowledge or the builder’s
intentions was often not identified.
Tribunal then noted at [156] that the homeowner filed a document entitled
Revised Points of Claim and Revised Points of Response
Document on 19 April 2024
and that those documents were “helpfully more concise and focused”.
The Tribunal outlined the
paragraphs 182 to 195 of her submissions. Those paragraphs are extracted in full
at [157] of the decision. The Tribunal then sought to distil the issues raised
in the homeowner’s submissions at [158] to [251],
together with findings
in relation to each of the claims. The Tribunal also either referred to or
extracted in its decision extensive
sections of the appellant’s written
submissions and parts of her Points of Claim, the details of which are
summarised below.
detail is important because the appellant’s Amended Grounds of Appeal
challenge most of the findings made by the Tribunal
in relation to her
Tribunal identified seven claims, which were considered in detail, concluding at
[253] that the Tribunal had not accepted that
the homeowner had established an
entitlement to any relief.
claims and how they were determined is set out below.
Claims that
the email from the builder dated 29 June 2021 was misleading and
Tribunal considered these claims at [158] to [169].
claims relate to a communication from the builder to the homeowner on 29 June
2021 to the effect that the author of the letter
had obtained advice from a
lawyer about whether the homeowner’s development consent had lapsed. There
is no dispute that the
lawyer referred to was Mr Vardas from the builder. The
email is to the effect that there was a 2019 Court of Appeal decision in which
the court held that removal of shrubs was sufficient to prevent the development
application from lapsing, however, there was a distinction
between removal of
shrubs and tree removal where the development consent required an arborist to
carry out the work. It was noted
that as the onus was on the applicant, they
would need evidence that a certified tree surgeon or arborist actually carried
works to be able to establish the works were part of the development
consent and that the lawyer had concerns about whether they
compliance with the development consent condition.
appellant claimed that this email was misleading and deceptive, she prematurely
abandoned pursuing claims in relation to the development
consent and the builder
failed to disclose to her that she had the option of changing the principal
certifying authority (PCA).
Tribunal rejected these claims for the following reasons:
(1) The homeowner had not adduced any evidence or otherwise shown that those
matters in the communication were not accurate or not
correct or otherwise
misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive and the Tribunal: at
(2) The homeowner did not adduce any evidence to establish that there was any
real possibility for obtaining relief from the Land
and Environment Court, or
another court that the development consent was still active and therefore not
satisfied that the homeowner
had in fact “prematurely” abandoned the
original development consent: at [160].
(3) While the Tribunal accepted that the builder did not advise the homeowner
(suggesting an applicant
could apply to change a PCA), the homeowner did not adduce any evidence to
establish that an opportunity
was lost because she did not change the PCA: at
conduct and conduct likely to mislead or deceive,
by characterising its
employee, Mr Vardas, as a “qualified lawyer”. The Tribunal found
that there was force to this submission
because Mr Vardas was not at that point
qualified to practice law and this was likely to have been a factor in the
decision at [165]. However, the Tribunal was not satisfied
that the homeowner suffered any loss or damage as a consequence of that
at [166]. Relevantly, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the homeowner had
forgone an opportunity to go to the Land and
Environment Court, nor was the
Tribunal satisfied that the substance of the communication concerning the risks
of proceedings were
misleading and deceptive: also, at [166].
of 29 June 2021 constituted “legal advice”
in contravention of s 10
Legal Professional Uniform Law 2014
(NSW). There is a prohibition
on engaging in legal practice by unqualified entities. The Tribunal found at
[168] that the email engaged
in the legal and evidentiary difficulties faced by
the homeowner but those matters of themselves did not mean that the
communication
constituted engaging in legal practice. The Tribunal noted at
[169] as follows:
However, and more importantly, these proceedings are a civil dispute between two
parties. These proceedings are not proceedings in
respect of a contravention of
section 10 of the Uniform Law. It is not necessary, and consequently it would
not be appropriate, to
resolve whether the communications contravened section 10
of the Uniform Law. It is not necessary to do so because the issue in these
proceedings is whether the builder engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct in
making the 29 June 2021 communications and, if so,
whether the homeowner is
entitled to a remedy for that conduct. Those issues do not turn on whether or
not there has been a contravention
of section 10 of the Uniform Law.
brief, the Tribunal was not satisfied there was misleading and deceptive conduct
concerning the 29 June 2021 email or that the
a claim in respect of this email.
Setting aside the contract
and/or the September 2021 tender
Tribunal considered these claims at [170] to [185] of the decision.
Tribunal noted that the homeowner’s submission that the misleading or
deceptive conduct of the builder gave rise to a remedy
of voiding the contract,
was taken to be a submission that the homeowner sought an order under s 89D of
the HBA setting aside the
contract. The Tribunal noted that the
prior to the
date of the contact and conduct after the date of the contract. The
Tribunal observed that there is a distinction where a party seeks
to allege that
the conduct induced them to enter into a transaction as opposed to conduct after
transaction is entered into. The
Tribunal found that as the contract was formed
on acceptance by the homeowner on 18 June 2021 of the contract, the 29 June 2021
communications
cannot be the basis for setting aside the contract because by
that time the parties had already entered into the contract; at [173].
Tribunal rejected the claims made in respect of the potential to change the PCA,
essentially for the reasons outlined above. The
Tribunal further noted that the
ascertained through
appropriate advice and that the homeowner’s right to
change the PCA from the Council existed irrespective of whether or not
Council had communicated that matter to the builder. The Tribunal found that, on
its face, maintaining the Council as the PCA
was neutral in terms of the
builder’s interests and should have been a neutral consideration in terms
of the homeowner’s
interest: at [177].
Tribunal did not accept that entry into the contract and acceptance of the
September 2021 tender was induced by or the consequence
of misleading and
deceptive conduct by the builder: at [178]. Nor did the Tribunal accept that the
into the contract if she had been informed she
could request a change in the PCA because, first, she did not say this was the
secondly, at the time of entry into the contract she was hopeful of
proceeding with the development consent on the basis of the documents
13 June 2021 and, thirdly, entry into the contract did not affect the right to
engage the PCA in any event: at [179]. The
Tribunal also noted that, for
completeness, it would not have exercised the discretion under s 89D to set
aside the contract of the
September 2021 tender on this basis. The Tribunal set
out its reasons at [180] in detail.
Tribunal rejected the homeowner’s assertion that failure to disclose
certain emails between the builder and the Council
was critical. The homeowner
knew there was a live issue as to whether the development consent was active and
this was recorded in
one of the amendments to the contract which noted that
there was “debate” as to whether the consent is still active:
[183]. The Tribunal further found at [181] as follows:
The content of those emails would only reinforce that the appropriate way
forward for the homeowner in mid-2021 was to seek and new
development consent
because the Council likely viewed the Development Consent issued in 2003 to no
longer be active. Those emails
do not support the homeowner’s contention
that the Development Consent issued in 2003 was prematurely abandoned.
relation to the issue of whether the September 2021 tender should be set aside
on the basis of a misleading and deceptive representation
from the author of the
email of 29 June 2021 that he had received advice from a “qualified
lawyer”, the Tribunal stated
that it was not persuaded it should make such
an order: at [185]. First, the characterisation of Mr Vardas is a qualified
did not cause any loss. Secondly, in circumstances where the pre-existing
dwelling had been demolished and the parties had partly
performed significant
obligations of the contract, setting aside the September 2021 tender would not
be reasonable, just or equitable
in the circumstances.
relation to the 10 March 2021 letter
Tribunal dealt with these claims at [186] to [197].
claim relates to communications between the builder on behalf of the homeowner
and the Council. In summary, the builder sent
an email to the Council on 5 March
2021 asserting that the development was “physically commenced” on 17
December 2007
by reason of the removal of six trees. The Council responded,
rejecting the assertion that removal of the trees satisfied the relevant
provisions. The builder replied to this email stating that it was up to the PCA
to advise whether the consent was still active and
made forceful submissions
development consent was active.
It was further asserted that, if not, the
Council representative should give reasons why it was not active. The Council
representative,
who was the PCA, responded by email dated 10 March 2021.
was further correspondence between the builder and the Council representative on
10 March 2021, the detail of which is set out
in the decision at [27] to [29].
The last email from the Council set out the reasons why the Council held the
view that the development
consent had lapsed and stated that if the builder held
another view, it should obtain independent legal opinion on the matter. It
in this context that the builder alleges that it sent a letter to the Council
dated 10 March 2021. The letter was included in
the builder’s bundle of
documents before the Tribunal at first instance. The letter was signed by Mr
Vardas and set out a reasoned
argument as to why the tree removal constituted
commencement of the work for the purposes of the development consent. The letter
relied on legal authority. The homeowner was provided with a copy of the letter.
There is dispute between the parties as to whether
the letter was in fact sent
to the Council. The homeowner contends that she has made inquiries of the
Council, and they did not have
a record of receiving the letter.
Tribunal concluded that the letter of 10 March 2021 had been sent and set out
the reasons for this in at [36] to [42] of the decision.
Tribunal notes that the focus of the homeowner’s submissions was that she
was misled by the positive tone of the letter
of 10 March 2021 and the belief
that it was prepared by a qualified lawyer. The homeowner further submitted that
two days after seeing
the letter of 10 March 2021, namely 18 June 2021, she
entered into the contract.
Tribunal rejected the submission that the builder represented it would provide
legal services, finding that on a proper reading
of tender amendment 3, the
builder would engage legal
representation and manage that legal representation
for the homeowner: at [193]. The Tribunal referred to the words in tender
3 as follows:
Should a declaration be required from the court, Champion Homes will engage
legal services to prepare and present the case to the
inferred the builder would contract with another party: at [194]. The Tribunal
also found that another significant flaw in the
the builder did not walk away from its obligations in tender amendment 3 until
the homeowner decided
not to pursue proceedings in the Land and Environment
Court. The homeowners instead pursued a new development consent. This occurred
after 29 June 2021. The Tribunal was not satisfied this claim was established:
at [196]. The Tribunal also noted that on 16 June
2021, the builder sent an
email to the homeowner stating that the Council did not consider the development
consent to be active and
this was inconsistent with the pleaded representation
that the builder had “assured” the homeowner of the likelihood
successfully confirming the active status of the 2003 development consent: at
regard to these findings, it is apparent that the Tribunal rejected these
Setting aside contract terms
Tribunal deals with these claims at [198] to [237].
claims relate to the homeowner’s contention that clauses of the contract
were unfair and should be set aside. Relevantly,
the clauses the homeowner
challenged were clauses 44.4, 49.1 and 53.5 of the contract.
Tribunal set out the provisions of ss 23, 24 and 27 of the ACL then considered
each of the provisions challenged.
Tribunal accepted that the contract was a standard form contract and therefore
turned to consider whether the relevant terms were
unfair for the purposes of s
24 of the ACL.
Tribunal extracted each of the relevant clauses in the contract.
44.4 provided as follows:
If the time allowed in the Tender for building works to commence expires before
all the clauses and all the special conditions of
this contract governing the
commencement of building works are satisfied, the builder shall be entitled to
increase the contract
price by way of a contract price adjustment of 6.5% of the
price shown in Schedule 1.
Tribunal noted that the time allowed in the tender for building work to commence
was 260 days, being 24 May 2022.
49.1 and 53.5 provided:
49.1 Despite clause 16.1 and 18.6, all variations in contract
price adjustments are payable after Warranty Insurance has been
within five (5) working days of payment being requested by the builder. If the
variations or contract price adjustments
are not paid as set out in this clause
then the builder is entitled to an automatic extension of the contract period.
For every day
the variation or contract price is not paid contract period will
be extended by one (1) day.
53.5 If the builder is required to carry out any excluded item
under the contract either by the owner, any statutory or other authority
be deemed a variation signed by the owner and claimed as a variation under the
Tribunal found that clause 44.4 protected the legitimate interests of the
builder as the builder could not commence building works
until development
approval from the Council was obtained: at [218]. That approval was not within
the builder’s control. It
was also noted that throughout the period
between formation of the contract and commencement of the building works there
that material and labour prices would increase. The Tribunal accepted
that if the builder’s costs increased less than 6.5%
in the relevant
260-day period, then the builder’s profit would likely, all things being
equal, increase: at [219]. However,
at the time the parties entered into the
contract neither party knew precisely what the material and labour price
increases would
be and clause 44.4 allocated the risk between the parties.
summary, the Tribunal was not satisfied that clause 44.4 caused a significant
imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations
and was satisfied that
the clause was reasonably necessary in order to protect the legitimate interests
of the builder. The Tribunal
satisfied that clause 44.4 caused detriment to the
owner and noted that the owner had the benefit of fixed contract price which
not change if the works were commenced within the relevant 260-day period.
The Tribunal found that the clause was transparent. The
Tribunal makes these
findings at [220]-[222].
relation to clause 49.1, the Tribunal noted that this clause altered the balance
of rights between the parties compared to the
standard term but did not consider
that this caused a significant imbalance in the party’s rights and
obligations. Clause 49.1
altered the time required for payment but not the
circumstances which created the underlying liability to pay. The Tribunal
that a five-day period to pay a contract price could cause some
detriment but rejected the homeowner’s contention that clause
required the applicant to pay a very high variation demand such as the claim of
$160,000 for onsite stormwater detention (OSD).
The Tribunal found that clause
49.1 would not validly operate in respect of the claim for the OSD unless the
builder could satisfy
that the item of work was an excluded item and that it was
required by the homeowner or some other statutory authority: at [233].
Tribunal also found that clause 49.1 was transparent. In short, the Tribunal was
not satisfied clause 49.1 was unfair.
relation to clause 53.5, the Tribunal noted that liability only arises if the
builder is required to carry out any excluded item
under the contract. The
Tribunal found that the scope of the clause did not mean that the builder could
unilaterally decide to add
items of work: at [235]. The Tribunal was not
satisfied that clause 53.5 created a significant imbalance in the parties’
and obligations and was satisfied that the clause was necessary to
protect the legitimate interests of the builder: at [236]. The
expressed in reasonably plain language and was transparent.
Tribunal therefore rejected the homeowner’s claims in relation to the
unfair contract provisions of the ACL.
Contracts Review Act
unconscionable conduct
Tribunal dealt with these claims at [238] to [243].
Tribunal noted that the homeowner’s submissions did not directly engage
Contracts Review Act
and s 89D of the HB Act but that the complaint
substantially relied on the same complaints where the homeowner contended that
contract was unconscionable and should be declared void. The Tribunal was
not satisfied that the builder’s conduct was unconscionable
or misleading,
except in respect to the representation to the effect that Mr Vardas was a
“qualified lawyer”, but this
was not material in any event because
the Tribunal had already concluded there was no loss or damage: at [239].
well-educated person, the contract price was not
exorbitant and, from the
complaints about underquoting, it would appear that the homeowner considered the
price attractive. The Tribunal
was not persuaded that the homeowner had
established a claim for relief under s
89D of the HBA: at
[240]-[243]
Underquoting
Tribunal dealt with this claim at [244] and [245].
complaint made was that the builder underestimated its quote in a manner that
was misleading or lacked skill and care.
this was an issue raised by the appellant in her Amended Grounds of Appeal and
in oral submissions at the appeal hearing,
it is apt to extract the findings of
the Tribunal on this issue, which are at [244] and [245], as follows:
244 A further complaint by the homeowner was that the builder
under-estimated its quote, in a manner that was misleading or lacked
care. The implication was that the homeowner was induced to enter into
contractual arrangements with the builder by the
under-quoting. However, the
rendered, they were below
market value for the contemplated work or any similar
cogent evidence. The submission at [193] in relation to the quote from GJ
was not based on any expert evidence or any proper comparison of two
quotes of work. I am not persuaded that the homeowner has established
builder engaged in any under-quoting which comprises wrongful conduct, whether
because it is misleading, negligently prepared
or some other basis.
245 The homeowner also alleged that the builder knew the
allowance in the contract for the onsite drainage system did not reflect
true cost (homeowner’s submission, [232]). However, the homeowner did not
establish, through evidence, that the builder
knew that to be the case at the
time the allowance was made.
Demolition work
obtaining home warranty insurance. The relevant
work was said to be demolition
of the pre-existing structure.
Tribunal noted at [247] that clause 2(2)(j) of Schedule 1 of the HBA (which
should be a reference to clause 2(3)(j), refer para
19 above) specifically
excludes demolition work from the definition of “residential building
work”. The Tribunal therefore
rejected this claim.
further issue raised was that the homeowner was charged and paid $20,000 in
relation to the demolition work. The Tribunal set out
the homeowner’s
submissions in this regard but noted that the submissions “did not
identify a precise cause of action
which might find a remedial order that the
Tribunal could make”: at [249]. The Tribunal noted that the contract
progress payment in the amount of $20,000 was to become payable after
completion of demolition. The reference to $5000 in the tender
documents was for
a promotion but the Tribunal was not persuaded that this promotion applied to
the contract between the parties:
at [249]-[250].
Tribunal was not satisfied that there was evidence to establish the matters
asserted by the homeowner in its submissions: at [251].
Tribunal observed that it did not have equitable jurisdiction to determine some
of the complaints in the homeowner’s submissions,
including complaints by
the homeowner about the builder’s alleged conflict of interest. The
Tribunal also noted that it did
not have jurisdiction to determine the
nature of trust
money: at [252].
Nature of internal
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act)
provides that a party to an internal appeal in respect of a final decision may
appeal as of right “on any
question of law”. The party may also seek
leave to appeal on “any other grounds”.
Questions of
meaning of a “question of law” was discussed in detail by the Appeal
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
) at [25]-[40]. A pure question of law does not depend on the
facts found and the question of law must be, self-evidently, a question
and not depend on the answer. A question of law is distinct from a mixed
question of fact and law, for which leave to appeal
is required. Examples of
questions of law include the matters set out in
Prendergast v Western Murray
Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
However, the categories of question of law are not closed.
matters referred to in
at [32] include: whether the Tribunal
drew inferences that were not available from the facts found; whether the
construction of a
statute or contract arrived at by the Tribunal at first
instance was wrong in some identified way; whether the decision was vitiated
bias, or a reasonable apprehension of bias, raising a procedural fairness
question; whether the Tribunal failed to respond to
substantial, clearly
articulated arguments based on established facts which may constitute a failure
to accord natural justice or,
alternatively, a constructive failure to exercise
not and whether the Tribunal made a jurisdictional error.
the ground of appeal does not raise a question of law, the appellant may seek
leave to appeal.
Leave to appeal
there is an appeal from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division, the
circumstances in which Appeal Panel may grant
leave to appeal are limited to
those set out in cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act. In such cases, the Appeal
Panel must be satisfied
that the appellant may have suffered a substantial
miscarriage of justice on the basis that:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and equitable; or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the weight of
evidence; or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt with).
Appeal Panel considered the meaning of a substantial “miscarriage of
justice” for the purposes of cl 12 of Sch 4 to
the NCAT Act in
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
, stating that a substantial
miscarriage of justice may have been suffered where:
... there was a “significant possibility” or a “chance which
was fairly open” that a different and more favourable
result would have
been achieved for the owners corporation had the relevant circumstance in para
(a) or (b) not occurred or if the
fresh evidence under para (c) had been before
the Tribunal at first instance.
principles to be applied by an Appeal Panel in determining whether leave to
appeal should be granted are well settled. In
the Appeal Panel concluded at [84] that:
(1) In order to be granted leave to appeal, the applicant must demonstrate
something more than that the primary decision maker was
arguably wrong in the
conclusion arrived at or that there was a bona fide challenge to an issue of
BHP Billiton Ltd v Dunning
[2013] NSWCA 421
the authorities cited there,
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
(2) Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal, only in matters that
(a) Issues of principle; or
(b) questions of public importance or matters of administration
or policy which might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of
going beyond merely what is arguable, or an error that is plain and
apparent which is central to the Tribunal’s decision and not merely
peripheral, so that it would be unjust to allow
the finding to stand; or
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and
clearly mistaken; or
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact-finding process in
such an unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to
unfair result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
Accordingly,
in an appeal from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division, the
appellant must satisfy the requirements of
cl 12(1) of Sch 4 and, if that is
done, the Appeal Panel must also then consider whether it should exercise its
discretion to grant
leave to appeal under s 80(2)(b).
before the Appeal Panel
appellant lodged a Notice of Appeal with her Grounds of Appeal and bundle of
supporting documents on 6 January 2025.
the appeal first came before the Appeal Panel for hearing on 19 May 2025, it was
apparent that the appellant did not understand
the appeal process, she had not
filed with the Appeal Panel all documents that were before the Tribunal at first
instance on which
she sought to rely in the appeal and she had not identified,
by reference to her Grounds of Appeal, the questions of law or errors
contended and whether she sought leave to appeal. She was given leave to file
and serve an amended Grounds of Appeal and
any further material on or before 2
appellant lodged Amended Grounds of Appeal on 4 June 2025 and confirmed, at the
resumed hearing, that the Amended Grounds and
the documents filed on 4 June 2025
superseded the documents previously lodged.
respondent lodged a response to the Amended Grounds and further supplementary
addition to the oral submissions made by the parties at the hearing of the
appeal, the Appeal Panel had regard to:
(1) The Amended Grounds of Appeal.
(2) The appellant’s amended bundle of documents dated 1 June 2025 received
on 4 June 2025, comprising various documents lodged
with the Tribunal at first
instance, including points of response, points of claim, revised points of claim
and revised points of
response, letter to the Tribunal about termination and the
appellant’s written submissions.
(3) The respondent’s Reply to Appeal and outline of submissions.
(4) The respondent’s bundle of documents and supplementary bundle,
including a copy of the decision with a copy of the documents
referred to in the
decision, the respondent’s submissions in response to the
appellant’s points of claim, statements
filed in the proceedings at first
instance and extracts from a transcript of part of the hearing at first
Leave to rely new evidence refused
appellant sought leave to rely on new evidence, being email evidence between the
appellant and GJ Gardner homes about the estimated
construction costs for the
project dated June and July 2024 and a new statement by her about restitution of
the house before it was
demolished. The appellant also requested leave to issue
a summons to the Council in respect of emails and correspondence between
respondent and the Council to resolve “conflicts” in the evidence
the respondent and the
is not a case where the appellant contends that leave to appeal should be
granted because there now exists significant new evidence
which was not
reasonably available at the time of the hearing. She contends leave is not
required. In any event, it is apparent that
the evidence identified was evidence
that was reasonably available at the time of the hearing of the proceedings at
first instance.
Tribunal made findings of fact based on the evidence and claims made at the
hearing and in the written submissions filed by the
parties after the hearing.
As observed by the Appeal Panel in
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
an appeal does not provide a losing party
with the opportunity to run their case again.
are not satisfied that this evidence would have produced a different result in
any event. For instance, the GJ Gardner evidence
was in support of a claim that
the appellant was entitled to damages for the lost opportunity or damages for
breach of wrongful repudiation
by the respondent, but this was not a claim made
before, during the hearing, or after the hearing in the appellant’s
submissions.
80(3) of the NCAT Act provides that the Appeal Panel may, if the grounds
warrant, determine the appeal by way of a new hearing
and may permit fresh
evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for evidence received by
the Tribunal at first instance.
However, as observed by the Appeal Panel in
Yuen v Thom
[2016] NSWCATAP 243
, this will be limited to
circumstances where the Appeal Panel decides to conduct a new hearing because,
having considered the grounds
for appeal, it is satisfied this is warranted.
Otherwise, internal appeals are not determined by way of a new hearing. An
on a question of law would rarely warrant the receipt of new evidence
Appeal Panel considered whether leave should be given to rely on new evidence in
Lettau v Artwork Transport Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 14
and found at
28. We regard as relevant to the discretion of the Appeal Panel to receive new
evidence on the appeal (which is not by way of a new
hearing), a consideration
of whether that evidence was available at the time of the hearing and, if so,
why it was not relied on.
Other factors that may be relevant include whether it
is likely that the new evidence would have produced a different result at the
Tribunal (see:
BCL v NSW Trustee and Guardian
NSWCATAP 18
Mielczarek v Commissioner for Fair Trading
NSWCATAP 217)
any prejudice caused to the other party if the new evidence was received. There
may be other matters which are also relevant
to that discretion.
summary, we are not satisfied that the grounds raised by the appellant warrant a
new hearing, nor are we satisfied that the new
evidence would have produced a
different result. The new evidence is material that was available at the time of
the hearing.
therefore refused leave to the appellant on rely on new evidence and refused the
request to direct the Registrar to issue a summons.
Extension of
appellant seeks an extension of time under s 41 of the NCAT Act to the time
she lodged her appeal, namely 6 January 2025. Section
41 gives the Appeal Panel
discretion to extend the period of time for the doing of anything under any
legislation in respect of which
it has jurisdiction, even if the relevant period
of time has expired.
Jackson v NSW Land & Housing Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP 22
) at [18]-[22], the Appeal Panel identified the matters to be
considered when determining whether time should be extended. These matters
include the length of the delay, the reason for the delay, the appellant’s
prospects of success and the extent of any prejudice
suffered by the
respondent.
delay was brief and was over the Christmas holiday period. The respondent does
not object to the extension of time, and we are
not satisfied, nor did the
respondent contend, that it has been prejudiced by the delay. The
appellant’s Amended Grounds of
Appeal raise, on their face, questions of
law and both parties have lodged extensive submissions and material addressing
the grounds
Accordingly,
we extend time for lodging the appeal to 6 January 2025.
Amended Grounds of Appeal, which comprised 77 pages, raises 16 grounds of
appeal. The Amended Grounds include a wide range of
claims, some of which are in
the nature of submissions. On the appellant’s admission, her submissions
and some of the case
references included were incorrect or based on artificial
intelligence material obtained from the Internet. The respondent referred
examples of this in its submissions in reply, some of which were self-evident.
We deal with this later in our reasons.
Amended Grounds as articulated by the appellant, using the headings and grounds
provided by her, can be summarised as follows:
(1) The Tribunal failed to consider the appellant’s claims under the HBA
and thereby failed to consistently apply s 48A of
the HBA to deal with the
appellant’s termination compensation claim arising directly from the
residential building contract
at [119]-[127]. The Tribunal misclassified the
claim as a claim under the ACL (Ground 1).
(2) The Tribunal failed to address the appellant’s defences to the
respondent’s enforcement of special conditions 44.4,
49.1 and 53.5 for
payment of multiple variations and the contractor price adjustment number 1
(Ground 2).
(3) The Tribunal erred at [145]-[156] and [170]-[172] by allowing the respondent
to lodge a late amended claim without leave and
in failing to decide the
appellant’s defences, deposit claims and wrongful termination compensation
claim (Ground 3).
(4) There was a denial of procedural fairness and evidentiary errors in respect
of the Tribunal’s findings at [69]-[77] in
relation to an email from the
Council dated 25 June 2021 (Ground 4).
(5) The Tribunal failed to consider or made errors in failing to consider the
appellant’s claim that the cost for the OSD was
excessive and the only
reference to this was at [232], which did not analyse or make findings on the
claim. The appellant alleges
that there was misrepresentation, breach of
statutory warranties and the claim for the OSD was unconscionable. The Tribunal
consider these claims (Ground 5).
(6) The Tribunal erred at [248] by failing to enforce the respondent’s
obligations under clause 38 of the contract which required
the respondent, at
its costs, to maintain all risk works insurance covering the building works
(Ground 6).
(7) The Tribunal was in error in failing to make a ruling on whether the amount
paid by the appellant of $35,000 and variation 6
(for $26,611) should be
refunded. The findings at [57] and [110] refer to termination the contract but
are “silent” on
whether these amounts must be refunded. This was a
live issue in the proceedings (Ground 7).
(8) The Tribunal was in error in failing to make a judgement on the lawfulness
and other demands made by the respondent and in failing
to order a refund of the
$20,000 paid by the appellant (refer [57] and [110] as per Ground 7) (Ground
(9) The Tribunal was in error in failing to find that special conditions 44.4,
49.1 and 53.5 were unfair and failed to consider special
condition 45.2 at
[198]-[201] (Ground 9).
(10) The Tribunal adopted a piecemeal approach in dealing with multiple
misrepresentations and multiple breaches of statutory warranties
and thereby
failed to consider the systemic nature of the conduct alleged by the appellant
(refer [76], [164]-[165], [173]-[177],
[181] and [182], [187]-[190] and
[244]-245]) (Ground 10).
(11) The Tribunal improperly excluded conduct after 18 June 2021 in its findings
at [170] to [172] (Ground 11).
(12) The Tribunal misapplied the causation test in its reliance finding under
the ACL at [157]-[197] (Ground 12).
(13) The Tribunal’s findings in relation to the evidence, and in
particular, the finding that the appellant did not adduce
any evidence as
referred to in its findings at [161]-[163] and [173]-[179] of the decision was
in error (Ground 13).
(14) The Tribunal’s findings on the misrepresentations made about a
qualified lawyer providing legal advice was in error at
[78]-[84] and
[164]-[166] (Ground 14).
(15) The dismissal of the appellant’s claims in relation to the legal
services and the findings at [159]-[166] and [186]-[197]
of the decision was in
error (Ground 15).
(16) The Tribunal’s findings in relation to the underquoting at
[240]-[245] misapplied the ACL and were in error (Ground 16).
appellant seeks an order by the Appeal Panel that the respondent’s
termination of the contract on 20 November 2023 was invalid.
She seeks a refund
of the deposit paid and the tender fees and seeks an order that the claim for
Variation 6, which she paid, is
not payable. The appellant also seeks a
declaration that the respondent is not entitled to termination compensation or
the deposit or the tender fee given its breaches of the HBA. She
claims compensation for “re-tender costs”, namely the
cost of the
appellant obtaining a new quotation, which she now has obtained from GJ Gardner,
and claims the difference between the
contract price and the GJ Gardner estimate
of $1,640,015. The appellant further claims relief for rescission of the
contract and
an order that the contract be declared void ab initio. The
appellant seeks restitution for the demolition of the house, her lost
consequential losses and compensation for her general consumer claims in the sum
of $70,175 for emotional distress, legal
fees and her time.
several of these claims are new claims that were not made by the appellants in
the proceedings at first instance.
Reply to Appeal
respondent supports the original orders made by the Tribunal, does not accept
that the Tribunal made errors of law and states
that the grounds of appeal in
the Notice of Appeal are in the nature of submissions rather than grounds of
respondent provided updated submissions in reply to the appellant’s
Amended Grounds of Appeal, including detailed submissions
in relation to each
amended ground. These are considered below. However, the respondent makes the
following submissions by way of
a general response to the appellant’s
Amended Grounds:
(1) The Amended Grounds are in the nature of submissions rather than clearly
articulated Grounds of Appeal.
(2) The appeal is an attempt by the appellant to run a different case on appeal,
raising matters that were not pressed at the hearing
or which were conceded.
(3) The appellant’s grounds do not raise a question of law and, at best,
raise questions of mixed fact and law which require
leave to appeal. In any
event, the grounds raised do not demonstrate that there was error made by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal considered
the claims raised by the appellant in her
Points of Claim and Revised Points of Claim.
(4) The appellant’s grounds should be rejected as they are replete with
errors made by the use of artificial intelligence,
which is not permissible
under NCAT Procedural Direction 7 – Use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence (Gen AI). In addition,
the appellant’s grounds and
submissions contain incorrect references to legal authority (described as
“fraudulent”)
and the appellant makes incorrect submissions about
the propositions raised by the cases and legislation cited. In summary, the
appellant’s
Amended Grounds of Appeal and submissions are
“gibberish” and contain incorrect and misconceived references or
propositions.
(5) Extracts from the transcript of the hearing and the history of the
proceedings demonstrates that there was no error in the Tribunal’s
findings or in the approach taken by the Tribunal.
(6) The appellant does not seek leave to appeal in her application but relies on
her contention that she raises questions of law
and therefore does not need
leave to appeal. The only leave requested by the appellant is leave to adduce
new evidence in support
of the appeal, which leave is opposed by the respondent.
make two observations in relation to the respondent’s Reply and
submissions in response to the appellant’s Amended
Grounds of Appeal.
the respondent’s submissions include descriptions of the appellant’s
grounds and submissions, such as “outrageous”
“fraudulent”. These references do not assist in identifying and
determining the critical issues in dispute in relation
to the appeal. However,
we accept that a number of these submissions are in response to personalised
criticisms of the respondent
in the appellant’s Amended Grounds and
submissions. The Appeal Panel has disregarded these unnecessary references in
both parties’
written contentions as they are largely irrelevant to the
issues that require consideration.
in the submissions and reply to the Amended Grounds of Appeal, the respondent
includes detailed commentary of the pre-hearing
directions made by the Tribunal
and extracts of a written “transcript” of the proceedings said from
the hearing before
the Tribunal first instance. The direction made by the Appeal
Panel directed to both parties was that if what happened at the hearing
instance was being relied on in the appeal, a typed transcript of the relevant
parts of the hearing together with the sound
recording of the entire hearing
should be filed and served. We do not consider that the extracts in the
submissions or in the material
provided by the respondent are sufficient to
satisfy this direction. For instance, the written extract was included as part
text of the submissions, it did not identify the time at which the
transcript referenced and there was nothing to indicate the accuracy
provenance of the transcript. The same can be said for the extracts provided in
the respondent’s material. As such, these
extracts were not taken into
account in our determination of the appeal.
Consideration
key issues for consideration are: first, whether the Amended Grounds of Appeal
raises questions of law; secondly, if so, whether
there was error and if so,
what orders should be made by the Appeal Panel; and, thirdly, if the Amended
Grounds do not raise questions
of law, should leave to appeal be nonetheless
Do the Amended Grounds of Appeal raise questions of
, the Appeal Panel observed that what constitutes a question of law
“is vexed and context dependent in the sense that the distinction
matters of fact and of law may turn on the circumstances in which the question
at [37]). It was also noted that, when dealing with
self-represented parties, the Appeal Panel may consider for itself whether a
question of law is raised. As such, if the material and submissions raise a
question of law in substance, a more generous approach
is warranted as an aspect
of ensuring procedural fairness, even though the ground has not been raised
expressly or with precision:
at [27]-[28].
was also the approach taken by the Appeal Panel in
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
, where the Appeal Panel stated at [13] that it was,
..appropriate for the Appeal Panel to review an appellant’s stated grounds
of appeal, the material provided, and the decision
of the Tribunal at first
instance to examine whether it is possible to discern grounds that may either
raise a question of law or
a basis for leave to appeal.
Unfortunately,
the unfocused nature of the Amended Grounds of Appeal makes it difficult to
discern the precise nature of the contentions
made, whether a question of law is
raised or whether leave is sought and, if so, the grounds for leave. It is
apparent from the Amended
Grounds, and the appellant agreed that this was the
case, that she had used a generative artificial intelligence program (Gen AI)
preparation of her Amended Grounds of Appeal, which included summaries of her
16 of the NCAT Procedural Direction 7 in relation the Gen AI provides that where
Gen AI has been used, parties must verify
in the body of the submissions and the
summaries that all citations, legal and academic authority and case law and
legislative references
are accurate and relevant to the proceedings. The
appellant did not do this and her Amended Grounds of Appeal, which were lengthy,
raised cases references and legal principles that either did not apply or were
not relevant to her case. We have nonetheless analysed
the Amended Grounds, to
identify the contentions raised and, in particular, whether the Amended Grounds
raise questions of law.
of law that appear to be raised by the appellant in her Amended Grounds of
Appeal include:
(1) Denial of procedural fairness
Prendergast
at [13](4));
Commissioner for Police, NSW Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAP 127
(2) A failure to exercise jurisdiction, which includes the failure to consider
and address a material issue raised by a party in
the proceedings that is within
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to determine (
Dranichnikov v Minister for
Immigration and Migration Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
Alexandria Landfill Pty
Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
and [413]). This category of error may also constitute a failure to accord
procedural fairness.
(3) Applying the wrong legal principle which materially affected the outcome
Bimson, Roads & Maritime Services v Damorange Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC
(4) Making a factual finding where there is no evidence to support that finding
Kostas v HIA Insurance Services Pty Ltd
(2010) 241 CLR 390
1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8 (which is related to 7) and part of 9 appear to raise claims
that the Tribunal failed to address and consider
a material issue raised by the
appellant before the Tribunal at first instance that was within its
a failure to exercise jurisdiction or a failure
to accord procedural fairness, which are questions of law. Grounds 3 and 4
to raise claims that the Tribunal failed to afford procedural fairness.
Some of the grounds also appear to raise contentions that
the Tribunal applied
the wrong legal principles, relevantly Grounds 10, 11 and 12. Ground 13 contends
that the Tribunal made a finding
that the appellant did not adduce
evidence, which was incorrect, raising a question of law.
balance of the grounds challenge findings made by the Tribunal on the evidence
provided. These contentions do not on their face
raise a question of law but
rather questions of fact or, at best, mixed fact and law. The appellant
therefore requires leave to appeal
on these other grounds.
examine each of the grounds raised by the appellant in her Amended Grounds of
Appeal below. However, before doing so, it is convenient
to first outline the
claims made by the appellant in the proceedings at first instance. This is
necessary to understand and determine
the appellant’s contention that the
Tribunal failed to consider claims made by her in the proceedings, which is a
claim denied
by the respondent.
Claims made by the appellant in
the proceedings at first instance
in the appellant’s bundle of appeal documents are documents that were
provided to the Tribunal at first instance by
the appellant, being: a document
headed Points of Claim provided to the Tribunal under cover of letter dated 9
December 2023; documents
headed Points of Response to the builder’s
amended claim; Revised Points of Response to the builder’s original claim
and Revised Points of Claim filed with the Tribunal on 4 March 2024; a further
document, described as Revised Points of Response
and Revised Points of Claim
filed on 14 May 2024 (but referenced in the decision as 5 April 2024) and
written submissions provided
to the Tribunal after the hearing in response to
the respondent’s reply submissions.
the appeal hearing, the appellant was asked to refer the Appeal Panel to the
document which best summarised the claims she
made at first instance. The
appellant referred to Part 6 of the Points of Claim document at pages 110 to 111
of her tender bundle
as being the summary of the claims that she made in the
proceedings.
summary document raises five claims. First, unconscionable conduct and
misrepresentation under sections 4, 21 and 29 of the ACL
and a claim for a
refund of the tender fee and compensation for misleading and deceptive conduct.
Secondly, claims about the refund
of the tender fee and, amongst other things,
compensation for misleading conduct. Thirdly, a claim in relation to what is
as a demand for “accurate and honest cost estimation in the
tender” and compensation for loss due to the builder’s
conduct. In this regard, the appellant sought a re-evaluation of the contractual
terms, particularly regarding the tender
fee. Fourthly, a claim for the
potential breach of the HBA relating to demolition and insurance coverage. In
the particulars to this
claim, the appellant requested financial compensation
for the impact of demolition without insurance and costs arising from the
termination and requested a refund of $21,155 paid for the demolition
expenses. Fifthly, the appellant claimed the builder failed
to include the OSD
and claimed breach of statutory warranties by failing to include an OSD.
the appellant’s Points of Response to the amended application, the
appellant took issue with the termination of the contract
by the builder on 20
November 2023 and, given the termination, sought refunds for the deposit of
$20,000, $26,611 for the plans and
$21,000 for the demolition fee paid to the
subcontractor.
her Revised Points of Claim filed on 4 March 2024, the appellant made claims in
relation to the OSD, the demolition works and made
claims alleging misleading
deceptive and unconscionable conduct which she claims induced her to enter into
the contract and agree
to the tenders of March and September 2021. The alleged
misconduct on the OSD was that the respondent had requested $160,000 upfront
the construction of the OSD and that an agreement had been reached between the
appellant and the respondent for the appellant
to investigate alternative
designs for the OSD.
written submissions lodged after the hearing comprise 46 pages and 287
paragraphs.
Tribunal referred to the original Points of Claim, the Revised Points of Claim
and the written submissions in its decision. The
Tribunal extracted paragraphs
182 to 196 of the appellant’s written submissions at [157], paragraphs 146
to 152 at [188], paragraph
183 at [191]-[192] and paragraphs 196 to 200 at
[248]. In addition, the Tribunal referred to or summarised paragraphs 115-30,
185, 188, 189, 192-193, 232, 241, 251-264, 263 and 273-275 of the
appellant’s written submissions at [153], [160], [170]-[171],
[187], [190]-[191] and [251] of the decision. The Tribunal also extracted
paragraphs 203 to 208 of the appellant’s Points
of Claim at [192].
references by the Tribunal to the appellant’s Points of Claim, revised
Points of Claim and Response and submissions do
not, of themselves, discount the
appellant’s contention that the Tribunal failed to consider material
claims made by her. However,
this is important context for the conclusions we
have reached on each of the Amended Grounds of Appeal.
on each of the Grounds
Ground 1 – failure to consider the appellant’s termination
compensation claim
appellant challenges the findings at [119]-[127] on the basis that the Tribunal
deals with her claims solely as consumer claims
and does not consider her claim
under s 48A of the HBA as a building claim. The appellant contends that she made
a “termination
compensation claim” to the effect that she was
entitled to terminate the residential building contract and because of this,
was thereby entitled to a refund of the deposit, and any may monies paid under
the contract. The appellant also contends that
the Tribunal incorrectly imposed
a limit for recovery under the ACL of $100,000. The appellant contends this is a
question of law
and she does not require leave.
respondent contends that these paragraphs of the decision merely set out the
consider the
appellant’s claims on these matters. There is no error.
of the documents referred to in [129]-[135] above, reveal that the only claim
that could be described as a “termination
compensation claim” is the
claim made at pp148-149 of the appellant’s appeal tender bundle, being the
claim in the Revised
Points of Claim document (pp126-149 of the tender bundle).
The claim made is that because of the builder’s breaches of contract,
statutory violations and deceptive conduct, the appellant requests rescission of
the building contract and seeks compensation for
her losses. The written
submissions of the appellant that were provided to the Tribunal after the
hearing also focus on misleading
conduct and misrepresentation during the
tendering process including entering into the contract.
claim for rescission was based on the appellant’s contention in the
proceedings at first instance that the contract should
be set aside. These
claims were not based on the HBA, save for the claim made in relation to s 89D
of the HBA, but rather the ACL.
The Tribunal considered these claims at length
in dealing with four of the claims made by the appellant and made findings about
matters, as outlined above, at [158] to [169], [170] to [185], [186] to
[197] and [238] to [243].
such, we reject the submission made by the appellant that the Tribunal
“misclassified” her claim as a claim under the
ACL and failed to
consider her “termination compensation claim”. Analysis of the
Tribunal’s reasons demonstrate
that the Tribunal carefully considered the
appellant’s claim that the contract should be set aside (or in her words,
based on the respondent’s alleged misconduct and her claim that
she should be compensated for all loses relating to this conduct.
made by the appellant were couched in terms of breach of the ACL and/or
contravention of the
Contracts Review Act
(and thereby also s 89D of the HBA).
The Tribunal’s reasons focussed on the appellant’s Points of Claim
or Revised Points
of Claim and written submissions, and, in our view, the
Tribunal correctly identified from the voluminous material provided by the
appellant, the essence of her claims.
ground is not established and is dismissed.
Grounds 2 and 9
– failure to address claims and/or error in relation to special conditions
under the contract
claims are related, and it is convenient to deal with them together.
appellant contends in Ground 2 that the Tribunal failed to address her defences
to the respondent’s enforcement of special
conditions 44.4, 49.1 and 53.5
for payment of multiple variations and the contract price adjustment. The
appellant also makes a related
claim in Ground 9 that the Tribunal was in error
in failing to find that special conditions 44.4, 49.1 and 53.5 were unfair. The
appellant further contends the Tribunal failed to consider special condition
45.2. However, examination of the appellant’s
claims and, in particular
her written submissions, reveals that she did not make any claims in relation to
clause 45.2, which explains
why this was not referred to by the Tribunal in its
reasons. We have disregarded this aspect of the appellant’s claims as this
is a new claim now sought to be made by the appellant that was not made before
the Tribunal at first instance.
respondent contends that Grounds 2 and 9 do not raise a pure question of law. It
is also contended that, in any event, it is clear
from the Tribunal’s
reasons it considered these contentions and rejected the appellant’s
claims that these contractual
provisions were unfair by reference to the
relevant legal authorities. The respondent contends that there is no error, and
grounds should be rejected.
accept this submission.
Tribunal considered these claims at [198]-[237] and [233]-[235] of its
relation to Ground 2, the appellant claims that clauses 44.4, 49.1 and 53.5
unfairly allowed the respondent to make a claim for
$160,000 relating to the
OSD, which should have been included in the contract. The Tribunal deals with
this issue at [233]-[235],
stating, correctly in our view, that clause 49.1
would not validly operate in respect to the claim for $160,000 relating to the
unless the item of work was an excluded item that was required by the
provision for stormwater drainage with a provisional allowance of $13,000. It
was therefore not an excluded item. The appellant
contends that there was
underquoting for the OSD. However, this raises a different claim and another
ground of appeal.
Ground 9, the appellant simply challenges all of the findings made by the
Tribunal at [198]-[237] where the Tribunal found, after
setting out its
reasoning, that it was not satisfied special conditions 44.4, 49.1 and 53.5 were
unfair. The precise basis for this
ground is not clear so we have examined the
particulars provided in the Amended Grounds of Appeal.
her particulars, the appellant identifies the errors of law as being; accepting
an out of time amendment without leave (we deal
with this issue in our
consideration of Ground 3 below but it is not explained how this impacts the
findings challenged), mischaracterising
the appellant’s basis for
disputing the original invoices (this particular also does not explain how this
impacts the findings
challenged), misclassification of defensive submissions as
independent claims (this particular is difficult to understand in circumstances
where the appellant raises concerns that various clauses of contract, which she
contended should be set aside as unfair, allowed
for certain claims to be made
by the respondent), failure to apply statutory HBA and Security of Payment Act
defences (the relevance
of this is not explained nor is it clear that it was an
issue raised in the proceedings), misapplication of the significant imbalance
test in s 24 (the particulars provided do not explain the nature of the error)
and errors said to relate to the “nullity of
deemed variations” and
“void pay when paid contingencies” (also not explained).
summary, the Tribunal examined and rejected these claims and, in so doing, gave
detailed reasons for its findings. The Tribunal
applied the relevant provisions
of the ACL and carefully examined the terms and effect of each of the clauses of
the contract challenged
by the appellant.
grounds are not established and are dismissed.
procedural fairness in allowing late amendment and related claims
ground raises a procedural fairness issue insofar as the appellant contends that
the Tribunal allowed the respondent to lodge
a late amended claim without leave.
The appellant also contends, in the particulars provided for this ground, that
the Tribunal failed
to decide the appellant’s defences, her deposit claims
and wrongful termination compensation claim. This latter contention
similar issues to those raised in Grounds 1, 7 and 8.
ground relates to the fact the Tribunal accepted the respondent’s amended
application on 16 December 2023, which increased
the quantum of the claim made
by the respondent to $134,675.70 to include termination damages. The basis for
the amendment was that
the respondent terminated the contract on 20 November
2023 and thereby claimed additional damages for breach.
amendment was made to seek damages after termination of the contract. The
respondent contends that as this claim was not pressed
at the hearing by the
respondent, there was no prejudice suffered by the appellant.
have reviewed the particulars provided in support of this ground, which are
nonetheless difficult to understand. Part of this claim
appears to be similar to
the claim the appellant makes in Ground 1, being the “termination
compensation claim”.
paragraph 31 of the particulars to Ground 3, the appellant states that her
entitlement to compensation flows from the Tribunal’s
failure to rule on,
yet nevertheless dismiss, her pleaded defence that the respondent wrongfully
terminated the contract on 20 November
2023. She further states the termination
notice issued by the respondent was invalid and contends she was entitled to
treat the contract
at an end as at 20 November 2023 and thereby claim
compensation for wrongful termination by the respondent. The appellant seeks an
order for repayment of all amounts paid under the contract, being the $35,000
tender fee, a further $20,000 dollars paid by way of
deposit and $26,611.00
which she paid for Variation 6. The appellant further contends that the damages
she is entitled to is the
difference between the alternative quote she obtained
from another builder, GJ Gardner, for the construction of the duplex and the
contract price, which is $742,177.
are two problems with this ground.
the respondent did not press its claim for additional damages, and it was
therefore unnecessary for the Tribunal to determine
this issue. This is
reflected in the findings made by the Tribunal in [132] to [136]. Accordingly,
the question of whether the Tribunal
should have refused leave to the respondent
to amend its claim is moot because the appellant suffered no prejudice. This
Ground 3 fails.
it is unclear how the amendment impacts any claim for “wrongful
termination” damages. Nor is it apparent that
this was a claim made in the
proceedings before the Tribunal at first instance.
appellant contends that the Tribunal failed to rule on the question of whether
the respondent had wrongly terminated the contract
and if it had done so, it
would have found the termination was invalid, the contract was still on foot,
the respondent wrongfully
repudiated the contract and the appellant was thereby
entitled to claim damages for the respondent’s wrongful repudiation.
ground is inconsistent with claims made by the appellant in the proceedings at
first instance that the contract should be rescinded
or set aside because of
misrepresentation and misconduct and that all moneys paid under the contract
should be refunded.
claim now raised on appeal is that the Tribunal should have ruled that the
contract was still on foot and the appellant lost the
opportunity of her
bargain, which is why she now seeks to rely on the quotation from GJ Gardner.
This was not a claim made by the
appellant in her Points of Claim, the Summary
of Claims referred to during the hearing of the appeal (at pp110-111 of the
tender bundle) or the Revised Points of Claim. The only lost opportunity
claim referred to in the written submissions provided to
the Tribunal after the
hearing at first instance was the claim for lost rental as a result of the
demolition of the house.
claim made by the appellant, as set out on page 45 of the appellant’s
written submissions to the Tribunal at first instance,
was for damages of
$482,0012.67, comprising $54,600 for rental income loss, $327,818 for the value
of the demolished house, $29,419.67
for consequential losses, being for
professional costs and compliance with the development consent conditions, and
$70,175 for general
consumer claims.
Tribunal did not refer to this lost opportunity claim in its reasons, and this
is because no such claim was made.
ground is rejected, both in relation to the procedural fairness claim and the
claim that the Tribunal failed to consider the
appellant’s wrongful
termination claim.
Ground 4 –denial of procedural fairness
and evidentiary errors (email from Council dated 25 June 2021)
appellant alleges a denial of procedural fairness and “evidentiary
errors” in respect of the Tribunal’s findings
in relation to an
email from the Council dated 25 June 2021. The appellant challenges the findings
made by the Tribunal at [69] to
was a dispute in the proceedings about this email. The Tribunal noted at [69]
that there were two possible versions of this
communication, one being the
version exhibited to the statement of one of the respondent’s witnesses
and one included in appellant’s
evidence referred to at [71] of the
decision, being a copy of the email obtained by the appellant from the Council
pursuant an application
made by her under the
Government Information (Public
Access) Act
(NSW) (GIPA). The Tribunal found that the version of the
email attached to the respondent’s evidence was the email that was
the Council to the respondent at [76] as follows:
I find that the 25 June 2021 email which Mr Trifiro sent to Mr Malesev is the
version at exhibit 1, SM-1 pp102-103. I do not accept
that Mr Malesev or any
other employee has altered the document and exhibited the document which was
received. I do so for three reasons.
First, the allegation of altering records a
serious allegation and involves, in these circumstances, an element of
dishonesty. Second,
the document obtained under the GIPA Act (Ex B p145) appears
to be an internal draft which required further refining before being
ready to be
sent. The words “
Yvette can you please trim this email and draft a
letter to the applicant with this info
” suggests the document obtained
under the GIPA Act was a draft which needed to be trimmed and that a letter was
to be drafted
on the basis of the contents of the email. Thirdly, the document
Mr Malesev received on 25 June 2021 was sent to the homeowner on
28 June 2021(Ex
B p64). Consequently, had Mr Malesev intended to alter the document his decision
to do so must have been taken in
June 2021. However, in June 2021 the parties
were not in dispute and there was no apparent motivation to do so.
both versions of the email noted that the Council did not accept that works had
been substantially commenced in relation
to the previous development approval
and both emails noted that the Council, or in the case of the second email, the
certification
team, did not accept that the development approval had been
activated. The first version of the email set out the reasons why the
had formed this opinion, and the second version simply noted that if the
respondent was dissatisfied with this decision,
it was “more than welcome
to take further legal action, or Council will be happy to sign over the
certification role to another
certifier”.
the particulars to this ground, the appellant contends that the Tribunal
misapplied the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
standard, the Tribunal only
superficially engaged in the key discrepancies in the evidence and in fairness
should have issued a summons
to the Council for the original email as requested
by the appellant in a submission made on 25 November 2024. It is submitted that
the Tribunal declined to issue the summons, gave no reasons and, by so doing,
denied the appellant a reasonable opportunity to present
decisive evidence about
which email was the correct version.
respondent contends that this ground should be rejected. The question of the
authenticity of the email is purely a question of
fact and not a question of
law. The appellant seeks to reverse the operation of
as the requisite standard of proof when it is the appellant who claims that
documents were doctored. There is no evidence
that the Tribunal refused to issue
a summons address to the Council in any event and the request by the appellant
for leave to issue
a summons for production as part of the relief sought by the
appellant is fundamentally misconceived.
reject this ground of appeal for a number of reasons.
the Tribunal set out the basis for its findings at [76]. The reasons are clear,
and the findings were open to the Tribunal
on the available evidence. One of the
observations made by the Tribunal, correctly in our view, was that an allegation
the respondent
deliberately altered the email is an allegation of dishonesty,
which was a serious claim. There is no reference to
decision, but we accept the respondent’s submission that the appellant, as
the party making this claim, had the burden
to provide evidence that was
sufficient for the Tribunal to be comfortably satisfied about this assertion. We
also accept the submission
that this is not a question of law but rather a
question of fact. There was conflicting evidence on this issue and the approach
by the Tribunal in its fact finding was considered and careful. There was
nothing illogical or superficial about the reasoning. As
such, we are not
satisfied there was error.
we reject the contention that the Tribunal’s refusal to issue a summons to
the Council to resolve this issue was a
denial of procedural fairness. We also
reject the appellant’s contention that the Tribunal’s failure to
give reasons
for the refusal was procedurally unfair.
is no material before the Appeal Panel relating to this request or any refusal.
In the absence of evidence about this issue,
this ground must fail.
also note that the appellant contends the request was made on 25 November 2024.
If the request was made on this date, any such
request was well after the
hearing had been finalised, well after the submissions of the parties had been
filed and just over a week
before the Tribunal published its reasons. Such a
request would have been in the nature of a request to reopen the proceedings
after they had been finalised. The utility of this request so late in the
proceedings, particularly when the appellant had already
obtained material under
the GIPA Act, is questionable.
it is not apparent how the different versions of the email are relevant or
material to the appellant’s claims. For
instance, there is no dispute that
the respondent sent the appellant the first version of the email and she had
this before she entered
into the second tender. If the second version of the
email is said to support the appellant’s claim that she would have changed
certifiers, this issue was considered by the Tribunal in its reasons at [163].
such, this ground does not disclose error on a question of law, or at all, and
Ground 4 is dismissed.
Grounds 5 and 16 – failure to
consider claims (OSD and underquoting)
5 and 16 both raise concerns about how the Tribunal dealt with claims of
underquoting in relation to the OSD. It is convenient
to deal with both grounds
Ground 5, the appellant contends that she made extensive submissions in relation
to the OSD and that the Tribunal did not deal
with those submissions about
whether the OSD, and not just the OSD walls, were excluded from the contract.
The appellant also submits
that the Tribunal failed to make findings in relation
to the “jurisdiction facts” required to determine cl 53.5. The
appellant refers to her Points of Claim, her Revised Points of Claim, further
Revised Points of Claim and written submissions filed
after the proceedings
(appeal bundle pp70-79, 126-129 and 157 and copy written submissions at pp
35-39, paras 202-232). The appellant’s
claims about the OSD as recorded in
these documents are summarised as follows:
(1) The Points of Claim (pp70-79) states that while the September 2021 tender
introduced a provisional allowance of $13,000 for the
stormwater drainage works,
it excluded detention basin walls and/or retaining walls. Full engineering
construction details of the
stormwater system, including the OSD structures and
pipes, were to be submitted as part of the development application notice of
determination. No provision was made for the collection, diversion and
dispersion of surface water to statutory or other authority
satisfaction and, as
the OSD was a mandated condition of the development application notice of
determination, it should have been
included. Clause 53.5 of the contract applied
if work is excluded under the contract and the work is required by the owner or
a statutory
authority. This was the case in relation to the OSD. The respondent
notified the appellant by email dated 14 July 2023 of the proposed
cost estimate
of $160,000. The respondent was required to provide the OSD under the HBA. The
respondent made unreasonable financial
demands of $160,000 for the construction
of the OSD when third-party quotes of $61,900 and $60,500 suggested potential
over-pricing
and financial coercion.
(2) This claim was repeated in the Revised Points of Claim (at pp126-29) and in
the further Revised Points of Claim at p157.
(3) In her written submissions, the appellant disputes the respondent’s
contention that the OSD was included as a provisional
amount and contends the
respondent refused to provide a detailed quotation and scope of works for the
OSD. These submissions appear
to be different to the claims made by the
appellant in her pleadings.
respondent contends that this issue does not raise a question of law, the OSD
was a provisional sum (as submitted by the respondent
in the proceedings) and
the Tribunals findings at [244] to [245] were findings that were available to
the Tribunal on the evidence.
reject the appellant’s contention that the Tribunal did not consider her
claims in relation to the OSD.
appellant made extensive claims and submissions about the OSD, which are
summarised above. Those claims were repeated in each
of the Points of Claim
documents but in essence the appellant contended that the OSD should have been
included as it was required
under the development consent and clauses 49.1 and
53.5 were unfair because they unilaterally allowed the respondent to make high
demands in the relation to the OSD. Further, and this appears to be the
appellant’s main complaint because she specifically
raised this at the
appeal hearing, the estimated cost for the OSD was significant and the
respondent knew the provisional allowance
did not reflect its true costs. The
respondent underestimated the allowance, which was misleading and in breach of
its obligations
of due skill and care.
Tribunal made findings in relation to these claims. The Tribunal found that
clauses 49.1 and 53.5 did not allow the respondent
to unilaterally make high
demands in relation to the OSD. The provisional allowance of $13,000
acknowledged the need for the construction
of stormwater drainage but
specifically excluded certain items from the provisional estimate. This was
clear from the provisional
allowance. The terms were not unfair (refer
[232]-[236]). The Tribunal also dealt with the claim about the underquoting at
and [245]. In brief, the Tribunal was not satisfied that there was
evidence the respondent knew the allowance for the onsite drainage
not reflect its true costs at the time the allowance was made or that there was
evidence the respondent had engaged in
wrongful conduct of under-quoting.
such, it is apparent that the Tribunal did consider these claims and made
findings of fact, which were available on the evidence.
There is no error of law
on a question of law, or at all. We therefore reject this ground.
Ground 16, the appellant contends that the Tribunal’s findings at
[240]-[245] in relation to underquoting misapplied the
ACL and were in
reply, the respondent contends that Ground 16 involves mixed questions of fact
and law but is, in any event, baseless.
support of this claim, the appellant contends that the stormwater allowance of
$13,000, which later increase to $160,000, distorted
the overall cost picture.
The Tribunal’s findings in relation to the underquoting allegedly
misstates the “consumer centric
test” for s 18 of the ACL. It is
further contended that the Tribunal’s rejection of the GJ Gardner
estimates “flouts”
the obligation under the ACL to consider all
credible market evidence.
ground is misconceived and does not identify any legal error in statutory
interpretation or authority. The Tribunal did not misapply
the ACL and the
findings made by the Tribunal at were open to the Tribunal on the available
evidence. At best, this ground raises
a question of mixed fact and law.
Accordingly,
this ground is also dismissed.
Ground 6 – demolition
insurance claim
appellant contends that the Tribunal erred by failing to enforce the
respondent’s obligations under clause 38 of the contract
which required
the respondent, at its costs, to maintain all risk insurance covering the
building works. The appellant challenges
the finding made by the Tribunal at
[248]. This ground relates to the claim by the appellant about the demolition
its reply, the respondent submits that this is not a pure question of law and
was not part of the appellant’s claims before
the Tribunal at first
Tribunal extracts those parts of the appellant’s submissions relating to
this claim at [248]. The Tribunal states at [249]
appellant’s submissions did not identify a precise cause of action which
might found a remedial order that
the Tribunal could make” but nonetheless
considers the claims made and deals with this claim at [249]-[251]. The Tribunal
not persuaded by the claim and further stated that the evidence did not
establish the matters asserted in the homeowner’s submissions.
should also be noted, in the event this ground could be characterised as a
failure to consider a material relevant claim, there
was no reference to clause
38 in submissions extracted or in the various Points of Claim and Revised Points
of Claim documents. The
key claim made by the appellant (recorded at p87, para
168 of the appeal bundle) is that the respondent did not have insurance in
before commencing the demolition works, thereby exposing the appellant to loss.
The appellant also raised concerns about the
$20,000 claimed for demolition
costs referred to in the contract and the $5,000 referred to in the tender
(Revised Points of Claim,
p158 appeal bundle). These claims were considered and
such, there is no error on a question of law, nor has the appellant established
error or unfairness. This ground is rejected.
Grounds 7 and 8
– failing to make a ruling on claims for refunds
grounds are similar. The appellant contends that the Tribunal was in error in
failing to make a ruling on whether the amount
paid by the appellant of $35,000
and Variation 6 (for $26,611) should be refunded (Ground 7). The appellant also
contends the Tribunal
failed to consider the appellant’s claim for a
return of the $20,000 paid and a refund of the deposit of $35,000 (Ground
reply, the respondent contends that neither ground raises a pure question of
relation to Ground 7, the appellant gave evidence to the Tribunal at first
instance that she was not seeking reimbursement of $26,611,
being reimbursement
of the various costs incurred for Council lodgement fees, surveyor fees and
8 raises a question of mixed fact and law
but in any event, there was no error. The tender fee was non-refundable and was
under the tender dated 31 March 2021. The appellant’s reference to
the principle of frustration of contract to justify her
claim that moneys paid
prior to termination are recoverable, is misconceived. If a contract is
“frustrated” the contract
not only terminates obligations under the
contract as to the future obligations but terminates the right of the payee to
money received only on the terms of the contract performance. This
doctrine is not relevant to the facts of this case.
Tribunal considered claims about the refund of moneys paid in the context of the
relief claimed by the appellant for misleading
and deceptive conduct and on the
grounds that the contract should be set aside as unfair and unconscionable. The
findings of the
Tribunal about these matters are set out at [158]-[243] of the
decision. In rejecting these claims, the Tribunal also rejected the
appellant’s claims for a refund of the moneys paid under the
is unclear whether the issues now raised by the appellant were raised at first
instance because the claims made about refunds are
confusing. Even if they were
raised, Grounds 7 and 8 do not raise an error on a question of law that we can
discern from the grounds
Accordingly,
these grounds are rejected.
Ground 10 – failure to consider
systematic nature of the conduct
appellant contends the Tribunal adopted a piecemeal approach in dealing with the
multiple misrepresentations and multiple breaches
of warranties and failed to
consider the systemic nature of the conduct alleged by the appellant.
reply, the respondent contends that the appellant has misquoted the authority
when she submits that the Tribunal should have considered
her claims about
misleading and deceptive conduct by reference to an “overall impression of
whether there was systemic misleading
in deceptive conduct”. The
respondent contends that the High Court decision relied upon by the appellant of
ACCC v TPG Internet
[2013] HCA 54
is not authority for this
proposition but is rather authority of the proposition that “there must be
a sufficient causal link
between the conduct and the error on the part of the
person exposed to it”. The respondent further contends that the
appellant’s
case hinged on establishing that the alleged representations
were in fact made and that the representations induced her to enter
second tender. It is submitted that the Tribunal considered the alleged
misrepresentations and the material facts in detail
and “comprehensively
dismantled” that claim. In summary, the respondent submits there was no
error on a question of law
and if there was any error, it is a classic example
of a mixed question fact and law.
accept the submission that this ground raises a mixed question of fact and law.
We also accept the submission that there was no
error made by the Tribunal in
noted above, the Tribunal extracted the relevant paragraphs of the
appellant’s submissions in its reasons at [157]. This
included the
following submission made by the appellant in para 195 (extracted by the
Tribunal in its reasons) which appears to be
the gravamen of the
applicant’s concerns:
The owner was induced into accepting the second tender due to deceptive,
misleading, and misrepresentative actions by the builder.
The builder misled the
owner into believing that qualified legal advice was provided by an independent
lawyer, rather than by the
builder’s own non-legally qualified staff.
Furthermore, the omission and redaction of email trails misled the owner into
there was no alternative options regarding the Principal Certifying
Authority (PCA). The second tender was presented with significant
design changes
and increased costs but quoted at the same price as the first tender ($897,838)
with the same stormwater allowance
($13,000) creating a false impression of the
project’s true cost. The builder’s actions, including withholding
information and failing to disclose serious conflict of interest with
advice from an initially undisclosed “lawyer” deprived
the owner of
making an informed decision and breached good faith and fair dealing.
Tribunal dealt with the detail of these claims made by the appellant at
[158]-[169] and [170]-[185] of the decision and at [244]-[245]
in relation to
the OSD and the underquoting. The Tribunal made comprehensive findings about
each of these claims. It was necessary
for the Tribunal to consider the claims
individually to determine whether the facts alleged were established. After
considering those
matters, the Tribunal then went on to consider whether the
conduct or representation was misleading and deceptive and, if so, whether
appellant had suffered any loss or damage as a consequence of the conduct. Those
findings are detailed, identify the conduct
or representations in context and by
reference to the surrounding circumstances and necessarily consider the question
the conduct or representation resulted in any loss or damage to the
appellant’s contention that the Tribunal’s approach was
“piecemeal” and therefore wrongful is rejected.
This ground of
appeal is dismissed.
Ground 11– error in not considering
conduct after 18 June 2021
appellant contends that the Tribunal improperly excluded conduct after 18 June
2021 in its findings at [170]-[172]. This ground
appears to raise the contention
that the Tribunal misapplied s 18 of the ACL. It is also contended that there
was a constructive
refusal by the Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction by failing
to consider any conduct after 18 June 2021.
respondent submits that this ground does not raise a pure question of law as it
turns on consideration of both facts and law.
accept that a contention the Tribunal misapplied the law inevitably raises
questions of both fact and law because it is necessary
to determine what matters
were taken into account by the Tribunal in making its findings. As such, this is
not a pure question of
law. However, the contention that the Tribunal failed to
take into account material considerations and thereby failed to exercise
this, we reject this ground of appeal.
Tribunal considered conduct that occurred after 29 June 2021 but found that,
insofar as the appellant was seeking to set aside
the contract entered into on
18 June 2021, conduct prior to this date could not be the basis for setting
aside a contract that had
already been entered into. This is plainly correct. To
the extent that the appellant claimed there was misleading and deceptive conduct
after this date, it was relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of
whether it should make orders in relation to the second
tender entered into in
September 2021. The Tribunal considered this, and its findings are set out at
such, there is no error. This ground is rejected.
– misapplication of causation test
appellant contends that the Tribunal misapplied the causation test at [157]-
[197] of the decision by insisting that each misrepresentation
“rigid but for” causation test considered in isolation. In support
of this ground, the appellant again makes
the submission that liability under s
18 of the ACL turns on the “overall impression” created by the
reply, the respondents submits that this is not a pure question of law as it
turns on consideration of both facts and law. The
respondent further contends
that there was no error in any event because relief under s 18 of the ACL is
founded upon proof of actual
reliance on the conduct alleged to constitute the
accept this submission and for the reasons also outlined in relation to Ground
10, we reject this ground of appeal.
Ground 13 – no
evidence finding
appellant contends the Tribunal was in error in its findings at [161]-[163] and
[173]-[179] that she did not adduce
evidence. If this contention is
correct, this would be a question of law (refer
relevant finding made by the Tribunal is at [162]-[163] as follows:
162 However, the homeowner did not adduce any evidence to the
effect that a different PCA would have concluded that the removal
of the trees
would in their view have constituted commencement of the works in the sense
required by the development consent. This
was not the only evidence that may
have identified a loss, but it is one type of evidence that may have done so. In
any event, there
was no evidence to the effect that any opportunity was lost by
the homeowner because she did not change the PCA.
163 Similarly, although the builder did not advise the
not adduce any cogent evidence that established that the builder’s failure
to advise the homeowner resulted in a loss of
opportunity or other relevant
loss. The homeowner did not lead evidence that had Mr Trifiro’s
communication been disclosed
to her by the builder then she would have contact
Mr Trifiro and taken steps such as changing the PCA together with evidence from
a certifier to the effect that the removal of the trees would in their view
constitute commencement of the works in the sense required
by the development
consent. This was not the only evidence that may have been identified that may
have identified loss of opportunity,
but it is one type of evidence that may
have done so.
respondent contends that this is not a pure question of law and turns on
analysis of the documents adduced in evidence. The respondent
also contends that
the conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal were available on the evidence.
noted, this may be a question of law, but this requires consideration of whether
the Tribunal actually made a finding that there
have examined [173]-[179] of the decision. The Tribunal does not state that the
appellant failed to adduce any evidence. It is
clear from these paragraphs that
the Tribunal considered the available evidence and makes findings based on this
evidence. We therefore
do not accept the premise of this ground.
also note that the appellant does not refer to any evidence that she adduced to
this effect but instead makes submissions about
the approach taken by the
Tribunal in relation to her claim.
matters do not raise a question of law, and it is apparent from the
appellant’s submissions on this ground that she challenges
Tribunal’s findings, which were made having regard to the available
evidence. This ground requires leave. Notably, the
appellant does not seek leave
and provided no submissions addressing the question of leave all the
considerations set out in Schedule
ground is rejected.
Grounds 14 and 15 – error in dismissing
claims about legal advice and legal services
Ground 14, the appellant contends that the Tribunal’s findings at
[78]-[84] and [164]-[166] relating to the misrepresentations
made by the
respondent about a “qualified lawyer” providing legal advice were in
error. In Ground 15, the appellant challenges
the dismissal of her claims in
relation to “legal services” and contends that the findings of the
Tribunal at [159]-[166]
and [186]-[197] were in error.
these contentions raise similar claims about legal advice or legal services said
to have been provided or to be provided to the
appellant, it is convenient to
deal with both of these grounds together.
its reply, the respondent contends that these grounds do not raise a pure
question of law and turn on analysis of questions of
mixed law and fact. It is
further submitted that there was no error or misrepresentation about legal
qualifications and the appellant’s
contentions are unsustainable.
precise nature of the complaints made in Grounds 14 and 15 is unclear. We have
nonetheless examined the relevant parts of the
decision to discern if there was
Tribunal made the relevant findings about these matters at [165]-[168] and
[186]-[197].
Tribunal found at [165] that the respondent’s characterisation of the
source of provenance of the matters set out in its
letter of 29 June 2021 was
from a “qualified lawyer” was conduct that was misleading and
deceptive. However, the Tribunal
further found at [166] that even if this
characterisation was misleading or deceptive, the Tribunal was not satisfied
that the appellant
suffered any loss and damage for the reasons set out in that
paragraph in detail. The Tribunal further considered whether communications
29 June 2021 constituted legal advice in contravention of the
Profession Uniform Law
2014 and found that it did not at [168].
our view, this is a case where the findings made by the Tribunal at [166] and
[168] were findings that were open to the Tribunal
on the evidence.
relation to the second ground, the Tribunal was not satisfied that that the
respondent had represented it would provide legal services,
setting out its
reasons at [193]-[194]. Nor was it satisfied that the respondent was unwilling
to perform it obligations in relation
to Land and Environment Court proceedings
the appellant decided not to pursue proceedings and instead decided
to pursue a new development application at [195]. The Tribunal
rejected the
claims that the respondent’s conduct was misleading and deceptive or
likely to mislead or deceive at [196]-[197].
These were findings of fact that
were also open to the Tribunal on the evidence.
essence, Grounds 14 and 15 challenge findings of fact made by the Tribunal at
[165]-[168] and [186]-[197] in relation to legal
advice and legal services
allegedly provided by the respondent.
grounds do not raise an error on a question of law, and the appellant requires
leave to appeal. She does not seek leave and
has provided no submissions
addressing these issues.
grounds are rejected.
Conclusions
the reasons outlined above, we are not satisfied that the appellant has
established that there are any errors of law on a question
of law. We have
therefore dismissed each ground of appeal.
appellant does not seek leave to appeal in relation to any of these grounds.
Despite this, and because she is a litigant in person,
we have considered
whether the appellant should be given leave to appeal on any of these grounds or
as a whole.
Leave to appeal
gateway for the exercise of discretion to give leave to appeal is that the
Appeal Panel must be satisfied that there has been
a substantial miscarriage of
justice on the grounds set out in cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act. Relevantly,
the appellant must
establish that there has been a substantial miscarriage of
justice because the decision was not fair and equitable, it was against
weight of evidence or because significant new evidence has arisen, being
evidence that was not reasonably available at the time
of the proceedings.
have reviewed the Amended Grounds of Appeal and the decision of the Tribunal,
which was comprehensive. We are not satisfied that
there is anything to indicate
that the decision under appeal was not fair and equitable. The Tribunal provided
the appellant with
reasonable opportunity to present her case and prior to the
hearing, there were detailed directions about evidence. A review of the
and the claims made by the appellant reveal that the Tribunal made considerable
efforts to identify and consider the claims
made, even though some of the claims
made were confused, repetitive and inconsistent. Notably, the decision refers to
or extracts
submissions and claims made by the appellant and analyses those
claims in the reasons.
are we satisfied that the decision was against the weight of evidence. The fact
that the appellant did not adduce sufficient evidence
to satisfy the Tribunal
suffered a substantial miscarriage
of justice. It is apparent from the decision
that the Tribunal carefully considered the evidence presented by both parties
weighing this evidence, made findings of fact on the basis of the
evidence. It is also apparent that the Tribunal made a number of
findings in favour of the appellant but was ultimately not satisfied she could
establish loss, reliance or damage.
the appellant was not able to point to any new evidence that had arisen that was
not reasonably available at the time of
the proceedings. The only evidence she
referred to is the evidence from GJ Gardner which was not compelling in any
event. This evidence
comprises an email about the cost of completing the duplex
now. This is not a cause of action that was available to the appellant
event. During the course of the appeal, and in her written submissions after the
hearing at first instance, the appellant
argued that the respondent had
wrongfully terminated the contract and this wrongful repudiation gave rise to a
claim for damages,
being the difference between the contract claim and the
estimated cost of retaining another contractor to construct the duplex. This
not the claim originally made by the appellant and this claim is inconsistent
with the claim that the contract should be set
aside, from the outset, on the
basis of misleading in deceptive conduct or alternatively, unconscionable
Accordingly,
we refuse leave to appeal.
Costs of the appeal
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules)
applies to costs in internal appeals. The effect of r 38A is that in the appeal
of a decision of the Consumer
and Commercial Division, the costs provisions
applying in the proceedings at first instance (in this case r 38) are carried
to the costs rules applying to the appeal of the decision. This being the
case, if the amount claimed or in dispute in the appeal
is more than $30,000,
the Appeal Panel will have a discretion to award costs. In this appeal, the
amount in dispute exceeded $30,000.
As such, we have a discretion to make an
order for costs.
the proceedings at first instance, the Tribunal ordered that each party pay
their own costs.
parties requested costs of the appeal in their written submissions.
respondent was successful, and, in the usual course, the winning party would be
awarded costs. However, the costs of the appeal
were not argued at the hearing
of the appeal, pending the outcome.
have therefore made directions to deal with any application for costs.
Conclusions and orders
Appeal Panel makes the following orders and directions:
(1) The time for the appellant to lodge a Notice of Appeal from the orders of
the Tribunal made on 6 December 2024 is extended to
6 January 2025.
(2) To the extent leave to appeal is required, leave is refused.
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
(4) If a party to the appeal wishes to make an application for costs, the
following directions apply:
(a) the party applying for costs (the costs applicant) must, within 14 days
after the publication of this decision, give the other
party (the costs
respondent) and the Registry any submissions and documents the costs applicant
intends to rely on in relation to
the application, including on the question as
to whether costs should be fixed or assessed;
(b) the costs respondent must, within 14 days after receiving the submissions
and documents of the costs applicant, give the costs
applicant and the Registry
any submissions and documents the costs respondent intends to rely on in
response to the application for
(c) the costs applicant must, within 7 days after receiving the submissions and
documents of the costs respondent, give the costs
respondent and the Registry
any additional submissions and documents the costs applicant intends to rely on
in response to the costs
respondent’s submissions and documents;
(d) the parties are to include, in their written submissions concerning the
application for costs, their submissions about whether
they consider that a
hearing in relation to the application can be dispensed with pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (493 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter