URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UUU [2013] NSWGT 24 (22 August 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 24
(22 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
22 August 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr Bill Tearle
Professional Member:
Dr Gail Jamieson
Community Member:
Ms Maria Circuitt
Guardianship application – person objecting
to application – who should be appointed - Public Guardian appointed as
for a period of 12 months to make decisions about health care, medical
and dental treatment, and services.
Procedural issues - Leave
granted to be legally represented – Standing of applicant –
applicant is husband (separated)
– Tribunal determined that applicant had
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 22 August 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian as Ms UUU’s guardian for a period
of 12 months, to make decisions on her behalf about
her health care, medical and
dental treatment, and the services which she should receive.
UUU, who is 40 years old, lives with her parents, Mrs DDJ and Mr WEQ, in
southwest Sydney. Ms UUU is separated from her husband,
Mr BGH, with whom she
has three children. Ms UUU is reported to have experienced a severe cerebral
haemorrhage in November 2010.
BGH, the separated husband of Ms UUU, applied to the Tribunal for the
appointment of both a guardian and a financial manager for
a hearing conducted on 30 April 2013, the Tribunal:
granted leave
for Ms UUU to be legally represented in these proceedings;
committed Ms
UUU’s financial affairs to the management of the NSW Trustee;
ordered that any
Centrelink pension or benefit to which Ms UUU may be entitled is to be excluded
from her estate under management;
adjourned the
hearing of the application for a guardianship order for approximately two
months, to a date to be fixed by the Registrar.
was, quite simply, insufficient time available on 30 April 2013 to conduct, or
even to commence, the substantive hearing of
Mr BGH's application for a
guardianship order for Ms UUU. Accordingly, the Tribunal determined to adjourn
its hearing of the application
for a guardianship order.
Tribunal on 30 April 2013:
reminded the
participants that Ms UUU’s welfare and interests must, by law, be given
paramount consideration; and
encouraged the
parties and the other participants to talk with each other before the next
hearing, with a view to exploring the possibility
of making arrangements that
might operate in Ms UUU’s best interests.
a procedural hearing conducted on 27 June 2013, the Tribunal adjourned these
proceedings for 8 weeks at the request of Mr Vaughan
Massey, Ms UUU's legal
representative. Mr Massey had sought that adjournment so as to obtain an
independent medical report concerning
Ms UUU's future treatment
THE EVIDENCE AND THE TRIBUNAL'S
GUARDIANSHIP
Reasons for this
application
BGH was concerned that Ms UUU was not receiving an appropriate level of
rehabilitation, and he also claimed that Ms UUU was subject
to verbal abuse by
her parents. At the commencement of the earlier hearing on 30 April 2013, Mr
BGH submitted that Ms UUU needs
a guardian to make decisions regarding all
aspects of her living arrangements.
Vaughan Massey, Ms UUU's legal representative, indicated that his client opposed
the application. Mr Massey submitted that Ms
UUU is able to make adequate
decisions concerning her accommodation, and other personal issues, with the
support of her family.
What did the Tribunal have to
the Tribunal may make a guardianship order, it must be satisfied that:
Ms UUU is a
person with a disability within the meaning of the Guardianship Act;
because of that
disability/those disabilities, Ms UUU is totally or partially incapable of
managing her person; and
there is a need
for a guardianship order to be made in relation to Ms
Conduct of the hearing on 22 August
Tribunal reconvened on 22 August 2013 to consider the application Mr BGH had
lodged for a guardianship order for Ms UUU. The
Tribunal had been given to
understand that Ms UUU would attend the hearing in person. However, the
commencement of the hearing was
delayed by 20 minutes, after it emerged that Ms
UUU now intended to participate by telephone from her home.
question of how best to assist a family member with arrangements for her care is
a matter on which people of good will may quite
legitimately
was quite evident to the Tribunal that there was a certain degree of conflict
between Mr BGH, on the one hand, and some members
of Ms UUU’s family, on
the other, concerning the arrangements for her care. This conflict was referred
to in some of the comments
made during the hearing by various
participants.
this stage, it would not be in Ms UUU’s interests for the Tribunal to
recite the details of the past or present disagreements.
The Tribunal does not
consider it either necessary or helpful to summarise here the range of views
expressed, unless specifically
relevant to an issue before the Tribunal. The
Members of the Tribunal carefully considered the views that were expressed, and
account of those views when making the Tribunal's
determinations.
it makes a decision, the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. The Tribunal
was of the opinion that it
was not appropriate to attempt to bring the parties to a
settlement.
Preliminary issue: the standing of Mr BGH to bring this
application
the early stages of the hearing on 22 August 2013, Mr Vaughan Massey, Ms UUU's
legal representative, raised the preliminary issue
as to whether Mr BGH had
standing under
Guardianship Act 1987
to bring this
guardianship application.
Section 9(1)
An application
for a guardianship order in respect of a person may be made to the Tribunal:
(a) by the person,
(b) (Repealed)
(c) by the Public Guardian, or
(d) by any other person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a
genuine concern for the welfare of the person.
Massey acknowledged that he had not, in any way, raised this as an issue during
the earlier hearing on 30 April 2013. Mr Massey
also conceded that he had not,
in any way, communicated this as an issue, either to the Tribunal itself, or to
the applicant, Mr
BGH. Mr Massey explained that the issue of standing had
occurred to him only very lately, on the day before the most recent
Massey submitted that the marriage between Ms UUU and Mr BGH had broken down,
and there was conflict between them concerning the
upbringing of their children,
and a property settlement was happening. In these circumstances, Mr Massey
submitted that it was open
to the Tribunal to find that Mr BGH is not a person
with a genuine concern for Ms UUU's welfare.
BGH stated that he sought the appointment of a guardian because of his concerns
that Ms UUU was not receiving proper medical treatment
or therapy. According to
Mr BGH, Ms UUU's parents are not willing to take her to necessary
BGH emphasised the depth of his concern for Ms UUU. He said that he cares for
her, and had visited her in hospital every single
day for nine months, and had
acted in her best interests by lodging this application. Mr BGH insisted that
he did not walk away
from the marriage. It was not his wish that the marriage
should end.
Tribunal accepted the evidence and the submissions of Mr BGH. The Tribunal was
satisfied that:
bringing to the attention of the Tribunal a fact situation in which Ms UUU's
interests may call for intervention by the
sincere in seeing the situation as one that may call for the intervention of the
Tribunal in the interests of Ms UUU; and
the application
is motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of Ms UUU.
these circumstances, the Tribunal formed the opinion that Mr BGH is, very
clearly, a person with a genuine concern for the welfare
Accordingly, Mr BGH does have the requisite standing to bring the application
before the Tribunal.
Is Ms UUU a person with a
disability?
Tribunal must first consider whether Ms UUU is a person with a disability,
Tribunal had before it the report prepared on 25 March 2013 by Dr Z, from the
Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit of a public hospital.
In that report, Dr Z
stated that Ms UUU had experienced a severe cerebral haemorrhage in November
2010. Dr Z reported that Ms UUU
declined therapy and recommended inventions,
based on what Dr Z considered to be ill-informed beliefs. Dr Z also stated that
disability affects her capacity to make decisions concerning her
accommodation, health and medical care, and financial affairs.
the hearing on 22 August 2013, Dr Z gave evidence that Ms UUU has quite
significant memory problems. Her disability affects
her capacity to retain
clinical information, and to make sound decisions. Dr Z also advised that Ms UUU
has poor problem-solving
Z expressed concern that Ms UUU is being deprived of the assistance needed to
overcome her anxiety, and that members of her family
are not facilitating her
care. Dr Z reported that Ms UUU did not attend her last review at the Brain
Injury Rehabilitation Unit of
the public hospital. Dr Z acknowledged that
members of Ms UUU's family have arranged non-Western medical therapies, such as
healing, for Ms UUU. Nevertheless, Dr Z emphasised that these
techniques should not replace her proven medical treatments.
Y, Provisional Psychologist in the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit, stated in a
report prepared on 23 January 2013 that Ms UUU
continues to demonstrate
significant global impairment, and any further cognitive improvement is likely
to be minimal. Ms UUU experiences
a severe level of depression and anxiety, and
a moderate level of stress. In Dr Y's view, Ms UUU is likely to make choices
and impulsively, without adequately thinking them through. Dr Y
concluded that Ms UUU does not currently possess the cognitive capacity
her own decisions. Dr Y noted that decisions made by Ms UUU's family members on
her behalf to restrict her access to the
rehabilitation therapy during the most
vital stages of her recovery, appear to have hindered the potential for Ms UUU
to make cognitive
X, Senior Social Worker in the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit of the public
hospital, stated in a report that she had prepared
on 14 March 2013 that Ms
UUU's therapy program had been interrupted by her parents’ reluctance to
bring her to the Brain Injury
Rehabilitation Unit. Ms X also advised that Ms UUU
is vulnerable, and can easily be manipulated and misled by her parents or her
W, Consultant Psychiatrist, prepared a certificate on 6 August 2013. In that
certificate, Dr W stated that Ms UUU suffers from
a major depressive disorder,
and is currently taking an antidepressant. Dr W's certificate stated no more
than that, and offered
no reasoning or analysis.
the hearing, Dr W acknowledged that he had met Ms UUU only once, on 6 August
2013. He confirmed that Ms UUU has a major depressive
disorder that is quite
severe. Dr W at first stated that he did not see any disability requiring the
appointment of a guardian for
Ms UUU. He then conceded that he did not undertake
any cognitive assessment of Ms UUU, and that he was not at all aware of any
treatment programs for Ms UUU that may have been proposed by the public
Vaughan Massey indicated that his instructions were that any disability Ms UUU
might have does not impact on her decision-making
capacity. Mr Massey submitted
on Ms UUU's behalf that members of her family can assist her in making
decisions. Mr Massey also asked
the Tribunal to accept Dr W's evidence that Ms
UUU's depressive illness is receiving attention.
Tribunal attached particular weight to the oral and written evidence of Dr Z,
and to the written evidence of Dr Y. The Tribunal
also noted that Dr W did not
undertake any cognitive assessment of Ms UUU.
the basis of the evidence presented, the Tribunal found that Ms UUU is a person
with a disability within the meaning of the
Guardianship Act
Ms UUU totally or partially incapable of managing her person?
reviewing the evidence, the Tribunal also found that, because of that
disability, Ms UUU is at least partially incapable of
managing her
Is a guardianship order needed?
UUU told the Tribunal that she does not have any plans for her future. Mr Massey
submitted that Ms UUU herself is comfortable with
the treatment and support she
is receiving from her family members.
Tribunal concluded that Ms UUU is in need of a guardian. Further reasons for the
Tribunal's decision appear below in the context
of the discussion of the
functions of the guardian.
reaching its decision, and to the extent to which this was possible, the
Tribunal also took account of the matters outlined by
Parliament in
Guardianship Act 1987
, and in particular:
the views of Ms
UUU, and of her carer, Mrs DDJ;
the importance
of preserving Ms UUU’s existing family relationships;
the importance
of preserving Ms UUU’s particular cultural and linguistic environments;
practicability of services being provided to Ms UUU without the need for the
making of such an order
What functions should
the guardian have?
Accommodation
UUU lives with her parents, Mrs DDJ and Mr WEQ, in southwest Sydney. Mr BGH gave
evidence that Ms UUU sleeps on a mattress in the
lounge room of that house.
Nevertheless, Mr BGH acknowledged that Ms UUU is happy sleeping there, and that
her accommodation is suitable
was no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that Ms UUU needs to have a
guardian with the authority to make decisions about
accommodation.
Health care and Medical and Dental
Z gave evidence that Ms UUU is not cognitively competent to consent to more
complex treatments.
Massey submitted that Dr Z did not identify any significant medical treatment
that Ms UUU now needs. Accordingly, in Mr Massey's
view, Ms UUU does not need a
guardian to make decisions concerning her medical treatments.
Tribunal accepted that the clinical evidence presented at the hearing showed
that, because of Ms UUU's lack of decision-making
ability, there is a clear need
for her to have a substitute decision-maker with the authority to make decisions
care, and her medical and dental treatments. The Tribunal
attached particular weight to Dr Z’s concern that Ms UUU is being
of the assistance needed to overcome her anxiety, and that members of her family
are not facilitating her care.
Z told the Tribunal that, in his view, Ms UUU now needs a functional assessment
to enable her to improve her independence. Dr Z
also gave evidence that Ms UUU
may need to enter a transitional living service, where she could stay on
weekends. Dr Z said that
Ms UUU would benefit from therapy, working towards
vocational training.
Tribunal accepted Dr Z's evidence, and decided that Ms UUU now needs a guardian
to make decisions concerning her access to services.
be the guardian?
applicant, Mr BGH, recommended to the Tribunal that the Public Guardian should
be appointed as Ms UUU's guardian.
the other hand, Mrs DDJ asked the Tribunal to appoint her to be her daughter's
private guardian. Mrs DDJ also suggested that the
Tribunal might appoint both
herself and Ms UUU's brother as her guardians. However, Ms UUU's brother did not
participate in the hearing
on 22 August 2013.
DDJ was quite unable to say how she would go about making important decisions
for her daughter, such as decisions concerning her
health care. Mrs DDJ simply
stated that she would take her daughter to the doctor. Although Mrs DDJ
acknowledged that her daughter
is "sick", she did not answer questions as to
whether or not Ms UUU might now need any further rehabilitation. Mrs DDJ said
she is "protecting" her daughter.
UUU readily confirmed during the hearing that her parents did not allow her to
attend the programs offered by the public hospital.
Tribunal has the authority to appoint the Public Guardian. However, the Tribunal
may not appoint the Public Guardian as a person's
guardian in circumstances in
which a guardianship order can be made appointing some other person as the
Guardianship Act 1987
section 15(3)).
It is helpful to refer
to the guidance of the NSW Supreme Court on the interpretation of this
Justice Windeyer interpreted that section as saying:
the Public Guardian should not be appointed in circumstances in which an order
be made in favour of another person. That requires not only
that the person be willing, reliable and responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations and principles set forth in the Act
being given effect. . . . what is described as a "contest"
is not sufficient
reason not to appoint a person otherwise appropriate as guardian.
[2003] NSWSC 1170
(2003) 59 NSWLR 220
a more recent decision, Hon Justice White emphasised that the Guardianship
Tribunal ought not to appoint the Public Guardian unless
the Tribunal had
concluded that some other person could not properly be appointed
[2011] NSWSC 1075].
Nevertheless,
before the Tribunal may appoint a private guardian, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that the proposed guardian:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship;
has no undue
conflict of interests (particularly financial) with those of the person under
guardianship; and
is able and
willing to exercise the functions of the proposed order.
other words, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the proposed guardian meets the
requirements for a guardian set out in
Guardianship Act
Tribunal certainly took account of the willingness of Mrs DDJ to assist her
daughter in this important way as her substitute decision-maker.
Further, the
Tribunal recognised that the appointment of Mrs DDJ would assist in preserving
Ms UUU's cultural and linguistic environments.
Nevertheless, Mrs DDJ did not
demonstrate an adequate understanding of the significance, and the impact, of Ms
UUU's cognitive impairment.
Tribunal took particular note of:
evidence that the staff of the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit at the public
hospital have made many attempts to engage
with Ms UUU, and with members of her
family, but these approaches have met with objections from Ms UUU's family
concerns that Ms UUU is being deprived of the assistance needed to overcome her
anxiety, and that members of her family
are not facilitating her care; and
the evidence of
Dr Y that decisions made by Ms UUU's family members on her behalf to restrict
her access to the rehabilitation therapy
during the most vital stages of her
recovery, appear to have hindered the potential for Ms UUU to make cognitive
Tribunal found that Mrs DDJ is willing, but not able, to exercise the functions
conferred or imposed by Ms UUU's guardianship
order. For these reasons, the
Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian to make decisions on behalf of Ms UUU
concerning her health
care, medical and dental treatment and services, as set
out in the Tribunal's Order.
How long should the order
Massey submitted that the Tribunal should arrange a relatively early review of
Ms UUU's guardianship order, to see how it has been
functioning in her
particular family context.
Tribunal decided that this initial appointment of the Public Guardian should be
for a period of 12 months. The Tribunal once again
attached particular weight to
the concerns expressed by Dr Z and Dr Y, as outlined
FORMAL FINDINGS
Tribunal made the following formal findings:
UUU is a person who has a disability and, as a consequence, is at least
partially incapable of managing her person.
circumstances of the case make it necessary and appropriate in Ms UUU’s
interests for a guardian to be appointed for her,
with the functions referred to
in the order, and for the period and subject to the conditions referred to in
that order.
circumstances of the case are such that it is not appropriate to appoint as
guardian a person other than the Public
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter