URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keogh v CPB Contractors Pty Ltd & Ors (No 2) [2024] NSWDDT 9 (25 July 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Keogh v CPB Contractors Pty Ltd & Ors (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 9
Hearing Date(s):
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 19 April 2024
Date of Orders:
25 July 2024
Decision Date:
25 July 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant
in relation to mine dust exposure at the Poitrel and Moorvale Mines for
$1,066,922.11, of which $830,800.00 is attributable to mine dust exposure at the
Poitrel Mine and $236,122.11 is attributable to
mine dust exposure at the
Moorvale Mine.
(2) Judgment for the plaintiff against the
second defendant in relation to mine dust exposure at the Moorvale Mine for
$236,122.11.
(3) Judgment for the plaintiff against the
third defendant in relation to mine dust exposure at the Boggabri Mine for
provisional
damages of $1,687,264.74.
(4) Order that the
dust-related conditions in respect of which an award of further damages may be
made against the third defendant
(arising from mine dust exposure at the
Boggabri Mine) are:
(a) Rheumatoid
(b) Scleroderma.
(c) Progressive
massive fibrosis.
(5) In addition to order (3) above, judgment for the
plaintiff against the third defendant in relation to mine dust exposure at
Blackwater Mine for $326,489.82.
(6) Judgment for the
plaintiff against the fifth defendant in relation to mine dust exposure at the
Boggabri Mine for provisional
$783,963.46.
(7) Declare that 100% of the sum awarded by the
judgment against the fifth defendant is damages to which Part 3 Division 5 of
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) applies.
that the dust-related conditions in respect of which an award of further damages
may be made against the fifth defendant
(arising from mine dust exposure at the
Boggabri Mine) are:
(a) Rheumatoid
(b) Scleroderma.
(c) Progressive
massive fibrosis.
(9) Order the first, second, third and fifth
defendants to pay the costs of the plaintiff.
(10) Judgment
for the fifth defendant against the third defendant on the Amended Fifth Cross
Claim in relation to mine dust exposure
at the Boggabri Mine for
$548,774.42.
(11) Order the third defendant to pay the costs
of the fifth defendant of and incidental to the Amended Fifth Cross
(12) Grant leave to all defendants to file cross
claims within 28 days, if so advised. If any further cross claims are filed, the
parties are to inform my Associate so that the cross claims can be listed before
me for case management.
(13) Liberty to restore the
proceedings before me if any party seeks a different costs order based upon an
Offer of Compromise or
other offer.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – coal workers pneumoconiosis – silicosis –
mixed dust pneumoconiosis – emphysema – chronic
obstructive
pulmonary disease – psychiatric injury
DUST DISEASES –
causation – negligence – exposure at multiple open cut coal mines
– machine operator –
extent of dust exposure – whether smoking
caused the lung diseases
DUST DISEASES – divisible and
indivisible diseases –whether coal workers pneumoconiosis is divisible or
indivisible –
whether psychiatric injury is divisible –there is a
rational basis to apportion psychiatric injury
INTERPRETATION – NSW statutory damages regime applicable to coal miners
– modified common law damages provisions
– whether cap on damages is
on nett or gross earnings – whether cap on damages includes or excludes
superannuation –
whether claim is statute barred – whether
provisional damages can be awarded
NEGLIGENCE –
apportionment between tortfeasors – employer’s non-delegable duty of
DAMAGES – general damages – past and future
economic loss – past and future superannuation – medical costs
– loss of life expectancy – Fox v Wood damages – pain and
suffering – psychiatric injury – apportionment
of psychiatric
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Coal Mine Health and Safety Act
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Accidents Compensation Act 1999
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Div 4, Schedule 6
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
Compensation Legislation Amendment Act 2012
(NSW), Sch 6,
, cl 26, Sch
Workers Compensation Legislation Further Amendment Act 2001
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum Sites) Act 2013
Cases Cited:
Agresta v Sydney Water Corporation
[2004] NSWDDT 8
BAE Systems
(Operations) Ltd v Konczac
[2017] EWCA Civ 118
BB v Helena College Council
[2021] WADC 42
BHP Coal Pty Ltd Re The BMA Enterprise Agreement 2022
Bourke v Victorian WorkCover Authority
[1998] VSCA 24
[1999] 1 VR
DC v New South Wales
[2016] NSWCA 198
Dingle v Associated Newspapers
[1961] 2 Q.B. 163
Foster & Anor v Cameron
[2011] QCA 48
(1981) 148 CLR 438
[1981] HCA 41
Glover v Australian Ultra Concrete Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 1284
Golden Eagle International Trading Pty Ltd v Zhang
Headon v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDDT 5
Kaplantzi & Anor v
[2003] NSWCA 386
Katidis v Meggitt Overseas Ltd (No. 2)
[1995] NSWDDT
Macquarie Pathology Service Pty Ltd v Sullivan
[1995] NSWCA
McGoldrick v Dendrobium Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWSC 1341
Mohr v Berrigan
Quarries Pty Ltd
[1995] NSW DDT 2
Mt Owen Pty Ltd v Parkes
[2023] NSWCA
Oxley County Council v McDonald [1999] BSWCA 126
Pollard v Baulderstone
Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 99
Qantas Airways Ltd v Lisica
[2007] NSWCA 371
Reilly v Malabar Electric Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWDDT 9
Pty Ltd v Ghaleb
[2005] NSWCA 208
Thompson v Smiths Shiprepairers Ltd
Timberland Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Bundy
[2005] NSWCA 419
Australia Pty Ltd v Christie
(2003) 65 NSWLR 1
[2003] NSWCA 47
Texts Cited:
Black’s Medical Dictionary, 38th ed (1995)
Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed (2013)
Parliamentary Coal Workers’ Pneumoconiosis Select Committee, Black Lung
White Lies: Inquiry into the Re-Identification
of Coal Workers’
Pneumoconiosis in Queensland, Report No. 2, 55th Parliament (May 2017)
McBean et al, “Radiological Appearance of Coal Mine Dust Lung Disease in
Australian Workers” (2018) 62(6) Journal of
Medical Imaging and Radiation
Oncology 794
The Penguin Medical Encyclopedia, 2nd ed (1982)
Insurance Regulatory Authority, Workers Compensation Benefits Guide, April
Principal judgment
Craig Andrew Keogh (Plaintiff)
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd (First
Campbell Mining Services Pty Ltd (Second Defendant)
Mining Pty Ltd (Third Defendant)
Downer Mining Regional (NSW) Pty Ltd (Fifth
Representation:
S Tzouganatos/V Boutas (Plaintiff)
D Talintyre (First
Defendant re Poitrel Mine)
I Griscti (First Defendant re Moorvale Mine)
Talintyre (Second Defendant re Moorvale Mine))
D Talintyre (Third Defendant
re Blackwater Mine)
G Rundle (Third Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
(Fifth Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
Solicitors:
Shine Lawyers
(Plaintiff)
BT Lawyers (First Defendant re Poitrel Mine)
Mills Oakley
(First Defendant re Moorvale Mine)
BT Lawyers (Second Defendant re Moorvale
BT Lawyers (Third Defendant re Blackwater Mine)
Wotton & Kearney
(Third Defendant re Boggabri Mine)
Sparke Helmore (Fifth Defendant re
Boggabri Mine)
File Number(s):
DDT 2021/45484
Introduction
The Defendants
Poitrel Mine
Moorvale Mine
Boggabri Mine
Blackwater Mine
The Diseases
Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis
Mixed Dust Pneumoconiosis
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Liability: Evidence of Mr Keogh and Others
Concerning Exposure
Western Australian Dust Exposure
Norseman Mine
Fimiston Mine
Granny Smith Mine
Sandstone Mine
Cataby Mine
Yarrie and Nimingarra Mines
Western Australian Mines Generally
Findings of Fact in Relation to Western Australian
Dust Exposure
Poitrel Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Evidence of Mr Smith
Findings of Fact in Relation to Poitrel Mine
Liability Finding in Relation to Poitrel Mine
Moorvale Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Evidence of Mr Smith
Evidence of Mr Haynes
Evidence of Ms Lara
Evidence of Ms Topping
Findings of Fact in Relation to Moorvale Mine
Liability Findings in Relation to Moorvale
Boggabri Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Evidence of Mr Bailey
Findings of Fact in Relation to Boggabri Mine
Liability Findings in Relation to Boggabri
Blackwater Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Evidence of Mrs Beverley Keogh
Findings of Fact in Relation to Blackwater
Liability Finding in Relation to Blackwater
Work After Blackwater Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Findings of Fact in Relation to Work after
Blackwater Mine
Credit of Mr Keogh in Relation to Liability
Liability: Is the Damage Divisible or
Indivisible?
Respiratory Damage: Principles and Authorities
Respiratory Damage: Consideration
Psychiatric Damage: Principles and Authorities
Psychiatric Damage: Consideration
Apportionment: Findings of Fact
Quantum: Preliminary Observations
Quantum: Medical Issues
Quantum: Evidence of Mr Keogh
First Affidavit of Mr Keogh
Second Affidavit of Mr Keogh
Oral Evidence-in-Chief
Cross-Examination
Re-Examination
Quantum: Medical Evidence
Evidence of Dr Edwards
Evidence of Dr Jones
Evidence of Dr Brown
Evidence of Dr O’Toole
Evidence of Dr Likely
Evidence of Dr Chalk
Findings on Medical Issues
Respiratory Issues
Psychiatric Issues
Drinking Alcohol
Life Expectancy
Quantum Evidence: Need for Care and Assistance
Evidence of Dr Edwards
Evidence of Ms Cogger, Occupational Therapist
Evidence of Ms Hammond, Occupational Therapist
A Legal Issue re Care and Assistance: Section 306H
of the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003 (Qld) (WCR Act)
Part 9 Division 3 of the WCR Act
Submission for Defendants
Submission for the Plaintiff
Evidence Relied Upon by the Queensland
Evidence Relied on by the Plaintiff
Consideration
Findings on Care and Assistance
Quantum: Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Findings on Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Quantum: Economic Loss Past and Future
Documentary Evidence for the Plaintiff
No Documentary Evidence for the Defendants
Past Economic Loss: Submissions for Plaintiff
Past Economic Loss: Submissions for the
Findings in Relation to Past Economic Loss
Fox v Wood Damages
Future Loss of Earning Capacity: Submissions for the
Future Loss of Earning Capacity: Submissions for the
Findings in Relation to Future Loss of Earning
Quantum: General Damages
Summary of Common Law Assessment of Damages against
First, Second and Third Defendants
Damages against Downer Regional
Which Version of the Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) Applies?
Is the Claim Statute Barred?
Can the Tribunal Award Provisional Damages?
Causation and Contributing Factor
Date of Injury
Non-Economic Loss
Economic Loss: Serious Injury
Economic Loss: Cap on Earnings
Superannuation
Failure to Mitigate
Apportionment of Damages and Costs
Summary of Modified Common Law Assessment of Damages
for the Fifth Defendant
Cross Claim by Downer Regional against Downer
Defence to Amended Statement of Fifth Cross
The Contribution Legislation
Evidence on the A5CC
Written Submissions
Downer Regional Oral Submissions
Downer EDI Oral Submissions
The Judgment in Parkes
Cross Appeal Between Titan and Mt Owen
Consideration
Other Potential Cross Claims
Introduction
Craig Keogh is a 52-year-old man who sues by an Amended Statement of Claim filed
on 27 March 2024 (ASOC) seeking damages for injuries
said to be attributable to
exposure to dust while working in coal mines in Queensland and New South Wales.
Mr S Tzouganatos with
Ms V Boutas appeared for the plaintiff, instructed by
Shine Lawyers.
Keogh alleges that he suffers from the following diseases and conditions as a
result of his dust exposure while working in the
(1) Coal workers pneumoconiosis (CWP).
(2) Silicosis.
(3) Mixed dust pneumoconiosis.
(4) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
(5) Emphysema.
(6) Adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressive mood.
(7) Moderate/major depressive disorder.
relation to dust exposure in Queensland, damages are sought on a final basis. In
relation to dust exposure in New South Wales,
provisional damages are sought
pursuant to
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
(NSW) (DDT Act).
Mr Keogh also seeks an order pursuant to s 11A of the DDT Act that further
damages may be claimed by him in respect
of the following conditions
attributable to exposure to dust in New South Wales, should they
(1) Rheumatoid arthritis.
(2) Scleroderma.
(3) Progressive massive fibrosis.
(4) Lung cancer.
Keogh also claims interest and costs.
statutory modifications of the common law apply to the assessment of damages
arising from torts committed in different States.
further legal issue to be determined is whether the respiratory diseases, and/or
the psychiatric conditions, are divisible or indivisible
is the first case involving CWP decided in the Dust Diseases Tribunal (the
Tribunal). It is also the first case concerning CWP
decided in any of the courts
in New South Wales or Queensland.
The Defendants
12 February 2024 an order was made that the first defendant have separate legal
representation in relation to Mr Keogh’s
work at the Poitrel Mine
(Poitrel) at Coppabella in Queensland and the Moorvale Mine, also at Coppabella.
the first day of the hearing the third defendant applied for a separate
representation order in relation to the Boggabri Mine (Boggabri)
in New South
Wales. A separate representation order was granted. This late application caused
some confusion in the recording of
appearances on the first page of each day of
the transcript. The correct appearances for each party, including those
separately represented,
are set out in MFI 5.
outlining the nature of the claim brought against each defendant, and the issues
to be decided, it is convenient to deal with them
mine by mine, since two of the
defendants have separate representation.
Poitrel Mine
Keogh alleges in his ASOC that between November 2008 and 3 September 2012 (46
months) he was employed at Poitrel to operate diggers,
dozers and graders. Mr
Keogh sues the first defendant CPB Contractors Pty Ltd (CPB) alleging that it
was the occupier, manager and
operator at Poitrel (ASOC par 2), and further that
CPB employed Mr Keogh at Poitrel (ASOC par 3).
Talintyre of counsel, instructed by BT Lawyers, appeared for CPB in relation to
Poitrel. The Further Amended Defence of CPB filed
on 10 April 2024 raised the
following liability issues (references to paragraph numbers below are references
to paragraphs in that
Further Amended Defence):
(1) CPB breached its duty of care owed to Mr Keogh in relation to his employment
by CPB at Poitrel (par 12(c)).
(2) CPB did not operate, manage or occupy Poitrel, but was engaged on behalf of
the mine operator BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance
to provide services at
Poitrel between January 2006 and July 2011 (par 2).
(3) CPB did employ Mr Keogh at Poitrel as a machine operator (par 3).
(4) Mr Keogh was exposed to coal dust in the course of his employment by CPB at
Poitrel (par 4).
Moorvale Mine
Keogh alleges that between 15 January 2013 and 15 March 2013 (2 months) and
later between 14 September 2013 and 13 August 2014
(11 months) he was employed
at the Moorvale Mine (Moorvale) by the second defendant Campbell Mining Services
Pty Ltd (Campbell) (ASOC
par 6). Mr Talintyre of counsel, instructed by BT
Lawyers, appeared for Campbell.
Further Amended Defence of Campbell filed on 10 April 2024 raised the following
liability issues (references to paragraph numbers
below are references to
paragraphs in that Further Amended Defence):
(1) Campbell admits that if CPB breached its duty of care to the plaintiff in
respect of the plaintiff’s work at Moorvale,
then Campbell will be deemed
to have breached its non-delegable duty of care to the plaintiff (par 12(d)).
(2) Campbell admits that it employed Mr Keogh at Moorvale between 15 January
2013 and 31 March 2013.
(3) Mr Keogh did not inhale dust including coal dust in the course of his
employment at Moorvale because: his only work duties were
to operate diggers,
dozers and graders; all diggers, dozers and graders incorporated sealed
air-conditioned cabins; no coal or other
dust penetrated the cabins of the
machinery operated by Mr Keogh in the course of his employment (par 7(b)).
(4) Campbell admits that it owed Mr Keogh a duty of care and says that the duty
is properly stated as a duty to take reasonable care
to avoid exposing the
plaintiff to the unnecessary risk of foreseeable injury in the course of his
employment, such duty being modified
by the operation of
Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003
(QLD) (the WCR
Act) (par 9(c)).
(5) Campbell says it was not foreseeable that:
(a) That the plaintiff would inhale coal dust in the course of his employment at
(b) That the quantity of coal dust the plaintiff might inhale created a
foreseeable risk of the plaintiff contracting a lung disease.
(c) That the quantity of coal dust the plaintiff might inhale at Moorvale
created a foreseeable risk of the plaintiff suffering CWP
or mixed dust
pneumoconiosis.
(d) That the quantity of dust that the plaintiff might inhale at Moorvale would
cause the plaintiff to suffer secondary psychiatric
injury (par 10(b)).
(6) Campbell supplied the plaintiff’s labour to CPB to work at Moorvale
under a labour hire arrangement and CPB devised, implemented
and enforced the
system of work, supplied and maintained the plant and equipment and controlled
all aspects of the work performed
by Mr Keogh at Moorvale (par 12(c)(i) and
(7) Neither the plaintiff nor any other employee of Campbell working at Moorvale
advised Campbell that the cabins of the earthmoving
equipment were unsafe or
were not adequately sealed to prevent the ingress of coal dust (par 12(c)(v)).
both periods of employment at Moorvale, Mr Keogh has sued CPB as the occupier,
manager and operator of Moorvale (ASOC par 5).
Pursuant to the first separate
representation order, CPB was separately represented in relation to Moorvale by
Mr Griscti of counsel,
instructed by Mills Oakley.
Further Amended Defence of CPB filed on 10 April 2024 raised the following
liability issues (references to paragraph numbers below
are references to
paragraphs in that Further Amended Defence):
(1) CPB was not the occupier, manager and operator of Moorvale, but CPB was
engaged by the mine operator Peabody Energy Australia
(PCI) (C&M Management)
Pty Ltd to provide services at Moorvale from May 2009 until September 2014 (par
(2) Mr Keogh was employed by Campbell between 15 January 2013 and 31 March 2013
at Moorvale as a machine operator (par 6(a)).
(3) Mr Keogh did not inhale dust including coal dust in the course of his
employment because: his only work duties were to operate
diggers, dozers and
graders; all diggers, dozers and graders incorporated sealed air-conditioned
cabins; no coal or other dust penetrated
the cabins of the machinery operated by
Mr Keogh in the course of his employment (par 7(c)).
(4) CPB owed Mr Keogh a duty to take reasonable care to avoid exposing the
plaintiff to the unnecessary risk of foreseeable injury
in the course of his
employment, such duty being modified by the operation of ss 305B, 305C and 305D
of the WCR Act (par 9(d)).
(5) It was not foreseeable:
(a) That the plaintiff would inhale coal dust in the course of his employment at
(b) That the quantity of coal dust the plaintiff might inhale created a
foreseeable risk of the plaintiff contracting a lung disease.
(c) That the quantity of coal dust the plaintiff might inhale at Moorvale
created a foreseeable risk of the plaintiff suffering CWP
or mixed dust
pneumoconiosis.
(d) That the quantity of dust that the plaintiff might inhale at Moorvale would
cause the plaintiff to suffer secondary psychiatric
injury (par 10(c)).
(6) CPB provided a safe place of work for the plaintiff at Moorvale (see par
12(e) which sets out this allegation in much more detail).
Boggabri Mine
Keogh alleges that he was employed at Boggabri between 15 September 2014 and 15
June 2016 (21 months).
Keogh alleges that the third defendant Downer EDI Mining Pty Ltd (Downer EDI)
was the occupier, operator and manager of Boggabri
during his entire time at
Boggabri (ASOC par 8). Downer EDI was separately represented for these periods
by Mr Rundle of counsel,
instructed by Wotton & Kearney.
Further Amended Defence of Downer EDI filed on 10 April 2024 raised the
following liability issues (references to paragraph numbers
below are references
to paragraphs in that Further Amended Defence):
(1) Downer EDI admits that it was the operator of Boggabri (par 3(a)).
(2) Downer EDI denies that it employed the plaintiff and says that the fifth
defendant Downer Mining Regional (NSW) Pty Ltd (Downer
Regional) was the
plaintiff’s employer at the relevant time (par 5).
the first eight months between 15 September 2014 and 13 May 2015, Mr Keogh
alleges that he was employed by Programmed Integrated
Workforce Ltd (Programmed)
(ASOC par 9). Programmed was sued as the fourth defendant, but the claim against
Programmed has resolved
and it took no part in the hearing.
Keogh alleged that at Boggabri, between 13 May 2015 and 15 June 2016 (13
months), he was employed by Downer EDI and by the fifth
defendant Downer
Regional (ASOC par 11). Mr Rowles of counsel, instructed by Sparke Helmore,
appeared for Downer Regional.
Defence of Downer Regional dated 4 April 2024 raised the following liability
issues (references to paragraph numbers below are
references to paragraphs in
that Defence):
(1) Downer Regional admits that it employed the plaintiff from 8 May 2015 to 15
June 2016 (par 4).
(2) Downer Regional admits that it owed a duty of care to the plaintiff during
that period of employment (par 7).
(3) Downer Regional does not admit that it knew or ought to have known that if
the plaintiff was exposed to and inhaled coal dust
there was a real risk that he
could contract lung diseases including CWP and mixed dust pneumoconiosis and
suffer psychiatric injuries
as a consequence (par 8).
(4) Downer Regional denies that it was negligent as pleaded in par 19 of the
ASOC and denies that it breached the New South Wales
statutory duties pleaded in
par 19 of the ASOC (par 9).
(5) Downer Regional denies that it breached its contract of employment with Mr
Keogh, as pleaded in par 20 of the ASOC (par 10).
(6) Downer Regional pleads contributory negligence (as fully set out in par 13
of the Defence).
Amended Fifth Cross Claim dated 4 April 2024 (A5CC), relating to exposure at
Boggabri, was also heard in these proceedings. The
cross claimant was Downer
Regional and the cross defendant was Downer EDI. Mr Rowles of counsel,
instructed by Sparke Helmore, appeared
for Downer Regional and Mr Rundle of
counsel, instructed by Wotton & Kearney, appeared for Downer EDI. The A5CC
claims indemnity
for or contribution towards any liability of Downer Regional to
Mr Keogh. The claim is made pursuant to
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Keogh alleged that between June 2016 and late October 2017 (16 months) he was
employed at the Blackwater Mine (Blackwater) by Downer
EDI (ASOC 14). He also
pleaded that Downer EDI was the occupier, manager and operator of Blackwater at
that time (ASOC par 13). Mr
Talintyre of counsel, instructed by BT Lawyers,
appeared for Downer EDI in relation to this period.
Further Amended Defence of Downer EDI filed on 10 April 2024 raised the
following liability issues (references to paragraph numbers
below are references
to paragraphs in that Further Amended Defence):
(1) Downer EDI admits that it breached its duty of care owed to Mr Keogh when he
was employed by Downer EDI at Blackwater (par 14(b)).
(2) Downer EDI denies that it occupied, managed or operated Blackwater but says
that it was engaged by BM Alliance Coal Operations
Ltd to provide mining
services at Blackwater (par 8).
(3) Downer EDI admits that it employed the plaintiff to operate diggers and
dozers at Blackwater between the dates alleged but denies
that it employed the
plaintiff to operate graders at Blackwater (par 9).
(4) Downer EDI admits that Mr Keogh was exposed to coal dust in the course of
his employment at Blackwater (par 10).
(5) Downer EDI does not admit that it knew or ought to have known that if Mr
Keogh was exposed to and inhaled dust including coal
dust, there was a real risk
that he could contract lung diseases including CWP and mixed dust pneumoconiosis
and suffer psychiatric
injuries as a consequence (par 12(b)).
The Diseases
Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis
is a broad term for lung diseases where the inhalation of dust has caused
interstitial fibrosis, which is scarring
in the lungs.
plaintiff tendered the report of a Queensland Parliamentary Select Committee
entitled “Black lung white lies” (PX
17). This report inquired into
the re-identification of CWP in Queensland. The following appears at p 56 of PX
“CWP is a type of pneumoconiosis solely caused by prolonged exposure to
coal mine dust. It is one of a broad group of coal
mine dust lung diseases
(CMDLD) caused by exposure to respirable coal mine dust over several years.
Disease develops from the deposit
of dust particles and the reaction of the lung
tissue to the dust.
There are three primary types of lung disease that are classified as
pneumoconiosis:
• asbestosis, cause by the inhalation of asbestos dust
• silicosis, caused by the inhalation of silica dust
particles, and
• CWP, caused by the inhalation of fine coal dust
Emphysema, chronic bronchitis, lung function impairment, and diffuse
dust-related fibrosis are other manifestations of CMDLD.”
Parliamentary Select Committee also reported as follows:
(1) CWP may take several years to develop and there are often no symptoms in the
early stages of the disease (PX 17, p 57).
(2) CWP is often associated with emphysema (PX 17, p 57).
(3) The development of CWP usually requires lengthy exposure to coal dust and
generally develops slowly (PX 17, p 60).
(4) A significant problem in diagnosing respiratory diseases such as CWP is that
there is a long latency period before symptoms emerge
(PX 17, p 60).
(5) There is no cure for CWP, and treatment consists of managing the symptoms
(PX 17, p 61). Damage to the lungs caused by coal
dust inhalation cannot be
reversed (PX 17, p 61).
(6) CWP is completely preventable through avoiding or limiting exposure to coal
dust (PX 17, p 61).
(7) The risk of developing CWP is directly related to the magnitude and duration
of exposure to coal mine dust. The latency period
between exposure and
development of CWP may be prolonged, but decreases with increases in dust
inhalation levels (PX 17, p 61).
is a lung disease that causes scarring to the lungs. Silicosis is caused by
prolonged exposure to respirable crystalline
silica (RCS) or quartz dust. Silica
is considered more likely to be harmful to the lungs than respirable coal dust.
This is in part
due to the macrophages (white blood cells which combat
pathogens) in the lung releasing a toxic substance when they engulf silica
particles, causing reactive fibrosis or scar tissue to form. If the volume of
fine silica is excessive, lung function becomes permanently
damaged, giving rise
to the progressive disease known as silicosis (PX 17, p 61).
may take several years to develop, with few or no symptoms in the early stages
of the disease. There is no cure, but early
detection is vital, as progression
of the disease can be slowed if exposure to RCS is avoided (PX 17, p 62).
Mixed Dust Pneumoconiosis
dust pneumoconiosis is the disease process resulting from prolonged exposure to
both respirable coal and silica dust. Mixed
dust pneumoconiosis nodules are a
hybrid between CWP and silicosis nodules (PX 10, p 2).
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
is an airways disease where there is narrowing of the medium and small airways
due to loss of bronchial tone. It is due to collapsibility
of the airways. It
may be evident in dust diseases such as asbestosis or silicosis. It is a disease
of the airways, rather than the
periphery or the interstitial areas of the lung.
The conducting tubes become inflamed and thickened and more collapsible than
so that when someone breathes out, the airways will collapse and reduce
the airflow:
Headon v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDDT 5
is a sub-type of COPD. It results in over-distension of the air cells in the
lungs, and the partial destruction of the lung
walls. This gives rise to the
formation of large sacs, from the rupture and running together of a number of
contiguous air vesicles:
Black’s Medical Dictionary
(1995). There is over-inflation of the air spaces with loss of the thin dividing
walls between spaces, where exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide should take
The Penguin Medical Encyclopedia
Liability: Evidence of Mr Keogh and Others Concerning
Keogh gave evidence-in-chief primarily through two affidavits (PX 1, Tabs 1 and
2). He also gave oral evidence-in-chief and was
cross-examined.
Keogh was born in September 1971 and is presently 52 years of age. He lived with
his mother and father and three siblings in rural
Victoria. He left high school
in Grade 11, in 1988. He was 17 years old at the time.
Keogh started work not long after he left school. He worked for a few months at
the local supermarket stocking shelves. He worked
as a bank teller for the State
Bank of Victoria for three to four years. He worked from about 1992 until 2004
in hotels. He worked
as a bartender and also did security work. Mr Keogh was not
exposed to dust in any of those jobs.
Western Australian Dust
is necessary to consider Mr Keogh’s possible dust exposure in several jobs
in Western Australia because he may have been
exposed to silica there. If there
was silica exposure in Western Australia, that would have contributed to his
disease of silicosis.
In legal terms, there could be an “empty
chair” in relation to the apportionment of responsibility for the
development
of silicosis. There was no coal dust exposure in Western Australia
and thus the employment in that State is not relevant to that
part of the case
concerning CWP and mixed dust pneumoconiosis.
2004 Mr Keogh left the hotel industry and moved to Kalgoorlie looking for work.
He was offered a position with 3D Earth Moving.
He was sent to the Norseman Mine
(Norseman) as a digger operator. Norseman was an underground coal mine.
Keogh’s job at Norseman was to raise the level of the tailings dam. His
job was to dig out land mass from a burrow pit, using
a digger. The material was
then loaded into dump trucks and dumped on top of the dam wall. All of his work
was above ground. Mr Keogh
said that the spoil which he dug out was clay. There
was no rock involved in this work. Once the spoil had been dumped on the dam
wall, he used the bucket of the excavator to flatten the edges of the tailings
dam wall. Mr Keogh was the only person operating a
digger near the tailings dam.
There was a water truck which was operating around the tailings dam at all
area of Norseman where Mr Keogh worked was “not a particularly dusty
environment”. Before he started digging the ground,
the area where he
worked was flooded with water to make it softer and easier to dig. This reduced
the amount of dust that was produced
by the digging. The water truck also
suppressed any airborne dust. Mr Keogh operated the digger from an enclosed
air-conditioned
cabin which had good seals and windows that stayed closed. He
said that “some very limited dust may have entered my cabin whilst
working but this was negligible compared to the dust I was later exposed to at
coal mines in Queensland and NSW”.
Keogh worked at Norseman for around six months.
Keogh was cross-examined about his dust exposure at Norseman by Mr Talintyre
(Tcpt 50/23 – 51/31). Mr Keogh said that he
did not see any other surface
machinery in operation. He described the dust to which he was exposed as
“very minimal”.
Mr Keogh acknowledged that the trucks driving around
would have generated some dust from their tyres. There were two excavators at
Norseman which Mr Keogh drove. They were both a couple of years old and
“were in good nick”. They did not have a pressurised
cabin, but they
had air-conditioning for the cabin. Mr Keogh agreed that at least some dust got
into the cabin of the excavators
while he was working at Norseman. Mr Keogh also
acknowledged that some dust would have got into the ute which drove him from the
sign-on area each day to where the excavator was located.
was no cross-examination to suggest that Mr Keogh was exposed to rock dust at
Fimiston Mine
October 2004 Mr Keogh started work for Cape Crushing at the Fimiston Open Cut
Gold Mine (Fimiston) in Western Australia. He worked
12-hour shifts for five
days a week. Mr Keogh worked there as a loader operator, which involved
operating a machine similar to a
digger except that the bucket faces outwards
and not inwards. Mr Keogh operated in a deep pit, known as the “Super
“shovel”, which was an 800-tonne piece of digging equipment.
shovel, the dump trucks and Mr Keogh’s loader worked in recently blasted
areas to remove the spoil generated by the blast.
The ground dug out by the
shovel and moved by Mr Keogh in the loader was generally rock. There was a water
truck working around Mr
Keogh constantly.
Keogh said in his affidavit that the dust at the Super Pit was minimal. Any dust
that was produced by the shovel was effectively
mitigated by the water truck.
The loader had a sealed, air-conditioned cabin “which kept the negligible
dust produced away
from me as I worked”. The seals and windows on the
machine were in good condition.
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh said that Cape Crushing were fanatical about the
cleanliness of their machines. Workers were given
15 minutes at the end of every
shift to clean all the windows, clean inside the cab and put Armor All on the
floor and the seats.
He described the cabin after that process as
“spotless”. Mr Keogh said that the seals of the doors were in
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Talintyre (Tcpt 52/1-31) about his dust exposure
at Fimiston. He said that his loader was kept about
30 or 40 metres away from
the shovel while the shovel was in operation. Dust from the shovel would reach
his machine. Mr Keogh did
not know what sort of rock he was digging, as he was
“pretty new to the industry back then”. Mr Keogh agreed that at
least some dust would get into the cabin of the loader while he was doing his
Granny Smith Mine
January 2005 Mr Keogh started work operating diggers, dozers and graders for
Hamptons Transport. He worked at the Granny Smith
Mine (Granny Smith), which was
an open cut and underground gold mine in Western Australia. All of his work was
done above ground.
He worked 12-hour shifts on a roster of two weeks on and one
Granny Smith Mr Keogh worked on developing a new tailings dam. He was excavating
land mass and depositing the spoil into dump trucks.
These trucks then dumped
the spoil on the wall. He described the spoil as “a clay-like
substance”. When operating a grader
or a dozer, he would run the machine
along an uneven surface to flatten it. These machines pushed dirt around the
site. He used the
dozer to spread the soil along the dam wall. Mr Keogh said
that the machines were in good repair and the seals and windows were
Mr Keogh said “I was not exposed to any significant
levels of dust at the Granny Smith Mine”. He said that there was
truck operating close to him as he worked, and that this water truck controlled
any dust. He stayed at Granny Smith for about
nine months.
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh said that there was no rock involved in building
the tailings dam. He said that tailings dams are
made of clay, and you simply do
not put rock in a tailings dam. Any rock in the wall of a tailings dam would
cause it to break and
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Talintyre about his work at Granny Smith (Tcpt
Keogh acknowledged that some of the work involved machines breaking rock. He was
a couple of kilometres away from the mine pit
when he was digging spoil. Mr
Keogh accepted that some of the dust at Granny Smith thrown up by his machine
and the trucks around
him would have made its way into the cabin of his machine.
Sandstone Mine
late 2005 Mr Keogh started working at the Sandstone Mine (Sandstone), where gold
was mined. He worked on a new Komatsu 1250 digger.
This machine had an enclosed,
air-conditioned cabin. Mr Keogh was involved in preparing a new area for mining
by digging away the
overburden to create the pit. This was a new area, so the
pit was only shallow. He operated his machine about four to five metres
the surface, in the open air.
overburden he was digging was not sandstone but was topsoil. Once he got deeper
it was hard compressed dirt. He said, “there
was no rock at this
Keogh was the only digger operator, and he worked alongside a few dump trucks.
The land mass he dug out to create the pit was put
into the dump trucks and then
taken away to be discarded. He kept digging the topsoil until the ground became
too hard to dig. At
that time he moved to begin working on a different area.
Explosives were used to blast the hard overburden, and he returned to the
sites one to two weeks after the blast to remove the overburden. He put the
overburden into dump trucks to be taken away. Mr
Keogh said that a water truck
operated in his area at all times. He occasionally operated a grader to create
flat surfaces in the
Keogh said that Sandstone was not a particularly dusty environment. Some dust
was produced when the machinery was in contact with
the dirt, but he had
negligible exposure to dust inside his cabin which was enclosed. Further, the
water truck stayed close to him
as he worked. Mr Keogh worked at Sandstone for
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh said that there was no sandstone in the mine,
and the name of the mine came from the name of a
nearby town called Sandstone.
He said that the machine he used was a brand-new machine which was in
“good nick”.
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Talintyre about his time at Sandstone (Tcpt 52/50
- 53/20). Mr Keogh said that his excavator worked
alongside four small dump
trucks. He accepted that some of the dust would have got into the cabin of his
excavator. This was so “even
though it was a pretty good excavator that
Cataby Mine
January 2006 Mr Keogh started working at the Cataby Open Cut Mineral Sands Mine
(Cataby) as the operator of diggers, dozers and
graders. He worked 12-hour days
on a two week on, one week off roster. He used the diggers to collect sand. Dump
trucks operated
around him to take away the sand to stockpiles. Most of time he
drove a Hitachi 3600 digger, which had an enclosed, air-conditioned
was operating in a pit around 10-15 metres below ground, in the open air. Mr
Keogh also used graders to level out haul
roads and the pit floor. A water truck
was always in operation near him.
Keogh said that the dust at this mine site was “negligible”. He said
that the seals on the cabin of his machine were
extremely good at keeping out
whatever dust was produced. He said, “I was exposed to hardly any dust
during this period”.
Mr Keogh worked at Cataby for about six to nine
was no cross-examination specifically about Cataby.
Nimingarra Mines
September 2006 Mr Keogh started a job with CPB at the Yarrie and Nimingarra
Mines, operating diggers, dozers and graders. Both
were open cut iron ore mines
in the Pilbara. Mr Keogh spent 95% of his time at the Yarrie Mine (Yarrie) as
the Nimingarra Mine (Nimingarra)
was put into care and maintenance in 2007.
Yarrie Mr Keogh removed overburden from the iron ore. The overburden was then
pushed away by a dozer. Mr Keogh also operated diggers
and dozers to collect
iron ore and load it into trucks. The pit in which he performed this work was
usually a water truck operating near him.
Keogh said that dust was produced when diggers and dozers moved spoil. Compared
to other mines in which he had worked, there were
more machines working in the
pit at Yarrie. He observed more dust in the air than he had at previous mines.
Some this dust entered
the cabin of his machinery.
Mr Keogh worked at Nimingarra, he was a supervisor who drove a Landcruiser to
observe the machinery operators perform their work.
He stayed in the car with
the windows up and the air-conditioning on.
Keogh said that at both Yarrie and Nimingarra it was all hard rock mining. This
was the first time he had come across this. He
worked there for a bit over two
years. The last 12 months was spent solely as a supervisor. He was not operating
machinery during
this time. When he was driving the Landcruiser and watching the
machine operators perform their work, he was about 100 metres away.
This period
of work “was not dusty at all”.
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh was asked to compare the dust at Yarrie with the
dust in his later work at open cut coal mines
in Queensland and New South Wales.
He said that the comparison was “totally different” and “very
Mr Keogh said that in Queensland the crews were bigger and the
machines were bigger. There were more machines running around the
Queensland. He said that his reaction to the dust he observed in Queensland was
a “wow factor”. In Western Australia
there was a little bit of dust
but not all the time. In the Queensland mines there was dust all the time.
Keogh was asked to compare the Yarrie exposure with the Boggabri exposure. He
said that Boggabri was “disgusting”.
He said that he just shook his
head and could not believe the amount of dust he saw at Boggabri.
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Talintyre about Yarrie and Nimingarra (Tcpt
56/30-43). Mr Keogh acknowledged that he did not sit
in the Landcruiser for 12
hours a day but got out from time to time to stretch his legs or have a
cigarette. This possibly exposed
him to dust from work that was going on 100
metres away. It depended on which way the wind was
Western Australian Mines Generally
Talintyre cross-examined Mr Keogh about the general conditions in Western
Australian mines (Tcpt 53/21 - 56/30). Mr Keogh agreed
that some dust got into
the cabin of every machine he operated. This was so, irrespective of how old the
machine was or how well
it was maintained. Some dust would get into the
Keogh agreed that when he had to clean out the cabin of the machinery while
working for Cape Crushing, there was always dust inside
the cabin to clean out.
He did this every shift. At the other mines in Western Australia the cabins were
cleaned sometimes, but sometimes
they were not. Mr Keogh agreed that even though
he worked on fairly new machines in Western Australia, dust would still get in.
time to time there was a seal not working properly on those machines. Mr
Keogh said that the dust was more noticeable in the cabins
in Queensland and New
South Wales, particularly because it was black and very fine.
Keogh said that in the various mines where he worked in Western Australia, the
crib rooms were always a long way away from the
mine. No dust reached the crib
Keogh agreed that in each of the mines he worked in Western Australia, except
for Cataby, there was some sort of rock blasting
that went on. Mr Keogh said
that while there was blasting at Norseman and Granny Smith, he was not working
where the blasting was
going on. That was happening a couple of kilometres away
from where he was digging spoil to make tailings dam walls. Mr Keogh agreed
blasting rock created dust. These blasts were controlled, and he was not allowed
to go into the pit until the dust had cleared.
He said that he never sat inside
machines when blast dust settled on those machines. The machines were left in
the pit, but every
worker had to be evacuated from the pit area before a blast
took place.
Findings of Fact in Relation to Western Australian
Dust Exposure
make the following findings of fact in relation to Western Australia dust
(1) There was no exposure to coal dust at any site in Western Australia.
(2) There was no exposure to rock dust at Norseman and thus no exposure to
(3) There was no evidence of the kind of rock dust to which Mr Keogh was exposed
at Fimiston and thus no evidence of exposure to
RCS. Further, any dust was
effectively damped down by the water trucks, and the machine which Mr Keogh
operated had effective seals
and windows. Even if there was RCS in some of the
rock dust to which Mr Keogh was exposed, I regard such exposure as de minimis.
(4) There was no exposure to rock dust at Granny Smith and thus no exposure to
(5) There was no exposure to rock dust at Cataby and thus no exposure to RCS.
(6) There was exposure to hard rock dust at Yarrie and Nimingarra. There was no
evidence that such rock dust contained RCS. Further,
there was efficient water
damping of the dust provided on a regular basis at both mines. Finally, for the
last 12 months at Yarrie,
Mr Keogh was a supervisor and had no exposure to rock
dust. Even if there was RCS in some of the rock dust to which Mr Keogh was
exposed, I regard such exposure as de minimis.
conclusion from these findings of fact is that there is no “empty
chair” in relation to silicosis (a divisible disease,
as discussed below)
because there is no evidence of exposure to RCS during any period of employment
in Western Australia. Even if
there was exposure to RCS in Western Australia, I
find that such exposure was de minimis.
Poitrel Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Keogh gave the following evidence in his first affidavit (PX 1, Tab 1). In
November 2008 Mr Keogh was approached by CPB to transfer
within the company to
work as the operator of diggers, dozers and graders at the Poitrel Coal Mine
(Poitrel) in Coppabella in Queensland.
This was an open cut coal mine. Most of
his dealings were with CPB. They were his day-to-day contact at the mine and
they gave him
instructions about where he was working and what he was to
operated on a 24-hour basis and Mr Keogh worked 12-hour shifts. He usually spent
shift. The mine was a much bigger
operation than any of the places he had worked in before. His job was to prepare
new areas for
mining by removing the overburden and “cleaning” the
coal seam. He was then engaged in digging coal, moving or redistributing
coal stockpiles and flattening areas with a grader. He regularly disturbed rock
in which coal was located. He worked in a pit
around 100 metres deep. Diggers
were used to remove as much of the overburden as possible so that the coal seam
was exposed. To “clean”
the coal seam, the digger would drive across
the exposed coal bed to remove the final layer of dirt with the bucket.
Initially, digging
was done in topsoil, but when the digger hit rock, this had
to be blasted. After the blast Mr Keogh would come back to the area with
digger and dig out the blasted rock until the coal seam was reached. Mr Keogh
was predominantly digging through hard rock which
was very dusty work. He said,
“Poitrel was one of the dustiest places I have ever worked”.
the bucket of the digger or dozer came into contact with the coal seam,
significant airborne dust was produced. Such dust
was also produced by other
diggers and dozers working nearby. Mr Keogh could see this airborne dust
“for the entirety of the
time that I performed this work”. He said,
“there were clouds of it”.
Mr Keogh commenced digging a coal seam, he had to get out of his machine and
inspect the coal seam to see how deep the layer
was. He did this a couple of
times per shift. Dust was also thrown up when the digger was used to move or
redistribute the stockpiles
of coal. He said that “significant airborne
dust was produced”.
Keogh often operated a grader to create flat surfaces in the mine. However, most
of his work was on diggers and dozers.
Keogh said that there were two water trucks on the mine site which constantly
travelled between the pits. The water trucks were
unreliable and often broke
down. They were not enough to stop the dust which was produced. This was in
contrast to Mr Keogh’s
experience in Western Australia where the water
trucks were constantly available and were effective in keeping down the dust
Keogh said that in many of the machines he operated, the seals of the cabin were
damaged, which allowed dust to enter the cabin.
Some of the windows could not be
closed, which led to dust entering the cabin. Clips which held the windows
closed were sometimes
broken, so the windows opened and let in dust. Mr Keogh
said, “I was often covered in dust at the end of my shift, and it would
coat my clothes, hair and exposed areas of skin”. This was in contrast to
his work in Western Australia.
Mr Keogh was out of his cabin inspecting the coal seam, there was no protection
from the dust generated by nearby machinery.
Machine operators were expected to
sweep the coal dust out of the cabin at the end of each shift, but this often
did not happen,
so Mr Keogh was starting work in a cabin which was coated in
dust. Mr Keogh did clean out his cabin, but this stirred up dust in
the air and
inside the cabin which he breathed in.
Keogh said, “the dust I was exposed to at the Poitrel Mine was far worse
than anything I had encountered in Western Australia”.
He said this was
because of the poor quality of the seals and windows in the cabins of the
machinery, the much larger fleet of machines
that worked at Poitrel and the
depth of the pit at Poitrel which made it difficult for dust to dissipate. He
said that the dust “would
build up into a thick fog throughout the
shift”. Mr Keogh found that the dust at the coal mine was a lot finer than
he had encountered in Western Australia. This meant that it got into
the cabins more easily.
par 110 of his first affidavit Mr Keogh said:
“Doing the best I can, I would estimate that my work at Poitrel was at
least 10 times dustier than mine sites I had worked
at in Western Australia.
Although the Yarrie Mine was slightly dustier than the other mine sites in
Western Australia, it was still
nowhere near as bad as Poitrel in terms of
Poitrel Mr Keogh was never provided with respiratory protection and was never
told to wear respiratory protection. He was never
told that exposure to coal
dust or dust generally could pose a risk to his health.
Keogh said that he had to complete a pre-start form for each machine before he
started his shift. He recorded on these forms when
seals and windows were
broken, but he said, “nothing was done, so I stopped complaining and got
on with it”.
Keogh said that dust monitoring did take place at Poitrel. In par 117 of his
first affidavit he said:
“When dust monitoring was performed in the machine cabins, it was left to
the mine supervisors to elect which machines would
be tested. To ensure that
their testing results were within limits, they would always elect for the
testing to be performed in new
or recently maintained machines, which were
properly sealed. I cannot recall any testing being done when we worked in clouds
his second affidavit (PX 1, Tab 2), Mr Keogh said that when he first got to
Poitrel he was taken aback. There were so many more
machines working together,
much more activity and dust and dirt flying around. The pit was a lot deeper
than those in Western Australia.
The machines were a lot bigger at Poitrel. The
excavators which Mr Keogh drove in Western Australia were usually 250-tonne
excavators,
and the biggest one was 360 tonnes. The excavators at Poitrel were
600-tonne excavators.
Keogh said that the four-wheel drive vehicles which were used to take workers
from the sign-on area to the machines in the pit
were “filthy, both inside
and out”. The air-conditioning in these vehicles “just circulated
the dust throughout
the vehicle”. Mr Keogh saw dust pushed out of the
vents and into the breathing space when a driver turned on the air-conditioning
in these vehicles.
Keogh said that at the end of a shift, he and his co-workers were taken back to
the main building in the four-wheel drive vehicles,
and everyone was covered in
dust and dirt, which the air-conditioning re-circulated inside the vehicle.
During a shift Mr Keogh had
to pat down his uniform once or twice to try and get
some of the dust off it. Mr Keogh travelled home with his dirty work clothes
He left the dirty uniform on until he went to bed. He used to shower first thing
in the morning. The mess hall at the Coppabella
camp was full of other workers
in their dirty work clothes.
Keogh said that one of the reasons he knew that the seals of the cabins in the
machines were not working, was that he could often
see daylight through the
rubbers in the windows. He could also hear the door rattling while the machines
were operating. The dozers
were particularly bad, with degraded cabin seals and
rattling doors. When such machines were operating they vibrated, and the
of the cabin caused gaps to emerge between the seals and around the
cabin doors.
Keogh said that he complained about these problems and sometimes they were fixed
after a few days, but sometimes nothing was done.
He said, “it was just
part and parcel of working on a mine site and the attitude was to ‘harden
Keogh gave further evidence about sweeping up the dust in the cabin. He said
that the coal dust was light and powdery, and he could
see a dark cloud of it
form as he swept the cabin. He tried to sweep this dust out the door, but there
was a lip at the bottom of
the door so he could not get all of it out. Some of
it stayed in the cabin.
Keogh estimated that he dug coal for about 30%-40% of the time he worked at
Poitrel. The rest of the time he dug overburden, which
included a lot of
was no cross-examination by Mr Talintyre of Mr Keogh in relation to Poitrel. At
the start of the second day of the hearing Mr
Talintyre made a number of
admissions of breach of duty on behalf of his clients. There was an admission by
CPB of breach of its
duty of care as the employer of Mr Keogh for the period at
Poitrel (Tcpt 61/38). The evidence of Mr Keogh concerning Poitrel thus
unchallenged. This includes his evidence about the pre-ordained dust monitoring
Evidence of Mr Smith
Vivian Smith swore an affidavit dated 18 March 2024 (PX 1, Tab 3). Mr Smith has
worked in the coal mining industry since 2002.
He is currently a new-to-industry
trainer for workers in open cut coal mines. He met Mr Keogh at both Poitrel and
Smith worked at Poitrel from September 2010 to August 2011. He was initially a
machine operator, operating dozers, trucks and graders.
He and Mr Keogh operated
machines in the same team. He said that “Poitrel was a very dusty work
environment”. Working
with coal produced a lot more dust than working with
overburden. The amount of dust depended on how dry the weather was and which
the wind was blowing. Some days were worse than others, “but there was
always dust”.
Smith said that the seals on the windows and doors of the cabins of the
machinery at Poitrel were “more often than not in
poor repair, cracked and
damaged”. He observed dust to enter the cabins during mining operations.
Some of the dozers had sliding
windows, which did not seal properly, as the
plastic clips were often broken or missing. This meant that the windows opened
Smith said that the air-conditioning in the cabins circulated air, including
dust, back into the cabin. The fans sometimes drew
air in through the cracks and
gaps in the seals, windows and doors, so they effectively sucked dust back into
the cabin. They were
not pressurized systems, which have a filter and a
mechanism to prevent air from outside the cabin being sucked in.
Smith used to clean the cabin of his machine at the start of every shift. He
found that his skin, hair and clothes had coal and
other dust all over them by
the end of the shift. When he got home, he had dust in his nose and would spit
Smith confirmed that it was necessary to get out of the machines a number of
times during each shift to inspect the coal seam.
It was also usual for him to
get out of the machine and stretch his legs for a few minutes and have a break.
Mr Smith never wore
a mask and was never warned about the dangers of inhaling
Smith said that the roads and ground at Poitrel were all covered in coal and
rock dust. They were unsealed dirt roads. He said
that there were never enough
water trucks at Poitrel to keep the dust down. It often took a water truck an
hour or two to get back
to a site which had been sprayed, by which time the
previous application of water had dried out and the dust was again thrown up
vehicles travelling along haul roads.
a few months Mr Smith was promoted to be a training co-ordinator. In that role
he often went out to the pits with operators
to teach them about new equipment
or to assess the abilities of qualified operators. He thus continued to observe
the state of the
cabins and the air and dust inside them.
Smith had complained to his supervisor at Poitrel, who was employed by CPB,
He said, “the
complaints were often ignored”. Even where a door seal was replaced, that
only reduced the amount of dust
entering the cabin. Mr Smith was never given any
respiratory personal protective equipment or told to wear any equipment while he
worked at Poitrel. He never saw anyone wearing a mask.
Smith was aware of dust monitoring being conducted at Poitrel. He said these
tests were done on new machines when they had just
come back from being
serviced. The machine chosen was always working on overburden rather than
cutting coal. The water truck operated
in close proximity to the testing machine
for most of the day. He said, “all of this was done to ensure that the
dust results
were favourable”.
Smith was not cross-examined by Mr Talintyre, due to the admission of breach of
duty of care. The evidence of Mr Smith about Poitrel
thus stood unchallenged.
This includes his evidence about the manipulation of the dust monitoring
Smith was cross-examined by Mr Griscti, but this related to Mr Smith’s
time at Moorvale, which is discussed below.
Findings of Fact in
Relation to Poitrel Mine
the light of the admissions made by CPB in relation to Poitrel, there is no need
to make detailed factual findings, except to record
that I accept all evidence
given by Mr Keogh and Mr Smith about Poitrel, since it was not only credible,
but it was unchallenged.
includes the evidence which both witnesses gave concerning:
(1) Regular work on coal and overburden.
(2) Constant dust.
(3) Inadequate water damping.
(4) The poor state of repair of the cabins of machines, which allowed dust to
enter the cabin.
(5) Dust collecting inside the cabin.
(6) Workers being covered in dust at the end of their shift, which coated their
clothes, hair and skin.
(7) The cynical manipulation of dust monitoring, to ensure nil or low results.
(8) Nothing being done when complaints were made about leaky seals and doors on
the cabins or machines.
Liability Finding in Relation to Poitrel Mine
admitted by CPB, I find that CPB is liable in negligence to Mr
Moorvale Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
his first affidavit (PX1, Tab 1) Mr Keogh said that he worked at Moorvale
January 2013 to March 2013 and then again from September
2013 to September 2014.
He was employed by Campbell, the second defendant, who deployed him to Moorvale.
Most of his dealings there
were with CPB, who gave him instructions about where
he was working and what he was to do. Mr Talintyre conditionally admitted breach
of Campbell’s non-delegable duty of care as the employer of Mr Keogh,
while he worked at Moorvale, but only if the Tribunal
was satisfied that CPB had
breached its duty as the operator of Moorvale (Tcpt 61/44). The running of that
issue was in the hands
of Mr Griscti.
operated on a 24-hour basis. Mr Keogh worked 12-hour shifts and spent about 10.5
hours of each shift operating machinery.
The work was basically the same as the
work he had performed at Poitrel.
Keogh said that there were one or two water trucks that travelled around the
mine attempting to suppress dust, but “these
were totally inadequate and I
would still see clouds of airborne dust as I operated the machines”. Mr
Keogh found that the
seals on the cabins of the machinery were damaged, and the
windows would not stay closed. Dust seeped into the cabin while he was
At the end of each shift, he was covered in dust. He inhaled this dust
throughout each shift and he could taste it.
were expected to clean out their cabin at the end of each shift, but often
operators did not do this. Mr Keogh kept up the
practice of cleaning the cabins
after his own shift. Cleaning caused more dust.
Keogh was never provided with, or advised to wear, any respiratory protection.
He was never told that exposure to coal dust or
dust generally could pose a risk
to his health. Problems with the dust sealing on equipment was brought up at
toolbox talks but “nothing
was done about the poor seals and
his two stints at Moorvale, Mr Keogh drove a road truck for about six months. He
was not exposed to dust during this period.
When he went back to Moorvale he was
still working for Campbell as an operator of diggers, graders and dozers. He had
the same exposure
to dust as he had during his first period.
par 62 of his second affidavit (PX 1, Tab 2) Mr Keogh recalled that during the
break between his two stints at Moorvale, he did
work at the South Walker Open
Cut Coal Mine (South Walker) in Queensland for about six to eight weeks. He was
a machine operator
and dug overburden only. Mr Keogh said that was not exposed
to the level of dust at South Walker as he had been at other Queensland
mines. It was after working at South Walker that he did some truck driving,
until he got a phone call from Campbell asking him
to go back to work at
Moorvale. That resulted in his second stint of working at Moorvale.
his second affidavit Mr Keogh said that at Moorvale he was driven from the
pre-start meeting room to the machines in a four-wheel
drive, which was dirty
and dusty. Mr Keogh found that his uniform was filthy with dust at the end of a
shift. He used to pat the
dust out of his uniform several times a day. He
travelled back to the camp where he was living at Nebo Junction. He stayed in
uniform until he went to bed, and he did not change it every day.
problems with the cabin seals, doors and windows which Mr Keogh experienced at
Poitrel, were also a problem at Moorvale. Coal
and rock dust came into the
cabins of the machines that he operated. Again, Mr Keogh had to get out of his
machine several times
a shift, just as he had at Poitrel. There was dust hanging
in the air when he got out of the cabin.
Keogh estimated that he spent 30%-40% of his time at Moorvale digging coal. The
rest of the time he dug overburden, which included
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh was asked to compare the dust in the air outside
the cabin and the dust inside the cabin, between
his work at Poitrel and his
work at Moorvale. He said (Tcpt 31/33),“[i]t’s about basically the
same”. Mr Keogh
said that there was never a day operating machinery where
he did not see dust in the air inside the cabin and on the flat surfaces
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Griscti concerning his time at Moorvale. It was
suggested that after machinery came back from maintenance,
the seals in the
cabin were in good condition. Mr Keogh disagreed saying “they’d
still be the same as when they went
in there”. He also said that the
windows were in the same condition when the machinery came back from
maintenance. He said
that the maintenance involved working on the motors and the
running gear but there was no improvement in relation to windows and
Evidence of Mr Smith
his affidavit (PX 1, Tab 3) Mr Smith also gave evidence about his time at
Moorvale. He said, “Moorvale had very similar dust
problems to
Poitrel”. Mr Smith said that there were never enough water trucks to keep
the dust under control. During each shift
he saw dust becoming airborne from the
vehicles and machines travelling around the mine site. Sometimes there were
of dust”. The level of dust depended on the weather
conditions and whether overburden or coal was being moved. In par 43 of
affidavit he said:
“I specifically recall great clouds of dust being blown everywhere then
the coal and rock was stockpiled and a big westerly
or northerly wind was
blowing. The water trucks could not water a whole stockpile and lots of dust was
in the air at those times.”
Smith confirmed that the seals on the windows and doors of the machines were
often cracked and worn out. The dozers were the worst.
The cabins of the
machines at Moorvale always had a layer of dust everywhere during the shift and
at the end of each shift. Mr Smith
observed operators to have coal and rock dust
all over them at the end of each shift. They did not look completely black like
underground
coal miners “but they had black and grey dust all over
Smith never saw dust monitoring done at Moorvale.
Smith was cross-examined by Mr Griscti. He confirmed that he worked as a
training co-ordinator at Moorvale for around three months
in 2012 or 2013. This
was when a company named Peabody was taking over the mine site.
Evidence of Mr Haynes
Mark Haynes was the Plant Superintendent at Moorvale from 2012 to 2014. His
evidence-in-chief is set out in a two-page written
statement (DX 3, Tab 5). As
the Plant Superintendent he was responsible for overseeing the maintenance of
all machinery at Moorvale.
All machinery underwent regular servicing.
Haynes attached a document to his statement entitled “Specification and
Maintenance Strategy”. Each machine at Moorvale
underwent routine
maintenance in accordance with the time frame set out in that document. When
maintenance was done, this included
checking the seals on the cabins and
checking the air-conditioning systems.
Haynes was cross-examined by Mr Tzouganatos (Tcpt 165/10 -168/35).
Haynes said that he did not do work on the machines himself. Mr Haynes agreed
that it was possible that, if a coal miner was working
at Moorvale operating an
excavator, coal and silica dust could get into the cabins. Mr Haynes
acknowledged that the Specification
and Maintenance Strategy document did not
refer to the maintenance of seals. He said that the document
“doesn’t have
the minor components in there”.
Haynes agreed that the mining industry in the Bowen Basin in Queensland is
“always booming” and that it was hard to
obtain experienced
multi-skilled plant operators.
Evidence of Ms Lara
Yanel Lara is an occupational hygienist who provided a report dated 19 April
2023 (DX 3, Tab 1). Ms Lara was asked by the solicitors
for Moorvale to answer a
number of questions.
Lara was asked to consider a spreadsheet entitled “Qld DRNM Coal Report
– Peabody – Moorvale”. She was
asked to state whether the
figures in the spreadsheet exceeded the Occupational Exposure Limit (OEL) in
place during the relevant
time, for either respirable coal dust or respirable
Lara said that during the period when the plaintiff worked at Moorvale, the OEL
for coal dust was 3.0mg/m³, as an 8-hour time-weighted
average (TWA) and
for quartz the OEL was 0.1mg/m³, as an 8-hour TWA.
Lara said that an OEL does not identify a dividing line between safe and
dangerous levels of substances of healthy or unhealthy
working environments.
Adverse health effects might be experienced by some workers due to natural
biological variation and a range
of individual susceptibilities. An OEL
establishes a statutory maximum upper limit which should be considered in
assessing when appropriate
control measures are required. Ms Lara said that good
occupational hygiene practice means that preventative intervention should take
place when the exposure exceeds one half of the OEL.
spreadsheet which Ms Lara examined contained 96 air samples from Moorvale for
the years 2013 and 2014. Out of those 96, a total
of 53 records were said to be
conducted by sampling workers operating dozers or graders, performing pre-strip
or overburden removal,
or coal removal. Of the 96 records, none were above the
OEL for coal or quartz.
Lara said that there are a number of control measures used in mining to minimise
exposure to dust in open cut mines. These include:
(1) Keeping coal dust damp to minimise dust generation.
(2) Minimising the drop distances of material when loading trucks or
stockpiles.
(3) Avoiding overloading trucks to reduce coal spillage and the resultant
generation of traffic dust.
(4) Enclosing cabins with filtered air-conditioning systems with regular filter
replacement.
(5) Effective door and window seals in enclosed cabins.
(6) Maintaining housekeeping inside cabins, amenities, offices and workshops.
(7) Administrative controls, such as limiting overtime, or changing work tasks.
Lara set out a number of assumptions she was asked to make to answer some of the
questions. She was asked to express a view as
to whether Mr Keogh would have
been exposed to levels of coal or quartz dust exceeding the OELs if he worked in
air-conditioned cabins
or excavators. She was asked to assume that he worked in
diggers, dozers and graders in air-conditioned cabins that were airtight
seals that did not leak. Her opinions on these matters were of no utility to the
court, as these assumptions were simply not
made out on the evidence.
Lara was cross-examined by Mr Tzouganatos (Tcpt 224/36 – 232/50). Ms Lara
said that while she was provided with the spreadsheet
containing the figures,
she was not provided with any reports from which those spreadsheet entries were
derived. She acknowledged
that an air sampling report would be prepared by a
scientist who conducted and reported each study, and the report would include
comments about what was happening at the time when the study was conducted. Such
reports would also record the weather conditions
at the time the test was
conducted and whether the machine was offline for a period of time during the
sampling period. The report
would have recorded whether the sample was conducted
in or outside the pit.
Lara agreed that it is difficult to extrapolate from one test result conducted
on one day on one worker to another worker working
on another day.
Lara was asked whether the 53 samples in the period from 2013 to 2014 would
permit her to reliably report anything in relation
to Mr Keogh’s potential
exposure while working in different machines. Ms Lara acknowledged that it would
have been helpful
to have more information about Mr Keogh in order to express an
opinion. Ms Lara agreed that the workplace environment and day-to-day
vary significantly, which can lead to variations in personal exposure levels. Ms
Lara also agreed that individual results
may not be representative of the
average or mean exposure for a similar exposure group.
Lara agreed that it has been known for over a century that coal miners are at
real risk of contracting lung diseases if means are
not taken to protect them
from inhaling coal and silica dust.
Lara agreed that if she had observed machine operators coming out of their
machine covered in dust, that would have been a major
occupational hygiene
Evidence of Ms Topping
Carolyn Topping is an occupational hygienist who provided a report to the
plaintiff’s solicitors (PX 1, Tab 25). In relation
to the work done by Mr
Keogh at Moorvale, Ms Topping said the following:
(1) Based on the conditions described by Mr Keogh, there was a foreseeable and
real risk of contracting a lung disease as a result
of exposure to coal dust and
crystalline silica.
(2) There were reasonably practicable measures available to an employer and a
mine operator to prevent or minimise the risk of contracting
lung disease well
before 2013.
(3) The working conditions described by Mr Keogh showed that the protective
measures implemented were not effective. In particular:
(a) the seals on the cabins of the machinery were damaged and the windows would
not stay closed;
(b) dust would seep into the cabin during the work shift;
(c) at the end of the shift Mr Keogh was covered in dust, he inhaled dust during
his shift and he tasted dust;
(d) the water trucks were totally inadequate;
(e) operators were expected to clean out their cabin at the end of each shift,
but some colleagues did not comply;
(f) cabins were constantly filthy even when Mr Keogh started his shift;
(g) cleaning the cabin disturbed the dust, causing more dust;
(h) Mr Keogh was not provided with or advised to wear respiratory protection.
is noted that Ms Topping expressed similar views concerning Poitrel, Boggabri
and Blackwater.
cross-examination by Mr Griscti, it was suggested that the 53 sampling records
dealt with in the report of Ms Lara constituted
sufficient information for a
reliable and quantitative assessment of dust exposure at Moorvale. Ms Topping
said (Tcpt 133/40) that
you need to know the number of people in the crews and
how many people are in the exposure group. The bigger the crew, the more samples
you have to take.
Topping acknowledged that in providing her opinion, she was reliant upon the
accuracy of the statements of Mr Keogh and Mr Smith
concerning dust exposure
(Tcpt 135/45).
Topping acknowledged that exposure monitoring or taking air samples is part of a
risk management process (Tcpt 136/8). Ms Topping
said that it is an important
tool, but to be able to rely on the information, tests need to be conducted in a
way that you can rely
on the results. You need to get enough samples. You need
to be able to see if you can infer something from those samples to a broader
group. You need to rely on the process of how the sample was
Findings of Fact in Relation to Moorvale Mine
make the following findings of fact in relation to Moorvale:
(1) Mr Keogh worked for 10.5 hours each 12-hour shift operating machinery. His
work was basically the same as he had done at Poitrel.
He was either digging out
coal or digging overburden.
(2) The water trucks which drove all around the site were inadequate to suppress
the clouds of airborne dust which arose from operating
the machines.
(3) The seals in the cabins of the machines were damaged and the windows would
not stay closed. Dust seeped into the cabin while
Mr Keogh was working.
(4) At the end of each shift Mr Keogh was covered in dust. He inhaled this dust
throughout each shift and he could taste it.
(5) Operators did not clean out their cabin and this meant that the cabins
contained dust when Mr Keogh started his shift.
(6) Mr Keogh was never provided with any respiratory protection and was never
told that exposure to coal dust or dust generally could
pose a risk to his
(7) Problems with the dust sealing on equipment were brought up in toolbox talks
but nothing was ever done about the poor seals and
(8) When Mr Keogh was transported to and from the pit in a four-wheel drive,
that vehicle was dirty and dusty.
(9) Mr Keogh’s uniform was filthy with dust at the end of each shift.
(10) Mr Keogh spent 30%-40% of his time at Moorvale digging coal. The rest of
the time he dug overburden, which included rock.
(11) The dust in the air both inside and outside the cabin was the same at
Moorvale as it was at Poitrel.
(12) There was never a day where there was no dust in the air inside the cabin
and outside the cabin.
(13) When machinery came back from maintenance, the seals were still in the same
poor condition as when the machines went in for
maintenance.
(14) Mr Haynes did not do work on the machines himself and he acknowledged that
the Specification and Maintenance Strategy document
did not refer to the
maintenance of seals. That document did not relate to what he described as
“minor components”.
(15) The mining industry in the Bowen Basin in Queensland is always booming and
it is still hard to obtain experienced multi-skilled
plant operators.
(16) While the 53 records examined by Ms Lara, occupational hygienist, disclosed
no readings above the OEL, Ms Lara did not have
access to data showing where
such readings were taken and the circumstances, including weather conditions, on
the days the readings
were taken.
(17) It has been known for over a century that coal miners are at real risk of
contracting lung diseases if means are not taken to
protect them from inhaling
coal and silica dust.
(18) If an occupational hygienist observed machine operators coming out of their
machine covered in dust, that would have been a
major occupational hygiene
(19) There are a number of control measures available to be used in open cut
coal mines, including:
(a) Keeping coal dust damp to minimise dust generation;
(b) Minimising the drop distances of material when loading trucks or
stockpiles;
(c) Avoiding overloading trucks to reduce coal spillage and the resultant
generation of traffic dust;
(d) Enclosing cabins with filtered air-conditioning systems with regular filter
replacement;
(e) Effective door and window seals in enclosed cabins;
(f) Maintaining housekeeping inside cabins, amenities, offices and workshops;
(g) Administrative controls, such as limiting overtime, or changing work tasks.
(20) Based on the conditions described by Mr Keogh, there was a foreseeable and
real risk of contracting a lung disease as a result
of exposure to coal dust and
(21) The working conditions described by Mr Keogh showed that the protective
measures implemented were not effective.
was no evidence called by CPB in relation to Moorvale to contradict the evidence
given by Mr Keogh and Mr Smith concerning the
constantly dusty conditions in
which machine operators worked. In those circumstances, I unreservedly accept
the evidence of Mr Keogh
and Mr Smith in relation to working conditions at
Liability Findings in Relation to Moorvale Mine
make the following liability findings in relation to Moorvale:
(1) CPB provided services at Moorvale to the mine operator, and owed a duty of
care to Mr Keogh.
(2) Mr Keogh was employed by Campbell at Moorvale as a machine operator.
(3) Mr Keogh did inhale dust, including coal dust, in the course of his
employment.
(4) Coal and other dust penetrated the cabins of the machinery operated by Mr
Keogh on a regular basis because there were defective
window seals, door seals
and windows in that machinery.
(5) It was foreseeable that Mr Keogh would inhale coal dust in the course of his
employment at Moorvale.
(6) It was foreseeable that the quantity of coal dust which Mr Keogh would
inhale created a foreseeable risk to him of contracting
a lung disease.
(7) It was foreseeable that the quantity of coal dust which Mr Keogh might
inhale at Moorvale created a risk of suffering CWP or
pneumoconiosis.
(8) It was foreseeable that the quantity of dust that Mr Keogh inhaled at
Moorvale would cause him to suffer secondary psychiatric
(9) The risk of coal miners contracting lung diseases has been known for over a
(10) There were a number of control measures available to be used in open coal
mines, which were identified by Ms Lara. None of
those measures were taken by
(11) CPB failed to provide a safe place of work for the plaintiff at Moorvale
and breached its duty of care owed to Mr Keogh.
(12) Campbell breached its non-delegable duty of care to Mr Keogh, as his
employer at Moorvale.
Boggabri Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
his first affidavit (PX 1, Tab 1) Mr Keogh said that he started a job as the
operator of dozers, diggers and graders at Boggabri
in around September 2014.
This was an above ground coal mine. He was sent to Boggabri by his then
employer, Programmed, which was
a labour hire company. He worked 12-hour shifts
on an 18-day roster. He spent about 10.5 hours of each shift operating
His work was basically the same as he had done at Poitrel and
Moorvale. The machine operators were split into crews either digging
out coal or
digging overburden, to reveal and clean the coal seam. Until the last year of
employment at Boggabri, Mr Keogh was mostly
digging hard rock and less often
coal. In the last year of his employment, he was only digging coal.
Keogh said that Boggabri was a very dusty mine. Clouds of dust were released
when he operated machinery to prepare new areas for
mining, digging coal, or
moving and redistributing the coal stockpiles. He worked in close proximity to
10 dozers, a couple of graders and 2 or 3 water
trucks. He said, “the amount of dust these machines produced working in
close proximity was extraordinary”. Mr Keogh said that all of this
activity produced dust in a small area and that Boggabri
was one of the dustiest
mine sites he worked at.
again, the cabins of the machines were poorly sealed and the windows did not
close properly. Dust entered the cabin and built
up over the course of a shift.
He inhaled this dust throughout each shift.
Keogh said that the water trucks were inadequate and that he saw airborne dust
for the entirety of the time he operated his machinery.
He said that the inside
of his cabin “was black with it”. He often found that the cabin had
not been cleaned by the previous
operator. He would find it “filthy with
coal dust”. He cleaned out his cabin at the end of each shift using a
Keogh said that he inhaled airborne dust even when he was on his half hour lunch
break at the crib huts. The dust produced by the
mine travelled the distance to
the crib huts during his breaks.
Boggabri Mr Keogh was never provided with, or advised to wear, any respiratory
protection. He was never told that exposure to coal
dust or dust generally could
pose a risk to his health.
Keogh worked at Boggabri for Programmed until May 2015, and then he started
working at Boggabri for Downer Regional. Toolbox talks
were held once a month
and there were daily pre-start talks. Nothing was ever done about poor seals and
windows. Dust monitoring
was performed “a handful of times whilst I worked
at Boggabri”. Mr Keogh said that the dust monitors were always worn
workers in new machines or machines where the seals had recently been replaced.
He never saw any air monitoring conducted where
he worked in clouds of
his second affidavit (PX 1, Tab 2) Mr Keogh gave evidence about his reaction
when he first went to Boggabri. He saw that it was
even dustier than Poitrel and
Moorvale. He thought to himself “What the hell is this? You’ve gotta
be joking!”
Keogh had a distinct recollection of seeing a dust cloud hanging over the pit
which was visible from a couple of kilometres away.
He used to see this on his
drive to work from the pub about half an hour away, where he lived while he
worked at the mine. Mr Keogh
was driven to and from the machines by four-wheel
drive vehicles. Sometimes these were minibuses. The journey took about 10
These vehicles were “filthy inside and out and I was exposed to
the dust circulating inside the vehicle”. He was also
exposed to similar
dust when he was driven back from the machines to knock off work. His uniform
became dusty, and he had to pat
it down to get the dust off a couple of times
each shift.
Keogh gave detailed evidence about the dust to which he was exposed when having
his lunch at the crib huts. Sometimes he sat outside,
which also exposed him to
dust. For the last 12 months that he worked at Boggabri the crib hut was
actually in the pit. It was about
20 metres below the surface in an area where
mining had finished. Digging of coal was going on lower down. The crib hut was
particularly
filthy and dusty during this period when it was in the pit and
workers were digging coal nearby.
Boggabri Mr Keogh also got out of his machine when digging coal to inspect the
seam. He also got out of the machine to stretch
his legs. This exposed him to
pars 86 and 87 of his second affidavit Mr Keogh said the following:
“I refer to paragraphs 144 and 148 in my earlier affidavit in which I
described the toolbox talks and pre-start talks at Boggabri.
On occasion, my
supervisor told me and my co-workers that there were VIPs coming to the mine for
a tour, so we had to shut down early.
The supervisors stopped the digger fleets
and water trucks were specifically brought in to dampen the dust. We effectively
a go-slow or a complete stop so that it was not dusty when the VIPs
As soon as the VIPs left, operation started up again as normal. The dust levels
in the pit went up.”
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Keogh described the conditions at Boggabri as
“disgusting” and he said, “I’d
never seen nothing like
that in my life”. Everyone was working in the one pit close together. Mr
Keogh said that at Boggabri
all the machines he operated were old and there were
no new machines. He was asked to compare the dust inside the machine and the
dust outside the machines at Boggabri to what he had experienced at Poitrel and
Moorvale. He said, “I’d nearly say four
times worse”. He said,
“it was just a cloud of black dust”.
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Rowles. Mr Keogh basically confirmed the evidence
he had given in-chief about conditions at Boggabri
(Tcpt 84/21
Evidence of Mr Bailey
Tony Bailey gave evidence-in-chief by an affidavit dated 19 March 2024 (PX 1,
Tab 5). Mr Bailey has worked in the coal mining
industry as an operator since
around 2006. His work has been at New South Wales coal mines and he is currently
a machine operator
at the Mount Thorley mine. In around 2015 or 2016, for about
six months, he worked at Boggabri as a dozer operator. He worked with
They were on the same roster. Both were operators and their work was very
Bailey said that the mining operations at Boggabri caused clouds of dust to go
up into the air and swirl around the machines. When
a load was dumped into a
truck, “it was so dusty I couldn’t even see the rest of my
machine”. He said that the
diggers were worse because the dirt was pulled
towards the machine rather than being pushed away. He said of all the coal mines
he has worked, “Boggabri was definitely the worst in terms of the
dust levels around the mine site”. He described it
as “basically a
large dust bowl”. Mr Bailey said there were never enough water trucks to
keep the dust down. Sometimes
Mr Bailey called a supervisor and asked for a
water truck to be sent, but it was usually an hour or two before the water truck
up. It was worse on night shift.
Bailey said that at Boggabri the machines had an enclosed, air-conditioned
cabin. However, the cabins were not pressurized, as
they are in the machines in
his current job at Mount Thorley. He described the Mount Thorley machines as
very different to the ones
he operated at Boggabri. These newer machines have an
alarm system which goes off if the cabin is not pressurized. If there is a
pressure change inside the cabin, so that the operator is not protected from the
dust outside the cabin, an alarm goes off. There
were no such systems on the
machines at Boggabri. Even these pressurized machines get some dust inside the
cabin. However, he said,
“it is far less than the dust I saw in the
machines I operated at Boggabri”.
Bailey said that at Boggabri the rubber seals on the cabins were often brittle
and cracked. The air-conditioning in the cabin recycled
the dusty air. Some of
the diggers had windows which did not close properly. At times Mr Bailey went
for a chat with Mr Keogh, and
he observed dust inside Mr Keogh’s cabin. At
the end of each shift at Boggabri there was a layer of dust inside the cabin on
all surfaces. Mr Bailey also used to get out of the cabin during a typical shift
to check the coal seam. This caused him to be exposed
to the dust in the open
air. Mr Bailey said that he could not get away from the dust at Boggabri, even
at the crib huts. Dust from
the mine got inside the crib hut when people walked
in or out, or when windows or doors were opened. He said, “the dust was
bad I could write my name in it on the tables”.
Bailey said that at the end of each shift at Boggabri, his hair, skin and
clothes were covered in dust. He complained to his supervisors
getting into the cabins, but he never saw a new set of seals or window clips
installed on machinery. When Mr Bailey found
a problem with a machine during a
pre-start inspection, he would report it, but the fitters rarely came to fix
Bailey was never given a dust monitor to wear at Boggabri, but he saw monitoring
going on, when monitors were put on operators
working in areas with less
traffic, so the dust levels were lower. On those days he observed the water
truck to spend a great deal
of time in the area where the dust monitor was
Bailey was never given a mask and was never warned that dust could make him
Bailey was not cross-examined and thus his evidence concerning conditions at
Boggabri stands unchallenged.
Findings of Fact in Relation to
Boggabri Mine
make the following findings of fact in relation to Boggabri:
(1) Mr Keogh worked for about 10.5 hours of each 12-hour shift operating
(2) The work he did was basically the same as the work he did at Poitrel and
(3) In the last year of his employment at Boggabri (when he was employed by
Downer Regional) he was only digging coal. Prior to that
last year he was mainly
digging hard rock and less often digging coal.
(4) Boggabri was a very dusty mine.
(5) There were a large number of heavy machines operating in close proximity
which produced a great deal of dust.
(6) The cabins of the machines operated by Mr Keogh were poorly sealed and the
windows did not close properly. Dust entered the cabin
and built up over the
course of each shift.
(7) The water trucks were inadequate to suppress dust.
(8) The inside of the cabin of Mr Keogh’s machinery was black with dust.
It had often not been cleaned by the previous operator.
(9) Mr Keogh also inhaled airborne dust during his half-hour lunch break at the
crib huts, where dust from the pit reached.
(10) Mr Keogh was never provided with any respiratory protection and was never
told that exposure to coal dust or dust generally
could pose a risk to his
(11) Complaints were raised about poor seals and windows at toolbox talks but
nothing was ever done about it.
(12) Dust monitors were only worn by workers in new machines or machines where
seals had recently been replaced. Mr Keogh was never
asked to conduct any dust
monitoring.
(13) Mr Keogh could see a dust cloud hanging over the pit which was visible from
a couple of kilometres away. He used to see this
on his drive to work.
(14) Mr Keogh and other workers were transported to and from the pit by
four-wheel drive vehicles or minibuses which with filthy
inside and out and
which exposed him to further dust.
(15) At the end of each shift his uniform was dusty and he had to pat it down to
get the dust off several times during a shift.
(16) On occasion when VIPs came to the mine for a tour, supervisors stopped the
digger fleets and the water trucks were brought in
to dampen the dust. Once the
VIPs left, the operation started up again as normal and dust levels in the pit
(17) The dust which Mr Keogh experienced at Boggabri was four times worse than
the dust at Poitrel or Moorvale.
(18) The evidence which Mr Keogh gave about dust, poor dust seals on cabins,
dust in cabins, dust inside the crib hut and dust monitoring
was corroborated by
the evidence of Mr Bailey, who was not cross-examined.
evidence was called by Downer EDI or by Downer Regional to establish their
version of the conditions at Boggabri. Nor was there
any cross-examination
directed to Mr Keogh or Mr Bailey to challenge what they said about the
conditions at Boggabri. I unreservedly
accept the evidence of Mr Keogh and Mr
Bailey concerning the dusty conditions at Boggabri.
Findings in Relation to Boggabri Mine
make the following liability findings in relation to Boggabri:
(1) Downer EDI was the operator of Boggabri for the entire time that Mr Keogh
worked there.
(2) Downer Regional was Mr Keogh’s employer for 13 months between 13 May
2015 and 15 June 2016.
(3) Both Downer EDI and Downer Regional ought to have known that if Mr Keogh was
exposed to and inhaled coal dust there was a real
risk that he could contract
lung diseases including CWP, mixed dust pneumoconiosis and psychiatric injuries
as a consequence.
(4) It has been known for over a century that coal miners could contract lung
disease if proper precautions were not taken.
(5) Ms Lara identified available precautions, none of which were taken by Downer
EDI or Downer Regional.
(6) Downer EDI breached its duty of care to Mr Keogh and is liable in
negligence.
(7) Downer Regional breached its non-delegable duty of care as an employer to Mr
Keogh and is liable in negligence.
(8) No evidence was called by Downer Regional in support of its pleading of
contributory negligence, nor were any questions put in
cross-examination
relevant to that issue. Downer Regional bears the onus on this issue and it has
failed to discharge that onus.
I find that there was no contributory negligence
on the part of Mr Keogh.
Blackwater Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
his first affidavit (PX 1, Tab 1) Mr Keogh said that he started work at
Blackwater in late 2016. This was an open cut coal mine.
Most of his dealings
were with Downer EDI, who gave him instructions on where he was to work and what
he was to do. Mr Talintyre
admitted breach of duty of care by Downer EDI for Mr
Keogh’s time at Blackwater (Tcpt 61/38). The mine operated on a 24-hour
basis. Mr Keogh worked four day shifts on with five days off, then five nights
shifts on with four days off. He spent about 10.5
hours of each 12-hour shift
operating machinery.
Keogh said that along with Boggabri, Blackwater was one of the dustiest mines he
worked at. He said that working with the machines
released “significant
dust”. He worked in close vicinity to other machines which were also
producing dust in the same
way. He said, “I could see dust in the air
outside the cabin for the entirety of the time I spent operating the
He also said, “the inside of my cabin was black with
Keogh said that in one area of the mine, the coal produced a particularly
powdery dust, which meant that “the dust levels
were especially fierce
there”. He spent a total of four weeks in this part of the mine, two weeks
digging coal and two weeks
removing overburden and cleaning the coal seam.
Keogh said that once again the seals on the cabins of the machines were damaged
and the windows would not stay closed. Dust seeped
into the cabin during every
shift. When he entered the cabin at the beginning of a shift, he found it
“filthy from the coal
dust and this would only build up further as I
Keogh said that he was exposed to dust even when he was on his half hour lunch
breaks at the crib hut. The crib buildings were
stationed a couple of hundred
metres from the pit and he would often sit outside to have his break. The dust
from the mine travelled
to the crib huts and he breathed it in.
Keogh was not provided with, or advised to wear, any respiratory protection. He
was never told that exposure to coal dust or dust
generally could pose a risk to
his health.
Keogh said that dust monitoring was performed “a handful of times”
when he worked at Blackwater. The process was similar
to that at Boggabri. The
dust monitors were always placed in new machines, or machines where the seals
had recently been replaced.
He never saw any testing of the air when he worked
in clouds of dust.
his second affidavit (PX 1, Tab 2) Mr Keogh said that the level of dust created
by operations at Blackwater was not as bad as Boggabri.
However, the dust levels
at Blackwater were worse than at Poitrel and Moorvale. Mr Keogh said that the
attitude towards maintenance
of the machines at Blackwater was “worse than
the other mines I worked at”. The maintenance of the door seals and the
windows was poor. Mr Keogh gave evidence of working on excavators with defective
buckets, and operating a bulldozer where the cabin
mount was missing and the
cabin was bouncing on metal without any cushioning while the machine was in
Keogh said that he could see the dust at Blackwater when he was a couple of
kilometres away from the mine, while he was driving
to work for the day. The
crib hut was near the area where the mining was taking place, on the edge of the
pit, and it was very dirty
and dusty inside. When Mr Keogh finished each shift,
his uniform was covered in dirt and dust.
Blackwater Mr Keogh spent much of his time digging and removing overburden. He
estimated that he dug coal about a quarter of the
time he was at Blackwater. The
problems with cabin seals, doors and windows were the same as at Poitrel. There
were never enough
water trucks at Blackwater to suppress the dust. Mr Keogh used
to get out of his machine a few times during each shift to inspect
the coal seam
and to stretch his legs. He was then exposed to dust hanging around in the air.
oral evidence-in-chief (Tcpt 33/29) Mr Keogh was asked to make a comparison
between the dust at the various mines. He said that
Blackwater was worse than
Poitrel and Moorvale, but not as bad as Boggabri. He said that Boggabri was
Moorvale and Poitrel. He said that Blackwater was
cross-examination by Mr Talintyre, Mr Keogh repeated that most of his time at
Blackwater was spent digging overburden (Tcpt 68/16).
cross-examination by Mr Rowles, Mr Keogh confirmed his evidence-in-chief about
the dust exposure at Blackwater (Tcpt 87/17 –
Evidence of Mrs Beverley Keogh
Beverley Keogh is the mother of the plaintiff. Mrs Keogh was not cross-examined.
She affirmed an affidavit on 19 March 2024 (PX
1, Tab 6). In pars 6 and 7 of
that affidavit Mrs Keogh gave evidence of visiting her son when he was living at
Gargett in Queensland.
This was when Mr Keogh was working at Blackwater. It was
a surprise visit, and Mrs Keogh went to her son’s house and waited
to return from work. In par 7 of the affidavit she said:
“When he arrived, I was shocked to see the state of him. His face was
black. I couldn’t believe how black it was. His
clothes were dirty as
well. I said to him words to the effect: ‘You’re filthy. Is that
coal dust?’ He said words
to the effect: ‘It must be. The machines I
operate are just trash’.”
Keogh had a week off after his mother arrived, so that was the only time she saw
him after a shift at Blackwater.
Keogh gave other evidence in her affidavit, which is discussed below in relation
to damages.
Findings of Fact in Relation to Blackwater
light of the admission of breach of duty of care made by Downer EDI concerning
Blackwater, it is not necessary to make detailed
findings of fact.
accept the evidence of Mr Keogh concerning his time at Blackwater, and in
particular, I accept his evidence that Blackwater was
Poitrel and Moorvale.
Liability Finding in Relation to Blackwater
admitted by Downer EDI, I find that Downer EDI is liable in negligence to Mr
Work After Blackwater Mine
Evidence of Mr Keogh
Keogh gave evidence about his work history after leaving Blackwater in October
2017 (PX 1, Tab 1). He first worked as a bulldozer
operator at the Adani Mine
Project. He used the dozer to clear land in preparation for a railway corridor.
He worked well away from
the coal mine and at no stage was he exposed to any
coal dust. He did not break any rock. There was minimal dust in the cabin of
dozer, as the seals were effective and the windows stayed closed. There was no
water truck, but the dust was negligible, so there
was no need for one.
April 2018 for about two weeks, Mr Keogh worked on a creek diversion project at
the Rolleston Mine. He was working about one kilometre
away from the mine, using
a grader to build a road to the creek to allow access for machinery. There was
no coal dust exposure in
that employment. He was exposed to minimal dust. During
his time at the Rolleston Mine there was intense rain and the earth was usually
wet, so there was no dust produced. A water truck came around every hour to
dampen the area.
leaving the Rolleston Mine, Mr Keogh obtained work with Workpac at the Weipa
bauxite mine in Far North Queensland. He helped
to build a tailings dam. He was
not exposed to any coal dust. He was digging dirt and dumping it into trucks
which then deposited
the dirt on the dam wall. He operated a dozer to collect
mud into large piles, where it could be collected by a digger to be placed
the trucks. There was no dust while he was “mud farming”. There was
no rock. A water truck came around every hour
to wet down the area. There was
minimal dust outside his cabin while he worked at Weipa.
Keogh left Weipa in around September or October 2018 and returned to work at the
creek diversion project at Rolleston Mine. He
was engaged by a labour hire
company called Dajwood. By the time he returned, the preparation for the project
was complete and work
had begun on the creek diversion itself. He spent most of
his time on the digger, digging soil which was dumped into a stockpile.
deposited soil into dump trucks which took it to the stockpile. He sometimes
operated a dozer to remove spoil left by the bucket.
There was no rock.
Keogh said that this was not a dusty environment. There was some airborne dust
produced when the bucket on the digger or the blade
on the dozer contacted the
ground but “it was minimal”. A water truck came around once an hour
to suppress the dust which
was generated. The cabin of his machinery had
effective seals and working windows. Mr Keogh worked at the Rolleston Mine until
21 October 2018.
cross-examination by Mr Talintyre, Mr Keogh confirmed that when he worked for
Dajwood, he was not digging coal. He said he was
working on the creek diversion
(Tcpt 67/27).
Findings of Fact in Relation to Work after
Blackwater Mine
make the following findings of fact in relation to work done by Mr Keogh after
he left Blackwater:
(1) There was no exposure to coal dust.
(2) There was no evidence of exposure to rock dust and thus no exposure to RCS.
Credit of Mr Keogh in Relation to Liability
is apparent from the findings made above, I have accepted the evidence of Mr
Keogh in relation to liability as reliable and credible.
Keogh appeared to me, based upon my observations of him in the witness box, and
based upon the consistency between his affidavit
evidence and his oral evidence
and cross-examination, to be a person without artifice or guile. He was very
frank in answering questions
and was even more frank in expressing how he felt
particular, I noticed that when he was asked questions about various mining
operations or techniques, he became more animated,
and was almost happy to
engage in providing answers to questions asked of him by counsel. This
impression is particularly relevant
to answers which Mr Keogh gave, stating that
he loved his work and was very distressed not to be able to work as a machine
in mines anymore. Mr Keogh struck me as a man who had found his ideal
job, and that job provided him very much with a sense of identity
and friendship
with fellow workers.
Liability: Is the Damage Divisible or
Indivisible?
recited above, my findings on liability are:
(1) CPB is liable in negligence in relation to Poitrel.
(2) CPB is liable in negligence in relation to Moorvale.
(3) Campbell is liable in negligence in relation to Moorvale.
(4) Downer EDI is liable in negligence in relation to Boggabri.
(5) Downer Regional is liable in negligence in relation to Boggabri.
(6) Downer EDI is liable in negligence in relation to Blackwater.
Tzouganatos submitted that the damage and loss caused by the Mr Keogh’s
injuries, both lung damage and psychiatric injury,
are indivisible. All
defendants submitted that the damage was divisible.
Tzouganatos referred (MFI 8, par 191) to the English case of
Smiths Shiprepairers Ltd
[1984] QB 405
). This was an
industrial deafness case. Men who had worked in shipyards in the United Kingdom
for over 40 years developed industrial
deafness. Part of their deafness
developed in the 20 years before hearing protection became available. Even after
hearing protection
became available, no steps were taken to guard against
hearing loss. The defendant employers were found not liable for the first
years of hearing loss but liable for the second 20 years of hearing loss. Thus,
there had to be some apportionment so that the
employers were only paying
damages for the years in which they were negligent.
decision is that of Mustill J sitting in the Queen’s Bench Division. The
plaintiffs relied upon the principle of law stated
by Devlin LJ in
Associated Newspapers Ltd
[1961] 2 QB 163
“Where injury has been done to the plaintiff and the injury is
indivisible, any tortfeasor whose act has been a proximate cause
of the injury
must compensate for the whole of it. As between the plaintiff and the defendant
it is immaterial that there are others
whose acts have also been a cause of the
injury and it does not matter whether those others have or have not a good
defence. These
factors would be relevant in a claim between tortfeasors for
contribution, but the plaintiff is not concerned with that; he can obtain
judgment for the total compensation from anyone whose act has been a cause of
his injury.”
J also referred to the following statement by Devlin LJ (at p 189):
“If four men, acting severally and not in concert, strike the plaintiff
one after another and as a result of his injuries he
suffers shock and is
detained in hospital and loses a month’s wages, each wrongdoer is liable
to compensate for the whole loss
of earnings. If there were four distinct
physical injuries, each man would be liable only for the consequences peculiar
to the injury
he inflicted, but in the example I have given the loss of earnings
is one injury caused in part by all four defendants. It is essential
purpose that the loss should be one and indivisible; whether it is so or not is
a matter of fact and not a matter of law.”
with industrial deafness, Mustill J said (at p 440H):
“This condition is not the direct product of a group of acts, not
necessarily simultaneous, but all converging to bring about
one occurrence of
damage. Rather, it is the culmination of a progression, the individual stages of
which were each brought about
by the separate acts of the person sued, or (as
the case may be) the separate non-faulty and faulty acts of the only defendant.
my judgment, the principle stated by Devlin L.J. does not apply to this kind
J said (at p 443D):
“The defendants as well as the plaintiffs are entitled to a just result.
If we know – and we do know, for by the end
of the case it was no longer
seriously in dispute – that a substantial part of the impairment took
place before the defendants
were in breach, why in fairness should they be made
to pay for it? The fact that precise quantification is impossible should not
alter the position. The whole exercise of assessing damages is shot through with
imprecision.”
J said (at p 443H-444A):
“I see no reason why the present impossibility of making a precise
apportionment of impairment and disability in terms of time,
should in justice
lead to the result that the defendants are adjudged liable to pay in full, when
it is known that only part of the
damage was their fault. What justice does
demand, to my mind, is that this court should make the best estimate which it
can, in the
light of the evidence, making the fullest allowances in favour of
the plaintiffs for the uncertainties known to be involved in any
apportionment.
In the end, notwithstanding all the care lavished on it by the scientists and by
counsel I believe that this has to
be regarded as a jury question, and I propose
to approach it as such.”
Tzouganatos relied (MFI 8, par 191) upon the discussion of divisible and
indivisible damage in
. At p 440 indivisible damage was described
by Mustill J as “the direct product of a group of acts, not necessarily
simultaneous,
but all converging about one occurrence of damage”.
Divisible damage was said to be “the culmination of a progression,
individual stages of which were each brought about by the separate acts of the
persons sued”.
Tzouganatos relied upon (MFI 1, par 192) the “unchallenged opinion”
of Dr Brown and Dr Edwards that Mr Keogh’s
coal mine dust lung disease was
indivisible. These opinions are set out below. The submission was that each
exposure materially contributed
to the total load of silica and coal dust which
was necessary to bring about the diagnosis in Mr Keogh. A threshold level of
exposure was necessary before the injury could occur.
there was no challenge to those opinions, nor was there any explanation by Dr
Brown or Dr Edwards what they meant by the words,
“indivisible” and
“divisible”. Doctors, of course, are not concerned with the legal
attribution of responsibility
for damage. They are presented with a patient who
has symptoms. They take into account the history and the clinical picture, and
they reach a diagnosis. Dr Brown and Dr Edwards were in agreement that there was
a threshold level of exposure necessary before injury
could occur. So far as
they understood Mr Keogh’s history, each significant exposure at a coal
mine had contributed a substantial
proportion of the silica dust and coal dust
which was inhaled and retained in Mr Keogh’s lungs. The total load of
coal dust in the lungs led to the coal mine dust lung diseases. It is
clear that both Mr Edwards and Dr Brown were speaking of causation
expressed the view that the disease was indivisible. That of course is not the
legal test, which is whether the damage
is divisible, not whether the
contribution to causation of the damage is divisible.
of the defendants submitted that the coal mine dust lung diseases were divisible
and not indivisible. Three defendants pleaded
that any damage was divisible:
CPB Further Amended Defence par 16; Campbell Further Amended Defence par 16;
Downer EDI Further Amended
Defence par 18. Downer Regional did not plead this
issue, but Mr Rowles made it plain in submissions that his client also asserted
that the damage was divisible.
Talintyre submitted (MFI 21, par 29) that the cumulative effects of the
inhalation of coal and silica dusts are “analogous
to the cumulative
effects of the inhalation of asbestos fibres in the development of asbestosis
(which is treated by the Tribunal
as a divisible injury)”. Mr Talintyre
referred in his submissions (MFI 21, par 34) to the decision of Ipp JA in
Seltsam Pty Ltd v Ghaleb
[2005] NSWCA 208
This case is considered below.
Respiratory Damage: Principles
and Authorities
cases over many years in the Tribunal have decided that silicosis (a form of
pneumoconiosis caused by exposure to silica) and
asbestosis (a form of
pneumoconiosis caused by exposure to asbestos) are divisible injuries. Because
coal workers pneumoconiosis
and mixed dust pneumoconiosis are forms of
pneumoconiosis, prior decisions in the Tribunal in relation to other forms of
pneumoconiosis
suggest that all of the coal mine dust lung diseases suffered by
Mr Keogh involve divisible damage.
Mohr v Berrigan Quarries Pty Ltd
[1995] NSWDDT 2
Johns considered a case where consecutive employers had failed to take
preventative measures, thus exposing a plaintiff to
silica dust which caused or
materially contributed to the plaintiff developing silicosis.
Johns referred to the decision of Justice Mustill in
, and to the
reference in
to the decision in
. Judge Johns
reviewed the medical evidence. Dr Joseph gave evidence that all exposures
contributed to the onset of silicosis. Silicosis
was a progressive disease that
could take many years to manifest itself. The more silica a person inhaled, the
greater the probability
that that person will develop silicosis. Dr Stephens
indicated that each individual silicic nodule is a separate assault on the lung,
in a similar way to a separate blow being struck and injuring a different
position in the body.
conclusion of Judge Johns was as follows:
“It seems to me clear that this disease is the culmination of a
progression, the individual stages of which have been brought
exposures and in those circumstances it is my view that it cannot clearly be
said to be the same damage. I therefore
conclude that the defendants are
consecutive tortfeasors, each being liable for the consequences of their
wrongful act in damages.”
Johns found that he was required to compare the parties’ relative
culpability in causing the damage. Where damages are
to be assessed against two
successive tortfeasors at the same time, both awards together should not be less
than the total loss suffered
by the plaintiff. Computation should start from an
assessment of that total loss, citing Mustill J in
Johns assessed general damages against the second, third and fifth defendants
(which had common representation) in the amount
of $35,000. He separately
assessed general damages against the fourth defendant in the amount of $15,000.
Separate judgments were
entered for the plaintiff against those parties.
decision of Judge Johns, to the effect that silicosis is a divisible form of
damage, was followed by Judge Duck in
Agresta v Sydney Water Corporation
[2004] NSWDDT 8.
Judge Duck said:
“The plaintiff will be entitled to succeed against both defendants. They
will be consecutive tort feasors, each responsible
for the damage done by it. In
this regard see
Mohr v Berrigan Quarry Pty Limited (In Liquidation
[1995] NSWDDT 2
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 355.
That was a silicosis case in which Johns J
discussed the relevant principles at length. I gladly acknowledge and accept the
that his judgment offers. In conformity with the approach the judge
adopted in that case I propose to assess the entitlement that
the plaintiff has
to damages and then to apportion responsibility for each of the defendants
concerned.”
much earlier decision of the Tribunal given by President O’Meally in
Katidis v Meggitt Overseas Ltd (No. 2)
[1995] NSWDDT 1
was concerned with the assessment of damages for mesothelioma. The President
found that mesothelioma was “a disorder quite distinct
from asbestosis and
other fibrosis-induced diseases caused by exposure to fibrosis-inducing
substances, which produce increasing
fibrosis with continued exposure”.
The President found that mesothelioma was not such a disease, because it was not
the culmination
of a progression or accumulative process such as occurs in the
case of asbestosis or silicosis.
decision of the President in
, in so far as it referred to
silicosis and asbestosis, was obiter, but was referred to with approval by Judge
decisions in the Tribunal have dealt with another form of pneumoconiosis, being
asbestosis. In
Reilly v Malabar Electric Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWDDT 9
Kearns found that asbestosis is a dose-related condition. This meant that a
person must be exposed to a significant quantity
of asbestos before he could be
considered to have contracted asbestosis.
[96] Judge Kearns said:
“Asbestosis is a divisible condition. In the context of this case, this
means that each defendant is liable only to the extent
of the damage caused by
that defendant’s tort. It is necessary to determine the extent to which
the Housing Commission and
the State caused injury and damage to Mr Reilly.
There may be many possible factors that could come into the determinations. This
case, however, was conducted on the basis that one factor only had to be
considered. That factor was the period of time over which
Mr Reilly did work for
each defendant in comparison to his total period of exposure to asbestos which
caused his condition.”
Talintyre (DX 21, par 34) cited the decision of the Court of Appeal in
, which was concerned with asbestos-related pleural disease (ARPD).
Ipp JA said at [32]-[34]:
“32 The essence of the term ‘divisible disease’ is that it
connotes a disease that increases in severity through
an ongoing process of
successive events that inflict harm on the victim. Each infliction of harm is
separate and independent of the
harm that has gone before.
33 A well-known example of a divisible disease is a hearing impediment caused by
exposure to excessive noise over a lengthy, continuous
period where each
successive exposure to noise separately increases the hearing loss.
34 In the case of ARPD, the disease is the consequence of inhaling asbestos
fibre in circumstances where each successive inhalation
of asbestos inflicts a
further and separate form of harm on the victim. As each infliction of harm is
an independent event, where
ARPD has cumulatively been brought about by
different tortfeasors over different periods, each tortfeasor is separately
the separate damage each has caused. Such tortfeasors are not
jointly, concurrently or severally liable to the victim. The damage
each is liable has to be separately proved and separately assessed.”
Respiratory Damage: Consideration
above authorities lead me to the conclusion that all of the coal mine dust lung
diseases suffered by Mr Keogh constitute divisible
respiratory damage. Each
inhalation of coal dust or silica dust is a separate infliction of harm and an
independent event, where
the diseases have cumulatively been brought about by
different tortfeasors over different periods, to adopt the formulation of Ipp
JA. Each tortfeasor is separately liable for the separate damage each has
caused. The damage for which each is liable must be separately
separately assessed.
the case of silicosis, decisions of long-standing in the Tribunal have found
that this disease results in divisible damage, so
that each tortfeasor which has
made a contribution to the creation of the disease must have damages separately
assessed. I follow
those decisions of the Tribunal, not just as a matter of
judicial comity, but because I regard them as undoubtedly correct.
is no decision to which I have been referred concerning whether or not CWP
constitutes divisible or indivisible damage. However,
CWP is but one species of
pneumoconiosis. The other types cited in “
Black lung, white
” (PX 17) are silicosis and asbestosis. Asbestosis is a disease
which has long been regarded (in my view correctly) as a divisible
the case of both silicosis and asbestosis, there needs to be a threshold dose of
dust before the disease is triggered. Once the
disease is established, each
successive tortfeasor has made its own contribution to the damage and damages
payable by each successive
tortfeasor must be separately assessed. CWP is also a
disease which has a threshold level of exposure, and I find that it too
constitutes
divisible damage, requiring me to separately assess damages for all
coal mine dust lung diseases acquired by Mr Keogh separately
against each
successive tortfeasor. That will involve consideration of the length of time
during which Mr Keogh was exposed to dust
and the intensity of the dust exposure
during that time. These are matters in relation to which findings of fact are
recorded above.
Psychiatric Damage: Principles and
Authorities
issue of whether psychiatric injury is divisible or indivisible was considered
by the England and Wales Court of Appeal (Civil
Division) in
BAE Systems
(Operations) Ltd v Konczac
[2017] EWCA Civ 118
). The leading
judgment is that of Underhill LJ.
Lordship said at [58] that one well-recognised type of case where there is a
rational basis for an objective apportionment is
where an industrial injury
becomes worse as a result of exposures over a long period, for only part of
which the defendant employer
is legally responsible. He gave the examples of
noise-induced hearing loss and asbestosis.
LJ referred at [67] to the decision of Mustill J in
, referring
to the passage at pp 443D-444A, where it was stressed that one should look to
the evidence to see whether liability could
be apportioned.
LJ said at [71]:
“What is therefore required in any case of this character is that the
Tribunal should identify a rational basis on which the
harm suffered can be
apportioned between a part caused by the employer’s wrong and a part which
is not so caused. I would emphasise,
because the distinction is easily
overlooked, that the exercise is concerned not with the divisibility of the
causative contribution
but with the divisibility of the harm. In other words,
the question is whether the Tribunal can identify, however broadly, a particular
part of the suffering which is due to the wrong; not whether it can assess the
degree to which the wrong caused the harm.”
[72] Underhill LJ said that the court should seek to find a rational basis for
distinguishing between a part of the illness which
is due to the
employer’s wrong and a part which is due to other causes, but whether that
is possible will depend on the facts
and the evidence. If there is no such
basis, then the injury will indeed be “truly indivisible”, and
principle requires
that the claimant is compensated for the whole of the
is authority in England for the proposition that psychiatric
injury may be divisible, depending upon the evidence, there seems to
be only one
mention of that decision in Australia. In
BB v Helena College Council
[2021] WADC 42
, the following is said at [165], citing
“I accept the defendant’s submission that these various psychiatric
disorders should be regarded as a single indivisible
injury. The essential
feature of a single indivisible injury is that there is no rational basis for an
objective apportionment of
causative responsibility for the injury.”
DC v New South Wales
[2016] NSWCA 198
), the Court of Appeal
had to consider whether psychiatric harm could be apportioned between a
non-tortious cause and a tortious cause.
Two young girls were sexually abused by
their stepfather. It was only after some years of abuse that the behaviour of
the stepfather
was reported to the government department which had a
responsibility to protect the girls. The primary judge made a contingent finding
that any award of damages would be reduced by 70% to reflect the psychiatric
harm caused by the stepfather before the State breached
its duty. This left 30%
of the harm apportioned to the State.
trial judge had found that the harm suffered by the two girls was indivisible.
However, the trial judge made the provisional finding
as to apportionment, in
case that decision was found to be wrong on appeal.
Court of Appeal said at [174] that all of the abuse over the whole period of the
stepfather’s offending had caused the psychiatric
condition. The Court of
Appeal (by majority) found that damages should be apportioned as provisionally
assessed by the trial judge.
Thus, the State was only liable for 30% of the
psychiatric harm, being the harm that occurred after the Department was notified
the abuse committed by the stepfather.
Qantas Airways Ltd v Lisica
[2007] NSWCA 371
), a worker
suffered an injury due to the negligence of the employer and also developed a
disabling psychiatric injury. There were
two causes of the psychiatric
condition, being a marriage breakdown and the workplace injury. Damages were
reduced on appeal as the
Court of Appeal considered at [63] that there should be
a reduction in the award of non-economic loss to take account of the effects
that part of the psychiatric injury not attributable to the employer’s
negligence.
are decisions concerning apportionment between a
non-tortious cause and a tortious cause. In both cases, there was evidence which
enabled the court to come to a view as to what part of the psychiatric damage
had resulted from each cause.
Psychiatric Damage:
Consideration
Tzouganatos submitted that the psychiatric injury was indivisible. All
defendants submitted that the psychiatric injury was divisible.
On an intuitive
view, there is much force in the submission that the psychiatric injury is
indivisible. Mr Keogh was fine psychiatrically
(subject to a long-standing
tendency to depression which was well controlled by medication) until he
received his diagnosis of CWP
and was prevented from working in his chosen
field. His psychiatric deterioration was rapid after that event. However, the
view is also attractive. If each defendant has separately contributed
to the respiratory diseases, as found above, and those diseases
have caused Mr
Keogh to deteriorate in psychiatric terms, then there is a rational basis for
apportioning responsibility for the
psychiatric condition and not just the
respiratory conditions.
Likely, psychiatrist, said (PX 1, Tab 16, p 163) that the depression has been
materially contributed to by Mr Keogh’s exposure
to dust and diagnosis
with respiratory injury. He said the same at PX 1, Tab 21, p 189.
Chalk, psychiatrist, diagnosed Mr Keogh with an adjustment disorder at DX 5, Tab
20, p 11 and DX 5, Tab 22, p 13. The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders
, 5th ed says that an adjustment disorder is the development
of emotional or behavioural symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor,
occurring within three months of the onset of the stressor. This was certainly
the case with Mr Keogh.
see no distinction in principle between the approach in
to this case where all causes of the psychiatric injury are
tortious. There is evidence in the case which enables a rational apportionment
to be made of the psychiatric damage. That psychiatric injury has flowed from
the development of the coal mine dust lung diseases.
Each defendant caused
physical damage in the proportions identified below, and thus each defendant has
caused the psychiatric damage
in the same proportions.
take a different approach would present several difficulties. Firstly, if the
respiratory conditions are regarded as divisible
but the psychiatric injury is
indivisible, that would require separate assessments to be made of damages for
the physical injuries
as opposed to the psychiatric injuries. The damages for
the physical injuries would be apportioned but the damages for the psychiatric
injuries would not be apportioned.
second difficulty presented would be that it is simply illogical for the court
to make a finding that each defendant has caused
a particular percentage of the
lung injury, but when the psychiatric injury flows directly from the lung
injury, somehow that same
proportion should not be applied.
and to its reliance on the
earlier decision in
, the Tribunal must identify a rational basis
on which the harm suffered can be apportioned between wrongdoers. As recited
Dr Likely said that the depression had been materially contributed to by
exposure to dust and diagnosis with respiratory injury.
The exposure to dust can
be rationally apportioned on the evidence. Dr Chalk diagnosed an adjustment
disorder, which is a condition
developed in response to an identifiable
stressor. The stressor in this case is the coal mine dust lung diseases, and
those diseases
in turn have been caused by the apportionable successive torts of
the various defendants.
there is evidence to enable a rational basis to be found for apportioning the
psychiatric injury, I find that the psychiatric
injury, just like the
respiratory damage, constitutes divisible disease.
Apportionment:
Findings of Fact
make the following findings of fact to attribute to each defendant a percentage
of responsibility for all of Mr Keogh’s injuries
and disabilities. I keep
in mind the words of Underhill LJ cited above, that “the whole exercise of
assessing damages is shot
through with imprecision”. In assessing
responsibility for damage, I will not wield too broad a brush, but I will
measure time
at each mine in months not days and calculate percentages of
responsibility to one decimal place.
set out below in table format my findings of fact, taking into account time
spent at each mine. In months, the time at each mine
(1) Poitrel – 46 months.
(2) Moorvale – 13 months (2 + 11).
(3) Boggabri – 21 months.
(4) Blackwater – 15 months.
also take into account the level of dust exposure at each mine. In this regard I
use the comparisons of dust levels given by Mr
Keogh, which I accept. To
(1) The levels of dust at Poitrel and Moorvale were about the same, so I have
allocated an “Exposure Weighting” to those
(2) Boggabri was four times as dusty as Poitrel and Moorvale, so its
“Exposure Weighting” is “4”.
(3) Blackwater was 20% dustier than Poitrel and Moorvale, so its “Exposure
Rating” is “1.2”.
is then a column for “Responsibility”, which is a figure reached by
multiplying the number of months by the “Exposure
Weighting”.
final column converts the “Responsibility” figure to a percentage.
The total of the units in the “Responsibility”
column is 161. For
each mine the numerator is the number in the “Responsibility” column
and the denominator is 161, expressed
as a percentage.
table is as
EXPOSURE WEIGHTING
RESPONSIBILITY
further calculation needs to be made for Boggabri, as the third defendant Downer
EDI (separately represented by Mr Rundle) is responsible
for the entire 21
months at Boggabri (ie 52.2%) but the fifth defendant Downer Regional was the
employer for only 13 of the 21 months
at Boggabri. Thus, the separate percentage
of responsibility for Downer Regional is: 13/21 x 52.2 = 32.3%. In summary,
has a 52.2% responsibility for the damage but Downer Regional only
has a 32.3% responsibility. Obviously these two figures overlap.
Quantum: Preliminary Observations
over these calculations, in due course, I must take into account:
(1) The different damages regimes in Queensland and New South Wales.
(2) The cross claim for indemnity or contribution brought by Downer Regional
against Downer EDI, arising out of the Boggabri exposure.
will now turn to the various quantum issues raised by the parties. I set out
below my summary of the evidence on quantum and my
findings in relation to
various heads of damage. This analysis and these findings relate to all
defendants.
I have found that the damages are divisible and apportionable, I will first
express my conclusions about the “full value”
for the different
heads of damage, in accordance with the approach derived from the cases referred
will later apply the percentages set out in par
above to “full
value”. This approach relates to the assessment of damages against the
first, second and third defendants,
because the assessment of damages against
those defendants is essentially a common law assessment, albeit with different
rates prescribed by statute in Queensland and New South Wales.
will put to one side, for the moment, the labyrinthine complexities of the
statutory damages regime which applies to an employer
in the coal industry in
New South Wales, such as the fifth defendant Downer Regional. While the factual
findings on quantum issues
apply to Downer Regional, the conclusions as to
appropriate “full value” awards set out below only apply to the
defendant, where indicated in my separate consideration of the quantum of
damages applicable to Downer Regional.
Quantum: Medical
to one side for the moment the different statutory provisions in Queensland and
New South Wales modifying the assessment of
damages, the quantum issues raised
by the defendants are set out below. My findings upon those issues are also set
quantum medical issues are as follows, by reference to numbered paragraphs in
the Further Amended Defence of CPB (noting that
Campbell and Downer EDI pleaded
the same quantum issues):
(1) The quantity of coal dust inhaled by Mr Keogh in the course of his
employment at Poitrel was insufficient to cause or contribute
to him developing
lung disease (par 11(b)(iii)). I reject this contention, as there is no medical
support for it. Dr Edwards and
Dr Brown were agreed to the contrary. Their
evidence is discussed below.
(2) The quantity of coal dust inhaled by Mr Keogh in the course of his
employment at Moorvale was insufficient to cause or contribute
to Mr Keogh
developing lung disease (par 11(b)(iv)). I reject this contention, as there is
no medical support for it. Dr Edwards
and Dr Brown were agreed to the contrary.
Their evidence is discussed below.
(3) Mr Keogh does not suffer lung disease as a consequence of the inhalation of
coal dust, whether in the course of his employment
at Poitrel or Moorvale (par
11(b)(v)). I reject this contention, as there is no medical support for it. Dr
Edwards and Dr Brown were
agreed to the contrary. Their evidence is discussed
(4) Mr Keogh’s COPD is solely caused by his history of smoking at least 25
cigarettes per day for more than 28 years and has
not been caused or contributed
to by any occupational inhalation of dust (par 11(b)(vi)). The smoking issue is
separately considered
(5) Mr Keogh does not suffer from coal dust pneumoconiosis (par 11(b)(vii)). I
reject this contention, as there is no medical support
for it. Dr Edwards and Dr
Brown were agreed to the contrary. Their evidence is discussed below.
(6) If Mr Keogh suffers from mixed dust pneumoconiosis, silicosis and/or
emphysema, then those conditions were not caused by the
inhalation of dust at
Poitrel or Moorvale but were caused by Mr Keogh’s inhalation of silica
dust while working in Western
Australia (par 11(b)(viii)). I reject this
contention because of my findings of fact recorded above in relation to work in
(7) Mr Keogh does not suffer adjustment disorder or depressive disorder as a
consequence of suffering lung disease (par 11(b)(ix)).
I reject this contention,
as there is no medical support for it. Dr Likely and Dr Chalk were agreed to the
contrary. Their evidence
is discussed below.
(8) Any adjustment disorder or other psychiatric disorder from which Mr Keogh
suffers is long-standing and has afflicted Mr Keogh
for more than 25 years (par
11(b)(x)). I reject the contention that Mr Keogh’s long-standing feelings
of depression were in
any way disabling, as there is no medical support for such
a contention. Dr Likely and Dr Chalk were agreed to the contrary. Their
is discussed below.
(9) Any psychiatric disorder suffered by Mr Keogh is a consequence of: a
long-standing depressive disorder; Mr Keogh’s personality
Keogh’s misdiagnosis with coal dust pneumoconiosis; the termination of Mr
Keogh’s employment by Dajwood when
he remained fit to work; and Mr
Keogh’s erroneous perception that he was unable to return to any
employment (par 14(e)). I
reject this contention, as there are no such facts
established by the evidence. Further, there is no medical support for such a
Dr Likely and Dr Chalk were agreed to the contrary. Their evidence is
discussed below.
(10) Any shortness of breath, lethargy, disturbed sleep or other symptoms were
not caused or contributed to by the inhalation of
coal dust at Poitrel or
Moorvale, but are the consequences of Mr Keogh’s pre-existing psychiatric
disorder and are the consequence
of lung disease secondary to smoking and the
inhalation of silica dust while employed in Western Australia (par 14(f)). The
issue is considered separately below. There is no medical support for
the balance of the proposition, concerning either a psychiatric
disorder or
silica dust.
(11) Mr Keogh has no restriction of his capacity to work (par 14(g)). I reject
this contention, as there is no medical support for
it. Dr Edwards, Dr Brown, Dr
Likely and Dr Chalk were agreed to the contrary. Their evidence is discussed
(12) Mr Keogh has failed to mitigate his loss as: he has an unrestricted
capacity to work; he has made a voluntary decision to cease
work when he is fit
to do so; he has failed to participate in suitable duties programmes arranged
for him by WorkCover Queensland;
and he has failed to comply with
recommendations as to treatment (par 15). The first and second propositions are
rejected, as the
evidence is to the contrary. The third and fourth propositions
are considered separately below.
its Defence, Downer Regional did not raise any quantum issues, except for the
statutory provisions modifying the assessment of
damages, which are dealt with
separately below.
Quantum: Evidence of Mr Keogh
First Affidavit of Mr Keogh
Keogh was working as a plant operator, without any apparent limitations, until
he was diagnosed with his respiratory conditions
on 22 October 2018. His
description of the events leading up to his diagnosis, and the consequences of
his diagnosis are to be found
in PX 1, Tab 1, pars 189-220.
12 March 2018 Mr Keogh saw his local general practitioner Dr Rehan Shah for a
Medical Clearance”. Mr Keogh had undergone an x-ray a few
days before this appointment. Dr Shah advised him there were some
abnormalities
on the scan which needed further investigating. Over the next few months further
testing was carried out, including
more x-rays and a CT scan of his chest. Mr
Keogh was referred to a respiratory physician Dr Edwards, who he saw in August
Edwards initially did not think that Mr Keogh had any dust-related
disease, but later said that he did have a dust-induced lung injury.
told Mr Keogh of this diagnosis when Mr Keogh went back to Dr Shah on 22 October
Keogh sent his
documents to his employer Dajwood and he received a
phone call asking him not to come into work. On 13 December 2018 Mr Keogh
a further phone call from Dajwood and he was told that Dajwood was
letting him go. He said he was “devastated”.
Keogh applied for WorkCover Queensland compensation in February 2019. Dr Shah
had certified that Mr Keogh was able to return to
work, providing that his
exposure to dust was kept below a certain level. Mr Keogh had given this
certificate to Dajwood, but they
would not let him return to their site. Mr
Keogh said, “I was desperate to go back to work, so Dr Shah amended the
next certificate
to say that I just needed to have personal dust monitoring
performed within three months of me going back to work”.
Keogh then went to see Dr Ian Brown, another respiratory specialist. Mr Keogh
told Dr Brown that he was desperate to go back to
work, so Dr Brown cleared him
to return to work “with very strict rules in place, including avoiding all
the financial year before his diagnosis, Mr Keogh was earning an average weekly
wage of $1,415.04.
receiving the diagnosis and losing his job, and the income that came with it, Mr
Keogh suffered a lot of stress. He had little
experience other than being a
machine operator in mines, where he had worked since 2004. On 13 November 2018
Mr Keogh was at home
and the situation “became too much”. He worried
that his disease would mean that he would never be able to return to
industry. He said, “I loved my job and was reliant on the income it
brought in”. Mr Keogh knew he was in danger
of suicide and he called a
friend, Donna. She looked after him that evening to make sure that he was okay.
On 29 November 2018 Mr
Keogh had “another breakdown” and he called
Dr Shah. Dr Shah sent an ambulance which took Mr Keogh to Mackay Base Hospital.
He was released from hospital later that night.
15 December 2018, a couple of days after Dajwood had told him that his job was
no longer available to him, Mr Keogh told his friend
Donna that he was
contemplating suicide when his money ran out. Donna called Mr Keogh’s
mother. After those episodes, his psychiatric
symptoms stabilised, and he felt
somewhat better when WorkCover Queensland agreed to pay him weekly benefits.
Before this he had
been relying on income protection insurance to pay his bills.
He started seeing a psychologist, Ms Caroline Ritchie, and a psychiatrist,
December 2018 Mr Keogh has struggled with his mental health. He feels flat a lot
of the time and does not have the motivation
to do anything. His appetite is
poor and he usually only eats one meal per day. Sometimes he goes for days at a
time without eating.
He has neglected his personal care and hygiene and at times
goes weeks without having a shower. He feels anxious and worried and
with concentration. He has become forgetful and disorganised. His sleep has
changed for the worse since the diagnosis.
Keogh said that around Easter 2021 (he later corrected this to 2022) he stubbed
his toe quite badly and he could not find the motivation
to get medical
attention. The toe eventually had to be amputated.
Keogh admitted that he had struggled with mental health issues for all of his
adult life. He had managed these issues by sometimes
taking a day off work, and
by taking medication.
December 2020 Mr Keogh obtained a job with a company called McMahons Ltd
operating bulldozers in Brisbane to build a golf course.
He could not cope with
the technology involved in this work as he could not concentrate. He was
constantly confused and was calling
his boss for help. Before his diagnosis, Mr
Keogh said that learning a new system would have been a breeze. He left the job
three weeks because he could not cope with the new technology which was
causing him a lot of anxiety and confusion. His failure at
that job impacted him
mentally. Mr Keogh said that this failure took him to a very dark place. He has
always worked and taken pride
in doing a good job.
Keogh put his house in Mackay on the market in July 2021 and he moved to Horsham
in Victoria to live with his mother. By the time
of his first affidavit Mr Keogh
had lived with his mother in Horsham for 18 months. He was still struggling with
lack of motivation,
concentration and generally feeling down.
April to August 2022 Mr Keogh worked as a taxi driver in Horsham. He did not
enjoy the work, as “I do not have a lot of
patience for people”. In
August 2022 Mr Keogh obtained a job as a machinery operator with HED Industries.
He was operating
an excavator. He left this job in November 2022 because it was
a poorly run, inefficient workplace. He felt frustrated and on edge.
The work he
was doing produced dust which he had to avoid.
leaving HED Industries, Mr Keogh did not work for a few months and found that
his mental health was deteriorating. In January
2023 Mr Keogh obtained a job
with Garraway Earthmoving, rehabilitating a tailings dam at an old mineral sands
mine near Horsham.
He was required to undergo a medical examination before he
started that job. The bulldozer he was operating was a brand-new machine.
only four hours of use when Mr Keogh started. He still found that dust got into
the cabin of his machinery and he began to
worry about the dust levels. Mr Keogh
hoped that that job would be safe for him but said, “[i]t clearly
Keogh said that he was also struggling with his mental health at work and the
management style of his supervisors. His concerns
Keogh concluded his first
affidavit as follows:
“I wish I did not have lung disease. Being a ‘dusted’ coal
miner is like having a death sentence in the industry.”
Second Affidavit of Mr Keogh
Keogh dealt with the effects of his diseases in PX1, Tab 2, pars 139-184.
Keogh raised complaint about the way he had been treated by WorkCover Queensland
when he applied for compensation. He had the impression
that he was being talked
down to and that WorkCover Queensland was accusing him of not wanting to work.
He said this was not true
at all. After a particular conversation with WorkCover
Queensland, he took a piece of rope and tied it to a steel beam in his shed.
did not go through with this, but “I came close”. That piece of rope
stayed hanging in the shed until he sold the
house and moved out in mid-2021.
Whenever he went into the shed over the intervening years, he saw it hanging
there and thought about
the way he had been treated by WorkCover Queensland.
Keogh also raised complaint about how he was treated by two rehabilitation
providers who saw him at the request of WorkCover Queensland.
He said that by
the time he saw them he had stopped eating and even showering. His house was a
complete mess. He said he could not
get motivated to do anything. He used to
think about the rope in the shed.
Keogh gave some more detail about the amputation of his toe. He said that this
occurred around Easter 2022, and that the reference
to Easter 2021 in his first
affidavit was an error. After Mr Keogh returned to Horsham in late 2021, his
sister Cindy, who is a nurse,
he had a clogged artery in the leg. On 3 November 2021 Mr Keogh underwent a
superficial femoral artery bypass. He recovered well. Mr Keogh said that
he no longer has any physical restrictions or pain as a
result of the toe
amputation or the later surgery.
par 152 of his second affidavit Mr Keogh said the following:
“I always took pride in my work, and I absolutely loved coal mining. Every
night after work, I thought through what had happened
that day and how I could
have done things better at work; how I could be a better coal miner. In my
family, work always came first
and was very important. I loved coal mining and I
wanted to be the best I could be.”
Keogh repeated his evidence that throughout 2019 and 2020 he struggled to come
to grips with not being able to continue work as
a miner. He felt flat and
depressed. He had no motivation. Mr Keogh gave some further information
concerning the sale of his house.
He said that before his diagnosis he used to
take care of the house and he did a lot of work on the landscaping. His house
and he had a view of the mountains around Mackay. He described it as
“my sanctuary”. Mr Keogh annexed to his second affidavit
a series of
photos of his home in Mackay, that he later sold. When Mr Keogh sold the house,
he simply walked out and left a lot of
his possessions there, such as a ride-on
mower, a generator, tools, a television and a stereo.
Keogh said that moving back in with his mother was very difficult. He had always
taken care of himself, and he could not bear the
thought of relying on her to
put a roof over his head.
finishing with Garraway Earthmoving in April 2023 Mr Keogh said that his mental
health went downhill. He realised that he was
never going to be able to be a
machine operator again. In April 2023 he planned his suicide. He thought about
it in detail for five
or six days.
the morning of 26 April 2023, Mr Keogh got up and spoke to his mother, who he
was living with. He said to his mother “I need
said, “I know Craig, you’ve needed help for a long time”. Mr
Keogh told his mother about
his suicide plan.
Keogh called Horsham Mental Health Service. She drove Mr Keogh to the Mental
Health Service and tried to get him admitted. Mr
Keogh told them of his plan to
commit suicide. Mrs Keogh then drove her son to the Mental Health Service in
Ballarat. He was admitted
and stayed there for two weeks. Since his discharge on
4 May 2023 Mr Keogh has not had any psychological or psychiatric treatment
has continued to take prescribed medications, as advised. He goes to the local
general practitioner for his prescriptions.
November 2023 Mr Keogh bought a motor home. He wanted to move out of his
mother’s house, but he did not want to rent. He
parked the motor home at
his sister’s property in Nhill and he lives there now.
par 171 of his second affidavit, Mr Keogh said that he has always supported
himself and did not believe in “handouts”.
He had not applied for
Centrelink benefits. His total and permanent disability claim was accepted by an
income protection insurer
and he was able to access some superannuation. He had
been using that money to support himself.
Keogh said that he is still in a bad way physically and mentally. Every day is
just the same. He wakes up every day and thinks
that it is just another day
without hope. He does not have any goals. He said that he struggles to get
through each day. In January
2024 he bought a dog “Bella”, and he
said the dog keeps his mind off things and gives him something to care for.
Keogh said he still thinks about suicide, but he does not have any plans. He
said that he tries to take his mind off his lung disease,
but things set him off
and he gets very emotional. He feels that no-one understands what he is going
Keogh said that he felt he could not cope with working again, even doing taxi
driving. He said that he gave it his all and he could
not do it. The medication
he now takes is very strong and it makes him “feel like a zombie”.
He struggles with concentration
and focus. He said, “some days I am just
off with the fairies”.
Keogh has problems with short-term memory. He has to write himself notes all the
time to remember to do simple things. He never
needed notes before. He forgets
things very easily.
Keogh said that his breathlessness has become much worse over the past six
years. He now struggles to walk to the mailbox and back
without getting puffed.
His sleep is disturbed. He sleeps a lot during the day but then struggles to
sleep at nighttime. About twice
a week he wakes from his sleep in a panic and
feels like he cannot breathe. It feels like a plastic bag over his head. He said
this was terrifying.
Keogh has tried to give up smoking many times over the years. He has tried gum
and he has tried patches. He has tried a nicotine
inhaler. He had not tried
medication because he was told he could not take it while he was taking Aropax,
which is the medication
he has been taking over the long term for depression.
Whenever he has tried to quit smoking he has become angry and fidgety and found
that he could not keep off the cigarettes.
Keogh said that he gets angry when he thinks about what has happened to him. He
did not do anything wrong. Mr Keogh said, “the
only thing I did was turn
up to work”. If Mr Keogh had been told that the dust in his cabins could
harm him, then he would
have worn a mask. He said that “simply put, my
life has been destroyed by my lung disease”.
Evidence-in-Chief
oral evidence-in chief Mr Keogh said that between starting tests in March 2018,
and being informed on 22 October 2018 by Dr Shah
of his diagnosis, he had not
heard anything and had no idea there was any problem with his lungs or with his
work (Tcpt 43/12). He
said that he was shocked and in disbelief. He never went
ringing Dajwood and asking to go back to work, but they kept saying
“no”. Dajwood terminated his employment in December
2018 just before
Keogh described dealing with WorkCover Queensland as being like on a
merry-go-round. WorkCover Queensland said that they would
cover his medical
expenses but would not cover lost wages, but Mr Keogh could not go back to work
(Tcpt 44/20).
Keogh was aware that Dr Brown had written a letter to WorkCover Queensland
saying that Mr Keogh could only work in a zero-dust
environment. Mr Keogh said
that in his trade, “that is absolutely impossible” (Tcpt 45/6).
Keogh said that he felt confused, because Dr Brown had written a letter saying
that he could not work in an environment where there
was any dust, but Dr
Schneider was trying to arrange for him to do a job as an excavator operator,
which would inevitably be dusty
work. Mr Keogh said that he felt like he was in
a washing machine (Tcpt 45/19). Mr Keogh cannot be criticised for lacking
in what he was being told by Dr Schneider and by WorkCover
Queensland. Dr Brown had advised that he should be in a zero-dust environment,
yet others were telling him to get back to work as an excavator operator. There
is no such occupation as a no-dust machine operator.
Keogh said that he had read the reports of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown, and that if
he needed care and assistance in the future, and
nursing care, then he would pay
for it himself. He did not feel good about the thought of ending up in a private
hospital or a public
facility (Tcpt 45/42).
Keogh said that nowadays his concentration was “not very good at
all”. As an example, he said that if he watched a
movie, his attention
span was only 15 or 20 minutes, and he could not follow the plot. Mr Keogh said
that he does drive but after
a while has to get out of the car and have a rest.
He can drive for 45 minutes between Nhill and Horsham. If he gets agitated and
has to control himself, then he stops and has a break. He never used to be like
that (Tcpt 46/15).
Keogh said that he had difficulty doing more than one thing at the same time. He
also had difficulty dealing with things that had
changed. He felt frustrated. He
could not deal with things that were brand new. He gets confused, lost and has a
panic attack. A
simple job becomes quite hard (Tcpt 46/34). He was never like
this before.
Keogh said that for the time-being he would live in the motor home. He said that
he could not care for a house and he did not know
where he would end up. He had
no plans. Sometimes he spends 14 hours a day in bed. Otherwise, he would just
get out of bed and sit
outside and watch his dog run around (Tcpt 47/10).
Keogh said that he was still smoking and that he knew that smoking was not good
for him. He knew that he shouldn’t be doing
it. Mr Keogh said that he had
tried to give up smoking but the longest he had gone without a cigarette was
tried to give up smoking about six times in the last 25
years. His hands would shake and he would be edgy and grumpy. Mr Keogh said
he would like to try again to give up smoking, but at the moment he was under a
lot of stress and later on he will give it a
go (Tcpt 47/23-44).
Keogh said that he went off alcohol last year for five months. He said that he
has basically been a heavy drinker all his life.
Currently he drinks about 8 or
10 cans of VB every day. When he was working in the mines and he went back to
camp or back to the
pub where he was living, he would have six stubbies of beer
a night. He did lose his job once in the super pit at Kalgoorlie when
over the limit on an alcohol test before starting a shift. During a rostered
week off he would drink about 18 stubbies a day
and drink about half a bottle of
bourbon. He would have a rest on the day before he went back to work and only
have about six beers.
Mr Keogh started drinking at this level when he worked in
hotels well before he became a miner. Mr Keogh said that alcohol never
his ability to operate a machine in Queensland or in New South Wales and it
never stopped him going to work. He had to blow
in the breathalyser every
morning and he never failed a test in those States (Tcpt
Cross-Examination
Keogh was first cross-examined by Mr Talintyre. He was questioned about whether
he would get psychological or psychiatric help
from anyone for his mental health
issues. His answer was (Tcpt 65/32-37):
“If I could get treatment, but I have seen a lot of people that have tried
to help me, and it’s very hard to keep going
understand, because it actually re-traumatises me every time I go as well, every
time I see someone new.
And what I’ve experienced is not much help is
actually given, and where I live at the moment, it’s a very small bush
town, the biggest one in the area, but you’re flat out getting a decent
doctor there to be honest, to even get a script, let
alone professional
accept this evidence and find that it answers the notion that Mr Keogh should
have been more pro-active in seeking mental health
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Griscti. Mr Keogh was asked about the amount of
alcohol he drinks. Mr Keogh agreed that excessive
drinking can be harmful to his
health. He said that he had received medical advice from time to time to cut
down on his drinking.
Mr Keogh said that he was probably drinking half the
amount now compared to what he drank when he was doing mining work. He was still
drinking daily (Tcpt 82/18-32).
Griscti also asked Mr Keogh about smoking and his attempts to give up. Mr Keogh
said that he would smoke about 30 cigarettes a
day. Mr Griscti asked whether,
taking into account drinking and smoking, Mr Keogh agreed that he had a tendency
to fail to act in
the best interests of his health. Mr Keogh agreed and said it
was not good for him (Tcpt 82/40).
Keogh was cross-examined by Mr Rowles. Mr Rowles asked him whether, when he was
doing taxi work, Mr Keogh found that getting out
of the house and doing work was
beneficial to him. Mr Keogh said that it was good to be around people. He did
not accept that he
could do that work at the present time. When asked why not,
Mr Keogh said (Tcpt 98/41-44):
“I’d be a risk to myself and others if I was driving a cab for 12
hours a shift, or four hours, or five hours a shift
cause you can’t just
pull over and stop. I’ve got to have breaks, and I’ve got to take
baby steps with everything
I do now, which, yes, I’m not real happy
Rowles suggested to Mr Keogh that apart from the fact that he could no longer
work as a machine operator, his lifestyle was much
the same now as it was when
he was working. Mr Keogh disagreed. When asked to say how his life was different
now compared to when
he was working in the mines, he gave the following answer
(Tcpt 99/3-8):
“Well, we’ll start right off. Right. I no longer can walk for very
far. All right. I’m 52. I can’t do that.
I can’t concentrate
like I used to. I have a severe mental problem, which I’m aware of. I used
to have depression. I
think it’s right at the max at the moment, and I
have a lot of issues. Basically, everything that I used to be, I’m not
anymore. I’m not even the person I used to be. That’s been taken
from me. I’ve been robbed of everything. So I
don’t know if that
answers your question. Yes.”
Re-Examination
re-examination Mr Keogh was asked why he said to Mr Talintyre that he did not
agree he was able to drive taxis. He said that he
was fatigued, very tired and
got confused very easily. He gets angry very quickly (Tcpt 101/13).
Keogh was asked why he told Mr Talintyre that he made no attempt to get back to
taxi driving. Mr Keogh said that this was because
“I was pretty messed up
back then, and I was suicidal” (Tcpt 101/17).
Keogh was asked why he told Mr Talintyre that he was not physically able to
continue doing the Garraway work. Mr Keogh said that
he found it very difficult.
He was tired all the time and found it hard to concentrate (Tcpt 101/45).
Keogh was asked who did the cooking, cleaning and shopping when he lived with
his mother. He said that his mother did this for
him, but she had always been
like that. Mr Keogh said that he could have done those things if his mother did
not. The same applied
to driving to Bendigo or to Melbourne. Mr Keogh could have
done that for himself (Tcpt 101/46-102/6).
Quantum: Medical
Evidence of Dr Edwards
Robert Edwards is a thoracic and sleep physician who has extensive experience in
assessing patients in Queensland with coal mine
dust lung disease. Three of his
reports went into evidence:
(1) Report dated 7 January 2019 (PX 4).
(2) Report dated 9 December 2019 (PX 5).
(3) Report dated 21 October 2023 (PX 1, Tab 23).
addition, Dr Edwards gave oral evidence and was cross-examined.
first report of Dr Edwards, dated 7 January 2019, was directed to WorkCover
Queensland. Dr Edwards noted that Mr Keogh had been
a smoker consuming 25
cigarettes per day and he was still smoking. He had smoked for 21 years. It was
noted that Mr Keogh became
breathless on very strenuous exertion but there was
no limitation to his exercise capacity. On examination he was in no respiratory
distress at rest. Spirometry values showed mild airway obstruction. A chest
x-ray showed some pleural thickening and the CT scan
of the chest showed minimal
nodules, mainly in the right upper lobe.
Dr Edwards did not think the changes were related to coal mine dust exposure.
However, he reviewed the high-resolution CT
scan of the chest with Dr Katrina
Newbigin and said he was convinced that Mr Keogh did have early CWP.
Edwards stated that because Mr Keogh worked in an air-conditioned cabin with
minimal dust exposure, he believed it was reasonable
for him to continue to work
in his current occupation as a machine operator. Dr Edwards thought that Mr
Keogh should have yearly
lung function reviews and a high-resolution CT scan of
the chest in a year’s time. Dr Edwards thought that the prognosis was
satisfactory, given his assumption that Mr Keogh worked in an air-conditioned
cabin and did not have significant dust exposure at
his second report dated 9 December 2019, Dr Edwards basically reiterated his
earlier opinion. He had not seen Mr Keogh since 22
August 2018. Dr Edwards did
say “once people develop coal workers’ pneumoconiosis it does not go
his third report dated 21 October 2023, Dr Edwards set out a detailed history of
work at various mines, and the dust exposure at
those mines. Dr Edwards had been
provided with the report of Dr Michael Jones, radiologist, and noted that Mr
Keogh had mild diffuse
CWP and mild simple silicosis, which had progressed
between 2018 and 2023. Dr Edwards said that Mr Keogh also had “large
inflammation changes and centrilobular emphysema, which are associated
with both cigarette smoking and respirable dust”.
Edwards noted that the main functional abnormality was one of airway obstruction
and was not a restrictive defect. The lung function
results had slightly reduced
since first recorded in 2018. There was evidence of radiological progression
since 2020 and evidence
of progressive reduction in lung function since June
opinion of Dr Edwards was expressed on p 7 of his report as follows:
“On my initial assessment, I was not convinced that he had mine dust lung
disease but since subsequent assessments, my opinion
was that he did have mine
dust lung disease in the form of mine workers’ pneumoconiosis and probable
silicosis in addition
to emphysema and mild chronic airway obstruction.
Following my most recent report of Mr Keogh, my opinion was that he suffered
from coal mine dust lung disease in the form of coal
pneumoconiosis and mild chronic airway obstruction.
Therefore, I would like to confirm my opinion that he does have coal
workers’ coal mine dust lung disease in the form of mixed
pneumoconiosis, chronic airway obstruction and emphysema.
This has been significantly contributed to by his exposure to coal dust in his
Queensland work.”
on p 7 of the report Dr Edwards said that the diagnosis had progressed since Mr
Keogh ceased work in the mining industry. Dr
Edwards said that Mr Keogh’s
life expectancy would be reduced as a result of this progressive disease. He put
the reduction
at approximately five years.
p 8 of the report Dr Edwards was asked to offer an opinion as to the likely
future progression of Mr Keogh’s condition. His
opinion was expressed as
“Therefore, Mr Keogh anticipated life expectancy is 26.53 years. During Mr
Keogh’s remaining life expectancy, the condition
is likely to slowly
progress. His symptoms will get progressively worse.
His functional capacity will also gradually deteriorate as follows.
Currently he is performed at an ECOG level of 0, that is, he is capable of full
independent activities with no limitation to his
exercise capacity. I would
anticipate that that he will be functioning at the ECOG of zero for 10 years.
He will then move on to an ECOG level of 1 for 10 years, at a level of low
dependency, being capable of almost all self-care and
most domestic tasks and
able to manage light property and lawn and garden maintenance. He needs
assistance with more strenuous levels
of activity. During which time he will be
slowly deteriorating to an ECOG level 2.
By that time, he will be passing onto an ECOG level of 2, with a medium level of
dependence, for approximately five years. At this
stage, he is likely to require
some assistance with self-care and if living alone will probably need to have
some sort of community
support. He would be able to manage light and sedentary
domestic chores but would need help in managing his property and lawn mowing
cetera. He will be up and about for more than 50% of his waking time.
He will then progress to an ECOG level 3 which is high dependence, where the
patient is only capable of limited self-care and confined
to a chair or bed for
more than 50% of his waking time. He would need added assistance in caring for
himself. He will be at this
level for approximately one year.
He will then move into a level of complete dependence, ECOG level of 4, for six
months before his demise.”
can be seen that Dr Edwards answered the question by reference to the ECOG
scale. That scale was put into evidence as PX 19. Its
full name is the
“ECOG Performance Status Scale”. The first page of PX 19 sets out
the scale as
ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS
Fully active, able to carry on all pre-disease performance without
restriction.
Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to
carry out work of a light or sedentary nature, eg, light housework,
Ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work
activities; up and about more than 50% of waking hours.
Capable of only limited selfcare, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of
waking hours.
Completely disabled; cannot carry on any selfcare; totally confined to bed
Edwards noted that Mr Keogh is now retired, but he said, “he would now be
unable to work in a role that exposed him to dust,
given the progression of his
p 9 of the report Dr Edwards said:
“In my report to WorkCover Queensland dated 7 January 2019, I opined that
Mr Keogh’s dust exposure had not been heavy
or significant, however, on
review of the enclosed documentation and in particular, Mr Keogh’s
affidavit, I am of the opinion
that the dust exposure whilst working in the
mines was both heavy and significant.”
Edwards gave oral evidence-in-chief. He said that accumulative exposure to mine
dust was the total exposure to mine dust which
occurs progressively from the
time a worker starts in the industry to the time they finish work in the
industry, and the larger the
exposure accumulated, the more likely people are to
develop coal mine dust lung disease (Tcpt 149/23).
Edwards said that it is recognised that a worker needs at least a 10-year
exposure to develop significant disease. There might
be a massive exposure over
a lesser period of time. In the coal mining industry it is usually a 10-year
accumulative exposure. He
agreed with the proposition that this was a threshold.
He agreed with the proposition that “every exposure gets you to the
where you have enough so that you get the disease” (Tcpt 149/38-45). Dr
Edwards was asked whether he had a view about
whether coal dust pneumoconiosis
is a divisible or an indivisible disease. He said:
“I consider it to be an indivisible disease. All of the periods of
to it, but in total. Totality. Not
individually.”
(Tcpt 150/9-11)
(Emphasis added)
Edwards was not cross-examined by Mr Talintyre. He was cross-examined by Mr
Griscti. Dr Edwards was asked whether his diagnosis
related purely to dust
exposure and did not relate to the impact of smoking. The answer of Dr Edwards
was that he always considered
the impact of smoking, but smoking did not cause
coal mine dust lung disease. It did not cause pneumoconiosis. Smoking does cause
and can contribute to emphysema and chronic airway obstruction. Dr Edwards said
that coal mine dust exposure and cigarette smoking
contribute equally. He said
that studies have shown that one pack of cigarettes per day for a year is
equivalent to one year of
heavy mine dust exposure (Tcpt 153/35).
Edwards was asked whether the cigarette smoking contributed to Mr Keogh’s
reduced life expectancy. He described it as “a
contribution” and explained that there had been progression on the CT scan
of pneumoconiosis but no evidence of
progression of emphysema or airway disease
(Tcpt 153/43).
was no cross-examination by Mr Rundle.
was cross-examination by Mr Rowles about an opinion expressed by Associate
Professor McKenzie in a report dated 2 April 2024.
However, that report was not
admitted into evidence. In answering the question about Associate Professor
McKenzie’s report,
Dr Edwards referred to the article “Radiological
appearance of coal mine dust lung disease in Australian workers” in
Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology
published in 2018. That
article was tendered as Exhibit PX 10.
asked Dr Edwards a question about the use of the phrase “coal mine dust
lung disease”, and what it meant or encompassed.
Dr Edwards said that mine
dust causes more than just classic pneumoconiosis, being CWP and silicosis. He
said that coal mine dust
lung disease consists of CWP, silicosis, mixed dust
pneumoconiosis, emphysema, chronic airway obstruction, chronic bronchitis and
dust diffuse fibrosis. He said that coal mine dust lung disease was much more
than CWP or “black lung” (Tcpt 156/30-39).
of Dr Jones
Michael Jones is a radiologist who provided a medico-legal report dated 1 August
2023 to the plaintiff’s solicitors (PX 1,
Tab 14). He viewed a chest x-ray
dated 9 March 2018 and CT scans of the chest dated 14 March 2018, 11 March 2019,
8 July 2020 and
21 July 2023. Dr Jones offered the opinion that Mr Keogh has
mild diffuse CWP and mild simple silicosis, which has progressed between
and 2023. Dr Jones also said that Mr Keogh has large airway inflammatory changes
and centrilobular emphysema, both of which
are associated with the inhalation of
respirable dust. Dr Jones said there may be some contribution from cigarette
smoking which
also causes large airway inflammatory changes and emphysema.
Evidence of Dr Brown
Ian Brown is a retired thoracic and sleep physician. The following reports were
(1) 20 August 2020 (PX 1, Tab 7).
(2) 30 September 2021 (PX 1, Tab 9).
(3) 26 September 2023 (PX 1, Tab 11).
(4) 17 March 2024 (PX 1, Tab 13).
addition, Dr Brown gave oral evidence and was cross-examined.
his first report Dr Brown said that as a consequence of mine dust exposure, Mr
Keogh had developed evidence of mixed dust disease
on CT scanning. He had
changes of COPD with mild airway obstruction on spirometry and significant
impairment of lung diffusion. Dr
Brown attributed the changes of COPD equally to
dust exposure and the heavy smoking history. He attributed the mixed dust
entirely to the workplace exposure. Dr Brown offered the opinion that Mr
Keogh had a 20% impairment of the whole person, with 15%
whole person impairment
attributable to his work-related dust disease and COPD and the balance of 5%
attributable to the smoking-related
COPD. Dr Brown noted that Mr Keogh
“had been removed from the workplace from early 2018” and had been
advised not to
be exposed to any coal dust or RCS. He also noted a related
psychological injury with anxiety and depression requiring psychological
psychiatric support.
his first report Dr Brown provided a scenario of potential medical and other
costs. These were said to be:
(1) Medical care from a general practitioner and respiratory specialists with
screening tests of complex lung function, chest x-rays
annually and CT scans
bi-annually - $27,000.
(2) Other medications including aerosol treatments, antibiotics and
depression-related medications - $15,000.
(3) Supplementary oxygen therapy with a home oxygen concentrator and a portable
oxygen concentrator for mobilising - $10,000.
(4) At least two episodes of hospitalisation to manage complications such as
infection - $15,000.
(5) Costs related to psychiatric care – not estimated.
Brown thought that over the next 10-12 years Mr Keogh would have a period of low
dependency in terms of the level of support required.
There would be a gradual
increase in support for activities such as lawnmowing, gardening, vacuuming and
shopping. There would then
be a period of five years of moderate dependency with
increasing support required, including laundry, housekeeping, shopping and
cooking. Dr Brown thought that Mr Keogh would then enter a period of oxygen
dependence for exertional activities. A period of high
dependency would follow
for two to three years including total dependency over several months and
palliative care for the last month
or so of his life. Dr Brown did not approach
this topic in his opinion by reference to the ECOG scale.
his second report Dr Brown recorded that Mr Keogh’s predominant ongoing
symptom was breathlessness. At that time Mr Keogh
was living at the home of his
mother in Victoria. His sleep was disturbed. His weight and appetite were
steady, but he remained in
the obese range.
tests showed evidence of mild to moderate airway obstruction without a
significant reversible component. Dr Brown thought
that the CT scan appearance
suggested a diagnosis of mixed dust pneumoconiosis. This was based on the
history of exposure to coal
dust and silica dust in Mr Keogh’s work as a
plant operator in the open cut coal mines. The radiological features were
with mixed dust pneumoconiosis.
Brown said that the interstitial changes and nodular infiltrates were due to
dust exposure and not cigarette smoking. The COPD
component was likely to be
significantly affected by smoking. Dr Brown said that cigarette smoking had not
contributed to the actual
pneumoconiosis changes, but it had significantly
contributed to the development of COPD. Dr Brown said that the COPD would
to progress under the influence of continued cigarette smoking. There
was a significant likelihood that life expectancy would be
shortened by COPD due
to cigarette smoking but there was a small component of reduced life expectancy
due to pneumoconiosis.
Brown said that Mr Keogh was not capable of returning to work as a plant
operator where there is any potential dust exposure. He
also thought that his
mood disturbance would likely make it difficult for him to return to
employment.
his third report Dr Brown said that he had not changed his opinion in relation
to the clinical and radiological features, which
showed that Mr Keogh had CWP
and simple silicosis. The most recent CT scan performed on 21 July 2023
suggested that these conditions
were mildly progressive. Smoking would have
contributed partly to the development of emphysema. A component of the emphysema
also directly related to pneumoconiosis as both coal dust and RCS are
contributors to the development of emphysema independently
of cigarette smoking.
The progressive CT scan changes were attributable to the inorganic dust
materials deposited in the airways.
Brown thought that the major symptoms were breathlessness with continuing cough
and sputum production. This was related to the
underlying dust disease. As that
disease progresses the breathlessness symptoms will occur at a lower level of
exertion and there
is likely to be a significantly increased risk of
superimposed chest infection. In the later stages of disease progression Mr
would become oxygen dependent for exertion. He would require several
periods of hospitalisation for management of complications,
particularly
bronchitis and pneumonia, in the years ahead.
Brown said that the additional information from the most recent CT scan and
complex lung function testing indicated a degree of
progression. He thought
there would be a significant impact on future life expectancy and performance
his fourth report, dated 17 March 2024, Dr Brown said that the updated history
suggested that symptoms had been mildly progressive.
There were increasing
symptoms of breathlessness which affected daily activities. Mr Keogh was now
breathless on showering and dressing
and had difficulty walking more than 100
metres, when he was required to stop and rest. Mr Keogh managed his shopping
by limiting his visits to the supermarket to every two or three days
and carrying only one bag of groceries. There was significant
sleep disruption
from choking and breathlessness. By the stage of the fourth report Mr Keogh was
living alone in a motor home situated
on his sister’s property. Dr Brown
noted ongoing significant mental health issues.
Brown said that cigarette smoking had not contributed to the changes of CWP or
silicosis. Cigarette smoking had been heavy and
significant throughout Mr
Keogh’s adult life and was most likely a significant contributor to
emphysema. However, there was
also contribution to emphysema from coal dust and
RCS exposure. Dr Brown attributed 50% of the emphysema to cigarette smoking
Brown maintained his opinion that there was a 15% whole person impairment due to
dust exposure in the workplace in Queensland.
He thought that there was no
significant contribution from working in Western Australia. There was a 5% whole
person impairment due
to cigarette smoking.
Brown thought that there was a 10-year reduction in life expectancy due to coal
mine dust lung disease. He said that cigarette
smoking would contribute a
further 5-year reduction in life expectancy.
Brown said that Mr Keogh could not return to any job, including as a machine
operator, where there was a risk of further dust exposure.
He saw no reason why
he could not work as a taxi driver or in another non-dust occupation. Dr Brown
did note that Mr Keogh had ceased
work as a taxi driver because of his mental
health considerations. The mental health issues would also affect his ability to
consistently in the workplace.
oral evidence-in-chief Dr Brown said that CWP and silicosis were the results of
the aggregate exposure over Mr Keogh’s mining
career. The total load has
caused the lung disease. When asked whether the coal and silica-related injuries
were divisible or indivisible,
Dr Brown said:
“Well, I don’t think that any part of his exposure is separable or
absolved from potential
in his disease. So I would call it
indivisible in the similar way that I am used to speaking about asbestos fibres,
and their subsequent
of asbestos-related lung
(Tcpt 175/48-176/2)
(Emphasis added)
Brown was cross-examined by Mr Talintyre. Dr Brown said that there was no
difference in the symptoms experienced by someone diagnosed
with mixed dust
disease as distinct from a worker diagnosed with CWP. The same applied to
silicosis. There was an overlap in the
typical symptomatology between COPD and
Brown agreed that there was a significant contribution to the COPD condition
caused by the heavy smoking history (Tcpt 177/21).
He said that there was a
significant component of the COPD which is attributable to the dust disease
(Tcpt 178/2). He said that continued
smoking would cause further damage and
smoking-related disease and that is in some way indistinguishable from the COPD
of dust disease
(Tcpt 178/11). However, the pattern of the emphysema was not
typical of the pattern associated with smoking-related emphysema, but
a smoking component (Tcpt 178/16).
Brown was asked by Mr Talintyre whether, with Mr Keogh’s smoking history
and COPD alone, he may have been prevented from
working in coal mines by a
medical examination. Dr Brown agreed that given the smoking history and the
COPD, irrespective of any
dust component, it would not have been a good idea for
Mr Keogh to continue working as a coal miner (Tcpt 181/42-182/2).
Brown agreed that as a general medical proposition, a heavy smoking history can
give rise to medical conditions that would incapacitate
somebody for work. It
can also give rise to medical conditions that require somebody to have personal
and domestic care. Smoking
is carcinogenic and can cause cancer. Dr Brown also
agreed that drinking between 6 and 18 full-strength beers a day for the last
years was an excessive alcohol intake, amounting to chronic alcohol abuse. That
alcohol intake history has the potential to reduce
life expectancy, incapacitate
somebody for work and give rise to medical conditions that might lead to a need
for personal or domestic
care. That alcohol intake history could lead to
life-threatening medical conditions (Tcpt 183/23-47).
was no cross-examination of Dr Brown by Mr Griscti, Mr Rundle or Mr
Evidence of Dr O’Toole
Robin O’Toole, occupational and environmental physician, provided a report
dated 9 September 2021 (DX 6, Tab 15). He carried
out a file review and answered
a number of questions asked of him. His report is of limited utility as it was
provided several years
before the 2023 high-resolution CT scan and complex lung
function tests which led Dr Edwards and Dr Brown to a definite diagnosis
progressive CWP and silicosis. No updated report was ever obtained from Dr
O’Toole. Further, several of the questions which
he was asked to answer
were based upon a factual premise which is simply not established by the
evidence. For example, question 6
asked Dr O’Toole to assume that Mr Keogh
had operated diggers, dozers and graders “in which the air-conditioned
are airtight, with seals that do not leak”. The overwhelming
evidence from Mr Keogh, corroborated by the two other miners who
evidence, is that this was simply not the case at any mine. Question 7 asked Dr
O’Toole to assume that between 10%-20%
of the time coal dust was admitted
into the cabin through damaged or degraded seals. Question 8 asked him to assume
that coal dust
entered the cabin 50% of the time. Again, these scenarios were
not established as facts by the evidence. Question 10 asked Dr O’Toole
advise on his view on the reliability of the diagnoses of CWP, mixed dust
disease and emphysema. Again, the diagnoses on which
Dr O’Toole was asked
to comment pre-dated the later views of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown by several
O’Toole was cross-examined by Mr Tzouganatos. He agreed that smoking
causes the effects of coal and silica dust to be greater
(Tcpt 218/30). Dr
O’Toole was asked whether, given the synergistic effect between coal and
silica dust and smoking, coal miners
should have been informed about that. Dr
O’Toole agreed that they should have been informed about the increased
risk caused
by smoking when exposed to coal and silica dust (Tcpt 219/23).
his report Dr O’Toole had said that dust in coal mines, including coal
dust, contains variable amounts of silica. Dr O’Toole
agreed that if a
worker is excavating coal, that means that the dust to which that worker is
exposed could be a mixture of coal dust
and silica dust. There is silica within
the coal itself (Tcpt 220/38-47).
Evidence of Dr Likely
Michael Likely is a consultant psychiatrist who provided medico-legal reports at
the request of the solicitor for the plaintiff.
In his first report dated 29
September 2020 (PX 9) Dr Likely recorded that Mr Keogh had experienced mood
disturbance and that on
most days he expressed a subjectively experienced
depressed and unpleasant mood. Mr Keogh told Dr Likely that his mood was no
depressed but he reported it as being “flat”. Mr Keogh said
that he was easily fatigued and had problems with concentration.
He experienced
anxiety, apprehension and worry for about one day per fortnight. Mr Keogh was
neglecting a regular diet. He was also
neglecting self-care and personal
hygiene. He had not bothered to shower in a week and his house was “a
pigsty” because
he lacked the motivation or energy to perform activities
such as vacuuming, cleaning or mopping.
Likely recorded that Mr Keogh was first prescribed the psychotropic drug
Paroxetine (also known by its trade name Aropax) in 1997.
At that time there was
an acrimonious relationship breakup. Mr Keogh punched a window and suffered
severe injuries to his arm. He
had been taking Aropax ever since. Mr Keogh
reported that between this event and the onset of symptoms in 2018 he had been
psychologically
well, except for a few times when he attempted to cease Aropax.
There was a strong family history of mental disorder, in that his
brother and eldest sister had been treated for depressive illnesses.
Keogh described difficulties with his late father who was a heavy drinker and
was physically violent towards Mr Keogh. On a mental
state examination, Mr Keogh
displayed ongoing depressive symptoms of loss, low self-worth, shame, guilt,
pessimism and nihilism.
He also had symptoms consistent with anxiety, being
catastrophisation and negative automatic thoughts. Dr Likely diagnosed Major
Depressive Disorder (partially remitted), Generalised Anxiety Disorder
(partially remitted) and Persistent Depressive Disorder (in
full remission). Dr
Likely said that these conditions had arisen as a direct result of Mr Keogh
being diagnosed with CWP. Mr Keogh
was psychologically well and unencumbered by
any symptoms of psychological morbidity until he was diagnosed as suffering from
Likely said that Mr Keogh had been absent from work solely because of his
illness and injuries from 22 October 2018. Dr Likely
also thought as an
“unequivocal opinion” that the symptoms of major depressive disorder
and generalised anxiety disorder
meant that Mr Keogh was totally and permanently
incapacitated from undertaking any form of remunerative employment.
Likely said:
“Mr Keogh impressed me as being an extremely stoic and resilient man who
derived much of his sense of self-worth and enjoyment
in life from his work
particularly in the mining industry.
He has a deep sense of loss regarding his inability to work.”
Likely provided a second report dated 25 August 2021 (PX 1, Tab 16). Mr Keogh
reported that his symptoms of anxiety had completely
dissipated, but he had
ongoing symptoms of disturbance in his mood. He was significantly depressed and
dysphoric most of the day.
His sleep had deteriorated since he last saw Dr
Likely. There was daytime sleepiness and associated lethargy, with anergia and
amotivation.
Mr Keogh was neglecting self-care and personal hygiene. He had not
showered for two weeks prior to being assessed by Dr Likely on
20 August 2021.
Mr Keogh described ongoing cognitive problems consisting of poor attention and
concentration. He said that he completely
lacked self-confidence. Mr Keogh gave
a history of returning to work in December 2020 with McMahons Ltd, constructing
a golf course
in Brisbane. The plant was computerised, and Mr Keogh said that he
became confused and unproductive. He resigned from this position
after about
three weeks of work. There was then a deterioration in his mood and a feeling of
despondency. Dr Likely recorded that
there was a profound sense of loss
regarding Mr Keogh’s work and self-identity. Mr Keogh reported drinking
six stubbies of
full-strength beer per night, which Dr Likely recorded was about
three times the recommended safe alcohol consumption limit under
World Health
Organization guidelines. Mr Keogh was tearful throughout the duration of his
interview with Dr Likely. His mood was
one of worsening depression. Dr Likely
noted cognitive deficits with poor attention, concentration and short-term
memory. Mr Keogh
lost his train of thought and had to be prompted by Dr Likely
in conversation.
new diagnosis of Dr Likely was Major Depressive Disorder (Chronic, Severe). This
had worsened since September 2020 although the
Generalised Anxiety Disorder and
the Persistent Depressive Disorder were now fully remitted.
Likely said that the diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder had been materially
contributed to by Mr Keogh’s dust diseases.
Until the diagnosis with CWP,
Mr Keogh had been psychologically well and was functioning in all spheres of
life. Dr Likely said that
the Major Depressive Disorder had the propensity to
become chronic, severe, deeply ingrained and treatment refractory. Dr Likely
thought that Mr Keogh required urgent referral to a consultant psychiatrist and
a clinical psychologist. The need for treatment for
depression would be
indefinite. The capacity for work had been compromised by the diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder. Dr Likely
said that as long as Mr Keogh remains depressed
he will be unable to procure or hold down any form of remunerative employment in
the future.
Likely provided a third report dated 11 October 2021 (PX 1, Tab 18). Dr Likely
thought that Mr Keogh was then suffering from treatment-resistant
depression. He
thought that he should remain on lifelong antidepressant drugs and that his need
for psychiatric treatment was likely
to be lifelong. The medication was
“likely to cost somewhere in the order of $300 per month”. The cost
of psychotherapy,
which Dr Likely thought should be provided monthly by a
psychologist, was “approximately $300 per session”. Dr Likely
that if Mr Keogh required hospital admission for Electro-Convulsive Therapy or
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation the cost would
be $20,000 for 3 weeks. Dr
Likely did not offer a view as to whether such treatment would probably be
Likely provided a fourth report dated 14 October 2021 (PX 1, Tab 20). Dr Likely
said that until treatment was started, and Mr Keogh
went through about 12 months
of treatment, it was not possible to offer an opinion about a return to some
form of employment. Because
Mr Keogh had been untreated for so long, it was
difficult to say how well his condition could be managed. There was a real risk
Mr Keogh would never be well enough psychologically to return to work.
Likely provided a fifth report dated 27 October 2023 (PX 1, Tab 21). By then Mr
Keogh was residing in a motor home located on his
sister’s property. He
was not working. Mr Keogh gave a history of driving cabs for Horsham Taxis for
six months in 2022. Mr
Keogh said that he struggled with the work and that he
was physically and emotionally exhausted after it. He would have two days
sleep. He ceased this job. Subsequently Mr Keogh worked as an excavator operator
from late August to November 2022 in Horsham
for HDE Industries. Again, he
became physically and emotionally exhausted. He ceased this job and had two
months off before returning
to earthmoving, this time as a bulldozer operator
for another three months between January and April 2023 for Garraway Industries.
This work was unsatisfactory as he was further exposed to dusty working
environments.
Keogh told Dr Likely that the reason for his return to work was to help his
mental health as he was sick of sitting around at home.
Mr Keogh was
experiencing a pervasive subjectively experienced depressed mood for most of the
day and on most days. His sleep was
broken and unrefreshing. He was only eating
once a day. Mr Keogh had acquired a Jack Russell puppy named Bella and this had
him with some comfort.
Keogh said that after he ceased work in April 2023 he became actively suicidal.
On 26 April 2023 Mr Keogh was so concerned that
he contacted Horsham Mental
Health Service. Mr Keogh’s mother conveyed him to Horsham Hospital and
subsequently to Ballarat
Hospital, where he was admitted on a voluntary basis to
the psychiatric unit for two weeks. Mr Keogh had formulated plans for suicide.
After treatment at Ballarat Hospital his symptoms had stabilised and he was no
longer experiencing suicidal ideation. Mr Keogh still
had difficulties with
attention and concentration, poor short-term memory, and a compromised capacity
to plan and organise tasks.
There had been an erosion in Mr Keogh’s sense
of self-worth. Mr Keogh reported episodic tearfulness and over-sedation. Mr
had a sense of a foreshortened future due to his respiratory conditions.
discharge from Ballarat Hospital Mr Keogh had weekly then fortnightly follow-ups
from the Horsham Mental Health Service over
a two month period. At the end of
that time he was discharged to the care of his general practitioner.
a mental state examination, Mr Keogh was flat and tearful. His thought content
showed prominent depressive cognitions characterised
by themes of loss,
hopelessness and isolation. Cognitive deficits in the areas of poor attention
and concentration were apparent
to Dr Likely.
Likely diagnosed Major Depressive Disorder (Chronic, Severe, Treatment
Resistant) and Alcohol Use Disorder.
Likely said there was a clear temporal relationship between Mr Keogh’s
diagnosis with COPD and pneumoconiosis, his cessation
of work and the consequent
evolution of symptoms and major depression. Mr Keogh’s capacity to work
currently, and in the future,
had been affected by the diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder. Dr Likely thought that Mr Keogh would never return to any
remunerative employment.
Likely gave oral evidence and he was cross-examined. In cross-examination by Mr
Talintyre, Dr Likely agreed that Mr Keogh should
have been encouraged to
continue treatment with a psychologist from November 2019 onwards (Tcpt 199/5).
Dr Likely did say that Mr
Keogh had found the psychotherapy offered by Ms
Ritchie had not provided him with significant assistance (Tcpt 199/50).
Likely did agree that the treatment which Mr Keogh received in 2019 and 2020
from Dr Rana and Ms Ritchie had assisted him. It had
resulted in some
improvement in his condition at the time (Tcpt 200/42). Dr Likely said that Mr
Keogh had continued with treatment
by way of prescription medication (Tcpt
Likely agreed that given Mr Keogh’s history before he was diagnosed with a
lung disease (in particular his prior depressive
condition and use of
antidepressant medication), Mr Keogh was at risk of sustaining a major
depressive illness as a result of some
other adverse life event (Tcpt 202/5). Dr
Likely did agree that alcohol has a depressive effect, and it reduces the
efficacy of psychiatric
treatment for depression (Tcpt 202/50). Dr Likely
thought that Mr Keogh would benefit from a targeted programme aimed at reducing
his alcohol intake (Tcpt 203/49). Dr Likely agreed that a return to work would
improve Mr Keogh’s mental state (Tcpt 204/1).
Evidence of
John Chalk is a psychiatrist who was retained by WorkCover Queensland to provide
medico-legal reports in relation to Mr Keogh.
In his first report dated 13
September 2021 (DX 6, Tab 21) Dr Chalk reported upon an assessment conducted on
10 September 2021. Mr
Keogh told Dr Chalk that he was anxious and depressed. He
was not attentive to self-care, and he was only showering irregularly.
described difficulties with concentration.
Chalk said that Mr Keogh had a long-standing depressive illness which had
commenced in his mid-twenties and was initiated by a
relationship breakdown. He
had no ongoing psychological treatment apart from medication. His condition did
not have any significant
impact upon his capacity to work. This condition was
not likely to have had a long-term impact upon his capacity for employment.
Chalk said that in his view, Mr Keogh developed a psychiatric illness as a
consequence of his dust disease. This was either a chronic
adjustment disorder
with depressed and anxious mood, or an aggravation of an underlying dysthymic
disorder. Dr Chalk thought that
the diagnosis of adjustment disorder was more
appropriate. He said that there was a degree of permanency in his condition.
Chalk’s diagnosis was of a chronic adjustment disorder with depressed and
anxious mood. From a psychiatric perspective, Dr
Chalk thought at that point
that Mr Keogh had the capacity to work full-time in an alternative
Chalk’s second report was dated 7 March 2024 and referred to an assessment
conducted on 6 March 2024 (DX 6, Tab 22).
Chalk said that the incapacity of Mr Keogh to return to his former job quite
clearly led to a significant aggravation of his underlying
psychiatric
difficulties. The diagnosis of his disease and his inability to return to mining
jobs “was the essential condition
for the development of the aggravation
of his previous difficulties”. Dr Chalk confirmed his diagnosis of
adjustment disorder.
Dr Chalk also thought that the ongoing psychiatric symptoms
would not preclude Mr Keogh from undertaking work as a plant operator.
noted employment for periods of three months on an apparent full-time basis,
referring to the taxi-driving job and the plant
operator job.
Chalk confirmed that he did not think that Mr Keogh was incapacitated by virtue
of any pre-existing condition. Dr Chalk agreed
with the assessment of Dr Likely,
that Mr Keogh was functioning relatively well at the time of his diagnosis and
that his antidepressants
had managed his condition for many years in a
satisfactory fashion.
Chalk was cross-examined.
Chalk was asked to assume that the dust disease would progress to the point
where in about 10 years time Mr Keogh would need some
assistance with the
activities of daily living. He was also asked to assume that thereafter it would
progress so that he needed more
assistance with activities of daily living,
progressing to supplemental oxygen, and eventually the need for around-the-clock
and assistance. He was also asked to assume that the dust disease would
progress so that Mr Keogh’s life would be terminated
between 5 and 10
years earlier than if he had not contracted the disease. Given those
assumptions, Dr Chalk agreed with the proposition
that Mr Keogh’s
depressive illness would deteriorate in the future and he would become more
depressed (Tcpt 247/34-50).
Chalk acknowledged that in the light of the fact that the physical injury was
deteriorating and that this was causing problems
in obtaining employment, Mr
Keogh’s psychiatric difficulties and depression would get worse (Tcpt
249/25). Dr Chalk thought
that Mr Keogh was the kind of person who took a great
deal of pride in being able to work and that the loss of his work had had a
significant impact upon him (Tcpt 249/32). Dr Chalk thought that Mr Keogh had a
degree of significant resilience and that he was
driven and motivated to work
(Tcpt 249/34). Dr Chalk thought that Mr Keogh had made reasonable efforts to try
to get back into the
workforce (Tcpt 249/42).
Chalk agreed that on the assumption that Mr Keogh’s physical and mental
condition had deteriorated since he last saw him,
it would be extremely
difficult to maintain any kind of employment (Tcpt
Findings on Medical Issues
Respiratory Issues
accept all of the evidence of Mr Keogh in relation to his respiratory
limitations.
accept all of the evidence of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown, who are largely in
make the following findings:
(1) Mr Keogh suffers from CWP, which has been contracted as a result of the
negligence of the defendants.
(2) Mr Keogh suffers from silicosis, which has been contracted as a result of
the negligence of the defendants.
(3) Mr Keogh suffers from mixed dust pneumoconiosis, which has been contracted
as a result of the negligence of the defendants.
(4) Mr Keogh suffers from COPD, which has been contracted partly as a result of
the negligence of the defendants, and partly as a
result of smoking.
(5) Mr Keogh suffers from emphysema, which has been contracted partly as a
result of the negligence of the defendants, and partly
as a result of
(6) Mr Keogh had no limitations on his capacity to work as a plant operator
prior to being diagnosed with these conditions in October
(7) Mr Keogh lost his job with Dajwood because it would not accept him back to
work after he was diagnosed with these diseases.
(8) Mr Keogh suffers from breathlessness, which has become much worse over the
last six years. This is graphically represented in
the chart tracing Mr
Keogh’s declining performance on lung function testing (MFI 13).
(9) As an example, he now struggles to walk to the mailbox and back without
experiencing breathlessness.
(10) Since his diagnosis, Mr Keogh has not been fit to return to any job,
including a job as a machine operator, where there was
a risk of any further
dust exposure.
(11) From the point of view of a respiratory specialist, there is no reason Mr
Keogh could not work as a taxi driver or in some other
non-dust occupation.
Psychiatric Issues
accept all of the evidence of Mr Keogh concerning his psychiatric issues.
accept all of the evidence of Dr Likely and Dr Chalk, since they are largely in
agreement, although they put different diagnostic
labels on Mr Keogh’s
make the following findings:
(1) Mr Keogh has suffered from depression for most his adult life. Mr Keogh has
managed this issue by taking medication and sometimes
taking a day off work. He
was psychiatrically well and able to do his mining job for many years with no
(2) After receiving his diagnosis in October 2018 and losing his job, Mr Keogh
lost his income and suffered a lot of stress.
(3) By November 2018 Mr Keogh was in danger of suicide, consulting a friend,
then his general practitioner, and then being admitted
to Mackay Base
(4) Since December 2018 Mr Keogh has struggled further with his mental health.
(5) Since that time: his motivation has been low; his appetite is poor; he has
neglected his personal care and hygiene; sometimes
he goes for weeks without
having a shower; he feels anxious and worried; he struggles with concentration;
and he has become forgetful
and disorganised.
(6) Mr Keogh stubbed his toe quite badly but could not find the motivation to
get medical attention. The toe eventually had to be
(7) In December 2020 when Mr Keogh obtained a job with McMahon Ltd, he could not
cope with the new technology because his psychiatric
condition meant that he
could not concentrate and absorb new information.
(8) From April to August 2022 Mr Keogh worked as a taxi driver in Horsham but
left that work because he did not have a lot of patience
for people and did not
enjoy the work.
(9) After leaving work as a taxi driver, Mr Keogh obtained several positions as
a machine operator, but had to stop each job because
there was still dust
getting into his cabin and therefore the job was not safe for him.
(10) Mr Keogh feels that being a “dusted” coal miner is “like
having a death sentence in the industry”.
(11) After conflict with WorkCover Queensland, Mr Keogh considered hanging
himself, but did not go through with that plan.
(12) In April 2023 Mr Keogh planned to commit suicide but finally told his
mother of his plan. His mother called Horsham Mental Health
Service and drove
him to be admitted to the Mental Health Service in Ballarat for two weeks.
(13) Since that hospital admission, Mr Keogh has continued to take medication,
which he has obtained on prescription through his
local general practitioner.
(14) Mr Keogh has never applied for Centrelink benefits and has survived thus
far on a combination of payment under a permanent disability
insurance policy,
payments from WorkCover Queensland, and accessing some of his superannuation.
(15) Mr Keogh feels that he could not cope with working again, even doing taxi
driving. He takes strong medication which makes him
“feel like a
(16) Mr Keogh gets angry when he thinks about what has happened to him, because
he did not do anything wrong himself.
(17) Mr Keogh had seen practitioners for help with mental health issues, but he
had not been able to obtain much assistance, as every
time he has to talk about
his situation it re-traumatises him.
(18) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that Mr Keogh suffers from a major
depressive disorder and a generalised anxiety disorder,
which mean that he is
totally and permanently incapacitated from undertaking any form of remunerative
employment.
(19) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that Mr Keogh is an extremely stoic and
resilient man who derived much of his sense of self-worth
and enjoyment in life
from working in the mining industry. Further, Mr Keogh had a deep sense of loss
regarding his inability to
(20) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that Mr Keogh is significantly depressed
and dysphoric for most of the day.
(21) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that until being diagnosed with CWP, Mr
Keogh had been psychologically well and was functioning
in all spheres of
(22) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that the need for treatment for
depression will be indefinite. As long as Mr Keogh remains
depressed, he will be
unable to procure or hold down any form of remunerative employment in the
(23) I accept the opinion of Dr Likely that Mr Keogh is now suffering from
treatment resistant depression.
(24) I accept the opinion of both Dr Likely and Dr Chalk that Mr Keogh developed
his psychiatric diagnosis as a consequence of his
coal mine dust lung
(25) I accept the opinion of Dr Chalk that Mr Keogh’s depressive illness
would deteriorate in the future and that he would
become more depressed.
(26) I accept the opinion of Dr Chalk that on the assumption that Mr
Keogh’s physical and mental condition had deteriorated
since Dr Chalk last
saw him, it would be extremely difficult for Mr Keogh to maintain any kind of
employment.
one area where Dr Likely and Dr Chalk were in conflict in their reports was in
relation to capacity to perform a non-dust occupation.
opinion of Dr Likely is set out in (18) above: Mr Keogh suffers from a major
depressive disorder and a generalised anxiety disorder,
which mean that he is
totally and permanently incapacitated from undertaking any form of remunerative
employment.
his first report Dr Chalk said that from a psychiatric perspective, Mr Keogh had
the capacity to work full-time in an alternative
position. However, as recited
above, Dr Chalk agreed in oral evidence that if Mr Keogh deteriorated physically
and mentally, then
it would be extremely difficult for him to maintain any kind
of employment. I prefer the opinion of Dr Likely in this regard. I have
the evidence of Mr Keogh that while he tried on many occasions to obtain
employment after he lost his mining job, he could
not cope with any of the jobs
that he took on. In particular, he could not cope with any job where there was
new technology involved,
such as the position with McMahon Ltd. Nor could he
cope with the taxi driving, as he found it difficult dealing with the
passengers,
and he lacked motivation and the cognitive ability to look after
himself at a basic level, let alone work with the general
accept the evidence of Mr Keogh regarding his smoking history. Unlike many other
cases which come before the Tribunal, Mr Keogh
was very frank about having a
long-term smoking history and smoking a large number of cigarettes per day.
accept the evidence of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown concerning the effect of smoking
upon Mr Keogh, since they were in agreement.
make the following findings of fact:
(1) Mr Keogh smokes about 30 cigarettes a day and has smoked for a long time at
that level.
(2) Mr Keogh had tried on several occasions to give up smoking but found that he
(3) The COPD and the emphysema are associated with both respirable dust and
cigarette smoking.
(4) The CT scanning showed that there had been progression of pneumoconiosis,
but no evidence of progression of emphysema or airway
(5) Part of the respiratory impairment of Mr Keogh was attributable only to dust
exposure and part is attributable to smoking-related
COPD and emphysema.
(6) Cigarette smoking has not contributed to the pneumoconiosis changes.
(7) Life expectancy would be shortened by the COPD due to cigarette smoking, but
there was also a reduction in life expectancy due
to pneumoconiosis.
(8) Emphysema was partly contributed to by smoking but there was a direct
relationship between pneumoconiosis and the development
of emphysema,
independently of cigarette smoking.
(9) I accept the opinion of Dr Brown that 50% of the emphysema and 50% of the
COPD are due to cigarette smoking alone.
(10) I accept the opinion of Dr Edwards that there was a five-year reduction in
life expectancy due to coal mine dust lung disease.
Mr Talintyre conceded in
oral submissions (Tcpt 363/19) that a five-year reduction was an appropriate
(11) I accept the opinion of Dr Edwards, that there is little reduction in life
expectancy because of smoking, because there had
been progression on the CT scan
of pneumoconiosis but very little evidence of progression of emphysema or airway
(12) I accept the opinion of Dr Brown that a heavy smoking history can give rise
to other medical conditions which could lead to
incapacity; in turn this could
require personal and domestic care; smoking is carcinogenic and can cause
Drinking Alcohol
accept the evidence of Mr Keogh concerning the level of his drinking over many
years. He is now drinking less than he did when he
worked in the mines, but he
still has a very high level of alcohol consumption.
accept the opinion of Dr Brown, that drinking between 6 and 18 full-strength
beers a day for the last 20 years was an excessive
alcohol intake, amounting to
chronic alcohol abuse. I also accept his opinion that this intake has the
potential to reduce life expectancy
or incapacitate Mr Keogh for work; it could
give rise to medical conditions that might lead to the need for personal
domestic care;
further, the intake could lead to life-threatening medical
conditions.
doctor was asked to put a percentage chance on such events happening and no
doctor was asked to predict any reduction in life expectancy
because of the
alcohol intake.
Life Expectancy
Keogh will be 53 years old in September 2024. Using the Medium Life Expectancy
Tables, the life expectancy of a 53-year-old male
is 32 years (ie until age 85).
These Tables are used as a result of the decision of the High Court of Australia
Golden Eagle International Trading Pty Ltd v Zhang
[2007] HCA 15.
have found above that Mr Keogh has a five-year reduction in his life expectancy
because of his coal mine dust lung disease. I will
not add a further reduction
in life expectancy for the smoking history, since I accept the evidence of Dr
Edwards that the CT findings
show little progression of disease attributable to
smoking. Nor will I make a reduction in life expectancy because of alcohol
consumption.
It must be remembered that the life tables reflect the entire
Australian population, including the smokers and the non-smokers, the
and the rechabites, the carnivores and the vegans. I find that Mr Keogh has a
life expectancy of 27 years (ie until age
80 in 2051).
a result of the above findings, I further find as follows:
(1) There should be an award of $5,000 for loss of expectation of life, adopting
the conventional figure of $1,000 per annum. That
award will be made against the
first, second and third defendants, but not the fifth defendant, for reasons
which appear below.
(2) There should be an award for future care and assistance, and for future
out-of-pocket expenses until 2050, applying the stages
put forward by Dr
Edwards. I recognise that Dr Edwards posits a life expectancy until 2051, but
his opinion regarding ECOG stages
of progression runs out in 2050. This is yet
another example of the assessment of damages being “shot through with
imprecision”.
Dr Edwards may have been using a different variant of the
life tables.
(3) There should be an award for future loss of earning capacity for the next 17
years, until age 70 in 2041. I select the age of
70 years because I accept the
evidence of Mr Keogh that he genuinely loved the work he did, and part of his
motivation for working
was that it really was his only social connection in
life. At the likely level of future earnings of a coal miner, he would not have
been eligible for the age pension at age 67 years, so there would be no
incentive to stop working then. While operating an excavator
is not an easy job,
nor is it one which involves brute physical strength.
(4) The discount for vicissitudes should be 20% not the standard 15%, to take
into account the evidence which I have accepted that
smoking and drinking to
excess can lead to health problems, even in a worker who is otherwise uninjured.
Quantum Evidence: Need for Care and Assistance
Evidence of Dr Edwards
opinion of Dr Edwards concerning the probable progress of Mr Keogh through the
different ECOG levels of care is reproduced in
can be seen from that opinion, Mr Keogh presently has no need for care and
assistance and will have no such need for 10 years from
the date of the report
expressing that opinion (21 October 2023). Thus, Mr Keogh will be at ECOG level
0 until 2033.
Edwards said that after 2033, and for a period of 10 years until 2043, Mr Keogh
is likely to be at ECOG level 1 which is low dependency.
He would be capable of
almost all self-care and most domestic tasks and would be able to manage light
property and yard maintenance.
He would need assistance with more strenuous
levels of activity.
Edwards said that Mr Keogh will probably be an ECOG level 2 for five years from
2043 to 2048. He would require some assistance
with self-care and if living
alone, would need some sort of community support. He would be up and about for
more than 50% of his
waking time.
Edwards said that after 2048 Mr Keogh would progress to ECOG level 3 which is
high dependence. He would only be capable of limited
self-care and would be
confined to a chair or bed for more than 50% of his waking time. He would be at
that level for one year (2049).
Edwards said that Mr Keogh would then move to ECOG level 4, for six months,
until his early death (2050).
Evidence of Ms Cogger, Occupational
Cogger, occupational therapist, saw Mr Keogh for an assessment on 23 October
2023 and provided a report dated 4 December 2023 (PX
1, Tab 31). In the
report’s Executive Summary (p 296), Ms Cogger recorded her observations of
Mr Keogh in relation to shortness
of breath (SOB), fatigue and pain. She
“Whilst being seated and participating in the interview component of the
assessment, he rated his SOB at 2/10, ‘light’.
His SOB increased as
he completed tasks like transferring, demonstrating bed mobility, moving around
his kitchen, bed making and
vacuuming. When retrieving an item from the floor
and doffing and donning shoes, his level of breathlessness was
He is experiencing a ‘severe’ level of
fatigue. This has also impacted on his capacity to think clearly and concentrate
on tasks. Mr Keogh reported that he experiences intermittent
‘tightness’ in the chest and around the sternum.”
Cogger was asked to have regard to the reports of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown, and
to provide her opinion on the hours of care which
would be needed in the future.
Unfortunately, Ms Cogger did not adopt the ECOG scale, put forward by Dr
Edwards, which I have accepted
as the appropriate approach to calculation of the
need for future care and assistance. Further, Ms Cogger did not adopt the
periods for different levels of care put forward by Dr Edwards.
Instead, Ms Cogger referred to the following levels of care:
(1) “Stage 1: Low Care” which she estimated at 2.58 hours of
assistance per week. Ms Cogger saw this level as applying
at the present time,
although the opinion of Dr Edwards was that Mr Keogh was presently at the ECOG
level 0, where he is capable
of full independent activities with no limitation.
Further, Dr Edwards thought that Mr Keogh would remain at ECOG level 0 for 10
years until 2033. The use of the term “Low Care” by Ms Cogger seems
to equate with ECOG level 1 put forward by Dr Edwards,
which he described
“a level of low dependency”.
(2) Ms Cogger split up “Low Care” to 5 years at 2.58 hours per week
and then 18 years at 8.58 hours per week. Dividing
“Low Care” in
this way at least accords with the approach of Dr Edwards, in that he said that
during the 10 years of
ECOG level 1 Mr Keogh would be slowly deteriorating to
ECOG level 2. However, the number of years selected by Ms Cogger simply does
line up with the years put forward by Dr Edwards, which I have accepted.
(3) Ms Cogger then put forward a level of “Moderate Care” to run
from 2046 to 2049. Again, the years do not line up with
the opinion of Dr
Edwards, who put Mr Keogh at ECOG level 2, which is “a medium level of
dependence” for five years from
2043 to 2048. Nevertheless, the opinion of
Ms Cogger for the number of hours required during the period of “Moderate
is of assistance. In her report (pp 309-310) Ms Cogger offered the
opinion that Mr Keogh would require personal care of 7 hours per
week, domestic
care of 13 hours per week and community care of 2 hours per week, a total of 22
hours per week.
(4) The next stage of care considered by Ms Cogger was described as “High
Care” which ran for one year between 2049 and
2050. This seems to coincide
with Dr Edwards’ ECOG level 3 which is “high dependence”. Ms
Cogger thought that during
“High Care”, Mr Keogh would require
personal and domestic care of 23.5 hours per week and community care of 2 hours
week, a total of 25.5 hours.
(5) The next stage of care discussed by Ms Cogger was “Complete
Care” for a period of one month in 2050, when Mr Keogh
would require 168
hours per week. This seems to equate to Dr Edwards’ ECOG level 4, which
was “complete dependence”
for six months before Mr Keogh’s
the best that I can to use the categories of Ms Cogger and adapt them to the
opinion of Dr Edwards about the progress through
the various ECOG levels, I find
that Ms Cogger puts forward the hours set out in the table
Hours per Week
2.58-8.58 hours
Appendix 1 to her report, Ms Cogger set out some “assistive
technology” which Mr Keogh would require in the future.
Most of the items
would be required in his final years. The total expense put forward by Ms Cogger
was $12,463.48. Taking a broad-brush
approach and taking into account that these
items of equipment will not be required for several decades, I find that the
appropriate
figure for assistive technology as a current “full
value” lump sum is $2,000.
Cogger’s report does contain a statement of the hourly rate, on a
commercial basis, which has to be paid for domestic care
and assistance. For
Monday to Friday, the hourly rate is $69. For Saturday, the hourly rate is
$83.42. For Sunday, the hourly rate
is $105.93.
Evidence of Ms
Hammond, Occupational Therapist
defendants relied upon an occupational therapy report by Ms Hammond dated 15
April 2024 (DX 12). Ms Hammond did not assess Mr
Keogh in person or visit his
I have accepted the opinion of Dr Edwards regarding the applicability of the
ECOG scale, and the likely progression along
that scale, the report of Ms
Hammond is of great assistance because she too approached the question by use of
the ECOG scale (pp
conclusions of Ms Hammond were:
(1) ECOG 0 - $0 per week.
(2) ECOG 1 - $26.55 per week, if Mr Keogh lived in his own home with a yard.
(3) ECOG 2 - $134.69 per week, if Mr Keogh lived in his own home with a yard.
(4) ECOG 3 - $1,351.68 per week if living in a motor home or $1,405.75 per week
if living in a unit or retirement village.
(5) ECOG 4 – hourly rates are not applicable, as the cost will either be
that of a nursing home or a hospital.
Hammond costed the hours of care at National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
hours of care she put forward were as follows:
(1) ECOG 0 – nil.
(2) ECOG 1 – 0.5 hours per week for property maintenance tasks.
(3) ECOG 2 – 2 hours per week for cleaning and laundry and 0.5 hours per
week for property maintenance tasks.
(4) ECOG 3 – personal care for 14 hours per week and domestic assistance
of 1-2 hours per week for cleaning, 1 hour per week
for laundry, meal delivery
service at $20 per main meal and a ½ hour for shopping, bill-paying and
life administration.
(5) ECOG 4 – 168 hours per week, of which 8 hours per day will be active
care and 16 hours per day will be passive or vigilant
D to the report of Ms Hammond set out the NDIS rates for commercial assistance.
I find that the relevant rate is the “Remote”
rate, as Mr Keogh has
always lived in a regional town rather than in a capital city. The NDIS rates
are set out in a table in Appendix
D, and they are the hourly rates which Ms
Hammond has applied to reach her calculations.
A Legal Issue re
Care and Assistance:
Section 306H
Workers Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003
(Qld) (WCR Act)
previously recited, the plaintiff alleges exposure to coal and silica dust in
three Queensland mines being those at Poitrel, Moorvale
and Blackwater. The
defendants sued in relation to those mines submit that the plaintiff is not
entitled to claim damages for future
paid services because of the operation of s
306H of the WCR Act. The plaintiff submits that s 306H of the WCR Act does not
him from obtaining damages for future paid services.
9 Division 3 of the WCR Act
9 of the WCR Act deals with “Assessment of Damages”. Section
306A(1)(a) provides that the provisions of the Part
do not apply in relation to
deciding awards of damages for an injury that is a dust-related condition, other
than Div 2, Div 3 Subdiv
1, and Div 4.
3 of Pt 9 is also headed “Assessment of Damages”. Subdivision 1 is
headed “No right to damages for particular
306C of the WCR Act provides as follows:
306C Application of sdiv 1
This subdivision sets out the principles a court must apply in awarding damages
for services that are provided, or are to be provided,
to a worker by another
person after the worker sustains an injury.”
306D of the WCR Act provides as follows:
306D Definitions for sdiv 1
In this subdivision—
gratuitous services
means services, other than paid services,
that are provided to a worker by a member of the worker’s family or
household, or
by a friend of the worker.
paid services
means services that are provided to a worker at
commercial rates by another person in the person’s professional capacity
in the course of the person’s business.
means services of a domestic, nursing or caring
Examples of services—
• assisting with personal hygiene needs
• changing bandages
• dressing wounds
• gardening
• housekeeping
• mowing the lawn”
306E of the WCR Act relates to paid services provided to the worker before
injury. This has no application to the present
case. Section 306F refers to the
worker performing services before the injury. Section 306F is not relevant to
the present case.
Section 306G of the WCR Act deals with gratuitous services
which were provided to the worker before the injury. There were none,
does not apply in the present case.
306H of the WCR Act provides as follows:
306H Services not required by or provided to worker before
(1) This section applies if—
(a) before the worker sustained the injury, the worker usually
did not require or was not usually provided with particular services;
(b) after the worker sustains the injury, the worker is
provided with services (the
provided services
(c) all or part of the provided services are gratuitous
(2) A court can not award damages for the cost or value
(a) the part of the provided services that are gratuitous
services; or
(b) services of substantially the same type as the gratuitous
services that are to be provided to the worker in the future as either
gratuitous services or paid services.
(3) However, this section does not apply if the court is
satisfied that the services mentioned in subsection (2)(a) were provided
gratuitous services only in exceptional circumstances.
Example of exceptional circumstances for subsection (3)—
During a 2-year period after the worker sustains the injury, the provided
services were provided on a weekly basis. However, the
provider of the services
was on holidays, or otherwise unable to provide the services, on 2 occasions. On
those 2 occasions the services
were provided as gratuitous services.”
Second Reading Speech (MFI 11, Tab 11) provides no guidance as to the meaning of
s 306H. The First Reading Speech (MFI 11, Tab
10) does provide some assistance.
The Attorney General said:
“The Bill also closes a potential loophole caused by
Foster & Anor
by ensuring that a court cannot award damages for domestic
services that are provided gratuitously to a worker by his or her family
household and to prevent a worker converting gratuitous services received prior
to trial into paid services after trial.”
Submission for Defendants
306H, in its current form, applies to the plaintiff. That is because s 36A of
the WCR Act says that the injury occurred at
the date of diagnosis. The
plaintiff was diagnosed in October 2018.
Queensland defendants submitted (MFI 20, par 83) that s 306H of the WCR Act can
be interpreted and applied in a relatively straight-forward
identifying the following evidence:
(1) Before the plaintiff was injured on 22 October 2018 he did not require, nor
was he usually provided with, domestic assistance
for tasks such as cooking,
cleaning and shopping. The plaintiff lived alone at Gargett in Mackay and took
care of himself.
(2) After the plaintiff sustained injury on 22 October 2018, he was provided
with services for about two years by his mother, being
domestic assistance
including cooking, cleaning and driving.
(3) Those domestic services provided to the plaintiff by his mother were
gratuitous services.
(4) The provisions of 306H(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the WCR Act are satisfied so
that s 306H(2) operates to preclude the Tribunal from
awarding damages for the
cost or value of those part of the provided services, being cooking, cleaning
and driving, which were provided
gratuitously in the past. The result, according
to the submission, is that services of substantially the same type which will be
provided to the plaintiff in the future, either gratuitously or as paid
services, are not recoverable as damages.
(5) The Queensland defendants dispute the plaintiff’s contention that the
section is not dealing with services required or
needed because of the injury
(MFI 20, pars 11, 12 and 13).
Submission for the Plaintiff
for the plaintiff submitted (MFI 8, pars 201-213) that the real issue is whether
there was a need for such services. Counsel
for the plaintiff pointed to the
critical word in s 306H(1)(a) as being the word “required”. The
submission in par 210
was as follows:
“Section 306H(1)(b) must be interpreted so as to relate to a situation
where after the injury, a different situation to 1(a)
is created – the
worker now requires (needs) the particular services, that it previously did not
require or was usually not
provided with.”
Evidence Relied Upon by the Queensland Defendants
the Written Submissions (MFI 20, par 83) there was a reliance upon the evidence
set out below.
the affidavit of Mrs Beverley Keogh dated 19 March 2024 (PX 1, Tab 6) Mrs Keogh
said at par 12:
“In about September 2019, I visited him at his home in Gargett because I
was so worried about him. I was afraid he would suicide.
Many times on the phone
he said words to the effect ‘I’m over it. I just want to finish it
all. I don’t know how
I’m going to keep living’. I thought he
needed some support.”
Ms Keogh said at par 13:
“When I arrived, I was shocked to see him. His hygiene was gone and I
didn’t know how long it had been since he had had
a shower. His house was
a complete mess. It was never like that before the diagnosis when I visited him.
His house was always neat
and tidy. It was like he just didn’t care about
anything anymore. I spent time helping him clean up his house.”
plaintiff gave the following evidence in cross-examination (Tcpt
“Q. How long did you spend living with your mother at
Horsham. A About two years.
Q. It was only, I think, towards the end of last year that you
moved to your sister’s place; is that right. A I live on my
front lawn in a van, but that’s correct. Yes.
Q. During the two years you lived with your mother A Yes.
Q. - did she cook you meals. A Yes.
Q. Did she clean where you lived. A Yes.
Q. Did she do the shopping. A Yes.”
Evidence Relied on by the Plaintiff
for the plaintiff identified (MFI 8, par 23) the evidence set out
(1) “Q. Does your mother drive. A Yes, she does.
Q. Did she ever drive you from place to place if you needed to
go somewhere over those two years, or did you drive yourself. A
No. She drove
quite a fair bit sometimes.
Q. Where did she drive you to. A She had to drive me down, she
had to drive me to Bendigo. No, she drove me from Bendigo to Melbourne
leg. Where else? She’s come on a trip with me back to Bendigo to get
checked up. Where else she gone?
Q. Did she drive you to Ballarat when you had to go to Ballarat
Mental Health Service last April. A Yes. She sure did.
Q. Did she drive you home again from there. A No. I caught the
train and bus.”
(Tcpt 69/14-22)
(2) “Q. You agreed, Mr Keogh, with the proposition
that was put to you that when you moved in with your mum, she did the cooking,
cleaning, shopping at the unit in which you lived with her. A Yes.
Q. Do you remember that. A Yes, I do. Yes.
Q. At that time, and during the whole period that you were
living with your mum, if you wanted to, could you do the cooking, the
and the shopping. A Yes, I could.
Q. Why didn’t you do it at that time. A Mum was doing it
for me. She’s always been like that. She’s caring every
Q. What about the driving to Bendigo, and to Melbourne? Could
you have done that yourself. A I could have, but I would have had
Q. When you were really sick and your mum drove you to
Ballarat, I take it you could not have driven yourself to Ballarat. A Definitely
(Tcpt 101/46-102/8)
Consideration
Queensland defendants submitted that what has to be answered is a simple
question: where the plaintiff did not require or was
not usually provided with
particular services before the injury, were services provided to him
gratuitously after the injury? The
submission was (MFI 20 par 13):
“Section 306H(1)(b) will therefore apply simply if, after the worker
sustains injury, the worker is provided with services
that are gratuitous
services within the meaning of s 306D WCRA.”
is important to note that the heading to the section speaks of services not
required by or provided to worker before the injury.
Further, s 306H(1)(a)
speaks of the worker usually not requiring or not usually being provided with
particular services before the
injury. The argument of the Queensland defendants
is that when the section goes on to speak of the position after the injury, one
simply asks whether as a fact services were provided, without the need to ask
whether the services were needed or required because
of the injury suffered.
With respect, this argument ignores the fact that the only claim for damages for
services which can be contemplated,
is for services provided because a person
has been injured. In other words, services which are required or needed because
has suffered an injury.
306H(2) of the WCR Act is divided into two parts. Paragraph (a) deals with
services “provided” in the past. Paragraph
(b) deals with a claim
for damages for future services, whether they are gratuitous or paid
is accepted that s 306H is a section designed to limit the circumstances in
which a worker can recover damages for services provided
before the trial or
after the trial. As a matter of law, the only services for which a claim can be
made are those services, the
need for which is caused by the injury. No
plaintiff can make a claim for the cost of things done for him which have
nothing to do
with the injury. When s 306H(1)(b) speaks of the worker being
provided with services after the injury is sustained, the section is
speaking of services required because the injury has been sustained. Parliament
did not need to legislate to forbid a claim
for gratuitous services which had
nothing to do with injuries sustained by the worker. The submission put for the
Queensland defendants
is unduly restrictive and far too literal.
evidence establishes that the gratuitous services provided by Mrs Keogh to her
son, when he lived with her in Horsham, were not
performed because Mr Keogh
could not do these things for himself. Rather, they were done as part of Mrs
Keogh’s perceived motherly
duty towards her son, in the same way as she
looked after any of her children when they stayed with her. Mr Keogh gave
evidence that
while he was living with his mother, if he wanted to, he could
have done the cooking, the cleaning and the shopping (Tcpt 101/50-102/1).
gave evidence that he was not doing those things, because his mother did them,
and “she’s always been like that”.
He gave evidence that his
mother did things for him every time when he went home, as she did for all of
her children. Mrs Keogh looked
after her children, even though they were grown
adults, and performed tasks such as cooking meals for them (Tcpt 102/2-4).
Keogh gave evidence that while his mother did some of the driving, he could have
driven to Bendigo and to Melbourne, but he would
have had to take breaks (Tcpt
102/5-6). When he was desperately mentally ill, and had to be driven by his
mother to Ballarat for
a hospital admission, she drove him as he could not do
that trip as a driver. That one car trip is of no moment in the case, as no
of the claim for future services relates to people driving Mr Keogh at a time
when he is suicidal and when he would be incapable
of driving himself.
the First Reading Speech identifies a loophole in the law created by the
decision in
Foster & Anor v Cameron
[2011] QCA 48
Parliament was determined to close by amending s 306H. The circumstances in that
case were that an injured person was provided
with services gratuitously, such
services being necessitated by injuries suffered by the worker. Parliament
provided in the new s
306H that a worker could not get around the intended
legislative restriction on damages for services by making a claim for such
to be provided in the future on a paid basis rather than a gratuitous
basis. In restricting damages which can be awarded for services,
Parliament must
be taken to have intended to restrict damages claims, which up until then were
seen as too wide.
only problem with damages claims, before Parliament intervened, was that the
(required) services which had been provided gratuitously
to an injured worker,
because of his or her injuries, could be converted to a claim for paid future
services. The right to claim
damages for any kind of services was only a right
of an injured worker who required services because of their injuries. Thus, I
the submission for the Queensland defendants that all that has to be
answered is three simply factual questions, and that just because
services were
provided by a mother to her adult son when he was living in her home, that means
that when the need for such services
arises in the future (and on the evidence
put forward by the plaintiff, that need ought not arise for another nine years)
claim cannot be made because of services provided by a mother out of
love, affection and duty, not being services which were needed
because the
injured worker could not perform those services himself.
will therefore proceed to assess the head of damages, relating to future paid
services against the Queensland defendants, on the
basis that the plaintiff is
not restricted in obtaining damages by s 306H of the WCR
Findings on Care and Assistance
have found that Mr Keogh has a life expectancy of a further 27 years until 2051.
I have found above that I prefer the approach of
Dr Edwards and Ms Hammond, both
of whom employed the ECOG scale. I have found above that I accept the opinion of
Dr Edwards concerning
the following need for future care and assistance as
(1) No care for the next nine years to 2033 (ECOG 0).
(2) Low dependency for 10 years from 2033 to 2043 (ECOG 1).
(3) Moderate dependency for 5 years from 2043 to 2048 (ECOG 2).
(4) High dependency for 1 year from 2048 to 2049 (ECOG 3).
accept the number of hours and the hourly rates in the report of Ms Hammond,
relating to the ECOG phases 0, 1, 2, and 3. Ms Hammond
did not provide a figure
for the ECOG 4 complete dependency stage. Ms Cogger did - $13,447.60 per week
(PX 1, p 313). Using that
evidence, I find that the cost of care during the
period of complete dependency (ECOG 4) for six months in 2050 is $13,447.60 per
those numbers to the summary of Dr Edwards immediately above, leads to the
following conclusions in relation to the weekly
cost of care and
assistance:
(1) 2024 to 2033 (nine years): nil
(2) 2033 to 2043 (10 years): $26.55 per week
(3) 2043 to 2048 (five years): $134.69 per week
(4) 2048 to 2049 (one year): $1,405.75 per week
(5) 2050 (for six months): $13,447.60 per week
will now set out my calculations for the “full value” damages for
future care and assistance, before taking account
of the proportionate
responsibility of each defendant for the divisible nature of the coal mine dust
lung diseases. I must use the
5% multiplier and deferral figures for the
Queensland torts and for Downer Regional, and the 3% multiplier and deferral
figures for
Downer EDI in relation to the NSW tort.
award for damages for “full value” future care and assistance using
the 5% tables is calculated as
Calculation
2033 to 2043
$26.55 x 412.9 x 0.645
2043 to 2048
$134.69 x 231.5 x 0.396
2048 to 2049
$1,405.75 x 50.9 x 0.310
$13,447.60 x 25.5 x 0.281
$137,958.49
“full value” award for damages for future care and assistance using
the 3% tables is calculated as
Calculation
2033 to 2043
$26.55 x 451.8 x 0.766
2043 to 2048
$134.69 x 242.6 x 0.570
2048 to 2049
$1,405.75 x 51.4 x 0.492
$13,447.60 x 25.7 x 0.464
$160,359.94
$223,723.26
Quantum: Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
plaintiff tendered documents to show the following past out-of-pocket
(1) Medicare - $615.40 (PX 2, Tab 82).
(2) Medical, rehabilitation and travel expenses paid by WorkCover Queensland -
$25,157.09 (DX 6, Tab 30).
(3) Mirani Pharmacy $1,285.94 (PX 2, Tab 84) + Priceline Pharmacy Horsham
$1,193.27 (PX 2, Tab 83), less cost of Aropax which Mr
Keogh was already taking
before his diagnosis $1,300 = $1,179.21 (the mathematics is set out in MFI 8).
total “full value” figure for the sum of the above past
out-of-pocket expenses is $26,951.70. This applies to all
defendants.
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
set out the estimates given by Dr Brown for potential medical and other costs
relating to respiratory care. I accept those
estimates. I will allow “full
value” damages for the amounts discussed below.
Brown put a lump sum figure of $27,000 on medical care from a general
practitioner and respiratory specialist, with regular screening
and scans. I
have made a finding above that Mr Keogh has a life expectancy of 27 years. Thus,
the cost for this first item of respiratory
care equates to $1,000 per annum
which is $19.23 per week. The 3% multiplier for 27 years (applicable for the NSW
tort of the third
defendant) is 970.6. The 5% multiplier (applicable to the
first, second and third defendants for the Queensland torts, and to Downer
Regional) is 783.0.
this first component of future respiratory care the calculations are:
(1) On the 3% tables: $19.23 per week x 970.6 = $18,664.64.
(2) On the 5% tables: $19.23 per week x 783.0 = $15,057.09.
Brown also thought that the cost of medications, including aerosol treatments,
antibiotics and depression-related medications was
$15,000. I will deal
separately with the cost of depression-related medications. I will perform my
calculations on this aspect of
future respiratory care on the assumption that
the appropriate lump sum for medications, other than psychiatric medications, is
spread over 27 years. This equates to $370.37 per year or $7.12 per
week. The calculations are:
(1) On the 3% tables: $7.12 per week x 970.6 = $6,910.67.
(2) On the 5% tables: $7.12 per week x 783.0 = $5,574.96.
Brown thought that the cost of supplementary oxygen therapy would be $10,000 and
there would be at least two episodes of hospitalisation
to manage complications
such as infection, at a cost of $15,000. The total of these two figures if
$25,000. They are not going to
be incurred in the near future. I will defer the
total of $25,000 for a period of 15 years. The 3% deferral figure for 15 years
0.642. The 5% deferral figure for 15 years is 0.481.
calculations are:
(1) On the 3% tables: $25,000 x 0.642 = $16,050.
(2) On the 5% tables: $25,000 x 0.481 = $12,025.
relation to the cost of psychiatric medication and necessary psychological
counselling and psychotherapy, I adopt the figures of
Dr Likely discussed above,
being a total of $600 per month, which equates to $138.46 per week. The
calculations are:
(1) On the 3% tables: $138.46 x 970.6 = $134,389.27.
(2) On the 5% tables: $138.46 x 783.0 = $108,414.18.
addition I will allow the figure of $2,000 for future equipment as stated
Findings on Out-of-Pocket Expenses
total “full value” damages for future out-of-pocket expenses for
respiratory care, psychiatric care and future equipment
(1) On the 3% tables: $18,664.64 + $6,910.67 + $16,050 + $134,389.27 + $2,000 =
$178,014.58.
(2) On the 5% tables: $15,057.09 + $5,574.96 + $12,025 + $108,414.18 + $2,000 =
$143,071.23.
Quantum: Economic Loss Past and Future
Documentary Evidence for the Plaintiff
plaintiff tendered a folder of financial documents which ran to 484 pages (PX
6). The documents in the folder are:
(1) Income Tax Returns of Mr Keogh from financial year ending 30 June 2008 to
financial year ending 30 June 2023.
(2) Payment Summaries received from employers from financial year ending 30 June
2011 to financial year ending 30 June 2017.
(3) Payslips from employers running from 10 August 2017 to 6 April 2023.
(4) Enterprise Bargaining Agreements relating to Blackwater for 2018 and
(5) Documents produced by CPB being offers of employment and payroll records of
comparable employees.
(6) Enterprise Bargaining Agreements produced by CPB.
plaintiff also tendered the decision of the Fair Work Commission in the matter
BHP Coal Pty Ltd re The BMA Enterprise Agreement 2022
[2023] FWCA 115
Tzouganatos referred to p 66 of that decision, which set out salaries paid to
Blackwater employees. Depending on the shift, employees
could earn between
$3,069.21 per week and $3,406.86 per week.
Tzouganatos also drew attention to p 70 of the decision which set out salaries
for the Goonyella Mine, p 76 which set out salaries
for Peak Downs employees and
p 85 which set out salaries payable to Saraji Coal Processing employees.
No Documentary Evidence for the Defendants
were no documents concerning financial matters tendered by any
Past Economic Loss: Submissions for Plaintiff
the primary written submissions for Mr Keogh (MFI 8) counsel set out the
approach to past economic loss in Annexure “A”,
“D” (in respect of the first and second defendants) and Annexure
“B”, Schedule “D” (in
respect of the third defendant).
The submission can be summarised as follows:
(1) In the last three full financial years of the Mr Keogh’s employment,
his average gross annual wage was $114,337.
(2) Mr Keogh’s current salary, if he could work in the open cut coal
mining industry, would be $168,000 gross per annum.
(3) His yearly salary would have increased by $10,736.60 per year, being the
difference between his average salary at the time of
his diagnosis and the
average salary which he could earn now, divided by five years.
(4) From 22 October 2018 to 30 June 2019 Mr Keogh could have earned $59,113.60
nett of tax.
(5) Between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2020 Mr Keogh could have earned $91,000 nett
(6) Between 1 July 2020 to 30 March 2021 Mr Keogh could have earned $71,136 nett
(7) The plaintiff makes no claim for the gap between 30 March 2021 and 11
January 2022, when he would not have been able to work
because of the problem
with his toe which resulted in its amputation.
(8) Between 11 January 2022 and 30 June 2022 Mr Keogh could have earned $47,856
nett of tax.
(9) From 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023 Mr Keogh could have earned $110,032 nett of
(10) Between 1 July 2023 and 30 June 2024 Mr Keogh could have earned $117,988
nett of tax.
(11) The total of these figures is $497,125.60 nett of tax.
(12) Mr Keogh’s actual earnings since diagnosis, as disclosed in the tax
returns for financial years 2021, 2022 and 2023 were
$63,179.92 nett of tax.
(13) Subtracting the actual earnings from the potential earnings, the
calculation is: $497,125.60 - $63,179.92 = $433,945.68.
for Mr Keogh also submitted that he had lost past superannuation at a rate of
11% on this figure. The calculation for past
loss of superannuation is:
$433,945.68 x 11% = $47,734.02.
for Mr Keogh also claimed interest on those amounts and set out calculations in
Table D1 to MFI 8. That table calculates interest
on past economic loss to be
$26,847. That figure was later revised down to $26,439 (MFI 28). This revised
figure calculated interest
to 1 April 2024 and indicated that interest was
accruing on $257,909.25 at the rate of 7.76%. I will add $5,993 to the figure in
MFI 28, to cover the period (109 days) between 1 April 2024 and delivery of this
judgment. The calculation is: $26,439 + $,5,993
the total amount submitted for “full value” past economic loss, past
loss of superannuation and interest on those
past losses is: $433,945.68 +
$47,734.02 + $32,432 = $514.111.70.
Past Economic Loss:
Submissions for the Defendants
Talintyre made the following oral submissions (Tcpt 363):
(1) The plaintiff has a capacity to work and that will only improve if he gets
proper treatment for his psychiatric condition.
(2) The plaintiff has lived successfully with a long-standing psychiatric
condition for over 20 years and seems to have enjoyed a
fairly good work
(3) Once the plaintiff gets past the stress and drama of this case, he will find
the capacity to do some work in the next 5-10 years,
although his condition is
progressive and will get worse over time.
(4) The plaintiff should not be assessed as being totally incapacitated and some
allowance should be made for a residual earning
capacity in the future.
do not accept these submissions. I have found above that Mr Keogh has no present
capacity for work and will have no capacity in
the future. Mr Talintyre made no
other submission concerning the appropriate quantum of damages for past economic
loss and made no
criticism of the mathematical approach put forward on behalf of
the plaintiff in MFI 8.
additional submissions in relation to past economic loss were made by Mr
Griscti, Mr Rundle or Mr Rowles.
Findings in Relation to Past
Economic Loss
my findings concerning medical issues above, both respiratory and psychiatric, I
have reached the conclusion that Mr Keogh has
no present capacity for work and
will have no capacity in the future. Mr Keogh cannot work in any job where he
would be exposed to
even the most minimal level of dust. He most certainly
cannot and should not be allowed to work in his old occupation as a plant
Keogh has tried some other work but has found that he could not cope with that
work mentally, either because he found the work
too mentally challenging or
because he could not bear to deal with the general public as a taxi driver. Mr
Keogh was, in my view,
quite genuine in his evidence on those matters.
conceded by Mr Talintyre, quite properly, the respiratory evidence shows that Mr
Keogh’s condition will deteriorate and I
have made findings above
concerning the stages of deterioration.
find that the past economic loss is a complete loss and should not be reduced
because of any residual capacity to work, over and
above the monies earned in
unsuccessful attempts to find alternative employment, as per the tax returns.
The calculation put forward
by Mr Tzouganatos gives a credit for those amounts
which have been earned.
those reasons I accept the submission in MFI 8 that the appropriate “full
value” figure for past economic loss, including
lost superannuation and
interest on past loss, is: $433,945.68 for lost wages, $47,734.02 for lost
superannuation and $32,432 for
interest on these amounts. For reasons which
appear below, the plaintiff cannot obtain an award of interest against Downer
Fox v Wood Damages
was no dispute about the calculation of the plaintiff’s claim for
damages in the amount of $55,726.22. The calculations are set out in
Schedule F to Annexures “A” and “B”
Future Loss of Earning Capacity: Submissions for the
Schedule E set out in both Annexures A and B to MFI 8, Mr Tzouganatos submitted
that the appropriate calculations are as follows:
(1) Future loss of earning capacity should be calculated to age 70 years.
(2) The plaintiff, if uninjured, could presently earn $2,269 per week nett of
(3) There should be a 15% discount for the vicissitudes of life.
(4) Using the 5% discount rate, the calculation for future loss of wages is:
$2,269 x 625 x 0.85 = $1,205,406.25.
(5) For future loss of superannuation, the calculation is: $1,205,406.25 x
14.56% = $175,507.15.
(6) Using the 3% discount rate, the calculation for future loss of wages is:
$2,269 x 728 x 0.85 = $1,404,057.20.
(7) For future loss of superannuation, the calculation is: $1,404,057.20 x
14.56% = $204,430.72.
Future Loss of Earning Capacity: Submissions for the Defendants
Talintyre submitted that Mr Keogh’s smoking had made a very large
contribution to his breathlessness and to any impairment
of his earning
capacity. This submission largely focussed upon the opinion of Dr Brown
concerning the extent of a smoking-related
illness and the level of respiratory
disability caused by smoking. I have already indicated that on this topic I
prefer the evidence
of Dr Edwards to Dr Brown.
Talintyre also submitted that Dr Rana, the original treating psychiatrist, and
Ms Ritchie, the original treating psychologist,
recommended continuing treatment
over and above medication, but Mr Keogh had not accepted that advice. I note
that these two practitioners
saw Mr Keogh many years ago. Mr Keogh has
deteriorated, both physically and psychiatrically, in the years since he was
Rana and Ms Ritchie. I prefer the views of Dr Likely and Dr Chalk,
who have seen Mr Keogh in recent times.
was no dispute about the mathematical calculations made by Mr
Tzouganatos.
Findings in Relation to Future Loss of Earning
recited above, I have found that the discount for vicissitudes should be 20% not
the 15% submitted by Mr Tzouganatos. The multiplier
for 17 years on the 5%
tables is 602.8. The multiplier for 17 years on the 3% tables is 697.3. I make
the following findings on a
“full value” assessment for future loss
of earning capacity:
(1) On the 5% tables the calculation for future loss of wages is: $2,269 x 602.8
x 0.80 = $1,094,202.50.
(2) On the 5% tables the calculation for future loss of superannuation is:
$1,094,202.50 x 14.56% = $159,315.88.
(3) On the 3% tables the calculation for future loss of wages is: $2,269 x 697.3
x 0.80 = $1,265,738.90.
(4) On the 3% tables the calculation for future loss of superannuation is:
$1,265,738.90 x 14.56% = $184,291.58.
Quantum: General Damages
relation to the first, second and third defendants, the assessment of damages
for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life
is a common law assessment.
The Tribunal really is in uncharted territory, as there have been no previous
common law assessments
for coal mine dust lung diseases (even if a judge were
permitted to have regard to previous decisions). Nor can any assistance be
obtained by considering recent awards of the Tribunal for general damages for
mesothelioma, where the suffering is intense but lasts
for a much shorter time
than Mr Keogh is facing.
have already indicated above that I accept all of the evidence of Mr Keogh in
relation to his respiratory and psychiatric pain and
suffering. I accept his
evidence concerning the effects of the conditions upon him, and the progression
of his respiratory difficulties.
My findings of fact are set out in detail above
under the heading “Findings on Medical Issues”.
Keogh is almost 53 years of age. I have found that he has a life expectancy of
another 27 years, during which time he will become
more and more debilitated,
both because of his coal mine dust lung diseases, and because of the mental and
emotional effects of those
diseases. He will die early and will live out his
last days requiring 24-hour care.
Tzouganatos submitted that an appropriate figure for general damages was
$750,000 (MFI 8, Synopsis of Damages). Mr Talintyre submitted
appropriate figure was in the range of $350,000 to $400,000 (Tcpt 363/15).
Counsel for the other defendants basically adopted
the quantum submissions of Mr
Talintyre. I am of the view that the figure put forward for the defendants is
far too low. Such a figure
would not reflect the pain and suffering yet to come
over the next 27 years, let alone compensate Mr Keogh for what he has already
been through.
view is that the appropriate figure for general damages is $750,000.
will also be an award for interest on past general damages, which I find to be
$250,000. The calculation for interest is: $250,000
x 2% x 5.75 years =
Summary of Common Law Assessment of Damages against
First, Second and Third Defendants
the 5% tables the “full value” assessment of damages is set out in
the following
Head of Damage
General Damages
$750,000.00
Interest on Past General Damages
Loss of Expectation of Life
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
$143,071.23
Future Care and Assistance
$137,958.49
Past Economic Loss
$433,945.68
Past Superannuation Loss
Interest on Past Economic and Superannuation Losses
Future Loss of Earning Capacity
$1,094,202.50
Future Superannuation Loss
$159,315.88
$2,915,087.72
the 3% tables, the “full value” assessment of damages is set out in
the following
Head of Damage
General Damages
$750,000.00
Interest on Past General Damages
Loss of Expectation of Life
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
$178,014.58
Future Care and Assistance
$223,723.26
Past Economic Loss
$433,945.68
Past Superannuation Loss
Interest on Past Economic and Superannuation Losses
Future Loss of Earning Capacity
$1,265,738.90
Future Superannuation Loss
$184,291.58
$3,232,307.94
above, I have
set out my findings about the percentage of responsibility attributable to the
dust exposure at the mines where Mr
Keogh worked. The application of those
percentages to the “full value” damages is set out in the following
$830,800.00
CPB and Campbell
$236,122.11
$1,687,264.74
$326,489.82
Keogh is entitled to the following judgments:
(1) Against CPB for $830,800.00 (Poitrel) + $236,122.11 (Moorvale) =
$1,066,922.11.
(2) Against Campbell for $236,122.11 (which overlaps with CPB’s
responsibility for damages arising from Moorvale exposure,
and does not give Mr
Keogh the right to double recovery in relation to Moorvale).
(3) Against Downer EDI for $1,687,264.74 (Boggabri) + $326,489.82 (Blackwater) =
$2,013,754.56. Because the first amount arises from
a tort governed by New South
Wales law, $1,687,264.74 will be awarded as provisional damages and $326,489.82
will be awarded on a
final basis.
Damages against Downer Regional
is now necessary to consider the New South Wales statutory damages regime for
coal miners, a “dark wood where the straight
way was lost”. Such was
the debate between Mr Tzouganatos and Mr Rowles about what the legislation
meant, that they dealt with
the topic in their primary written submissions (MFI
8 and MFI 24), two folders of legislation and cases (MFI 9 and MFI 11),
short written submissions (MFI 10, MFI 17 and MFI 18), oral
submissions during the hearing, additional oral submissions on 19 April
and replies, responses and ripostes filed by leave after judgment was reserved
(MFI 26, MFI 27, MFI 28, MFI 29, MFI 30 and
MFI 31). That is not said as a
criticism, as I was grateful to have the submissions of experienced counsel to
assist in untangling
the Gordian knot created by the legislation.
parties agreed that:
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) (the WCA) governs the award
of damages sought by Mr Keogh against Downer Regional, relating to the
employment of Mr Keogh by
Downer Regional at Boggabri.
(2) The modified common law damages provisions in
Div 4 of the WCA, before
certain 2001 amendments, applied. This Division contains
Section 151J
of the WCA applies to an award of damages for future economic
loss and so the appropriate discount rate is 5%.
was a dispute between the parties concerning the following legal
(1) Which additional provisions of the WCA apply to the plaintiff’s
(2) Whether
of the WCA means that Mr Keogh is statute barred from
commencing these proceedings against Downer Regional.
(3) Whether the Dust Diseases Tribunal may award provisional damages against
Downer Regional.
(4) Whether employment was a contributing factor or whether employment was the
main contributing factor to contracting the diseases.
(5) What was the date of injury and what is the effect of
of the WCA?
(6) While the parties agreed that 151G of the WCA applies to an assessment for
damages for non-economic loss, there was a dispute
as to whether the plaintiff
met the threshold requirement imposed by
of the WCA.
(7) While it was agreed between the parties that
of the WCA applied to
damages for economic loss claimed by the plaintiff against the fifth defendant,
there was a dispute as to whether
the plaintiff met the definition and threshold
(8) Whether
of the WCA resulted in there being a cap on the award of
damages for past and future economic loss.
(9) Whether the plaintiff had failed to undergo appropriate medical treatment
for his psychiatric injury or to manage his smoking
and alcohol consumption.
(10) The parties agreed that Mr Keogh cannot claim or be awarded interest on any
damages awarded for past economic loss. Downer
Regional submitted that interest
on other heads of damage should not be awarded, because of the provision in
of the WCA. There was an initial dispute about the rate of interest
payable on damages awarded, but Downer Regional eventually conceded
plaintiff is entitled to interest at a rate of 75% of the rate prescribed for
the purpose of
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) – see
MFI 29 at par 5.6.
(11) Whether the court is required to apportion damages and costs under s 151S
of the WCA.
Which Version of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) Applies?
was agreement between Mr Tzouganatos and Mr Rowles that the Modified Common Law
Damages provisions of the WCA, in force in 2001
before certain 2001 amending
legislation, apply to claims for damages made by coal miners.
example, the right to claim damages for non-economic loss was abolished by the
Workers Compensation Legislation Further Amendment Act 2001
Section 151G, which had given a worker a right to seek damages for non-economic
loss, was replaced in 2001 by a new s 151G
which provided that only damages for
past and future loss of earnings may be awarded.
, cl 3 to the WCA is headed “2001 amendments not applicable to coal
miners”. It provides that the 2001 amendments to the
WCA “do not
apply to or in respect of coal miners and this Act and the 1998 Act (and the
regulations under those Acts) apply
to and in respect of coal miners as if the
2001 amendments had not been enacted”. Subclause 3(4) defines “coal
to mean “workers employed in or about a mine”. The
same subcl defines “the 2001 Amendments” to include the
Workers Compensation Legislation Further Amendment Act 2001
which had abolished the right to seek damages for non-economic loss. The effect
cl 3 of the WCA is to apply the modified common law damages
regime in force prior to the 2001 amendments, so that coal miners retain
right to claim damages in accordance with the modified common law damages
provisions in the WCA prior to the 2001 amendments.
WCA has been regularly amended over the years, sometimes five or six times per
year. When amendments have been made, the amending
legislation usually makes
clear, by a provision in a Schedule, whether the amendment applies to coal
miners or not. Some of these
amendments, and whether they are applicable to coal
miners, are discussed below.
Is the Claim Statute
Rowles submitted that by operation of s 151D(2) of the WCA, the claim brought
against Downer Regional by Mr Keogh was statute barred.
151D(2) of the WCA provides as follows:
“A person to whom compensation is payable under this Act is not entitled
to commence court proceedings for damages in respect
of the injury concerned
against the employer liable to pay that compensation more than 3 years after the
date on which the injury
was received, except with the leave of the court in
which the proceedings are to be taken.”
was common ground that Mr Keogh had not sought leave under s 151D(2) to commence
these proceedings.
Tzouganatos submitted that s 12A of the DDT Act operated to abolish all
limitation periods for claims in relation to dust-related
conditions, and thus s
151D(2) of the WCA had no application.
12A of the DDT Act provides as follows:
12A No limitation period
(1) The purpose of this section is to enable proceedings to be brought before
the Tribunal in relation to dust-related conditions
at any time.
(2) Nothing in the
Limitation Act 1969
or any other statute of
limitations
operates to prevent the bringing or maintenance of proceedings
before the Tribunal in relation to dust-related conditions.
(3) Without limiting subsection (2):
sections 14
of, Division 6 of
of, and Schedule 5
Limitation Act 1969
do not prevent the bringing or maintenance of any
such proceedings before the Tribunal, and
(b) any such proceedings may be brought or maintained before the Tribunal even
though a limitation period has already expired under
that Act, and
(c) any such proceedings may be brought or maintained before the Tribunal as if
Division 1 of
of that Act had never been in force.”
(Emphasis added)
usual time limit for a worker to bring proceedings against an employer for
damages is the time limit prescribed by s 151D(2) of
the WCA. This subsection is
a “statute of limitations” as that phrase is used in s 12A(2) of the
DDT Act. Thus nothing
in s 151D(2) operates to prevent Mr Keogh bringing
proceedings before the Tribunal in relation to his dust-related conditions. I
find that s 151D(2) of the WCA does not apply to the claim brought by Mr Keogh,
as it is a proceeding brought before the Tribunal
in relation to his
dust-related conditions. Such a claim may be brought before the Tribunal at any
find that the claim is not statute barred.
Can the Tribunal Award
Provisional Damages?
claim against Downer Regional is for provisional damages, pursuant to s 11A of
the DDT Act, which provides as follows:
11A Award of provisional damages
(1) This section applies to proceedings of the kind referred to in section 11
(1) that are brought after the commencement of this
section and in which there
is proved or admitted to be a chance that at some definite or indefinite time in
the future the person
who is suffering from the dust-related condition in
respect of which the proceedings are brought (the injured person) will, as a
result or partly as a result of the breach of duty giving rise to the cause of
action, develop another dust-related condition.
(2) The Tribunal may, in accordance with the rules:
(a) award damages assessed on the assumption that the injured person will not
develop another dust-related condition, and
(b) award further damages at a future date if the injured person does develop
another dust-related condition.”
11A abrogates the “once and for all” rule in relation to an award of
damages for personal injury. It is a substantive
provision which applies to
torts committed in New South Wales. It does not apply to torts committed in
Queensland, where there is
no provisional damages provision in the law.
Rowles submits that s 151F of the WCA has the effect that provisional damages
cannot be awarded to a coal miner seeking damages
against an employer.
5 Div 3 of the WCA deals with “Modified Common Law Damages”. Section
151E(1) of the WCA provides:
“(1) This Division applies to an award of damages in respect of--
(a) an injury to a worker, or
(b) the death of a worker resulting from or caused by an injury,
being an injury caused by the negligence or other tort of the worker’s
151E(3) of the WCA provides:
“(3) This Division applies to an award of damages in respect of an injury
caused by the negligence or other tort of the worker’s
employer even
though the damages are recovered in an action for breach of contract or in any
other action.”
151F of the WCA provides as follows:
151F GENERAL REGULATION OF COURT AWARDS
A court may not award damages to a person contrary to this Division.”
submission made by Mr Rowles is that to award provisional damages would be to
award damages contrary to Pt 5 Div 3 of the WCA
dealing with “Modified
Common Law Damages”.
do not accept this submission. Nowhere in Pt 5 Div 3 is there a prohibition on
provisional damages. Section 11A of the DDT Act is
of universal application to
any proceedings of the kind referred to in s 11(1) of the DDT Act, which are
proceedings brought by a
person suffering from a dust-related condition where
such condition is attributable or partly attributable to a breach of duty owed
to the claimant. Section 11(1) of the DDT Act provides that such proceedings for
damages in respect of that dust-related condition
may be brought before the
Tribunal and may not be brought or entertained before any other court or
tribunal. Thus the Dust Diseases
Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction to hear
damages claims in relation to dust-related conditions. Section 10(4) of the DDT
Act provides
that in any proceedings brought under s 11, “the Tribunal has
the same power to make decisions as the Supreme Court would,
but for this
section, have had in relation to similar proceedings brought in the Supreme
Court”. Section 10(5) of the DDT Act
provides that a decision of the
Tribunal has the same effect as, and may be enforced in the same way as, a
decision of the Supreme
claim made by Mr Keogh has been brought in the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal. That gives Mr Keogh a right
to provisional damages, as
provided in s 11A of the DDT Act. It is correct, as submitted by Mr Rowles, that
certain heads of damages
are governed by the WCA, in that it modifies how much
can be awarded for various heads of damages. However, there is no prohibition
the WCA upon the Tribunal exercising all of the powers given to it by the DDT
Act, which includes a power to award provisional
it would be anomalous if persons who contracted a dust-related condition through
employment were given lesser rights than
persons who contract a dust-related
condition through non-employment exposure to dust. The DDT Act covers the field,
and is not cut
down in any way by the WCA, at least in respect of the award of
provisional damages. I reject the submission made by Mr Rowles on
this topic.
Causation and Contributing Factor
20.1 of the Defence to Amended Statement of Claim of Downer Regional pleads
reliance upon a definition of “injury”
said to come from s 4 of the
2001 version of the WCA. Mr Rowles submits that this definition requires a
plaintiff to prove that he
contracted a disease “in the course of
employment but only if the employment was the main contributing factor to
contracting
the disease”.
raising this as a defence, Downer Regional is relying upon the current version
of the definition of “injury” in s 4
of the WCA. The current version
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of
employment,
(b) includes a disease injury, which means—
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of
employment but only if the employment was
the main contributing factor
contracting the disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration in the course of employment of any disease, but only if the
the main contributing factor
to the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of the disease, and
(c) does not include (except in the case of a worker employed
in or about a mine) a dust disease, as defined by the
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
, or the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of a dust disease, as so defined.”
(Emphasis added)
Tzouganatos submitted that this definition of “injury” was inserted
into the WCA by the
Workers Compensation Legislation Amendment Act 2012
(NSW), Sch 7(1).
Tzouganatos submitted (MFI 8, par 177) that the 2012 amendment did not apply to
the present case, because of Sch 6,
, cl 26 of the
Workers Compensation
Legislation Amendment Act 2012
(NSW) which provides:
“The amendments made by the 2012 amending Act do not apply to or in
respect of an injury received by a coal miner (before or
after the commencement
of this clause), and the Workers Compensation Acts (and the regulations under
those Acts) apply to and in
respect of such an injury as if those amendments had
not been enacted.”
to the 2012 amendment of the definition of “injury” a worker had to
prove simply that the employment was “a
contributing factor”, not
that the employment was “the main contributing factor”.
Tzouganatos submitted that the plaintiff did not have to show that the
employment was “the main contributing factor”,
but simply had to
prove that the employment was “a contributing factor”. I accept that
submission. The definition of
“injury” applicable to the present
case, involving an injury received by a coal miner, is the pre-2012 definition
requires the plaintiff to prove that employment was “a contributing
have reviewed the evidence of Dr Edwards and Dr Brown above, which plainly shows
that exposure to dust in the course of coal mining
was the only factor leading
to the development of CWP, silicosis and mixed dust pneumoconiosis. That
evidence also shows that coal
mine dust exposure was a contributing factor to
emphysema and COPD. Smoking was the other contributing factor.
therefore find that Mr Keogh has established causation against Downer Regional,
as that concept is understood in the light of the
definition of
“injury” which applies to him as a coal miner.
I am wrong in that analysis, then I also find that the employment was the main
contributing factor to the development of CWP, silicosis
and mixed dust
fibrosis. Indeed, the exposure to those dusts was the only contributing factor,
and thus the employment, at least
in relation to those diseases, was the main
contributing factor to Mr Keogh contracting those diseases.
151G of the WCA governs damages for non-economic loss. It provides in s 151G(8)
that the damages awarded are to be assessed
by reference to the amount in force
“at the date of injury”. Section 151H of the WCA governs damages for
economic loss.
It provides in s 151H(6) that the damages awarded for economic
loss are to be assessed by reference to the amount in force at “the
of the injury”.
Rowles submitted that the date of injury could be ascertained by reference to s
15 or s 16 of the WCA. Section 15 of the WCA deals
with the case where an injury
is a disease which is contracted by a gradual process. Section 16 of the WCA
deals with the case where
an injury consists in the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of a disease. In both cases, the injury shall,
the purposes of the WCA, be deemed to have happened:
(1) At the time of the worker’s incapacity, or
(2) If incapacity has not resulted from the injury, at the time the worker makes
a claim for compensation with respect to the injury.
first submission of Mr Rowles was that the date of the injury fixed by either s
15 or s 16 of the WCA, was “the date on
which last exposure in NSW
occurred” – MFI 24, par 2.1(d). At this date, the April 2016
indexation rate applied. In the
alternative, he submitted that if the date of
incapacity was in 2018, then the October 2018 indexation date applied –
par 2.1(e).
is difficult to see why the relevant date would be when the last employment
exposure in New South Wales occurred. That phrase is
to be found in s 15(1)(b)
and s 16(1)(b) of the WCA. However, those paragraphs provide that
“compensation is payable by the
employer who last employed the worker in
employment to the nature of which the disease was due”. Mr Keogh is not
seeking compensation;
he is seeking modified common law damages. Further, those
provisions simply identify the employer on risk, they do not say that the
must be suffered during the period of employment. The notion of the date of last
exposure in New South Wales (presumably meaning
last employment date in New
South Wales) does not appear in s 15(1)(a) or s 16(1)(a).
20.2 of the Defence to Amended Statement of Claim of Downer Regional pleads that
the injury of the plaintiff is deemed to
have occurred at the time of his
incapacity pursuant to s 15 of the WCA, and that the plaintiff has alleged
incapacity from on or
“The Fifth Defendant therefore denies liability for this claim upon the
basis that it was not the employer at this time of
alleged incapacity.”
pleading is supported by no more than the bare assertions in the written
submissions referred to above.
Tzouganatos submitted that Downer Regional cannot rely upon s 15 of the WCA as
that section has no application to the plaintiff’s
common law claim for
damages. Mr Tzouganatos submits that it applies solely to any statutory rights
(ie a workers compensation claim)
that Mr Keogh may have had under the WCA.
is difficult to see why that submission is correct. Sections 151G and 151H of
the WCA both say that the damages awarded are to
be assessed by reference to the
amount in force “at the date of the injury”. Section 15(1)(a)
provides that if there
is a disease of gradual process, then the injury shall
“for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have happened” at
time of the worker’s incapacity. There is no indication in the words of s
15(1)(a) that the fixing of the date of injury
is to be confined to a right to
compensation rather than for all purposes under the Act. Further, if s 15(1)(a)
does not apply to
a modified common law damages claim, then how is the court to
establish the date of injury, so as to ascertain the basis for an award
damages for non-economic loss and economic loss? There is no different
definition of “the date of injury” contained
in the modified common
law damages provisions of the WCA.
any event, the submission by Mr Tzouganatos in relation to non-economic loss
(MFI 8, pars 229-236) was that because Mr Keogh was
diagnosed with CWP in
October 2018, it is the October 2018 figure in the
Workers Compensation
Benefits Guide
- April 2024
(MFI 11, Tab 19) published by the State
Insurance Regulatory Authority (SIRA), which applies. The ultimate conclusion
expressed by
Mr Tzouganatos was that the applicable maximum amount of
non-economic loss awardable under s 151G of the WCA is $437,633.
submission of Mr Rowles (MFI 24, Appendix 2) confirms that the appropriate
figure applicable from 1 October 2018 was $437,633
for non-economic loss. Mr
Rowles also set out the figure of $416,733, applicable as at 1 April 2016.
reject the submission of Mr Rowles that the 2016 figure is the applicable one,
or that the figure to be selected results from the
date of injury being the date
at which the worker was last employed. I find that the appropriate figure is
$437,633, which applied
at the time of the worker’s incapacity. On the
evidence, this is shortly after 1 October 2018. Mr Keogh worked right up until
the date of his diagnosis.
Non-Economic Loss
applicable version of s 151G of the WCA is as follows:
151G Damages for non-economic loss
(1) (Repealed)
(2) The amount of damages to be awarded for non-economic loss is to be a
proportion, determined according to the severity of the
non-economic loss, of
the maximum amount which may be awarded.
(3) The maximum amount which may be awarded for non-economic loss is $204,000,
but the maximum amount may be awarded only in a most
extreme case.
(4) If the amount of non-economic loss is assessed to be $36,000 or less, no
damages for non-economic loss are to be awarded.
(5) If the amount of non-economic loss is assessed to be between $36,000 and
$48,000, the amount of damages to be awarded for non-economic
Damages = [Amount so assessed - $36,000] x 4
(6) (Repealed)
(7) Division 6 of
(Indexation of amounts of benefits) applies as if the
amounts of $204,000, $36,000 and $48,000 were adjustable amounts and were
to in section 81 (1). However, section 80 (2) does not apply to the
amounts of $36,000 and $48,000.
(8) If an amount mentioned in this section:
(a) is adjusted by the operation of Division 6 of
(b) is adjusted by an amendment of this section,
the damages awarded are to be assessed by reference to the amount in force at
the date of injury.”
149(1) of the WCA defines “non-economic loss” to mean:
“(a) pain and suffering, and
(b) loss of amenities of life, and
(c) loss of expectation of life, and
(d) disfigurement.”
Rowles submitted (MFI 24, par 5.4) that Mr Keogh could not satisfy the
non-economic loss “threshold” in s 151G of the
WCA. This is a
reference to s 151G(3), which provides that if the amount of non-economic loss
is assessed at less than a certain
figure, no damages for non-economic loss are
to be awarded. That figure was originally $36,000 in the 2001 version of the
Rowles submits, correctly in my view, that the applicable indexed
threshold at the present time is $77,229. That threshold is a dollar
which represents approximately 17.65% of the maximum amount which can be awarded
for non-economic loss.
151G(3) of the WCA provides that the maximum amount that may be awarded for
non-economic loss is the 2018 indexed figure of
$437,633, but the maximum amount
may be awarded only in a most extreme case. Mr Tzouganatos submitted (MFI 8, par
241) that this
maximum award should be made, because it is difficult to conceive
of a more serious injury, for a coal miner, than that sustained
by Mr Keogh. I
reject this submission. The reference to “a most extreme case” is
not a reference to a most extreme case
of a coal miner, or a most extreme case
of any worker in a particular occupation. The words mean exactly what they say.
In the field
of motor accident damages, those words have been interpreted to
include quadriplegics and children with severe brain injuries. Without
downplaying the significant difficulties which Mr Keogh has, and which will
increase, he is not a most extreme case.
151G(2) of the WCA requires the award of damages for non-economic loss to be a
proportion, determined according to the severity
of the non-economic loss, of
the maximum amount which may be awarded. This requires the Tribunal to assess
the non-economic loss
of Mr Keogh by fixing a percentage of the maximum amount
which may be awarded.
have set out above in detail my findings concerning the effect of the coal mine
dust lung diseases upon Mr Keogh, including the
psychiatric sequelae. In
awarding damages for non-economic loss, I not only compensate Mr Keogh for his
past pain and suffering,
but also for the significant and increasing pain and
suffering over the next 27 years of his life. I find that the appropriate
“proportion”
as required by s 151G(2) of the WCA, requires an award
of 75% of the maximum amount. The calculation is: $437,663 x 0.75 =
$328,225.75.
reject the submission made by Mr Rowles that, if Mr Keogh exceeds the statutory
threshold, he should be awarded no more than 40%
of a most extreme case (MFI 24,
is a second threshold provision in s 151G, contained in s 151G(4) of the WCA.
This sets a sliding scale for non-economic loss
damages which fall above the
lower threshold, but below approximately 23.5%. Mr Keogh exceeds this upper
threshold limit, and thus
there will be no reduction in the damages for
non-economic loss.
was common ground that in his claim against Downer Regional, Mr Keogh cannot
obtain a separate head of damages for loss of expectation
of life, because of s
149(1)(c), which has been reproduced above.
Economic Loss:
Serious Injury
151H of the WCA contains a threshold which a plaintiff must satisfy before there
can be any damages awarded for economic loss.
A plaintiff must show that he has
received “a serious injury”.
151H of the WCA provides:
151H No damages for economic loss unless injury serious
(1) No damages are to be awarded for economic loss unless the injured worker has
received a serious injury or dies as a result of
the injury.
(2) A serious injury is, if received before the commencement of Schedule 2 (2)
Workers Compensation (Benefits) Amendment Act 1991
(a) an injury for which the compensation otherwise payable under section 66 for
the loss or losses resulting from that injury is,
in the opinion of the court,
not less than 33 per cent of the maximum amount from time to time referred to in
section 66 (1), or
(b) an injury for which damages for non-economic loss of not less than $67,800
are to be awarded in accordance with this Division
(whether or not compensation
is payable under section 66).
(2A) A serious injury is, if received on or after the commencement of Schedule 2
Workers Compensation (Benefits) Amendment Act 1991
(a) an injury for which the compensation otherwise payable under section 66 for
the loss or losses resulting from that injury is,
in the opinion of the court,
not less than 25 per cent of the maximum amount from time to time referred to in
section 66 (1), or
(b) an injury for which damages for non-economic loss of not less than $48,000
are to be awarded in accordance with the Division
(whether or not compensation
is payable under section 66).
(3) (Repealed)
(4) Division 6 of
(Indexation of amounts of benefits) applies as if the
amount of $48,000 were an adjustable amount and were referred to in section
(1). However, section 80 (2) does not apply to the amount of $48,000.
(5) For the purposes of determining whether an injury is a serious injury, the
court has the powers under this Act of the Compensation
Court relating to the
reference of a matter to a medical referee or medical panel for report.
(6) If an amount mentioned in this section:
(a) is adjusted by the operation of Division 6 of
(b) is adjusted by an amendment of this section,
the damages awarded are to be assessed by reference to the amount in force at
the date of the injury.”
Keogh satisfied the definition of serious injury contained in s 151H(2A)(b) in
that damages of more than the threshold amount in
that paragraph are to be
awarded to him. Mr Rowles submits that the present level of the threshold is
$102,972 (MFI 24, par 5.6).
As found above, damages for non-economic loss have
been assessed at $328,225.75. This is above the indexed threshold of $102,972.
Thus the serious injury threshold in s 151H of the WCA has been
Economic Loss: Cap on Earnings
151I of the WCA provides that in relation to past economic loss, the court is to
disregard the amount by which the injured
worker’s nett weekly earnings
would, but for the injury, have exceeded the amount that is the maximum amount
of weekly payments
of compensation under s 35 of the WCA. Mr Tzouganatos and Mr
Rowles were agreed that the s 35 cap applies to a claim for nett weekly
and not gross weekly earnings. Mr Rowles tendered MFI 10, which is a schedule
setting out the maximum weekly payment under
s 35 of the WCA from time to time.
MFI 10 contains a note at the bottom which says, “[n]ote the above amounts
are expressed
as gross amounts and include any allowance for
superannuation”. That note is not part of the SIRA
Workers Compensation
Benefits Guide
, and I take it to be a submission. I deal below with the
claim for superannuation. For the reasons set out below I have come to the
that the maximum weekly payment figure under s 35 of the WCA does not include
allowances for superannuation, which can be compensated
as a separate head of
damage. If, contrary to that conclusion, loss of superannuation was to be added
to loss of wages, then the
s 35 cap would be exceeded.
claim put forward by Mr Tzouganatos for past economic loss and future loss of
earning capacity relates to loss of nett wages.
For each of the periods for
which a claim is made, and for the future, I find that the amounts sought by Mr
Keogh are, in every case,
below the s 35 cap set out in MFI 10.
calculations have been set out above in relation to the award for past economic
loss and the award for future loss of earning
capacity, against the Queensland
defendants using the 5% discount tables. Because the amounts claimed from time
to time do not exceed
the cap under s 35 of the WCA, those amounts are also the
applicable figures for the award against Downer Regional for past economic
and future loss of earning capacity. It was agreed that a 5% discount rate
applies to future economic loss, because of s 151J
of the WCA. To reiterate,
those amounts are:
(1) Past economic loss (not including past superannuation): $433,945.68.
(2) Future loss of earning capacity (not including future superannuation):
$1,094,202.50.
Superannuation
Tzouganatos submitted that Mr Keogh was entitled to an award for loss of
superannuation which would have been paid by his employer,
over and above an
award of damages to reflect his loss of wages. Against the first, second and
third defendants, there was no dispute
that Mr Keogh was entitled to a separate
award for loss of superannuation. That has been included in the figures set out
relation to the first, second and third defendants.
Rowles submitted that under the WCA there could not be a separate and additional
award for loss of superannuation. Rather, he submitted
that any loss of
superannuation had to be lumped in with nett weekly earnings. The significance
of that submission was that it could
push the weekly amount claimed over the
maximum amount for nett weekly earnings allowable under s 151I of the WCA.
his submission Mr Rowles relied upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Kaplantzi & Anor v Pascoe
[2003] NSWCA 386
case concerned a limitation on damages for past or future economic loss
contained in the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
of that statute provided as follows:
“(1) This section applies to an award of damages:
(a) for past or future economic loss due to loss of earnings or
the deprivation or impairment of earning capacity, or
(b) for the loss of expectation of financial support.”
par 42 of the decision in
Hodgson JA said:
“In my opinion, the benefit of superannuation contributions made by an
employer is an element of asset acquisition through
the exercise of the
deceased’s earning capacity, and thus also is to be taken into account as
part of nett weekly earnings.
It follows that the separate award of $36,973.06
in relation to superannuation must also be set aside.”
response Mr Tzouganatos pointed out that the provisions in the
Accidents Compensation Act 1999
(NSW) are different to those in the WCA.
point arose for decision in a modified common law damages claim under the WCA in
Glover v Australian Ultra Concrete Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 1284
). A submission was made for the defendant in that case, similar
to the finding of Hodgson JA in
, set out above. Under the WCA,
s 151I provides as follows:
151I Damages for economic loss—loss of past or future earnings
(1) This section applies to an award of damages:
(a) for past economic loss due to loss of earnings, or
(b) for future economic loss due to the deprivation or impairment of earning
capacity, or
(c) for the loss of expectation of financial support.
(2) In the case of any such award, the court is to disregard the amount (if any)
by which the injured or deceased worker’s
net weekly earnings would (but
for the injury or death) have exceeded the amount that is the maximum amount of
weekly payments of
compensation under
(even though that maximum
amount under
is a maximum gross earnings amount).
(3) The maximum amount of weekly payments of compensation under
future period is to be the amount that the court considers is likely to be the
amount for that period having regard to the
operation of Division 6 of
(Indexation of amounts of benefits).
(4) This section applies even though weekly payments of compensation to the
worker concerned are not subject to the maximum amount
prescribed under
, Harrison J did not deal with the defendant’s submission
that superannuation contributions paid by an employer are part of
economic loss
due to loss of earnings or future economic loss due to deprivation or impairment
of earning capacity. Instead, Harrison
J accepted a submission made for the
plaintiff that
of the WCA applied, which resulted in a separate award for
loss of superannuation benefits paid or to be paid by an employer.
of the WCA provides as follows:
149 Definitions
(1) In this Part:
damages includes:
(a) any form of monetary compensation, and
(b) without limiting paragraph (a), any amount paid under a compromise or
settlement of a claim for damages (whether or not legal
proceedings have been
instituted),
but does not include:
(c) compensation under this Act, or
(d) additional or alternative compensation to which Division 8 of
applies, or
(e) an award of compensation or direction for compensation under
Victims Compensation Act 1996
(f) a sum required or authorised to be paid under a State industrial instrument,
(g) any sum payable under a superannuation scheme or any life or other insurance
(h) any amount paid in respect of costs incurred in connection with legal
proceedings, or
(i) damages of a class which is excluded by the regulations from this
definition.”
decision of Harrison J on the point is to be found at [10] and [11] of
where his Honour said:
“10 The definition of ‘damages’ expressly excludes any sum
payable under a superannuation scheme. In other words,
superannuation is not
expressly contemplated as a head of damage under the legislation. Superannuation
has otherwise been conventionally
recognised and applied as a head of damage at
common law: see, for example, Todorovic and Anor v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
150 CLR 402.
In short, the limitations applying to damages do not apply to those
heads of damage that have been specifically excluded. An award
of damages in
accordance with s 151F is not an award of ‘any form of monetary
compensation’ that includes superannuation.
11 The defendant did not make submissions that dealt with Mr Glover’s
argument based on s 149. That is unsurprising. In my
opinion the definition of
damages in that section clearly excluded superannuation from the operation of
the modified common law damages
regime in Division 3. The availability of
superannuation as an unmodified head of common law damages remained. Mr Glover
is entitled
to the agreed sum of $178,951.56 for this head of damage.”
is arguable that when s 149(1)(g) of the WCA speaks of “any sum payable
under a superannuation scheme” it is referring
to amounts paid out by the
trustee of a superannuation scheme, rather than paid into a superannuation fund
by an employer. It is
to be noted that the phrase “any sum payable under a
superannuation scheme” occurs in the same paragraph as reference
payable under “any life or other insurance policy”, which of course
would be a payment out to an injured worker.
that available argument, the decision of Harrison J in
a superior court and I find that, as a matter of judicial comity, I should
follow that decision. I am reinforced in that
view by the decision of Garling J
McGoldrick v Dendrobium Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWSC 1341
), which referred to the approach of Harrison J, with apparent
approval at [156].
was a claim by a coal miner for modified
common law damages under the WCA.
will follow the decisions of Harrison J and Garling J and make a separate award
against Downer Regional, in relation to both past
and future superannuation
award for loss of past superannuation will be $47,734.02 which is the figure
calculated on the 5% tables. The award for future
loss of superannuation will be
$159,315.88, again using the 5% discount tables for future economic loss, which
also applies to Downer
Regional because of s 151J of the
Failure to Mitigate
151L of the WCA provides:
151L Mitigation of damages
(1) In assessing damages, the court must consider the steps that have been
taken, and that could reasonably have been or be taken
by the injured worker to
mitigate those damages.
(2) In particular, the court must consider the following matters:
(a) whether the injured worker has undergone appropriate medical treatment,
(b) whether the injured worker has promptly sought suitable employment from the
employer or, if necessary, suitable alternative employment,
(c) whether the injured worker has duly complied with the worker’s
obligations under Chapter 3 of the 1998 Act (Workplace injury
management),
(d) whether the injured worker has sought appropriate rehabilitation training.
(3) In any proceedings for damages, the person claiming damages has the onus of
proving that all reasonable steps to mitigate damages
have been taken by the
injured worker. However, the person claiming damages does not have the onus of
establishing that the steps
referred to in paragraphs (b)–(d) of
subsection (2) have been taken, and the court assessing damages does not have to
the matters referred to in those paragraphs into account, unless it is
established that before those steps could reasonably be expected
to have been
taken the worker was made aware by the employer or insurer that the worker was
required to take those steps.
(4) In any proceedings for damages, a written report by a person who provided
medical or rehabilitation services to the injured worker
is admissible as
evidence of any such steps taken by that worker.”
Rowles submitted (MFI 24, par 9.1) that the plaintiff had failed to undergo
appropriate medical treatment for his psychological
injury or to manage his
smoking and alcohol consumption.
have found above that the plaintiff did consult psychologists in the early days
after he developed his psychiatric state, but I
accept his evidence that he
found little value in returning to see them. I also accept his evidence that
living in a country town,
it was very hard to obtain mental health help. Mr
Keogh does continue to see his general practitioner and takes the medication
for his psychiatric condition. I reject the submission that Mr Keogh
has failed to undergo appropriate medical treatment for his
psychiatric
far as management of alcohol consumption is concerned, s 151L(1) provides that
the court must consider the steps that have been
taken and that could reasonably
have been taken “to mitigate those damages”. There was no medical
evidence to suggest
that the consumption of alcohol by Mr Keogh, even though at
a high level, had done anything to affect his respiratory condition or
psychiatric state. While it was acknowledged by doctors that the level of
alcohol consumption of Mr Keogh is not a healthy one,
there was no medical link
between reducing alcohol consumption, and the possibility of improving the
respiratory condition or the
psychiatric state. I reject the submission that Mr
Keogh has failed to mitigate his damages by managing his alcohol
consumption.
relation to managing smoking, Mr Keogh and the doctors acknowledged that he
smokes far too much. His smoking has made a contribution
towards his COPD and
his emphysema. I have taken into account in assessing damages, that not all of
these two conditions relate to
dust exposure. Damages have therefore been
moderated in the sense that they had been assessed only to compensate Mr Keogh
conditions caused by mine dust exposure. Had Mr Keogh not been a smoker,
his damages would have been higher, because smoking has
made a contribution
towards emphysema and COPD. I reject the submission that Mr Keogh has failed to
mitigate his damages by managing
his smoking.
findings also answer the submissions of Mr Talintyre that Mr Keogh has failed to
mitigate his damages.
151M of the WCA provides as follows:
“151M Payment of interest
Limited statutory entitlement
A plaintiff has only such right to
interest on damages as is conferred by this section.
Domestic services, nursing and attendance
No interest is payable on
damages comprising compensation under section 151K. A court cannot order the
payment of interest on such
Non-economic loss
No interest is payable on damages awarded under
section 151G. A court cannot order the payment of interest on such damages.
Other heads of damages
The following provisions apply to damages,
other than damages to which subsection (2) or (3) applies:
(a) Interest is not payable (and a court cannot order the payment of interest)
on such damages unless:
(i) information that would enable a proper assessment of the plaintiff’s
claim has been given to the defendant and the defendant
has had a reasonable
opportunity to make an offer of settlement (where it would be appropriate to do
so) in respect of the plaintiff’s
full entitlement to all damages of any
kind but has not made such an offer, or
(ii) the defendant has had a reasonable opportunity to make a revised offer of
settlement (where it would be appropriate to do so)
in the light of further
information given by the plaintiff that would enable a proper assessment of the
plaintiff’s full entitlement
to all damages of any kind but has not made
such an offer, or
(iii) the defendant has made an offer of settlement, the amount of all damages
of any kind awarded by the court (without the addition
of any interest) is more
than 20% higher than the highest amount offered by the defendant and the highest
amount is unreasonable
having regard to the information available to the
defendant when the offer was made.
(b) The highest amount offered by the defendant is not unreasonable if, when the
offer was made, the defendant was not able to make
a reasonable assessment of
the plaintiff’s full entitlement to all damages of any kind.
(c) For the purposes of this subsection, an offer of settlement must be in
Calculation of interest
If a court is satisfied that interest is
payable under subsection (4) on damages:
(a) the amount of interest is to be calculated for the period from the date of
the death of or injury to the worker until the date
on which the court
determines the damages, and
(b) the amount of interest is to be calculated in accordance with the principles
ordinarily applied by the court for that purpose,
subject to this section.
Rate of interest
The rate of interest to be used in any such
calculation is three-quarters of the rate prescribed for the purposes of section
Supreme Court Act 1970
for the period concerned.
Judgment debts
Nothing in this section affects the payment of
interest on a debt under a judgment or order of a court.”
were agreed that there could be no interest on non-economic loss because of s
151M(3) and that the appropriate rate of interest,
if any, was 75% of the court
rate of interest, because of s 151M(6).
Rowles opposed any award of interest because the plaintiff did not provide
information to enable Downer Regional to make a proper
assessment of the
plaintiff’s claim and also because Downer Regional had not had a
reasonable opportunity to make an offer
of settlement in respect of the
plaintiff’s full entitlement to damages of any kind. Thus Downer Regional
relied upon s 151M(4)(a)(i).
In written submissions (MFI 29, pars 5.2-5.4) Mr
Rowles pointed out that the plaintiff filed an Amended Statement of Claim and an
Amended Statement of Particulars on 27 March 2024 but was not granted leave to
proceed upon the Amended Statement of Particulars
until 5 April 2024. The trial
commenced on 8 April 2024. There is much force in this submission.
the Amended Statement of Claim the most important amendments were to add a claim
for damages for silicosis and emphysema. These
had not been pleaded until the
Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 27 March 2024. Indeed, prior to that
amendment, silicosis
was listed as a disease for which further damages might be
claimed under s 11A of the DDT Act.
Amended Statement of Particulars provided much detail that was not in the
earlier version of that document. The Amended Statement
of Particulars
dramatically increased the following claims:
(1) The claim for past economic loss was originally particularised in a total
amount of $230,103.19. The increased amount particularised
for the first time
just before the trial was for an amount of $452,021.45.
(2) The originally particularised claim for future economic loss totalled
$518,255.65. The new claim for future economic loss was
for $969,333.03 (to age
67 years) or $1,091,591.25 (to age 70).
late addition of two diseases to the Amended Statement of Claim and the late
supply of particulars which greatly increased the
claim for past economic loss
and future loss of earning capacity, leads me to conclude that the plaintiff did
not provide information
that would enable a proper assessment of his claim and
further that Downer Regional did not have a reasonable opportunity to make
offer of settlement after receiving the Amended Statement of Claim and the
Amended Statement of Particulars.
am therefore of the view that interest is not payable on any of the heads of
damage which I will award to Mr Keogh against Downer
Regional. The test in s
151M(4) has not been satisfied.
Apportionment of Damages and
151S of the WCA provides as follows:
151S Court to apportion damages etc
(1) If a judgment is obtained for payment of damages to which this Division
applies as well as for other damages, the court is required,
as part of the
judgment, to declare what portion of the sum awarded by the judgment is damages
to which this Division applies.
(2) In any such case the court is required to apportion any costs
Rowles submitted (MFI 24, par 4.4) that “time on risk is the only way to
determine each defendant’s responsibility”
and that this “must
be done to undertake the assessment of damages to be awarded under Div 3 Pt 5 of
the WCA (as against the
fifth defendant)”.
Tzouganatos submitted (MFI 8, par 243) that there is nothing in s 151S that
prevents the Tribunal from entering judgment for the
full amount of damages
against each defendant, including the fifth defendant. All that is required is
that the Tribunal declare what
portion of the sum awarded was damages as against
the fifth defendant.
accept the submission of Mr Tzouganatos. It is supported by the decisions of the
Court of Appeal in
Oxley County Council v McDonald
[1999] NSWCA 126
Timberland Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Bundy
[2005] NSWCA 419
. In accordance with those decisions, I will find a judgment against
Downer Regional for the full amount of damages as calculated
below. Those
decisions suggest that s 151S is relevant where there are two joint tortfeasors,
one of which is an employer, and s
151Z of the WCA comes into play. Section 151S
really has no work to do where (as here) there are separate assessments against
tortfeasors.
more abundant caution, I will declare that the full amount of the judgment
against Downer Regional is for damages to which the
modified common law damages
provisions of the WCA apply.
Summary of Modified Common Law
Assessment of Damages for the Fifth Defendant
figure for non-economic loss is set out above. The damages for past
out-of-pocket expenses, past economic loss, past superannuation
are the same as those calculated above against all other defendants.
The damages for future loss of earning capacity, future loss
of superannuation,
future out-of-pocket expenses and future care and assistance are the same as
those calculated above against the
Queensland defendants, to which a 5% discount
rate for the future applies.
the modified common law damages provisions of the WCA, the “full
value” assessment of provisional damages is
set out in the following
Head of Damage
Non-economic loss
$328,225.75
Interest on Non-economic Loss
Loss of Expectation of Life
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
$143,071.23
Future Care and Assistance
$137,958.49
Past Economic Loss
$433,945.68
Past Superannuation Loss
Interest on Past Economic and Superannuation Losses
Future Loss of Earning Capacity
$1,094,202.50
Future Superannuation Loss
$159,315.88
$2,427,131.47
the percentage applicable to Downer Regional (as set out in par
above), there will be
judgment against Downer Regional for provisional damages of: $2,427,131.47 x
32.3% = $783,963.46. Obviously
this figure overlaps with the provisional damages
against Downer EDI arising from its operation of Boggabri, and Mr Keogh cannot
have double recovery for the period of his employment by Downer Regional at
Cross Claim by Downer Regional against Downer
Regional and Downer EDI are tortfeasors who are below found liable by judgment
to Mr Keogh. The issue for determination on
the A5CC is the apportionment of
liability between those parties, pursuant to
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Defence to Amended
Statement of Fifth Cross Claim
its Defence to the A5CC Downer EDI denied that it owned Boggabri as alleged in
par 7 of the A5CC. Downer EDI said that it held
a Mine Services Contract for
Boggabri which included the period from 15 September 2014 to 15 June 2016.
EDI admitted that it was the operator, as defined in the
Coal Mine Health and
Safety Act 2002
(NSW) and the
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum
Sites) Act 2013
(NSW), of Boggabri during that period.
definition of an “operator” in the
Coal Mine Health and Safety
“(a) in relation to a coal operation that is a place within a colliery
holding, means:
(i) the colliery holder, if the colliery holder nominated himself, herself or
itself as the operator of the coal operation under
nomination was not rejected, or
(ii) the person nominated by the colliery holder as the operator of the coal
operation, and not rejected by the Chief Inspector,
(iii) (Repealed)
(b) in relation to any other coal operation, means the person with the day to
day management of the coal operation.”
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum Sites) Act 2013
replaced the
Coal Mine Health and Safety Act 2002
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum Sites) Act 2013
provides the definition of a “mine operator”:
“7A Meaning of ‘mine operator’
(1) In this Act—
mine operator
of a mine means—
(a) the mine holder, or
(b) if the mine holder has appointed, in accordance with the
regulations, another person to be the mine operator, that other person.
(2) The regulations may provide for the appointment of more than one mine
operator for a mine (so that there are different mine
operators for different
parts of a mine) and for that purpose—
(a) a reference in this Act or the regulations to the mine operator
of a mine includes a reference to the mine operator of part
of a mine, and
(b) the functions of a mine operator of a mine are, in the case of a
mine operator of part of a mine, functions in respect of that
part of the mine.
(3) The regulations may provide for the appointment of one person as the
mine operator for more than one mine. In such a case all
of the relevant mines
are, for the purposes of this Act, to be treated as one mine.”
The Contribution Legislation
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) relevantly
provides that:
“(1) Where damage is suffered by any person as a result of a tort (whether
a crime or not):
(c) any tort-feasor liable in respect of that damage may recover contribution
from any other tort-feasor who is, or would if sued
have been, liable in respect
of the same damage, whether as a joint tort-feasor or otherwise, so, however,
that no person shall be
entitled to recover contribution under this section from
any person entitled to be indemnified by that person in respect of the liability
in respect of which the contribution is sought.
(2) In any proceedings for contribution under this section the amount of the
contribution recoverable from any person shall be such
as may be found by the
court to be just and equitable having regard to the extent of that
person’s responsibility for the damage;
and the court shall have power to
exempt any person from liability to make contribution, or to direct that the
contribution to be
recovered from any person shall amount to a complete
indemnity.”
application for contribution under
requires the court to compare the
relative culpability of the parties causing the damage. The classic statement of
the task is contained
in the judgment of Clarke JA in
Macquarie Pathology
Service Pty Ltd v Sullivan
[1995] NSWCA 540
where his Honour said:
“The making of an apportionment involves the comparison of culpability and
of the acts of the parties causing damage. To put
it another way, the court is
concerned with considering the relative blameworthiness and the relative causal
potency of the negligence
of each party.”
Evidence on the A5CC
Rowles tendered a folder (DX 11) which contained a large bundle of the Downer
EDI training records for Mr Keogh, when he worked
at Boggabri. The documents
have been completed and signed, verifying that Mr Keogh was trained and assessed
by Downer EDI on the
systems and machinery relevant to his work at Boggabri.
Rowles also tendered the affidavit of Mr David Unwin (DX 7, Tab 14) which states
that Downer Regional is a subsidiary of Downer
EDI, and that Downer EDI provided
mining services at Boggabri.
Regional relied upon this evidence to show that Downer EDI supervised and
controlled the plaintiff’s work during the
relevant period.
EDI did not adduce any evidence in relation to the A5CC.
Submissions
Written Submissions of Mr Rowles (MFI 24) addressed apportionment between the
parties in pars 1.1 – 1.11. He referred to
Mt Owen Pty Ltd v Parkes
[2023] NSWCA 77
(MFI 24 par 1.5) to support his
submission that the liability of Downer Regional should be found to be between
0% and 20%. Mr Rowles
said at par 1.6:
, the employer was initially found 20% liable but on
appeal was found 0% liable because where the arrangements between the actual
employer and the host are such that there is a transfer of control from the
employer to the host, this can lead to an outcome where
the host will be
vicariously responsible for the negligence of the hired worker.”
submitted that Downer EDI was in full control of Boggabri and the work
undertaken by Mr Keogh (MFI 24, par 1.7), so as to
effect a transfer of control
from the employer to the host.
Rowles submitted that the training records from Downer EDI (DX 11, Tab 2) proved
that Downer EDI, as the host employer, was “in
full control of the manner
in which the work [was] undertaken” because they show that while Mr Keogh
was employed by Downer
Regional, he was trained by Downer EDI at Boggabri (MFI
24, par 1.8).
Rowles submitted that there is “unchallenged evidence that Downer EDI
controlled the Plaintiff’s employment whilst
he was at the Boggabri mine
site including during the period that he was employed by the Fifth
Defendant” (MFI 24, par 1.10).
Consequently, he submitted that Downer
Regional’s liability should be apportioned between 0% to 20% (MFI 24, par
Downer Regional Oral Submissions
closing submissions Mr Rowles submitted that the question is, “how much
responsibility and how much control did Downer Regional
really have?” Mr
Rowles submitted:
“[T]he plaintiff was employed by the labour hire company, sent to the
mine, but then the moment that he went to the mine, effectively
the training and
control and the operation of the mine was all controlled by the third
defendant” (Tcpt 382/43-47).
Rowles suggested that the reason Mr Keogh, in cross-examination, mistakenly
considered himself to be working for Downer EDI was
because Downer EDI
“had absolute control of the work that he did on a day-to-day basis
throughout the whole of the period that
he was employed in that mine”.
Consequently, Mr Rowles said that it “is a situation of a host employer
who has absolute
control of the work conditions [and] the machinery that the
worker uses over that period of time” (Tcpt 383/28-29).
Rowles again referred to the decision of
, submitting that by
analogy, the control that Downer EDI had over Mr Keogh was such as to make the
operator of the mine 100% responsible
for the injury that occurred (Tcpt
383/33-38).
Downer EDI Oral Submissions
Rundle made a brief submission on apportioning liability between the parties. He
submitted the appropriate contribution to be paid
by Downer EDI was between 50%
to 80% (Tcpt 389/4).
The Judgment in Parkes
, Mr Mitchell Kemp and Mr Glen Parkes were employed by the labour
hire company Titan Technicians Enterprise Pty Ltd (Titan). Titan
sent Mr Kemp
and Mr Parkes to work at the Glendell Coal Mine which was owned and operated by
Mt Owen Pty Ltd (Mt Owen).
Kemp and Mr Parkes were undertaking maintenance on a bulldozer at Mt
Owen’s site when Mr Kemp dropped the blade of the bulldozer,
injuries to Mr Parkes.
Parkes claimed damages against Mt Owen and Titan, alleging that Mt Owen (and not
Titan) was vicariously responsible for Mr Kemp’s
negligence and that Mt
Owen breached its duty of care owed to Mr Parkes.
Owen asserted that Titan, as Mr Kemp’s legal employer, was vicariously
liable for Mr Kemp’s negligent act and that
Titan breached its duty of
care owed to Mr Parkes and was therefore at least partly responsible for damages
payable to him.
primary judge found that Mr Kemp was the employee of Mt Owen for the purposes of
the incident, and it was therefore vicariously
liable for Mr Kemp’s
negligence. The primary judge also found that both Mt Owen and Titan breached
their duties of care owed
to Mr Parkes. Consequently, the primary judge
apportioned liability at 60% for Mr Kemp’s negligence, for which Mt Owen
vicariously liable, and the balance of 40% was shared between Mt Owen and
Titan. Of the 40% liability shared between Mt Owen and
Titan, the primary judge
apportioned 80% to Mt Owen and 20% to Titan.
appeal the primary issues were whether Mt Owen was vicariously liable for the
negligence of Mr Kemp (vicarious liability appeal)
and whether Titan, as Mr
Parkes’ legal employer, breached its duty of care to him (cross appeal).
Only the cross appeal issue
is relevant to the issues in
dispute on the A5CC.
Cross Appeal Between Titan and Mt
the cross appeal by Titan, the Court found in favour of Titan by a 2:1 majority
(Brereton and Kirk JJA, Basten AJA dissenting).
the primary judgment, liability was apportioned to Titan based on Mt
Owen’s failure to stipulate in the Job Safety Analysis
requirement that no implement movement should occur while tradesmen were within
the footprint of the bulldozer. The JSA
contained detailed directions and
control measures for the steps to be undertaken while carrying out maintenance
on the bulldozer.
However, the JSA did not specifically restate a requirement in
another procedure applicable to the bulldozer maintenance task, that
there be no
equipment movement while personnel were within the bulldozer’s footprint.
finding that Titan was negligent, the primary judge said at [77]:
“As an employer of, inter alia, diesel mechanics within the mining
industry, Titan would be aware of the matters relevant to
my decision about
foreseeability, significance of risk and available precautions that I have set
out above dealing with the liability
of Mt Owen. On the same basis I am of the
view that Titan is negligent.”
the majority in the Court of Appeal found that “no more was
required” to instruct the workers about what had
to be done, given the
“clear requirement stipulated in the JSA, which no-one suggested they did
not understand” (at [16]).
JA explained at [19] that the crew members had been taken through the JSA before
work commenced and that they “must
all be taken to have been aware of its
requirements”. Brereton JA said that even if a further specification was
included, it
is not apparent that it would have made any difference, with Mt
Owen submitting that, “the practical reality is that Kemp just
pleased in the execution of that work at the time, without reference to the
requirements of either Mt Owen or Titan”
JA stated that the apportionment between Mt Owen and Titan “miscarried, by
failure to have regard to the circumstances
that the JSA was Mt Owen’s
document, prepared for a procedure required to be performed by Mt Owen on Mt
Owen’s site and
equipment under Mt Owen’s ultimate direction and
control” (at [23]). Further, the majority found that Mr Parkes’
employment had “been transferred to Mt Owen” which led to
Titan’s apportionment being assessed as nil (at [23]).
the dissenting judgment, Basten AJA accepted the primary judge’s
conclusion that the JSA did not make the control measures
imposed on the
movement of equipment sufficiently clear as “none of the three men working
on the machine took the view that
they had to stand clear of its footprint
whilst the implements were manoeuvred” (at [83]).
AJA stated that owing to “the special duty that it owes to its employees,
Titan was obliged to ensure that reasonable
care be taken for the safety of Mr
Parkes”, and while the JSA was not Titan’s document, that did not
absolve it from
responsibility (at [82]).
dismissing the cross appeal, Basten JA explained at [84]-[85]:
“84 Titan had accepted its responsibility to take steps to ensure a safe
working environment for its employees and, as has
been noted, formulated
extensive safety protocols which were to apply unless those of the host employer
were of an equal or more
demanding standard. In order to ensure that that
standard was fulfilled, Titan should have been alert to imprecision, ambiguity
uncertainty in the JSA. Accordingly, there was no error on the part of the
trial judge in finding Titan liable.
85 Since both Titan and Mt Owen had the relevant legal authority to impose
constraints on the activities of Titan’s workers,
in circumstances where
Titan was able to take appropriate steps to carry out that function, there was
no error in attributing equal
responsibility to the host employer (Mt Owen) and
the legal employer (Titan) for the injury to the plaintiff.”
AJA set out the legal principles of employers’ liability. Importantly, the
host employer and the legal employer both
owe a non-delegable duty of care to
workers. Citing
TNT Australia Pty Ltd v Christie
(2003) 65 NSWLR 1
[2003] NSWCA 47
), Basten AJA said that “it was
significant that the degree of control exercised by the host employer in
did not derogate from the general duty of care imposed on the
legal employer” (at [75]).
content of an employer’s non-delegable duty is variable and may depend on
the circumstances (at [78]). After discussing
the authorities, Basten AJA said
that “in each case the assessment of the content of the duty of care
turned on the level of
control which it was reasonably practicable for the
employer to exercise” (at [81]).
Consideration
Titan successfully appealed and had its liability apportioned to
0% because the majority held that the JSA of Mt Owen sufficiently
stipulated the
procedures and risk controls for the bulldozer maintenance work.
evidence in relation to the A5CC is distinguishable from the evidence in
In this case there was no evidence tendered to show what, if any,
steps Downer Regional took to discharge its non-delegable duty owed
to Mr Keogh.
, there was evidence that Titan had safety procedures which
employees had to follow. Such a direction was included in the service
between Titan and Mt Owen. No evidence was adduced about terms of any agreement
between the present parties for the provision
of labour hire, nor was there any
evidence of Mr Keogh’s employment contract with Downer Regional.
employer does not discharge its non-delegable duty or cease to have the duty
simply by sending its employee to a host employer.
For Downer Regional to have
discharged its non-delegable duty, it must show that it took reasonable steps
for the health and safety
of Mr Keogh.
, the evidence established that Titan regularly visited the Mt Owen
site to perform safety checks and speak to employees. Titan also
had its own
work health and safety procedures and policies in place that its employees had
to follow. These measures were relevant
to whether or not Titan discharged its
non-delegable duty owed to its employees. In contrast, there was no evidence
that Downer Regional
provided any health and safety procedures or information to
its employees, provided any training to Mr Keogh, visited Boggabri, or
any information, instruction, or training to its employees about the risks
involved with working at Boggabri.
Rowles’ submission that this case is analogous to
Downer Regional’s liability should be apportioned as 0% is rejected.
Titan’s liability was only apportioned
to 0% because the evidence showed
that it had stringent safety procedures and that it regularly monitored Mt
Owen’s site to
ensure the safety of its employees.
the limited evidence shows that Downer EDI as a host employer provided Mr Keogh
with all his training, that does not establish
that Downer EDI had absolute
control of the work conditions, nor does it absolve Downer Regional from
performance of its non-delegable
employer’s duty of care is not modified just because its employees are
sent to work for a client. In such circumstances the
employer may be required to
adopt additional measures by way of warning or training in order to discharge
its continuing duty of
care to its employees:
Regional was required to take reasonable steps to protect the health and safety
of Mr Keogh while working at Boggabri. Whether
an employer’s non-delegable
duty is discharged when an employee is working at a third party’s premises
depends on such
matters as “the employer’s opportunity to inspect
the premises, the length of time the employer has put his employees
the premises, the awareness in the employer of the danger, his capacity to
shield his employees from danger and various
other factors”:
Victorian WorkCover Authority
[1998] VSCA 24
[1999] 1 VR 189
Pollard v Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 99.
discharge its non-delegable duty, Downer Regional could have provided
information and instruction to its employees about adequate
personal protective
equipment including respiratory protection, and required its workers to abide by
those standards, unless Downer
EDI had the same or better standards in place, as
was the situation in
Regional could have ensured its employee’s health and safety by requiring
Downer EDI to improve its conditions or systems,
and by not providing workers
until Downer EDI made such improvements. Downer Regional had the power to
prescribe, warn, command and
enforce obedience.
an employer of workers in the mining industry, Downer Regional should have been
aware of the risks of coal dust, the foreseeability
of the risk, the
significance of the risk and the available precautions. To discharge its
non-delegable duty, Downer Regional should
have visited Boggabri to apprise
itself of the conditions and risks to its employees placed at the mine. There
was no evidence that
it did so. The appalling conditions at the mine were plain
for all to see.
causal potency of the negligence of Downer EDI and Downer Regional is equal
– both exposed Mr Keogh to the same level of
harmful dust at Boggabri,
during the period when Mr Keogh was employed at Boggabri by Downer Regional.
relative blameworthiness is not equal. Downer EDI operated the mine, generating
enormous clouds of harmful dust, but Downer Regional
did not. Downer EDI had
control over the training of Mr Keogh. Downer Regional could and should have
taken basic steps to discharge
its non-delegable duty of care as the employer of
Mr Keogh. There is absolutely no evidence of Downer Regional taking any steps
to discharge this duty of care, unlike the direct employer in
cannot escape liability.
the A5CC regarding Mr Keogh’s exposure at Boggabri, I apportion liability
30% to Downer Regional and 70% to Downer EDI.
The calculation for the
contribution to be ordered against Downer EDI is: $783,963.46 x 70% =
$548,774.42.
Other Potential Cross Claims
oral submissions (Tcpt 371/14-29) Mr Talintyre said that the defendants would
like to have time, after judgment is delivered, to
consider whether to bring
contribution cross claims, as Downer Regional has done against Downer EDI. Such
claims may not be necessary,
as I have found that the damage is divisible and
not indivisible. As asked, I will make an order granting leave to all defendants
to file any further cross claims within 28 days of delivery of this
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant in relation to mine
dust exposure at the Poitrel and Moorvale Mines for
$1,066,922.11, of which
$830,800.00 is attributable to mine dust exposure at the Poitrel Mine and
$236,122.11 is attributable to
mine dust exposure at the Moorvale Mine.
(2) Judgment for the plaintiff against the second defendant in relation to mine
dust exposure at the Moorvale Mine for $236,122.11.
(3) Judgment for the plaintiff against the third defendant in relation to mine
dust exposure at the Boggabri Mine for provisional
damages of $1,687,264.74.
(4) Order that the dust-related conditions in respect of which an award of
further damages may be made against the third defendant
(arising from mine dust
exposure at the Boggabri Mine) are:
(a) Rheumatoid arthritis.
(b) Scleroderma.
(c) Progressive massive fibrosis.
(d) Lung cancer.
(5) In addition to order (3) above, judgment for the plaintiff against the third
defendant in relation to mine dust exposure at the
Blackwater Mine for
$326,489.82.
(6) Judgment for the plaintiff against the fifth defendant in relation to mine
dust exposure at the Boggabri Mine for provisional
damages of $783,963.46.
(7) Declare that 100% of the sum awarded by the judgment against the fifth
defendant is damages to which
Division 5 of the
Workers Compensation
(NSW) applies.
(8) Order that the dust-related conditions in respect of which an award of
further damages may be made against the fifth defendant
(arising from mine dust
exposure at the Boggabri Mine) are:
(a) Rheumatoid arthritis.
(b) Scleroderma.
(c) Progressive massive fibrosis.
(d) Lung cancer.
(9) Order the first, second, third and fifth defendants to pay the costs of the
(10) Judgment for the fifth defendant against the third defendant on the Amended
Fifth Cross Claim in relation to mine dust exposure
at the Boggabri Mine for
$548,774.42.
(11) Order the third defendant to pay the costs of the fifth defendant of and
incidental to the Amended Fifth Cross Claim.
(12) Grant leave to all defendants to file cross claims within 28 days, if so
advised. If any further cross claims are filed, the
parties are to inform my
Associate so that the cross claims can be listed before me for case
management.
(13) Liberty to restore the proceedings before me if any party seeks a different
costs order based upon an Offer of Compromise or
other offer.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.29 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter