URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Kellogg (Aust.) Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 12 (19 September 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Kellogg (Aust.) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 12
Hearing Date(s):
4 September 2025
Date of Orders:
19 September 2025
Decision Date:
19 September 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I impose a fine of $510,000.
(2) Kellogg is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — workers fell off elevated work platform after
it was struck
by a truck — workers not supervised — workers not adequately trained
or inducted — safety procedures
not followed — failures were
reflective of a failure to implement existing adequate safety systems —
large company —
good corporate citizen
SENTENCING —
relevant factors on sentence — objective seriousness — aggravating
factors — mitigating factors
— deterrence — appropriate
penalty — reduced moral culpability due to failures of other entities
of previous convictions — cannot find that offender is
unlikely to reoffend
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Occupational Health and Safety Act 1983
Work Health and Safety
Cases Cited:
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Markarian v The Queen (2005)
228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New
South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA
R v Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA 412
v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 174
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Glass) v Kellogg (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2000) 101 IR 261
[2000] NSWIRComm 53
WorkCover Authority (NSW) (Inspector
Howard) v Baulderstone Hornibrook Pty Ltd
(2009) 186 IR 125
[2009] NSWIRComm
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Kellogg (Aust.) Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
A Mykkeltvedt (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
(Aust.) Pty Ltd (Kellogg) manufactures and distributes ready-to-eat cereals and
snacks from a manufacturing plant in Banksmeadow,
New South Wales (the site).
Kellogg engaged Chess Engineering Pty Ltd (Chess) to conduct works involving the
replacement and installation
of new air curtains above the roller doors of a
number of the loading docks at the site. On 3 March 2023, Mr Bassam Ghosn and Mr
Hojin Lee, on the instructions of Chess, were repairing a damaged bracket above
the roller door to loading dock 7 when Mr Chanpreet
Singh reversed his truck
into loading dock 7, colliding with the Elevated Work Platform (EWP) on which Mr
Ghosn and Mr Lee were working.
Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee were thrown out of the EWP
and fell approximately four metres to the ground of loading dock 6. Each
significant fractures, requiring surgery.
appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a person who
had a work health and safety duty pursuant
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with that duty
and thereby exposed Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee to a risk of death or serious injury
contrary to s 32
risk particularised at paragraph 16 of Annexure A to the Summons is as
“The risk was the risk of workers, in particular Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee,
suffering serious injury or death as a result of direct
or indirect contact with
a vehicle entering the loading dock when they were undertaking the task
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843).
prosecutor tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts. I have taken this document
into account in coming to an appropriate sentence.
What follows is a brief
summary of the facts relevant to the offence to permit an understanding of the
sentence imposed.
is an engineering company that undertakes structural steel fabrication,
equipment installation and installation maintenance.
Kellogg engaged Chess to
install air curtains, a fan system installed at an entrance to a building
designed to prevent the entry
of contaminants, above the roller doors of loading
docks 4 to 8 at the site. At the time of the incident, Chess had undertaken
engineering works for Kellogg at the site for 40 years without any
serious safety incidents.
employed Mr Adam Hollis as the site supervisor. At the time of the incident, Mr
Hollis had been a site supervisor for six years
and supervised approximately 15
workers, including contractors. He reported to Mr Mark Ornig, a construction
supervisor and project
manager and Mr Bruce Macklin, a mechanical and project
engineer. Both Mr Ornig and Mr Macklin were employed by Ignite Limited (Ignite)
and assigned full time to the Kellogg site. Also employed by Ignite as the
project manager and electrical engineer responsible for
the curtain project was
Mr Bob Crispin. Kellogg employed an engineering manager, Mr Sachin Patil, whose
duties included the supervision
of Mr Macklin and Mr Crispin.
Singh was a casual truck driver employed by TASTRANS Pty Ltd. Mr Singh had been
driving trucks for approximately six years at the
time of the
Injured workers
Ghosn was a casual metal welder and fabricator employed by WMA Labour Hire Pty
Ltd (WMA). Chess engaged WMA to provide the labour
services of Mr Ghosn as part
of a labour hire agreement. Mr Ghosn had 25 years’ experience in welding
at the time of the incident.
When working at the site, Mr Ghosn reported to Mr
Lee was a contractor engaged by Dana Engineering Pty Ltd (Dana). Chess
subcontracted maintenance and installation work at the site
to Dana. Mr Lee had
been working for Dana for 18 months and had approximately nine years’
experience in welding at the time
of the incident. He also reported to Mr Hollis
when working at the site.
Air curtain project
works commenced on 28 February 2023 under the supervision of Mr Hollis. Loading
docks 4 to 8 remained operational during the works.
The loading docks had lights
to indicate if they were safe to use. However, the safety indicator lights had
not been working for
some time. Buttons to activate the roller doors to the
loading dock were accessible from the outside of the building. Contrary to
Kellogg’s Safe Work Instruction, truck drivers had, on occasion, used the
buttons to open the roller doors.
1 and 2 March 2023, the engineering team erected barricades using engineering or
danger tape and plastic cones outside the loading
dock where works were to
occur. On 2 March 2023, Mr Ornig inspected the worksite setup at the loading
dock before Mr Ghosn and Mr
Lee began work for the day. During the course of the
day, Mr Ghosn noticed a damaged steel bracket above roller door 7 which needed
to be replaced prior to the installation of the new air
The morning of the incident
3 March 2023 at around 6:30am, Mr Ornig, Mr Hollis, Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee attended
a 15-minute prestart discussion at the site. Mr
Hollis instructed Mr Ghosn and
Mr Lee to set up an EWP to replace the damaged bracket. The loading dock area in
which the air curtains
were to be installed were on a slight gradient. Mr Hollis
had previously requested the use of an EWP that could automatically level
itself, however, this specific EWP was not available to be used on the day of
the incident.
approximately 7:00am, Mr Hollis left the site to attend another job. On leaving
the site Mr Hollis observed that, contrary to the
practice on previous days as
outlined in [
above, there were no barriers or warning markers in place and the roller doors
to loading docks 6 and 7 were closed. Mr Hollis did
not provide any instructions
to Mr Ghosn or Mr Lee in relation to the absence of barriers or other
The incident
approximately 7:00am on 3 March 2023, Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee began works to repair
the bracing on loading dock 7. The EWP was positioned
on the raised platform of
loading dock 6 and was protruding into loading dock 7. Mr Lee faced the roller
door and commenced welding
the bracket. Mr Ghosn, who was operating the EWP,
faced the opposition direction, with his back to the welding to prevent flash
Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee were elevated approximately four metres above the
ground. During this time, the roller door to loading dock 7
was closed but not
approximately 7:30am, Mr Singh arrived at the site driving a semi-trailer truck.
Mr Singh completed a Driver Declaration Form and
gave it to the security guards
on duty. The security guards, who were employed by MSS Security Pty Ltd (MSS
Security), spoke with
a forklift operator who confirmed that the loading docks
were empty and then advised Mr Singh of the same.
Singh then proceeded to drive his truck from the security gatehouse to the
loading dock area where he parked and waited for several
minutes. Mr Singh
observed that the loading dock roller door was closed and that there were no
signs or barricades in place. Mr Singh
exited his truck, walked over to the
control panel positioned on the exterior of loading dock 7 and pressed the
controls to open
the roller door to loading dock 7. Mr Singh then returned to
his truck and reversed it into loading dock 7, colliding with the EWP
causing it to fall to the ground. Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee were thrown out of the EWP
and fell approximately four metres to the ground
of loading dock 6.
attended to Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee until paramedics arrived at the site. Mr Ghosn
and Mr Lee were later taken to St Vincent’s
Hospital Sydney by ambulance.
Ghosn was hospitalised for three weeks after suffering pelvic and vertebral
fractures. He underwent an open reduction and internal
fixation surgery on his
pelvic fractures involving the insertion of rods and plates. He later spent
approximately nine weeks as an
inpatient at Royal Rehab Private.
Lee suffered a fractured left hand. He was hospitalised for two days before
returning to South Korea to undergo surgery that involved
the insertion of pins
in his left hand. Mr Lee was unable to work for approximately four months after
the incident. He then returned
to work at the site.
obligations and guidance material
to the incident, the following industry guidance material was published and
available to Kellogg:
(1) The Safe Work Australia (SWA) “Guide to Managing the Risks of Elevated
Work Platforms” (EWP Guide) dated September
2021 identifies that persons
conducting a business or undertaking (PCBUs) have the primary duty of care for
the health and safety
of workers at the workplace. It also states that workers
must be consulted on the health and safety issues concerning the use of
The EWP Guide identifies known hazards as including contact or collision with
other people or plant and the risks associated
with working from heights. It
also states that isolation controls should be implemented to restrict site
access to people who are
directly involved in the work and that sufficient
supervision should be maintained. It proposes the use of physical barriers,
zones, sensing devices, spotters and pre-use safety checks as safety
mechanisms.
(2) The SWA “Traffic Management Guide for Warehousing” dated July
2014 states that contractors and visiting delivery
drivers should be aware of
site traffic safety rules and procedures.
(3) The SWA “Labour Hire: Duties of PCBUs Guide” dated 3 February
2020 requires all duty holders in a labour hire arrangement
to consult,
cooperate and coordinate with each other so far as is reasonably practicable. It
also requires PCBUs to ensure workers
have sufficient training, information and
supervision arrangements and imposes obligations on both host and labour hire
minimise risks to workers’ safety.
(4) The SWA “Traffic Management: Guide for Warehousing” dated July
2013 similarly states that a PCBU should implement
a sufficient traffic
management plan that explains how risks will be managed at a warehouse. This
should include details of who is
responsible for managing traffic flow,
instructions for controlling traffic and the implementation of barriers and
signs to warn
pedestrians.
Systems of work prior to the incident
the time of the incident, there were numerous safety systems in place at the
Kellogg site.
Risk register and risk assessments
site risk register titled “EHS Management System Procedure Risk Register
– Botany” dated 15 November 2017 (Risk
Register) identified relevant
hazards including working from heights, the presence of visitors on site, heavy
vehicle movements,
capital work projects and mobile plant use including EWPs. It
identified relevant hazard controls including pre-work safety, work
planning and
consultation with all impacted parties, none of which were implemented on the
day of the incident. It also proposed
a series of hazard controls for working
from heights, which included training, the use of Job Risk Assessment and Work
Method Statements
(JRAWMS), work permits and exclusion zones, with the last of
these measures only being applicable to packing lines.
Risk Register identified proposed controls for the presence of contractors and
visitors including mandatory JRAWMS, work permits
and consultation with the
engineering team at pre-start meetings. It also required visitors to be
accompanied by a Kellogg staff
member. It identified and addressed the risks of
heavy vehicle movements on site by implementing “traffic management
under the direction of security”. Notwithstanding these
measures, site security confirmed to Mr Singh that he could proceed
unaccompanied to the loading docks, which they stated were empty. He was not
informed that work was being performed. From there he
was able to enter the
loading dock by activating the roller door from the outside.
Crispin was unaware that the Risk Register existed. However, he completed a WHSE
Risk Assessment Form for the air curtain upgrade
which identified the hazard of
forklift movements near the loading docks and had proposed the use of barricades
and signage. It also
required the completion of a JRAWMS prior to work
commencing.
27 February 2023, Mr Hollis, on behalf of Chess, completed a JRAWMS on
Kellogg’s letterhead for the installation of the air
curtains and bracing.
Under the JRAWMS, Mr Ornig and Mr Hollis were responsible for inspecting the
work area prior to each day of
work. This did not occur on the morning of the
incident. Further, the JRAWMS required the loading dock area to be closed and
and roller doors isolated between 1 and 3 March 2023. Again, these
measures were not implemented on the day of the incident.
did not adequately communicate the JRAWMS to its workers at the site. Mr Ghosn
and Mr Lee’s signatures appear on the JRAWMS
and are dated 28 February
2023. However, both men have stated that the signatures, which purport to be
theirs, are not. Mr Ghosn
has also stated that he had never seen the JRAWMS
document prior to SafeWork NSW’s investigation. Kellogg is not aware of
Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee’s apparent signatures were found on the JRAWMS.
The JRAWMS was also annotated at some point between 27
February 2023 and 3 March
2023 to identify the isolation of the roller safety door as an additional safety
Risk Register required visitors to the site to be accompanied by a Kellogg staff
member. Again, this did not occur on the day
of the incident, as Mr Singh
accessed the site unsupervised upon completion of his Driver Declaration Form.
Furthermore, nobody from
Kellogg, Chess or Ignite informed Mr Singh that work
was being performed in the loading dock.
Work permits and
Risk Register and JRAWMS required the use of work permits prior to the
commencement of works, and Kellogg had a “Permit
to Work Program”
procedure. However, once again Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee have both stated that the
signatures on the work permits
are not theirs and Mr Ghosn has denied that any
work permits were issued on the morning of the incident. It was Mr Hollis’
responsibility to obtain the signatures of his workers on the permits once they
were issued to him by Mr Ornig. Accordingly, Kellogg
is unable to account for
how that could have occurred. In any event, the work permits did not stipulate
the requirement for the roller
door to be isolated, contrary to the terms of the
also had a “Working from Heights and Fall Protection” procedure
dated 17 November 2020. This procedure identified
work in EWPs and requirements
for barriers to prevent collision with vehicles and contractor safety. It also
stated that signs should
be erected warning of the dangers of the work area. On
1 and 2 March 2023, the engineering team displayed signage and barricades
indicate the works being undertaken. However, on the day of the incident, this
did not occur. This procedure also contained an
elevated work risk assessment
Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS) template for working in an EWP. However, this
template was not used
in relation to the works.
maintained numerous safe work procedures, including a “Safe Work
Instruction: Unloading Trucks” policy dated 9
March 2015. This policy
stipulated that only trained and assigned persons were to operate the loading
dock roller doors. It also
required trucks to be ushered into a loading dock in
the presence of a forklift operator. However, it was not provided to Mr Singh
and its requirements were not otherwise met on the day of the incident.
Kellogg had a “Kellogg Good Manufacturing Practices Policy for Botany
Plant” dated 20 October 2020, which identified
rules for packing material
delivery drivers. However, it did not specify that drivers were not permitted to
operate the exterior
control panel to open the roller doors.
terms of traffic management, Kellogg had an “EHS Management System
Procedure – Moving Equipment & Pedestrian Segregation”
October 2020, which managed risks associated with segregating moving equipment
and pedestrians generally on site. At the
time of the incident, Kellogg did not
have a traffic management plan to facilitate communication between security,
forklift operators,
delivery drivers and maintenance workers. Additionally,
although Chess had allocated a spotter to the site between 28 February 2023
2 March 2023, he was not at work on the day of the incident and Chess did not
allocate an alternative spotter in his place.
Training and
had a “Driver Declaration Form” dated 17 March 2021, which was
signed by Mr Singh on the day of the incident.
However, this document failed to
provide information regarding who was permitted to activate the control panel on
the exterior of
the loading dock. Nor was that information contained in the site
safety rules, documented in the “Kellogg EHS Management System
Contract Induction Revision 3.0”. Aside from the Driver Declaration Form,
Mr Singh was not provided with any site
instructions.
Ghosn stated that when he commenced work at the site, he received a
5–10-minute induction from Mr Hollis. He did not receive
training from Chess, Kellogg or WMA. Mr Lee stated that he received several site
inductions, but none related to working
safely around traffic. However, Mr Lee
had received training from Chess about safely working at heights, including the
requirement
to barricade worksites, alongside verbal training from Dana.
the time of the incident, neither Mr Ghosn nor Mr Lee held an Elevating Work
Platform Association NSW “Yellow Card”.
Prior to the incident, Mr
Ghosn was asked by Mr Hollis (who did hold the necessary Yellow Card) to
demonstrate he was EWP qualified
by operating an EWP for several minutes.
neither Mr Ornig nor Mr Hollis had informed the security guards on the day of
the incident that works were still ongoing.
Supervision
Mr Hollis was offsite when the incident occurred, Chess did not appoint another
worker to fill his role. Despite being the
construction supervisor and project
manager, Mr Ornig was also not present. Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee were not supervised
by any staff
from Kellogg, Chess or Ignite. Mr Singh was also unsupervised,
despite Kellogg’s policy requiring all visitors to the site
supervised.
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, Kellogg implemented the following systems of work in response to
Prohibition Notices issued by SafeWork NSW:
(1) updated its SWMS, JRAWMS and related material for the completion of the air
curtain project and retrieval of the fallen EWP;
(2) conducted and recorded Toolbox Talks on the updated SWMS material which
included topics relating to working at height, isolation
of loading dock roller
doors and barricading and fencing off all areas; and
(3) engaged Two Way Cranes Pty Ltd to recover the EWP, including the provision
of a lift plan document for the lift and relocation
of the EWP.
also undertook the following actions in response to the incident:
(1) removed the external controls of the roller doors and moved the motor
isolators to the roller doors to ground level;
(2) increased the prominence of barriers in the loading area;
(3) implemented a rule that project managers are required to review and approve
(4) provided training to engineers and remedial painting contractors for the use
of EWPs, including the use of spotters and exclusion
(5) provided training to warehouse workers in prevention of access to loading
docks when docks are not in use and establishing exclusion
zones when trucks are
(6) developed and implemented a new loading and unloading Standard Operating
Procedure; and
(7) reviewed policies regarding permits to work, unloading trucks and contractor
management.
has continued to make improvements to the site following the incident such as
installing new dock locks and upgrading the
dock guarding. Kellogg has also
replaced its former (manual) visitor and contractor induction system with an
online process administered
by a third-party
Offender’s case on sentence
relied on the affidavit of Mr Glen Wojcinski sworn 14 August 2025. The following
is a summary of his evidence in addition
to matters already set out in the
Agreed Statement of Facts.
Wojcinski is the Supply Chain Director, Australia and New Zealand at Kellogg,
having been in this role since September 2022. He
has approximately 20
years’ experience in the food and manufacturing industry, with previous
roles including supply chain and
operations management. He holds a Master of
Business Administration and a Graduate Certificate in Management from Charles
Sturt University
and a Certificate IV in Competitive Manufacturing. He also
holds certification as a Supply Chain Professional from the Association
Operations Management.
part of his role, Mr Wojcinksi is responsible for ensuring safety across
Kellogg’s supply chains, people, business and assets
and is also
responsible for implementing Kellogg’s safety management system. He
reports to Kellogg’s Managing Director
for Australia and New
Expression of remorse and contrition
Wojcinski, on behalf of Kellogg, acknowledged and expressed sincere regret for
the incident and its impact on Mr Ghosn, Mr Lee
and their families and friends.
He also acknowledged and expressed regret for the impact of the incident on any
workers at the site.
Wojcinski stated that he had seen Kellogg’s leadership emphasise, at every
opportunity, that it has not taken the incident
lightly, and that extensive
meetings were held within the leadership team and in the wider supply chain
function to reflect on it.
He further stated that Kellogg is committed to
ensuring an incident like this does not reoccur and has undertaken a review of
systems and procedures, with several steps having been taken to ensure site
safety measures are strengthened.
Wojcinski stated that, following the incident, he visited and spoke to Mr Ghosn
at the hospital and enquired of both Mr Ghosn and
Mr Lee’s wellbeing over
several weeks. He also states that he was kept up to date on their ongoing
wellbeing and recovery.
the incident, Mr Wojcinski held on-site communications and briefed employees
was offered to any employees
who required it.
has been manufacturing ready-to-eat cereal at the site for almost 100 years. The
site currently operates 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. As at the end of 2024,
Kellogg employed over 400 people across Australia and New Zealand as well as
around 100 contractors.
Kellogg also works with approximately 600 direct and
indirect suppliers and sources most of its grains from Australian farmers.
manufactures over 93% of its breakfast cereal products at the site.
Wojcinksi gave evidence of Kellogg’s extensive community contributions.
Since 2013, Kellogg has donated approximately 68
million serves of food to
people in need across Australia and New Zealand, including to schools, childhood
centres, Indigenous and
outback communities, sports clubs and charities
supporting communities including through partnerships with Foodbank Australia,
Breakfast Buddies program, Ronald McDonald House and the Australian Red
Kellogg established the Kellogg Australia Charitable Foundation in 2007, which
has distributed over $2 million in funding
to help local community groups.
Kellogg also has a 30-year partnership with Surf Life Saving Australia and a
global partnership with
Movember which has helped raise over $1 million to
support mental wellbeing between 2019 and 2023.
has also partnered with farmers and suppliers to help reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and is working towards net zero carbon
emissions by 2050 and 100%
reusable, recyclable or compostable packaging by 2030. It is committed to
responsibly sourcing its ingredients.
Finally, Kellogg has been recognised as an
Employer of Choice for Gender Equality by the Workplace Gender Equality
Wojcinksi stated that Kellogg has a ‘“safety first” culture,
which involves “safety shares” at Town
Halls, team updates and
leadership team meetings, and safety performance metrics. It also includes the
company’s “Mission
Zero” initiative, which was launched in
July 2024 to achieve a zero-injury workplace.
Systems of work
prior to the incident
Wojcinski gave unchallenged evidence of the following systems of work in place
at the time of the incident, in addition to those
set out in the Agreed
Statement of Facts.
(1) An established work health and safety management system that is centrally
managed by Kellogg’s work health and safety team.
This system establishes
the standards and procedures that apply across Kellogg to ensure work health and
safety compliance is integrated
into all activities across the site.
(2) A system designed to prevent unauthorised access to the loading dock. This
included an External Warehouse Standard which provided
a procedure for
controlling incoming materials and monitoring visitor activity. It also included
a general process for transport
drivers to access the site through the security
(3) Traffic management arrangements, including the “Moving Equipment and
Pedestrian Segregation Program” for managing
risks associated with
segregating moving equipment and pedestrians. Prior to the incident, and in
accordance with the JRAWMS, Mr
Hollis and Mr Ornig had a system to prevent
vehicles from entering a dock while work was being carried out which involved
the security gatehouse of the dock being closed, having a spotter
present, and placing the plastic tape barrier outside the particular
day so it was visible to incoming trucks.
(4) Instruction and training procedures. This included all drivers being
expected to complete a Driver Declaration Form. It also
included the
“Contractor Management and Visitor Safety Procedure” dated 21 March
2018, which explicitly required the
establishment of “an induction program
for contractors and visitors”. Furthermore, both Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee had
Kellogg’s Induction Assessment for Contractors prior to
commencing work at the site. Finally, the “Moving Equipment and
Segregation Program” stated at cl 4.7.2 that contractors should be
informed of Kellogg’s traffic management
Systems of work after the incident
detailed evidence which Mr Wojcinski gave in this regard was consistent with the
Agreed Statement of Facts and is reflected in
the summary at [
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Kellogg falls in the
range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
prosecutor submitted that this offence was a serious one having regard to the
variety of failures which occurred in Kellogg’s
systems, and asked the
Court to take into account the following factors in making its
assessment:
(1) the foreseeable and indeed obvious nature of the risk of direct or indirect
loading dock;
(2) the failure of the offender to implement measures to prevent access to the
loading docks whilst works were occurring,
(3) the numerous key failures in the provision of training, instruction and
supervision to Mr Ghosn, Mr Lee and Mr Singh;
(4) the nature of the measures which could have been implemented which were not
at all onerous and any one of which would have greatly
reduced the risk; and
(5) the potential consequences which could have arisen from Kellogg’s
failure to eliminate or minimise the risk, which in this
case included death or
very significant injury.
submitted that the objective seriousness of the offence was low. First, Kellogg
relied on Chess, with whom it had a long-standing
relationship of 40 years, to
undertake specialised engineering work at the site that Kellogg did not have the
expertise to do. Kellogg
relied on Chess to ensure that workers engaged from
other subcontractors were appropriately qualified, trained and supervised and
had very limited involvement in relation to the work that was being undertaken.
Chess had employed Mr Hollis as site supervisor, alongside Mr Ornig as
construction supervisor and Mr Macklin as mechanical
and project engineer. Mr
Hollis observed there to be no barriers or warning markers in place on the day
of the incident but failed
to direct the workers to rectify this. Moreover,
neither Mr Hollis nor Mr Ornig were present during the works, and there was no
in attendance on the day of the incident.
as its workers were not involved in the performance of the work and lacked the
expertise to conduct it, Kellogg was not aware
that there was no supervision on
the day of the incident, nor was it aware of the absence of a spotter. It
accepted that there were
measures it could, and should, have taken, such as
ensuring the loading dock indicator lights were operational and that workers
not readily activate the roller doors to the loading dock from outside of
the building.
Furthermore,
Kellogg submitted that this is not a matter in which there were no procedures or
controls in place. Rather, its various
site procedures were not fully complied
with in connection with the incident. As such, Kellogg submitted that the
failures were reflective
not of the absence of adequate systems, but instead a
failure to implement them. Kellogg also pointed to the fact that WMA, Dana,
Security, TAS and Ignite have not been prosecuted in relation to the incident.
accept that the failings of Chess in particular, as identified by Kellogg and
reflected in the Agreed Statement of Facts, contributed
to the manifestation of
the risk. I also accept that Kellogg’s reliance upon Chess to put
appropriate safety systems in place
in respect of the work that Chess had been
engaged to perform at the site needs to be viewed in the context of their
long-standing
relationship without incident. It also needs to be viewed in the
context of what occurred in the days prior to the incident when
supervision,
barricades and spotters were in place. However, in determining the objective
seriousness of the offence, the focus remains
on the failure of Kellogg to meet
its statutory obligation. In
Workcover Authority (NSW) (Inspector Howard) v
Baulderstone Hornibrook Pty Ltd
(2009) 186 IR 125
[2009] NSWIRComm 92
Baulderstone
), Walton J, Vice President held at [241]–[242]
(emphasis added):
“There is now ample authority for the proposition that the contribution of
another entity to a risk to safety may be considered
in mitigation in the
assessment of penalty of a defendant. The authorities range from cases such as
the present, where the contributing
entity has provided services or advice which
have contributed to the detriment to safety (
commonly, cases where the entity or entities are engaged in a common project,
enterprise or task with the defendant which
carries out the role of a principal,
contractor or fellow sub-contractor:
Morrison v Waratah; Morrison v
Workcover Authority of New South Wales
(Inspector Mansell) v Anytime Industrial Services Pty Ltd
(2001) 110 IR
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Farrell) v
Morrison (No 2)
[2002] NSWIRComm 27
(2002) 112 IR 312
Workcover Authority of New
South Wales (Inspector Mansell) v Orica Australia Pty Ltd
(2002) 116 IR
Workcover Authority (NSW) v Consolidated Constructions Pty
[2001] NSWIR Comm 263
(2001) 109 IR 316.
The common thread running through this line of authorities is the principle that
where it may be contended that an entity, other
than a defendant, has
contributed to a detriment to safety (either by advice or common enterprise),
the question remains, in assessing penalty, what are the specific
culpabilities of the defendant, the statutory obligations placed
defendant not having been diminished by the notion that other entities may have
contributed to the risk to safety
(see, for example,
at [46]). The contribution of the other entity is only relevant
to the extent that its contribution casts light upon the real level
culpability of the defendant:
Morrison v Waratah
at 437. Such an analysis may assist in
understanding the reasonableness of the defendants’ actions, and may
include an assessment
of systems which were operating at the time of an incident
giving rise to the prosecution ...”
its plea of guilty, Kellogg accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at least
minimise the reasonably
foreseeable risk:
“(a) Prevent unauthorised access to the loading dock and
use of the external control panel buttons.
(b) Provide appropriate instruction and training to
contractors, and in particular truck drivers, in relation to the operation
the loading dock roller doors, including that they are not permitted to operate
the roller doors.
(c) Develop, implement and enforce an adequate traffic
management plan for the duration of the works, which included details of:
(i) The responsibilities of the person/s responsible for
managing traffic flow at the site; and/or
(ii) Procedures for controlling traffic and mobile plant
movement within the site; and/or
(iii) The use of spotters to assist with directing traffic
and/or the operation of mobile plant at the site; and/or
(iv) The installation of barriers, exclusion zones, and signage
to separate pedestrians and vehicles;
(d) Provide contractors and workers, and in particular Mr
Ghosn, Mr Lee and Mr Singh, with adequate training in relation to site-specific
hazards, including working around heavy vehicles and traffic management;
(e) Provide appropriate supervision to visitors, contractors
and workers at the site, and in particular Mr Ghosn, Mr Lee, and Mr
Singh whilst
the works were being conducted.”
above measures both individually and in combination could have been implemented
without great burden or inconvenience to Kellogg.
Further, the Agreed Statement
of Facts identifies numerous failings of Kellogg’s systems, the
elimination of any one of which
would have prevented the incident irrespective
of the actions of Chess. Nor am I satisfied that the failings were an
unfortunate
coincidence of a number of “one off” incidents. In
particular, the evidence before the Court was that the failure of
indicator lights outside the loading docks was not a recent development.
Similarly, there was a history of truck drivers,
on occasion, operating the
loading dock control panels contrary to the terms of the “Safe Work
Instruction: Unloading Trucks”
was plainly within the ambit of Kellogg’s control to prevent unauthorised
access both to the loading dock and the external
control panel. As to the
former, Kellogg failed to comply with its own policy that Mr Singh be
accompanied by a Kellogg worker once
he moved beyond the secure entry point to
the site. I have dealt above with the unauthorised access by truck drivers to
the loading
dock control panel. Indeed, and with reference to the second
measure, it appears that the policy prohibiting truck drivers from operating
roller door control panel was not routinely communicated to truck drivers. It
did not appear in the Driver Declaration Form and
Mr Singh was not otherwise
made aware of it.
the controller of the site, Kellogg had responsibility for its traffic
management plan, although Chess was also required to ensure
that measures were
in place to manage traffic hazards in the context of the work that it was
performing. It was also Kellogg’s
responsibility to conduct proper
training for the contractors and workers on site, including in relation to site
specific hazards
such as working around heavy vehicles and the site traffic
management plan. Finally, Kellogg was required to have appropriate supervision
in place in relation to the air curtain project. Kellogg had a number of senior
personnel in place to manage both the air curtain
project and the site more
generally. However, no senior personnel, in particular Mr Ornig and Mr Crispin,
inspected the work site
prior to the commencement of the work on the morning of
the incident.
Nonetheless,
I accept that this is not a case where no attention was paid to safety, or where
there was a culture of failing to adhere
to safety systems. The evidence of the
extensive safety systems that Kellogg had in place demonstrates that it was
intent on having
and maintaining safe systems of work. The safety systems
concerning the induction of delivery drivers to the site was inadequate.
However, the predominant failure giving rise to this offence was Kellogg’s
lack of compliance with its well documented safety
potential consequences of the risk materialising included death. There was more
than one worker exposed to the risk. The serious
injuries suffered by Mr Ghosn
and Mr Lee were a manifestation of the risk.
the above matters into account in the manner indicated, I find that the
objective seriousness of the offence falls within the
Moral culpability of Kellogg
noted above, Kellogg had a longstanding relationship with Chess as the provider
of engineering services at the site. Kellogg had
therefore engaged well
qualified engineering support to undertake work that its own staff were not
qualified to do. Chess had completed
a JRAWMS which required Mr Hollis (as well
as Mr Ornig) to inspect the work area prior to the commencement of work each
day. Accordingly,
I accept that Kellogg had exercised a degree of diligence to
ensure that appropriate controls were established for the works associated
the air curtain project.
Hollis and Mr Ornig had a pre-start meeting with Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee on the
morning of the incident. Kellogg was unaware that Mr
Hollis had then been called
to another job. Kellogg was also unaware that the spotter whom Chess allocated
to the job was not at
work and that no alternative spotter had been allocated.
Further, the engineering team had erected barricades with danger tape and
plastic cones on the two days immediately prior to the incident. There is no
explanation for the absence of those measures on the
morning of the incident.
While such matters do not have a direct bearing upon the objective seriousness
of the offence, consistent
with the decision of this Court at [242] of
Baulderstone
, set out at [
] above, they are factors which reduce Kellogg’s
moral culpability in relation to the offence.
Aggravating
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
offence does not require an injury to be sustained, but merely the creation of
the risk of death or serious injury. The Agreed
Statement of Facts sets out the
significant injuries suffered by both Mr Ghosn and Mr Lee, which plainly
establish this aggravating
factor. Each required surgery to insert rods, plates
or pins to treat the serious fractures which they sustained in the fall. In
Victim Impact Statement dated 2 September 2025, Mr Ghosn powerfully articulated
the life changing effect of the accident upon
him physically, emotionally,
mentally and financially and the impact of those effects on his confidence, his
relationships and his
sense of purpose. I have had regard to that evidence in
the manner permitted by law.
has 10 prior safety related convictions, the most recent being two offences
against s 15(1) and a further offence against
s 16(1) of the
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 1983
) in 2000, which essentially
correspond to offences for breaches of ss 19(1) and 19(2) of the
respectively: s 21A(2)(d)
. However, as these offences occurred 25
years ago, I accept that the subject offence does not demonstrate a continuing
attitude of
disobedience to the law. The prosecutor does not contend otherwise.
I address these prior convictions in the context of mitigating
Mitigating factors
submits that it does not have a significant record of previous convictions given
the scale and longevity of its manufacturing
operations and the fact that the
most recent of its 10 safety related convictions occurred 25 years ago: s
. The prosecutor submits that Kellogg’s criminal
record, including the three convictions in 2000 for general duties offences
referred to at [
above, disentitles it to the benefit of that provision. The prosecutor points to
the 14 April 2000 decision of Walton J, Vice President
WorkCover Authority
of New South Wales (Inspector Glass) v Kellogg (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2000] NSWIRComm 53
) in which Kellogg was afforded
leniency on the basis that its previous convictions concerned “relatively
minor matters”.
This decision ostensibly excluded the s 16(1)
offence conviction entered the day before
was handed down,
which was well after the
1999 hearing date. It also could not have
had regard to the further offence pursuant to s 15(1) of the
which Kellogg was convicted in May 2000. At [49] of
, Walton J held
as follows:
“Whilst the defendant has had some prior convictions under the
Factories, Shops and Industries Act 1962
, these penalties concerned
relatively minor matters. Having regard to the size of the corporation, the
number of employees and longevity
of its operations, I consider that, in all the
circumstances, I should treat this corporation as one which, in relative terms,
receive discount for good industrial citizenship. This is particularly so
as the defendant has operated throughout this period in
a hazardous field and
where it is quite evident that the defendant has strived for the establishment
of good safety procedures and
continues to do so.”
criminal history precludes me from affording it the leniency that might be
attracted by a first offender. However,
the judicial discretion to afford an
offender leniency pursuant to s 21A(3)(e)
“is not all or
nothing and may be a matter of degree”:
Saunders v The Queen
per Price J at [66] (Beech-Jones CJ at CL agreeing at [1] and
Lonergan J agreeing at [70]). In view of the scale of Kellogg’s
manufacturing operations and the passing of 25 years since it was last convicted
offence, I am prepared to extend some leniency to Kellogg in
recognition of its extended period of operation without conviction.
am also prepared to find that Kellogg is otherwise of good character: s
. The steps which it took after the incident including
extensive training of staff and implementation of safety equipment around the
loading area demonstrate this. Kellogg’s good character is also
exemplified by its significant community involvement as outlined
by Mr Wojcinski
in his affidavit and summarised at [
] above. That includes the donation of more than 68
million serves of food to people in need since 2013. In that regard, I also give
weight to Kellogg’s endeavours to model good corporate citizenship in its
pursuit of sustainability and equal opportunity as
set out above at [
now turn to Kellogg’s likelihood of reoffending: s 21A(3)(g)
. In view of Kellogg’s history of convictions for safety related
offences, to which I have already referred, and the number
of independent safety
systems failures which enabled the incident to occur on 3 March 2023, I cannot
find, even on the balance of
probabilities, that Kellogg is unlikely to
reoffend. Consistent with the prosecutor’s submission, I nonetheless
accept that
Kellogg has good prospects of rehabilitation pursuant to s
, both because of the 25 years that have elapsed since
the previous offences occurred, and the numerous steps taken by Kellogg to
improve its safety mechanisms after the subject incident.
has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
Wojcinski’s evidence demonstrates that Kellogg has accepted responsibility
for its actions and has acknowledged that its
failures led to the injury of Mr
Ghosn and Mr Lee. Kellogg has also acknowledged and expressed regret concerning
the impact of the
incident on other workers at the site, including those who
responded to the incident. Kellogg’s early guilty plea is a further
demonstration of contrition.
entered a plea of guilty on 30 June 2025 to the charge as particularised in the
summons issued on 28 February 2025. This was
only the second mention of these
proceedings. Kellogg is entitled to a discount on penalty that reflects the
utilitarian value of
that early plea:
R v Thomson; R v Houlton
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. I accept the joint position of the parties that a discount of 25% is
appropriate in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
submitted, and I accept, that its cooperation with the authorities is a matter
which should operate in mitigation of the sentence
to be imposed upon it:
s 21A(3)(m)
. Kellogg’s conduct in response to the
incident extended beyond bare compliance with SafeWork NSW’s investigation
included removal of the external control panels for the roller doors and the
implementation of an online contractor induction system
administered by a
third-party vendor. Kellogg also facilitated interviews between SafeWork NSW and
personnel on the site who were
employed by Chess, Ignite, and MSS Security.
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general
deterrence.
deterrence is also a relevant consideration, given the number of safety systems
failures which enabled the incident to occur.
Nonetheless, the evidence
establishes that, at the time of the incident, Kellogg was a company which paid
high regard to its
responsibilities. I am fortified in this view
by the measures which have been implemented since the incident to improve
safety systems. I also note the attendance at the sentencing
proceedings of Kellogg’s Legal Director and Company Secretary
with its’ Senior Legal Counsel as a demonstration of the seriousness with
which Kellogg views this matter. These are
factors which operate to reduce the
weight that specific deterrence might otherwise attract in view of the
continuing scale of Kellogg’s
manufacturing
operations.
Capacity to pay a fine
Court is required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
before imposing a fine. Kellogg has not provided any evidence concerning its
capacity to pay a fine and makes no submission
in that regard.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that circumstance. I have regard
to that matter in determining the appropriate
was convicted of the offence as charged pursuant to an order that I made on 4
September 2025.
appropriate fine is $680,000, which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea
make the following orders:
(1) I impose a fine of $510,000.
(2) Kellogg is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed
or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter