URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Barry Sutcliffe) v Ourcorp Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 74 (1 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Barry Sutcliffe)
Ourcorp Pty Ltd.
20253427/05/2
Hearing Dates:
17 November
2005, 22 March 2006, 23 March 2006, 28 March 2006.
1 June 2006
Legislation:
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2000
Section 136.
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Ms N Rouillon,
Moray & Agnew Solicitors.
Counsel for the Prosecutor: Ms P
Solicitor for the Defendant: Mr C. Cuffe, Gillis Delaney
Solicitors.
Counsel for the Defendant: Mr D Jordan.
Reasons For Decision
1. The defendant herein pleads not guilty to two breaches of
Occupational Health and Safety Act,
2. On 23 September
2004 two officials of the Shop Distributive and Allied Employees Union, Mr
Lincoln Kinley and Mr Joseph Bourke,
attended at the warehouse premises utilised
by the defendant for its business operations. After the two SDA officials had
on the defendant’s premises for a short period of time they were
ordered to leave the premises by Mr Craig Anderson who held
the position of the
warehouse manager and was employed by the defendant.
3. The Prosecutor
alleges that the action of the defendant in ordering the two SDA officials from
the site constituted a breach of
s. 136(1)(a)
of the Act which provides that a
person must not:-
“Obstruct, hinder or impede any authorised
official in the exercise of the official’s functions under this
4. The two charges before the Court constitute an alleged
breach of the Section in respect of Mr Kinley and a further alleged breach
relation to Mr Bourke. Given that the two charges are so closely associated
and arise out of the same circumstances it was clearly
appropriate for the
charges to be heard together.
5. At the outset it should be noted that on
17 November 2005 the Court heard an interlocutory application on behalf of the
seeking to have the Court Attendance Notices dismissed on the grounds
that they disclosed no offence known to the law. The Court
Attendance Notices
as originally filed in these proceedings describe the alleged offences in the
following terms:-
Section 136
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2000
. The defendant obstructed, hindered and impeded an
authorised official in the exercise of the official’s functions under
Division 3 of
of the Act.”
6. The submission put to the
Court was that whilst it was open to the Prosecutor to bring the defendant to
the Court to defend an
allegation that it “
obstructed, hindered or
in the specific terms of
Section 136(1)(a)
not open to the Prosecutor to bring a charge against the defendant in terms not
found in the statute, namely
“obstructed, hindered and impeded
7. On 17 November 2005 I dismissed the applicant and
found the Court Attendance Notices were validly before the Court and that the
Court had jurisdiction to determine the matters.
8. At the interlocutory
hearing counsel for the Prosecutor submitted that whilst the prosecution
rejected the proposition relied upon
by the defendant, the prosecution proposed
to amend the Court Attendance Notice in any event to put the matter beyond doubt
by specifically
relying only on the word “obstructed” and not on the
words “hindered and impeded” in relation to the matter.
Notwithstanding my finding in relation to the validity of the Court Attendance
Notice as originally lodged I gave the prosecution
leave to amend in the manner
foreshadowed and subsequently on 21 November 2005 amended Court Attendance
Notices were lodged in the
registry describing the offence in each case as
The defendant obstructed an authorised official in the exercise of the
official’s functions under Division 3 of
9. Thereafter the matter was listed for hearing in March
2006. At the outset of the substantive hearing of the matter, Mr Jordan
counsel for the defendant put it clearly on the record that the position of the
defendant was that it relied upon Section 21 of
Criminal Procedure Act
and did not concede that any power in the Court to allow an amendment to the
wording of the charge was capable of curing any error
that may have been present
when the original charge was formulated and filed in the Court to commence the
proceedings. It was submitted
that where a charge fails to disclose an offence
known to the law the Court has no jurisdiction to deal with the matter,
dealing with it by way of amendment, and that in such circumstances it
would be appropriate for a Court simply to dismiss the charge.
dealt with the interlocutory application on an
basis on 17
November 2005, I do not propose to revisit my reasons for so determining in the
body of this decision. It is sufficient
to note that notwithstanding my ruling
on that day the prosecution elected to amend the Court Attendance Notice with
leave of the
Court and in doing so it has not on any view widened the nature of
the charge. No submission was put to the Court to suggest that
the defendant
was in any way disadvantaged or prejudiced by being asked to meet an allegation
that it “obstructed” as
opposed to an alleged offence utilising each
of the words “obstructed”, “hindered” and
11. Whilst the legislation does not include a
definition clause which defines the word “obstruct” I note the
provided by the Collins dictionary and thesaurus which provides the
following guidance –
(dictionary) 1. to
block with an obstacle, 2. to make progress or activity difficult, 3. to impede
or block a clear a view of.
(thesaurus) arrest, bar,
barricade, block, bring to a standstill, check, choke, clog, cumber, curb, cut
off, frustrate, get in the
way of, hamper, hamstring, hide, hinder, hold up,
impede, inhibit, interfere with, interrupt, mask, obscure, prevent, restrict,
shield, shut off, slow down, stop, thwart,
12. It is the prosecution case that the SDA officials
attended at the defendant’s premises on the day in question for the
of investigating suspected breaches of the
Occupational Health and
Further, it is the prosecution case that both were authorised
officials within the meaning of the legislation and that the defendant
obstructed them in the exercise of their functions under the
Occupational
Health and Safety Act
Further, the prosecution asserts that the SDA
officials complied with the statutory requirements relevant to the exercise of
functions including providing notification at the time of their entry onto
the premises and having their respective authorities with
them at the time of
their entry onto the premises.
13. The Court notes that copies of the
relevant authorisation documents issued by the Office of the Industrial
Registrar of New South
Wales were tendered in evidence in the course of the
proceedings and it is clear from the defendant’s final submissions that
it is not disputed that the SDA officials were “authorised
officials” for the purposes of
14. Further, it is not disputed that the warehouse
manager, Mr Craig Anderson, instructed the SDA officials to leave the premises
after they had been on site for a short period of time.
15. It is clear
however that the defendant submits that the evidence does not provide evidence
beyond reasonable doubt that the authorised
officials had attended at the
premises for the purposes of exercising functions pursuant to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Further, the defendant submits
that the Court would find that the evidence does not support a finding beyond
reasonable doubt
that the authorised officials complied with the statutory
requirements and in particular the requirement in
Section 78(2)
of the Act which
“The authorised representative must notify the
occupier of the premises of the authorised representatives’ presence on
the premises as soon as reasonably practicable after entering the premises
16. The prosecution called the following witnesses, Mr
Kinley (an industrial officer of the SDA at the time of the alleged offence),
Bourke (the local SDA organiser at the time of the alleged offence), Ms L. Ioane
(an assistant warehouse manager of the defendant),
Mr Craig Anderson (the
defendant’s warehouse manager), Mr Raymond Smith (the owner and director
of the defendant) and Inspector
Barry Sutcliffe the informant herein. In the
defence case evidence was called from Mr Ross Brown (a former employee of the
and Mr Michael Gillis the defendant’s solicitor.
17. The evidence provided by Mr Bourke, and to a lesser extent Mr
Kinley, establishes that prior to 23 September 2004 one or more
members of the
SDA employed by the defendant had raised with Mr Bourke concerns relating to
occupational health and safety issues
at the defendant’s premises. Some
of these matters related to the driving of forklift trucks by unlicensed drivers
were apparently other matters raised concerning the general level of
maintenance at the premises. Mr Bourke’s evidence was
that he had had a
meeting with one of the members, a man named Max, in a nearby coffee shop a week
or so prior to the visit which
took place on 23 September 2004. Mr
Bourke’s evidence was that as an organiser of the SDA he would routinely
visit workplaces
on his own to carry out his usual organising duties for members
of the union in his designated geographical area. However, on this
occasion he
had asked the Industrial Officer Mr Kinley to accompany him as the purpose of
the visit was not a routine organising
visit but an inspection in accordance
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Mr Bourke’s evidence
was that he was not experienced in such matters and felt that he required Mr
Kinley’s assistance.
Mr Kinley’s evidence was that he had not had
any communications with SDA members on the site prior to the day of the alleged
offences. There is some debate as to the exact time that Mr Bourke and Mr
Kinley attended at the defendant’s premises but
it was clearly in the
earlier part of the day, probably between 8 am and 8.30 am. The SDA officials
parked their cars in the street
near the defendant’s premises and together
walked down a long driveway past a car park and walked into the warehouse area
a large opening and under a raised roller door. It is clear that the
SDA officials had not bypassed any security arrangement to
access that part of
the premises. The evidence suggests that this was an area to which customers
would drive their cars to collect
furniture and other household goods after
having made their selections at the defendant’s showroom which was 5 to 10
drive away. The normal procedure was that a customer would drive their
car to the car park or to the area adjacent to the roller
doors of the warehouse
where signage would direct them to an office immediately adjacent to the open
entry area of the warehouse.
Once a customer presented themselves at the
office which was clearly marked as a customer collection point the office staff
make arrangements for the specific goods to be collected by the
defendant’s staff and brought out for loading onto the customer’s
18. Both Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke in their evidence stated that
as they walked in through the open door of the warehouse a group of
were present. The group included Max who was already known to Mr Bourke from
the previous meeting in the local coffee
shop. The evidence given by Mr Kinley
was to the effect that he addressed this group of employees generally and
requested that
someone inform the manager that he and Mr Bourke had arrived at
the premises. His recollection was that someone had left the group
point and that it was his assumption that they had left the group for the
purpose of locating the manager and passing on
Mr Kinley’s message. In
his evidence Mr Bourke was by no means certain that this request had been made
at the outset and
he thought it possible that his members in the group had
commenced the conversation by raising various safety issues which they indicated
should be the subject of inspection.
19. The first person with managerial
responsibilities for the defendant who communicated with the SDA officials was
Ms Ioane who gave
evidence to the effect that as she was not approached by any
of the SDA employees, but had been working in one of the aisles of the
and had noticed a stranger who appeared to be wandering about in the entrance
area near the roller doors and she had left
her work to approach and find out
what they were doing at the premises.
20. Ms Ioane gave evidence to the
effect that her managerial responsibilities were quite limited and that she
acted as Acting Manager
if Mr Anderson was not on the premises. Her evidence
was that she had not received training in relation to the defendant’s
procedures concerning visits by trade union officials, whether for occupational
health and safety purposes or any other purposes.
Ms Ioane gave evidence that
the SDA officials informed her that they had come to the premises for the
purpose of conducting a safety
inspection. Being untrained in relation to such
a situation Ms Ioane had informed the SDA officials that she would need to seek
instructions as to what she should do and left the area to seek assistance.
There is no suggestion that Ms Ioane gave the men any
particular direction at
that time or made any requests to them concerning where they should wait or what
they should do whilst she
was seeking assistance.
21. The evidence would
suggest that following Ms Ioane’s departure the SDA officials continued to
have conversations with employees
of the defendant and these conversations
included receiving information from the employees relating to safety matters.
The evidence
suggests that employees of the defendant walked with Mr Bourke to
various spots to point out defects in the surface of the floor
of the warehouse.
22. Thereafter Mr Craig Anderson, the warehouse manager, arrived at that
part of the premises. His evidence was that he had not been
approached or
present on site, but he had been upstairs
in the staffroom getting a cup of
coffee and had noticed that there were visitors down in the entrance area and he
had gone down
to investigate.
23. It is clear that Mr Anderson then had a
conversation with Ms Ioane. Whilst Ms Ioane gave evidence that she had
informed Mr Anderson
that the two men were from the union and that they had come
to the premises for the purposes of conducting a safety inspection, the
of Mr Anderson is that whilst he had been informed by Ms Ioane that the men were
union officials he did not believe that
she had made any mention of a safety
inspection or safety issues at all. The evidence of Mr Anderson was that the
officials themselves
did not state the reason for their visit and that he did
not ask them. Further, they had not provided him with any identification
documents or any authority documents concerning safety inspections and that he
had not asked to be shown any identification or authorisation
24. From the evidence it would appear that Mr Anderson’s
position in relation to such matters was not greatly different to that
Ioane. He had received no specific training in relation to the
defendant’s policies concerning visits by union officials
included visits for safety inspection purposes or general industrial matters.
Mr Anderson had not felt that he had the
requisite authority to deal with the
matter and informed the two SDA officials to this effect.
evidence is clear that Mr Anderson also left the area to seek further assistance
and before doing so gave no direction and
made no requests to the SDA officials
concerning where they should wait or what they should do or refrain from doing
whilst he was
away seeking further assistance.
26. Following the
departure of Mr Anderson, Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke resumed their activities which
appeared not to constitute an organised
or systematic inspection of the
premises, but rather wandering about in the entry area, venturing part of the
way down some of the
aisles, conversing with employees of the defendant
including members of the SDA and being shown particular aspects of the premises
which the employees sought to draw to their attention.
27. The evidence
of Mr Anderson and Mr Smith indicates that after Mr Anderson left the SDA
officials he went to the office and immediately
telephoned Mr Smith who was the
senior person in the organisation. Mr Smith was the owner and a working
director of the defendant.
Mr Smith stated that he was telephoned at home by Mr
Anderson as he was preparing to dress and go to work. Mr Anderson had informed
him by telephone that he had detected two men wandering about in the premises
and that when he had approached them they had announced
that they were union
officials. Mr Anderson had sought directions as to what he should do. Mr
Smith gave evidence to the effect
that he had become both concerned and angry
when he received this information from Mr Anderson. His evidence was that his
related to the possibility that these men were in fact thieves who were
at the premises for the purpose of casing the area with a
view to committing a
future break-in to steal plasma television sets and other valuable goods that
were stored in the warehouse.
Mr Smith stated that there had been previous
problems with thieves and it was a matter of ongoing concern to him. He was
happy about strangers wandering in and out of his warehouse premises.
Further, he was angered by the thought that the men may in
fact be union
officials who had decided to turn up without notice at the site and demand
access without complying with the provisions
of the legislation, namely the
Industrial Relations legislation, which required the union to give an employer
notice before coming
to the defendant’s premises in reliance upon right of
entry entitlements.
28. Mr Smith indicated that given those
circumstances, he felt it appropriate to direct Mr Anderson to go back to the
two men and
instruct them to leave the site immediately. It is clear from the
evidence of both Mr Smith and Mr Anderson that this was an unequivocal
direction. Mr Anderson was to tell the men to leave and to effectively see
them off the premises.
29. Following that conversation Mr Anderson had
returned to the entry area of the warehouse where he had spoken to the two SDA
and directed them to leave the premises forthwith. The evidence of
Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke is that Mr Kinley responded to this
direction by
specifically informing Mr Anderson that it was an offence to order them from
then premises as they were authorised by
Occupational Health and Safety
to be at the premises to conduct a safety inspection. Whilst
there is a conflict in the evidence as to whether this was the first
occasion on
which Mr Anderson was informed that the visit of the two men related to a safety
inspection, it was clearly the first
occasion on which Mr Anderson was
specifically informed that the two SDA officials asserted that they had a
statutory right to be
at the premises and that ordering them to leave the
premises constituted an offence under the legislation.
uncontested evidence is that notwithstanding this specific piece of information
which was given to Mr Anderson, he elected
to comply with the direction he had
just been given by Mr Smith and he persisted with his demand that the two men
leave the premises
31. Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke then complied
with the direction and left the premises. At that point they made contact by
with the Workcover Authority of New South Wales to lodge a complaint
concerning alleged obstruction in the carrying out of a safety
inspection which
they were authorised to carry out pursuant to the
Occupational Health and
32. The prosecution alleges that the conduct of Mr
Anderson in requiring the SDA officials to leave the premises at that point in
time constitutes an obstruction pursuant to
s. 136(1)(a)
33. On behalf of the defendant it is submitted that whilst the two
SDA officials were authorised to conduct a safety inspection in
accordance with
the legislation this was not their actual purpose on the day. On behalf of the
defendant it is submitted that a
Court would find that a genuine doubt exists as
to the true purpose of the visit to the defendant’s premises by the two
The defendant relies upon the evidence which suggests that prior to
Ms Ioane approaching the two men they were engaged in discussions
defendant’s employees at the site. Further, after Ms Ioane left to seek
assistance the two SDA officials continued
to have conversations with employees
at the site.
34. In this regard the defendant relies heavily upon
evidence that was called on behalf of the defendant from Mr Brown and Mr Gillis.
35. Mr Brown gave evidence that whilst he is no longer employed by the
defendant he was employed at the premises on 23 September 2004
and that he can
recall being approached by a man he did not know who engaged him in conversation
and who asked him questions including
“Do you know Max?”,
“Are you a member of the SDA?” and when he answered in the negative
like to join?” to which he also replied in the negative
and walked away. Mr Brown stated whilst he was being asked questions
man another man who he did not know had also approached them down the aisle in
which the conversation was taking place.
Mr Brown was unable to identify
either of the two men and he thought that the conversation had taken place at
some time between
8.30 am and 11.30 am on the day in question.
Gillis gave evidence to the effect that he had received a telephone call from Mr
Smith on that day and that Mr Smith had sought
legal advice in relation to the
conduct of two union officials who had come to the premises without notice. Mr
Gillis stated that
he was instructed in his capacity as the solicitor for the
defendant to attend at the site which he had done. At some time after
Inspector Sutcliffe had arrived at the site and had carried out his own
inspection of the premises exercising his powers under
the legislation. Mr
Gillis gave evidence that he had attended the inspection carried out by Mr
Sutcliffe and that both Mr Kinley
and Mr Bourke had been permitted to attend in
that inspection as well. Mr Gillis gave evidence that Mr Bourke in particular
made it a practice to leave the group and participate in conversations with
employees of the defendant in various parts of the premises
away from the main
inspection group. He had on several occasions followed Mr Bourke and had
informed him that he had no right to
participate in such conversations away from
the formal inspection that was taking place and that after several such
occasions he
had found it necessary to complain to Inspector Sutcliffe
concerning Mr Bourke’s behaviour and that Mr Bourke had been directed
the Inspector to remain with the group. The inspector had indicated that the
inspection being carried out at that stage was
a Workcover inspection and not an
SDA inspection and if Mr Bourke wished to be part of the inspection he would
have to remain with
the inspection group and not wander away.
defendant submits that this evidence would satisfy the Court that a real doubt
exists as to whether Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke
had attended on that day to perform
a safety inspection. It was submitted that the purpose of the visit appeared
to be associated
with recruitment purposes and that the Court would have real
doubt, especially in light of the evidence of Mr Brown, and that the
sufficient to base a finding that the prosecution had failed to establish the
point beyond reasonable doubt. It was submitted
that the authorisation was not
relevant if the true purpose of the inspection was not for a safety inspection
but for collateral
38. I am satisfied, on the evidence before
the Court, that when Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke arrived at the defendant’s
on 23 September 2004 it was for the purpose of conducting a safety
inspection in response to complaints that had been received by
concerning safety issues. Notwithstanding the complaint made by the defendant
concerning discussions that took place between
the two SDA officials and the
employees prior to their departure from the site, the evidence strongly suggests
that these conversations
were prompted by the employees themselves who were
raising safety issues which they sought to bring to the attention of the SDA
Such conversations are entirely consistent with the purpose of the
visit to conduct a safety inspection.
39. The defendant relies
heavily upon the evidence of Mr Brown who deposed to an incident at some time
between 8.30 am and 11.30 am
when he stated that he was approached whilst he was
working in an aisle. This is the only evidence of a conversation being
other than by one of the employees themselves. The defendant
suggests that the Court should conclude that the two men were Mr Kinley
Bourke and that the incident occurred during the first visit to the site that
day by Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke and not during
the second visit when they
returned with Inspector Sutcliffe at some time after 9 a.m.
view of the Court Mr Brown’s description of events seems to be consistent
with the evidence given by Mr Gillis who
described his endeavours to round up Mr
Bourke and guide him back to the main group during Inspector Sutcliffe’s
later in the day. I accept the submission made on behalf of the
prosecutor that evidence of conversations that occurred during
Sutcliffe’s inspection is not relevant to the events earlier in the day
when the two SDA officials entered the site
to conduct an inspection of their
41. In any event, I reject the basic premise on which the
defendant’s submission is based. A conversation concerning a separate
subject matter could not, of itself, undermine the fundamental purpose of a site
visit and inspection. The legislation does not
specify that persons
conducting a safety inspection may not discuss any matters other than safety
issues. If Mr Bourke had asked
Max as a matter of courtesy how his family was
faring, such a question would not convert the purpose of the visit to a social
42. The Court notes that this was not a workplace where the SDA
was unable to attract membership. The evidence clearly discloses
that the SDA
had a number of employees on the site including a site delegate and it is clear
that the members were sufficiently active
to contact the union about safety
concerns, that Max had been happy to meet Mr Bourke off site in relation to such
issues and a number
of members were waiting to greet the two SDA officials when
they arrived at the site on the day. Further, the evidence of Mr Smith
that he had no objection to his employees joining the relevant union if they so
wished. There is no evidence before the Court
that suggests that Mr Bourke and
Mr Kinley had gone to the site on the relevant day for the purpose of speaking
to Mr Brown or other
non members of the SDA for recruitment
43. The defendant submits that the authorised officials from
the SDA failed to comply with the statutory obligation found in
Occupational Health and Safety Act
which provides
“The authorised representative must notify the occupier
of the premises of the authorised representative’s presence on
premises as soon as reasonably practicable after entering the premises
44. The evidence of Mr Kinley is that as soon as the two
men walked into the entry area of the warehouse they saw the group of employees
(which included Max) and that at the outset a request was made that the manager
be located and informed of their presence on the
site. Mr Kinley’s
recollection was that someone left the group immediately and that he assumed
they had gone to fetch the
manager. Mr Bourke was by no means certain that
this request was made at the outset. His recollection was that the men raised
number of safety issues at the outset of the conversation. Notwithstanding the
variation in the recollections of the two SDA
officials I am satisfied that
there was no significant delay before the request was made. I am satisfied
that the request was made
before Ms Ioane looked up from her work in one of the
aisles and noticed that the men were inside the warehouse. I am satisfied
the SDA officials were waiting for a manager to arrive at the same time that
they were engaged in conversations with employees
in the entry area of the
45. On behalf of the defendant it is submitted that the office
just inside the doorway of the warehouse should have been utilised
officials for the purpose of notifying management. The submission to the Court
is that the most efficacious means of
notifying management would have been to
approach the inquiry window to the office and ask a clerical employee to notify
of their presence at the site. This would have permitted Mr
Anderson, who was the warehouse manager to be paged or telephoned forthwith.
The evidence before the Court establishes that neither Mr Kinley nor Mr Bourke
had previously visited this site. Mr Bourke had
previously met Max on one
occasion and this meeting had occurred off site in a nearby coffee shop.
Neither SDA official had any
prior knowledge of the layout of the premises or of
the manager’s hours of work or of any procedures put in place by the
in relation to the reception of visitors.
46. The evidence
demonstrates that when the two men walked into the building they immediately saw
a group of employees and Mr Bourke
immediately recognised Max. It was by no
means unreasonable for Mr Bourke and Max to greet each other and to introduce
their companions.
I am satisfied on the evidence that Mr Kinley asked this
group to notify management of their arrival on site. At that point,
was an established procedure for the reception of visitors it might have been
expected that Max or one of the other employees
would have informed the SDA
officials of such procedure. Apparently no one in the group suggested that the
best method to notify
management would be to make an inquiry at the customer
collection office inside the doorway of the warehouse.
47. In the view of
the Court the provision found at
does not require an authorised
official to arrive at a workplace, present at the workplace office and quietly
await the arrival of
a representative of management before venturing further
into the premises or speaking to any of the employees engaged at the
48. In the view of the Court such a reading of the sub-section
would make it comparatively simple for a controller of premises to
purpose of the legislation by simply ignoring the arrival of such an authorised
official and leaving them indefinitely
in a holding pattern. In response to a
question from the Court in relation to the proper interpretation of this
sub-section, it
was submitted by Mr Jordan that in such circumstances the
authorised official would not be required to wait for the arrival of the
representative of management rather, it would be appropriate for the authorised
official to seek out the representative of management
by physically entering the
administration areas of the workplace even if that meant entering, uninvited,
into the boardroom. I
reject that submission. In my view there is no basis
for such an intrusive scheme being the intention of the legislature. In
view of the Court the provision is clearly a creation of compromise. Whilst it
is usual for union officials, when exercising
a right of entry, to give an
employer at least the statutory minimum period of notice prior to their arrival
at the workplace, the
occupational health and safety legislation gives an
authorised official the requisite authority to go onto a site without any notice
whatsoever. There can be no doubt that this demonstrates the
Parliament’s concern over occupational health and safety matters
as a concern that the provision of a notice period might assist in the avoidance
of the detection of breaches of occupational
health and safety requirements.
For example, at the defendant’s premises it is clear from the evidence
that when Inspector
Sutcliffe first arrived at the site his first action was to
approach an employee who was using a forklift truck and demanded to see
man’s licence. The employee in question did not have a forklift licence.
An employer given notice of a visit would be
able to allocate work on the day in
question to ensure, for example, that unlicensed forklift truck drivers were
performing other
duties at the time of the visit.
49. Notwithstanding the
intention behind the scheme of the legislation which is to deny employers any
notice of safety inspections,
the compromise is that when union officials are
the authorised officials they are required to “
notify the occupier of
the premises of the authorities representative’s presence on the premises
as soon as reasonably practicable
after entering the premises
…”. In the view of the Court there is nothing in that provision
which prohibits the authorised officials having conversations
with employees if
they are approached and spoken to by the employees themselves. This does not
mean that the authorised officials
may attend at a site and instruct any person
to cease work or to attend at a meeting. However, there is nothing in the
legislation
which prohibits an authorised official from conversing with an
employee at the time of their arrival at the site if they are approached
50. I am satisfied on the evidence before the Court that within
a relatively short period of their arrival on the site the two men
approached by Ms Ioane who held a subordinate management position on the
premises. She was apparently not aware that Mr Anderson
had arrived at work
and at the time she believed that she was the acting manager. She approached
the men as a representative of
management and was immediately informed by the
men of the fact that they were officials of the SDA and the purpose of their
which was to conduct a safety inspection. At that point in time the men
had made contact with a management representative and irrespective
action was thereafter taken by Ms Ioane to discuss the matter with other members
of the management team, the two men had
successfully notified the occupier of
the premises of their presence as well as the purpose of their attendance at the
the view of the Court this communication constitutes notification
as soon as reasonably practicable after entering the premises
51. The Court notes that in addition to the above
matters there was, in the defendant’s case, some criticism of the SDA
for failing to provide to Ms Ioane or to Mr Anderson their authority
documents which demonstrated that they were authorised to exercise
entry onto the premises for the purposes of a safety inspection. Further,
there was a suggestion, although it could
not be put higher than that, that one
of the authorised officials might not have had their authority document with
them on the day
in question. Neither Ms Ioane nor Mr Anderson suggested that
they had at any stage asked Mr Kinley or Mr Bourke to produce their
authorities.
Both Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke gave evidence that they had their authorities with
them at all material times on the day
in question. The evidence of Inspector
Sutcliffe is that when he met Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke at or about 9 am on the
day in question
at the local coffee shop he asked to see their authorities and
both men immediately produced them.
52. In the view of the Court the
prosecution has successfully established beyond reasonable doubt that the two
officials from the
SDA were authorised officials, that they had been obstructed
in the exercise of their functions under the legislation and that they
complied with the relevant statutory requirements for the exercise of their
53. It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that even if
the Prosecutor made out the elements of the offence there were relevant
to the charge which the Court would take into account.
54. The Prosecutor
contends that the offence under
s. 136(1)(a)
of the Act is a strict liability
offence which falls within the second category of offence articulated by Street
R v Wampfler
and drawn from the decision of the High Court in
Teh v The Queen
R v Wampfler
(1987) 11 NSWLR 541
v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
157 CLR 523).
R v Wampfler
his Honour Chief Justice
Street noted:
“Mens rea will be presumed to be present unless
and until material is advanced by the defence of the existence of honest and
reasonable belief that the conduct in question is not criminal in which case the
prosecution must undertake the burden of negativing
such belief beyond
reasonable doubt.”
55. Counsel for the defendant submits that
if the prosecution is correct in its assertion that
s. 136(1)(a)
is a strict
liability offence the defendant relies upon the existence of an honest and
reasonable belief that the conduct in question
was not criminal. The defendant
submits that a
“preliminary question is which person holds the relevant
belief for the purposes of a defence of honest and reasonable mistake
The defendant, a corporation, is charged as the person who obstructed the SDA
officials. The evidence establishes that
the only natural person with the
authority, on behalf of the defendant, to ask the SDA officials to leave was Mr
Smith. Mr Anderson
was new to the job, was not used to dealing with union
officials and needed to obtain instructions from Mr Smith. He did not purport
to ask the SDA officials to leave the warehouse until he obtained those
instructions from Mr Smith. Therefore, it is Mr Smith’s
belief which is
relevant in assessing whether the defendant has a defence of honest and
reasonable mistake of fact.”
56. In the view of the Court the above
proposition does not constitute the relevant test of whether the defendant
herein, a corporation,
has breached the occupational health and safety
legislation. The test, as constructed by Mr Jordan of counsel on behalf of the
defendant is somewhat akin to an exercise frequently required within the realm
of administrative law where a court must determine
which individual person was
the relevant decision maker before embarking on an exercise of establishing
which matters were taken
into account by the decision maker before coming to the
decision which is the subject of challenge. I am not satisfied that such
approach has any relevance to the task presently before the Court which is to
determine whether or not the defendant herein, a
corporation, is guilty of an
offence under
(1)(a) of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
The Court accepts the submission made by Ms Lowson, on behalf of the Prosecutor,
in the following terms:-
“It is irrelevant whether Mr Smith knew
that the two were union officials there for the purpose of conducting safety
inspection.
It is sufficient that Mr Anderson was aware of that at the time
prior to him walking Mr Bourke and Mr Kinley off the premises.
company’s knowledge is not limited to the highest ranking officer in that
company when concerned with the “defence”
of honest and reasonable
belief. (Brambles Holdings Ltd v Carey
(1976) 15 SASR
57. The evidence is clear that at the very first
communication between the authorised officials and a representative of
management,
namely Ms Ioane, the officials informed Ms Ioane that they were SDA
officials and that they were attending for a safety inspection.
Subsequently,
the same information was conveyed to Mr Anderson directly by the two officials
at the time that he asked them to
leave the site. The weight of the evidence
also suggests that Mr Anderson was informed by Ms Ioane that the two men had
her that they were there for the purposes of a safety inspection
although it is quite conceivable that Mr Anderson was sufficiently
flustered and
confused by an unfamiliar situation to not fully absorb the information given to
him by Ms Ioane. Further, when Mr
Bourke and Mr Kinley informed Mr Anderson in
a very clear fashion that they had a statutory entitlement to attend at the site
a safety inspection Mr Anderson was sufficiently impressed by the anger that
had been displayed in his telephone conversation to
Mr Smith that he preferred
to carry on with the direction of ordering the two men to leave the site rather
than asking them to wait
while he telephoned Mr Smith again to pass on to him
this important piece of information. I am satisfied on the evidence that at
the time Mr Kinley and Mr Bourke were ordered to leave the premises by Mr
Anderson the defendant had been put clearly on notice as
to the purpose of the
visit by Mr Bourke and Mr Kinley, and that in those circumstances there was no
basis for any reasonable belief
that the defendant’s conduct, in requiring
the men to leave the site was not criminal conduct.
58. The Court notes
the authorities provided to assist the Court by Ms Lowson and Mr Jordan
concerning the question of whether the
offence herein is in fact an offence of
strict liability. The Court is assisted in particular by the detailed
discussion of the
relevant issues by his Honour Mr Justice Marks in the matter
TWU v Australian Document Exchange Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 74
his Honour was considering the provisions of s. 298 of the
Relations Act
which involved similar considerations concerning authorised
officials exercising a right of entry, albeit under separate legislation.
After a careful consideration of the relevant authorities his Honour
“On balance, I conclude that the offence the subject
of this summons is one falling within the second of the classifications
to by Street CJ in Wampfler. That is, mens rea will be presumed to be present
unless the defence advances material of
the existence of honest and reasonable
belief that its conduct was not criminal, in which case the burden of negativing
such belief
falls on the prosecutor.”
59. With respect this
Court finds that the reasoning of his Honour Mr Justice Marks in the
constitutes an appropriate conclusion for this Court to follow. For the
reasons given above I am satisfied that the offence is a
strict liability
offence falling within the
“second of the classifications referred to
by Street CJ in Wampfler.”
Further, I find that the defence has
failed to satisfy the Court that evidence exists that would suggest that the
corporation,
the defendant herein, held an honest and reasonable belief that the
conduct was not criminal. In that context I reject the submission
Court should disregard information provided to representatives of management
such as Ms Ioane and Mr Anderson and give consideration
only to information that
was available to Mr Smith. Were that to be a relevant test it would be a
simple matter for corporations
to avoid liability for serious misconduct simply
by use of a device whereby within the management structure an artificial barrier
was created between persons clearly in possession of requisite knowledge and
other persons deemed to be the relevant decision maker
on behalf of the
corporation.
60. Notwithstanding the view of the Court that the approach
adopted by his Honour Mr Justice Marks should be followed, it is clear
defendant argues the matter in the alternative. The defendant submits that if
the offence is not a strict liability offence
there is an onus on the prosecutor
to prove that the defendant,
“knew that the SDA officials were
authorised officials under the Act, knew that they were acting in the course of
under the Act and, with that knowledge intended to obstruct the SDA
officials.”
61. I am satisfied that at the time Mr Anderson
walked Mr Bourke and Mr Kinley from the premises and required them to leave in
capacity as warehouse manager for the defendant he had been put on notice in
the clearest fashion that the two men were SDA officials,
that they were duly
authorised, that they were acting or seeking to act in the exercise of functions
under the Act and, with that
knowledge, sought to obstruct them by requiring
them to leave the site. I am satisfied that notwithstanding Mr
possession of this information he elected to proceed with the
removal of the two men from the site rather than subject himself to
unpleasant task of discussing the matter further with Mr Smith who was clearly
agitated by the fact that two union officials
had come onto the site without
prior notice to him. In that regard I reject as highly implausible the claim
by Mr Smith in his
evidence that he thought the two men might be thieves seeking
to case the premises for a future robbery attempt. Given the fact
Bourke and Mr Kinley had been able to walk clearly into the warehouse premises
without encountering any security arrangements
and that customers were invited
to attend at that part of the premises on a regular basis casts considerable
doubt on the veracity
of this evidence. I am satisfied that the stance adopted
by the defendant was that the two officials were to be obstructed irrespective
of the purpose of their visit in circumstances where Mr Smith held a personal
view that the warehouse was his warehouse and that
he had proprietary rights
that made it unacceptable for any person to walk into his warehouse without his
prior approval. In this
regard Mr Smith clearly lost sight of the fact that
whilst he was the controller of the premises, the premises constituted a
His employees had statutory entitlements to be protected whilst at
a workplace. The employees of the defendant had rights of
a fundamental and
statutory nature that were not overborne or diminished in any way by the
defendant’s assertion of proprietary
rights. In the view of the Court
the controller of premises may treat uninvited visitors as trespassers only
until the controller
of the premises brings employees onto the site. As soon as
employees are on the site industrial laws and occupational health and
laws create statutory rights in the clearest terms authorising certain persons
to enter into the premises without prior approval
of the controller in specified
circumstances. In the view of the Court there is no reasonable basis for the
defendant as a corporation
or for its owner or members of management to treat as
trespassers persons with a clear statutory right to enter onto the premises
the purpose of protecting either the industrial rights or the health safety and
welfare of persons engaged in work in a workplace.
62. It follows that
even if the Court, as presently constituted, is not correct in adopting the view
that the offence under
s. 136(1)(a)
Occupational Health and Safety Act
is a strict liability offence of the type discussed above I am satisfied
that the prosecution has made out the elements of the offence
beyond reasonable
63. I find the defendant guilty of both breaches described in the
Court Attendance Notices, namely the obstruction of Mr Kinley and
obstruction of Mr Bourke.
64. Given the findings of the Court on the
question of liability it is appropriate that the matter be listed for further
mention for
the purpose of setting a convenient timetable for the parties to
adduce evidence relevant to the task of sentencing as well as submissions
sentence and costs. In those circumstances I propose to list the matter for
further mention on Wednesday 28 June 2006.
In the meantime, the parties shall
have liberty to apply.
65. I publish my reasons.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
1 June 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter