URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/469.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Olsen [2025] NSWDC 469 (14 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 469
Hearing Date(s):
3 – 6 November 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Newlinds SC DCJ
(1) As to Count 1:
(2) As to Count 2: No
(3) As to Count 3:
(4) As to Count 4: Guilty.
Catchwords:
CRIME — Driving offences — Dangerous driving occasioning
JUDGE ALONE TRIAL — s 132 Criminal Procedure Act
— Findings beyond reasonable doubt that driving dangerous and caused
— Central issue was the accused the driver
No direct evidence as to who driver of vehicle was as between deceased and
accused — Inferences — Intermediate
facts need to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt — Totality of facts proved beyond reasonable doubt
accused as driver —
Alternative explanation that deceased was the driver
not a reasonable or rational conclusion from totality of proven facts
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Road Transport Act 2013
Road Rules 2014
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Principal judgment
Rex (Crown)
Blake Olsen (Accused)
Representation:
M Swift (Crown)
G Fren (Accused)
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (Accused)
File Number(s):
2022/291007
Publication Restriction:
15 April 2022, 18-year-old Blake Olsen (“the Accused”) and his good
friend 21-year-old Billy Smith drove from Coonamble
to Baradine with the
intention of doing some pig shooting. They were in a Toyota Hilux duel-cab
utility (“the ute”) owned
by the grandfather of the Accused. The
Accused and Billy Smith never returned to Coonamble in the ute. By that evening,
Billy Smith
was dead, and the Accused was seriously injured.
trip started that afternoon in Coonamble when the Accused and Billy Smith
dropped in at the Shell Roadhouse and asked their friend
Lydia Murray if she
wanted to go with them. She declined because she was working. Billy Smith told
Lydia Murray that he would give
her a call when they got back to Coonamble that
between 8:37pm and 10pm, they were on their way back to Coonamble. On a section
of sealed road between Baradine and Coonamble,
ute was travelling at around 140km/h when it drifted off the sealed road surface
onto the grass verge,
the driver corrected, and the ute went into a skid across
the sealed surface of the road into the grassland beyond, by which time
travelling sideways at high speed. After sliding through the grass and scrub for
approximately 25m, it flipped and then tumbled
for approximately another 80m,
where it came to a rest. Various parts of the ute came adrift, some of its
wheels and the tray table
were thrown clear and there was left behind a trail of
debris. Two dogs in the rear were killed.
the point where the ute came to rest, Billy Smith was either in the passenger
seat or adjacent to it. The Accused was located about
42m short of the ute in
the long grass, approximately 70m from where the ute left the roadway. Both were
very seriously injured.
Billy Smith’s injuries proved fatal.
Accused lived with his de facto partner, Peppah McMullen, in premises in
Coonamble. Lydia Murray, who is Peppah McMullen’s
cousin, lived in a
similar relationship with Kane Olsen, a cousin of the Accused. The couples lived
in different houses on the same
street. All were friends with both Billy Smith
and the Accused.
first people to attend the scene were, firstly, Peppah McMullen, and shortly
thereafter, Kane Olsen and Lydia Murray. What they
confronted upon arrival was a
scene of bloody devastation which I find impossible to describe adequately in
words. No doubt this
experience will leave them all traumatised for the rest of
their lives.
to the emergency services or anyone else arriving, in a heightened state of
trauma and panic, it took some time to locate the
Accused and Billy Smith, who
were both very seriously injured. Billy Smith was alive in the passenger seat
but pretty obviously dying.
He had suffered multiple catastrophic injuries. He
was comforted by them, especially Lydia Murray, first in the passenger seat of
the ute and later on the ground next to it. Upon arrival of the ambulance and
police, both Billy Smith and the Accused were transported
to medical facilities
in Coonamble, but Billy Smith died from his injuries in the ambulance before
they got to the hospital.
Accused was found some distance from the ute. He also was extremely seriously
injured, suffering extensive brain injuries, which
almost certainly rendered him
immediately unconscious and immobile.
The charges
investigation by the police, the Accused was charged with one count of drive a
motor vehicle in a manner dangerous to another
person or persons, whereby the
vehicle was involved in an impact, as a result of which the death of Billy Smith
was occasioned in
contravention of s 52A(1)(c) the
Crimes Act 1900
2 is a “backup” offence of negligent driving causing death. Count 3
is drive motor vehicle during disqualification
period and Count 4 is drive
vehicle with illicit drugs present in blood.
Judge alone
16 October 2024, with the consent of both the Crown and the Accused, Traill DCJ
made an order that the trial proceed before a judge
without a jury and
consequently between 2 and 5 November 2026 at Coonamble, I heard the trial.
These are my reasons for my verdict.
I proceed, may I say this to the families, loved ones, and friends of both Billy
Smith and the Accused.
never had the opportunity to meet Billy Smith but, from all the evidence I have
heard, it is clear that he was a decent young man
with a bright future ahead of
him. He was loved by his family and friends. His death deprived him of all the
opportunities of life
that lay ahead of him and is an unfathomable loss for his
family, loved ones, and friends.
far as the Accused, Blake Olsen, is concerned, he suffered near fatal injuries
causing him extensive pain and suffering. More to
the point, he will have to
live with the trauma of what occurred and, regardless of whether I find he was
the driver or not, the
guilt involved in surviving the incident where his good
friend died will be profound and long lasting. No doubt the ripple effects
this tragic event have affected all of his family, loved ones, and friends.
to the three young people, all of whom were very close to both the Accused and
Billy Smith, who first attended at the scene and
did what they could to help, no
one should have to witness what they saw, and their trauma will almost certainly
be with them for
the rest of their lives.
Court extends its sympathy to all of those directly and indirectly involved and
hopes that the finalisation of this court case
is but a step along the way to
some sort of healing process. I also publicly acknowledge my thanks to all those
who watched and listened
to the case for the respectful and dignified way they
conducted themselves throughout the hearing despite the harrowing nature of
as I will shortly explain, the central question for me to decide is am I
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused
was driving. Before I decide
that question, it is important to say that I am sure that whoever was driving
that night did not set
out to hurt, let alone kill, anyone.
elements of the offence
elements of the primary offence are, firstly, that the relevant driving was
," which means that objectively it was either,
intrinsically in all circumstances or because of the particular circumstances
surrounding
the driving, was, in a real sense, potentially dangerous.
test is objective and requires proof that the Accused’s driving subjected
another person or persons to a level of risk greater
than ordinarily associated
with driving in a motor vehicle. The manner of driving must be found to be a
serious breach of the proper
conduct of a vehicle on a roadway, such as to be,
in a real sense, potentially dangerous to others who may be upon or in the
of the roadway.
offence is one of strict liability, there is no need to prove an intention that
the driving be actually dangerous. There is a
defence of honest and reasonable
mistake of fact that it was safe to drive. There is no suggestion of such a
defence here.
next element is causation of death. In that regard, the Crown must prove the
conduct in driving was a substantial or significant
cause or a sufficiently
substantial cause of the outcome. It need not be the only operating cause.
" for the purpose of the offending includes being
in control of the steering movement or propulsion of the vehicle
Road Transport Act 2013
(NSW)). Although, “
not itself defined in the
the purpose of this case, it is sufficient to direct myself that the notion of
driving for the purpose of this element is that
the person sitting in the driver
seat, controlling the car with their hands on the steering wheel and feet on the
pedals and so on,
was driving the ute.
Dangerous driving caused
the death of Billy Smith
Fren, who appeared for the Accused, made it clear in his opening and throughout
the conduct of the trial that there was no issue
for his part but that the
driving was dangerous in the sense contemplated by the legislation, nor that the
dangerous driving was
the direct cause of Billy Smith's death.
concessions are well-made. There was ample evidence tendered by the Crown to the
effect that the primary cause of the accident
was the fact that the ute was
travelling at around 140km/h on a country road, at night, where the speed limit
was 100km/h, at a point
where the road narrowed.
its own, the speed was not such as to cause the ute to be uncontrollable if
driven appropriately. However, I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that what
occurred, was that, just before a point where the road becomes narrower, the
passenger side wheels of
the ute left the sealed roadway and travelled for about
50m on the grass verge. The driver then sought to correct by steering the
the right and the ute went into a skid, which, because of the high speed, was
uncontrollable and became progressively more
pronounced as the ute crossed the
sealed tarmac. By the time it reached the grass verge on the other side of the
road, it was travelling
at high speed sideways, wherein it continued to travel
in that way for about 25m before it tumbled (or “
passenger side front wheel), so as to go into a significant and violent
spiralling rollover until it came to rest about
80m from where it started to
tumble. During that time, it rolled over multiple times.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the speed that the ute was travelling
at the time the driver lost control was a very significant
cause of the
far as causation is concerned, again Mr Fren did not put this in issue. The
uncontested medical evidence is that Billy Smith died
as a direct consequence of
the injuries he sustained in the crash.
I am satisfied of that element of the offending beyond reasonable
What is in issue — Who was driving?
sole issue as between the parties and the only element of the offence left in
light of my findings to this point is the question
of who, as between the
Accused or Billy Smith, was driving the ute? I direct myself that the correct
legal question is, am I satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the Crown has
proved that the Accused was driving?
light of those findings and the other agreed facts, if the Crown proves beyond
reasonable doubt that the Accused was driving, the
Accused will be guilty of
Count 1 and Count 2 will fall away. It is also accepted that, if the Accused was
driving, Counts 3 and
4 must return a verdict of guilty. There is no doubt that
the Accused was disqualified from driving and had some illicit drugs in
system. These are both agreed facts. However, I should make it clear that there
is no evidence, nor suggestion, that the drugs
in the Accused’s system in
any way contributed to the crash.
I come to explain my consideration of whether I am satisfied the Crown has
proved the element of “
” beyond reasonable doubt, I
must first give myself some directions of law.
Directions of
compliance with subs 133(2) and (3) of the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW), I remind and direct myself as to the following principles of law, which I
must apply as the judge of the facts.
General directions
Accused has pleaded that he is “
” to all charges on
the indictment, thereafter it becomes my duty and responsibility to consider
whether the Accused is “
” of any or all of the counts and to return my verdicts
according to the evidence that is before me.
to the onus of proof. This is a very important direction. This is a criminal
trial of a most serious nature and the burden to prove
the guilt of the Accused
is on the Crown. That onus rests upon the Crown in respect of every element of
every charge. There is no
onus of proof on the Accused at all. It is not for the
Accused to prove his innocence but for the Crown to prove his guilt. As to
standard of proof, it is beyond reasonable doubt. I remind myself that suspicion
or a finding of probability, or even a finding of
very likely, is not a
substitute for proof beyond reasonable doubt. By his plea of not guilty, the
Accused is requiring the Crown
to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. By
pleading not guilty he is in no way required, and does not take on any onus, to
that he is not guilty. He most certainly has no onus to prove that he is
innocent, nor does he have to prove that Billy Smith was
the driver.
is, and always has been, a critical part of our system of justice that people
tried in this Court are presumed to be innocent unless
and until they are proved
guilty beyond reasonable doubt. Unless the Crown succeeds in proving each and
every one of the essential
ingredients or elements of the charge beyond
reasonable doubt, then the Accused must be found “
of the charges.
is only the elements of the offences that must be proved beyond reasonable
doubt. Not every fact in the case needs to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt. It
is the proof of the elements that are the subject of that heavy requirement. The
elements are the essential
ingredients necessary to make good a charge. I have
already directed myself as to the elements of the primary charge. This direction
is subject to one important exception to which I will return, concerning what
are known as “
intermediate facts
” relied on by the Crown in
circumstantial cases.
beyond reasonable doubt
” is a composite of ordinary
everyday words and that is how I should understand them. If, at the end of my
deliberations, after
taking into consideration all of the evidence, and having
considered the submissions made to me by counsel in their address, I am
satisfied that the Crown has established any one of the elements beyond
reasonable doubt then it is my duty to bring in a verdict
”, because the Crown will have failed to do what the law
requires it to do.
direct myself that if the Accused’s guilt has not been proven to my
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt, it is vitally important
that I clearly
understand that the Accused must be found “
follows from this that if I am left unable to decide whether the Crown has
proved its case in relation to any element
or if I have a reasonable doubt in
respect of that matter, the Accused is entitled to the benefit of that doubt,
and I must find
him not guilty.
Agreed facts
large part of the evidence before me is a Statement of Agreed Facts. There is no
issue about the existence of the facts in that
statement, and I must take them
as established for the purposes of this trial. I have already summarised those
facts in the introduction
to these reasons and am satisfied of those matters. As
I have said, based on those Agreed Facts, but also on my consideration of
the evidence in the trial, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the
elements of “
Submissions
have heard addresses from the Crown and counsel for the Accused. I have
considered those submissions and given such weight to the
submissions as I think
they deserve. I understand that in no sense are those submissions evidence in
Common sense/impartiality
the tribunal of fact, I am expected to use my individual qualities of reasoning,
my experience, my understanding of people and
human affairs, and my common
acknowledge that I have a very important matter to decide in this case –
important not only to the Accused but also to the
whole community. I must, as a
judge of the facts, act impartially, dispassionately, and fearlessly. I must not
let any sympathy I
may have towards the Accused or any emotional reaction as to
the tragic death of Billy Smith sway my judgment.
the sole judge of the facts, I must not act capriciously or irrationally. I am
obliged to determine all relevant issues of fact
according to the evidence that
has been presented against the Accused during the course of the
is a circumstantial case. For the Crown to satisfy me beyond reasonable doubt,
it needs to persuade me that I ought find by inference
that the Accused was
driving the ute. I need to be satisfied as to that fact beyond reasonable doubt.
I direct myself that I may,
in my role as judge of the facts, draw inferences
from the evidence or circumstances proved. Inferences may be valid or invalid,
justified or unjustified, correct or incorrect. I may only draw an inference
from otherwise proven facts if such inference is the
only reasonable inference
that can be properly drawn from those facts. I must be satisfied of the guilt of
the Accused beyond reasonable
doubt. Amongst other things, that means that I
should be extremely careful about drawing any inference. I must examine any
inference to ensure that it is a justifiable inference.
Importantly,
I must not draw any inference unless it is the only rational and reasonable
inference in the circumstances. For reasons
I will shortly explain, this
direction is critical to the resolution of this case as, at the heart of this
case, are two competing
inferences, one consistent with guilt and the other not.
The case boils down to the question of whether the inference consistent
not guilty verdict (i.e. that Billy Smith was the driver) is a rational and
reasonable conclusion from the facts otherwise
proved. If it is, then I must
bring in a verdict of not guilty.
Links in chain / strands in
Ordinarily,
no particular fact or circumstance relied upon in a circumstantial (inferential)
case needs to be proved beyond reasonable
doubt. There are, however, some
circumstantial cases, and I consider this to be one, where one or more of the
facts relied upon by
the Crown is or are so fundamental to the process of
reasoning to the guilt of the Accused so that fact or facts must be proved
reasonable doubt. Such facts are referred to as “
intermediate
” and are sometimes described as an indispensable
link in the chain
” of reasoning towards an inference of
guilt. Whilst there is no settled way to determine what is or is not an
indispensable
intermediate fact, the question may be tested by asking whether,
in the absence of a finding as to that fact, there would nonetheless
capable of an inference consistent with guilt. The “
link in the
” analogy is to be contrasted with other facts in circumstantial
cases not essential, in which case the analogy is to a series
strands making up a cable
”. Each strand not being strong
enough to prove the element but taken together make up a very strong cable
capable of proof.
is for me, as the Judge of the law, to determine, as a matter of law, if any
particular fact or facts is or are an intermediate
fact. If I reach that
conclusion, I must direct myself that before I can find guilt based on an
inference, I must be satisfied of
that fact(s) beyond reasonable doubt from
circumstances that include one or more intermediate facts. I will return to this
later in these reasons and, will direct myself as to which intermediate
fact(s) need to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Other
than such facts, it is
only the element that need to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
steps in reasoning to a finding of guilt in a circumstantial case is first to
find certain basic facts established by the evidence.
Unless they are
intermediate facts, those facts do not have to be proved to any particular
level. Taken by themselves, each cannot
prove the guilt of the Accused. The next
step is to then ask, by way of inference, whether the conclusion from a
combination of those
established facts that a further fact or facts exist. The
ultimate fact, being an element of the charge, is the only question that
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt unless one of the individual facts is
identified as being an essential link in a chain
or an intermediate fact, in
which case that fact itself must be proved beyond reasonable doubt. If, when all
the proved facts are
considered together, a conclusion of guilt is a reasonable
one to draw, that does not mean conviction. It is necessary in those
circumstances
to determine whether there is any other reasonable conclusion
arising from those facts that is inconsistent with a conclusion of
there is any other reasonable conclusion arising from those facts that is
inconsistent with the guilt of the Accused, the
circumstantial case will fail.
At the risk of repetition, at the heart of this case is whether the other
conclusion, that is that
Billy Smith was driving, is a reasonable conclusion, or
to put it another way, sufficient to cause me to have reasonable doubt that
Accused was the driver.
a conclusion from one set of established facts to find another fact involves a
process of logic and rational reasoning. The
conclusion cannot be based on
speculation, conjecture or supposition.
on the topic of inferences, it is not uncommon, and in this case there are a
number of examples of this, that the primary
facts relied upon by the Crown are
themselves inferences drawn from a series of underlying facts beneath that
primary fact. If that
be the case, then proof of that primary fact must be
established in the same way as I had explained.
Right to silence
including at trial
must not draw any adverse inference against the Accused because he did not give
or call evidence in his defence. I cannot use that
fact against him in any way.
In any event, I am comfortably satisfied that he has no memory at all of the
relevant events because
of his injuries.
Expert evidence
this case, Dr Benjamin Harding, Dr Andrew McIntosh, and Seargent Rehwinkel have
all been called as expert witnesses. An expert
witness is a person who has
specialised knowledge based on their training, study or experience. Unlike other
witnesses, a witness
with such specialised knowledge may express an opinion on
matters within his or her particular area of expertise. Other witnesses
speak only as to directly perceived facts, that is, what they saw or heard etc.,
and are not permitted, ordinarily, to express
their opinions.
value of any expert opinion very much depends on the reliability and accuracy of
the material which the expert used to reach his
or her opinion. It also depends
on the degree to which the expert analysed the material upon which the opinion
was based and the
skill and experience brought to bear in formulating the
opinion given. Experts can differ in the level and degree of their experience,
training and study, yet each can still be an expert qualified to give an opinion
where that opinion is based on that witness's specialised
evidence is admitted to provide me with information and an opinion on a
particular topic which is within the witness's expertise,
but which is likely to
be outside the experience and knowledge of the average lay person.
expert evidence is before me as part of all the evidence to assist me in
deciding if I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as
to the elements of the
offence. I should bear in mind that if, having given the matter careful
consideration, I do not accept the
evidence of the experts, I do not have to act
upon it. This is particularly so where the facts upon which the opinion is based
not accord with the facts as I find them to be. I am also, to a degree,
entitled to take into account my common sense and my own
experiences if they are
relevant to the issue upon which the expert evidence relates.
has been no challenge to the qualifications of any of the expert witnesses, all
of whom I think are well qualified.
Assessing witnesses
direct myself that, as the Judge of the facts, it is my role to determine what
evidence I accept as truthful, and/or reliable, and/or
what evidence I reject as
being either untruthful or unreliable. It is also my role to determine what
weight or emphasis I give to
any one particular part of the evidence and what
inferences I ultimately draw from the totality of the evidence.
is for me to assess the various witnesses and decide whether they are telling
the truth and/or whether I think they are reliable.
It is a matter entirely for
me as to whether I accept or are prepared to act on their evidence.
ultimate decision as to what evidence I accept and what evidence I reject and
how much weight or emphasis I give to any particular
piece of evidence, may be
based on all manner of things, including what the witness had to say, the manner
in which the witness said
it, and the general impression he or she made upon me
when giving the evidence. It is also important to consider any particular
in the context of other proven facts to determine if it is
am not obliged to accept the whole of the evidence of any witness, nor am I
obliged to reject the totality of any witness’
evidence. I may, if I think
appropriate, accept part and reject part of the same witness’ evidence.
The fact that I do not
accept a portion of evidence of a witness does not mean
that I necessarily must reject the whole of that witness’ evidence.
entitled to accept the remainder of that evidence if I think it worthy of
acceptance.
Evidence as to who the driver was
is no direct evidence as to who was driving the ute. Billy Smith was killed and
did not say anything relevant to this question
prior to dying.
Accused, at first, exercised his right of silence when questioned by police but
ultimately, gave the following statement under
compulsion on 29 September 2022,
pursuant to
regulation 287
Road Rules 2014
(NSW). His statement
“In relation to the crash, I have no recollection of any events on that
day at all. My current most recent memory of events
before the crash is from
several days beforehand, and the next thing I remember is waking up in hospital
approximately 18 days later.
I currently have no recollection of the events of
the crash or the day it occurred.”
light of the Accused’s very serious injuries sustained in the accident,
very significant brain trauma,
which resulted in him being almost certainly rendered immediately unconscious
and then spending many
days in ICU and many weeks in hospital with multiple
injuries, including significant life-threatening head trauma, his statement
he has no memory as to the incident at all is, not just plausible, but likely,
and I have no reason to doubt it.
Crown relies on all of the circumstances that can be proved, so as to seek to
persuade me that I ought be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that it was the
Accused who was the driver.
will first state the circumstances relied upon by the Crown and then analyse the
evidence supporting each circumstance.
circumstances relied upon are as follows:
(1) That whoever was driving the ute did not have a seatbelt on and whoever was
the passenger in the ute did have a seatbelt on;
(2) The injuries sustained by Billy Smith;
(3) The injuries sustained by the Accused; and
(4) The location of each of Billy Smith and the Accused immediately after the
then with the evidence as to each circumstance relied upon.
position of the seat belts
question of what are known as seatbelt injuries, as well as other injuries
occasioned to both Billy Smith and the Accused is significant
in this case. The
reason for that significance is the uncontested evidence of all of the experts
was that, upon examination of the
seatbelts, the driver’s side seatbelt in
the ute was in the “
locked short
" position and the passenger side
seatbelt was in the “
locked long
" position. This is important
because the mechanics of how modern seatbelts operate in an accident is similar
to the operation of
airbags. That is, upon sudden deceleration indicating a
collision, an explosion goes off in the seatbelt housing which has the effect
retracting the seatbelt as far as possible, whilst at the same time engaging a
ratchet type mechanism which then locks the seatbelt
in the position it
retracted to.
there is no one sitting in the seat or if there is a person sitting in the seat
who does not have the seatbelt on, the seatbelt
will retract to the
locked short
" position, but if there is a person wearing the
seatbelt it will retract to a “
locked long
" position, being the
point at which the person's body stopped the retraction.
Mr Fren did not concede the expert findings, he did properly concede that it was
close to inevitable that I would accept that
do accept that evidence, it is compelling, rational, and easy to understand. It
was not the subject of any challenge at all.
am also satisfied, because all of the evidence, both expert and otherwise, is
consistent with this, and if necessary I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt,
that the seatbelts in the ute, immediately after the accident, were:
(1) The passenger seatbelt was “
locked long
(2) The driver seatbelt was “
locked short
next factual conclusion, itself the product of inferential reasoning based on
the expert testimony to which I have just referred,
is that whoever was the
driver of the ute did not have his seatbelt on and whoever was the passenger in
the ute did have his seatbelt
on. On the basis of the findings I have made so
far, that conclusion is inevitable.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that, whoever the driver was, was not
wearing a seatbelt and, whoever the passenger was, was
wearing a seatbelt. This
is an important finding because, for reasons I will come to, I consider this to
intermediate fact
” essential to the proof of the
Crown’s case.
Billy Smith’s injuries
Seatbelt injuries
is a detailed Autopsy Report relating to Billy Smith prepared by Dr Harding. Dr
Harding gave evidence explaining his Autopsy
Report and his expert opinions as
to Billy Smith’s injuries. He was cross-examined. His evidence is a
combination of direct
evidence of his observations and clinical examination and
opinion evidence based on those clinical observations. I found him to be
honest, reliable, and compelling witness.
McIntosh has also provided extensive opinion evidence about these injuries in
his Reports. His evidence is based on Dr Harding’s
Autopsy Report together
with a large number of autopsy photographs. He was also cross-examined, and I
also found him to be an honest
and reliable witness.
focus was placed on both Dr Harding’s and Dr McIntosh’s opinions as
to what are referred to as “
seatbelt injuries
reviewed the photos; in particular, photo 40 from Exhibit D, about which both
witnesses gave evidence.
the Autopsy Report, Dr Harding said, in relation to Billy Smith's
“There was a possible seat belt mark present on the anterior abdomen, and
pelvis with an oblique linear abrasion, extending
from the right iliac fossa to
the left side of the upper abdomen and a horizontal band of deep bruising on the
anterior aspect of
the pelvis. The orientation of the mark is not inconsistent
with injury caused by a 3 – point car restraint (passenger side
seatbelt).”
he gave his oral testimony, Dr Harding was asked by me whether he saw a
difference between an opinion that Billy Smith's injuries
inconsistent with seatbelt injuries
,” as opposed to an opinion that he
considered the injuries to be consistent with being caused by a seatbelt.
preferred the former. In other words, he was not prepared to say that the
injuries were consistent only with seatbelt injuries
and was quite candidly
prepared to leave open the possibility that they may have been caused by other
mechanisms.
Harding also cautioned that the accepted literature in the field of forensic
medicine is such that it is considered unsafe and
undesirable to form a
definitive conclusion as to whether a person was or was not wearing a seatbelt
based only on clinically observed
McIntosh’s opinion was consistent with Dr Harding’s. He also
considered there were injuries to Billy Smith consistent
with a seatbelt being
worn but said that they were also consistent with other mechanisms of injury. He
also said it was not appropriate
to conclude from injuries alone in this sort of
violent collision, whether a person was or was not wearing a seatbelt.
should say that I have reviewed the autopsy photographs myself and, in
particular photograph number 40 in Exhibit D, which to my
untrained eye do very
much look like injuries caused by a sash seatbelt across the lower abdomen or
upper pelvis of Billy Smith,
with a significant injury towards his right hip
where one would expect a seat belt buckle to be located, and another injury
diagonally across and up his abdomen, where one would expect the bottom
part of the shoulder strap to be located.
I am not an expert and armed with the caution in the medical literature to which
I have referred, consider that I can take
it no further than Dr Harding’s
and Dr McIntosh’s limited conclusions that the injuries are not
inconsistent with a seatbelt
being worn by Billy Smith and it is certainly
possible that they are seatbelt injuries. That possibility is more than fanciful
accordingly I will take it into account when considering the ultimate
question, but I will give it limited weight.
medical experts also expressed opinions as to whether Billy Smith would have
been mobile, in the sense of being able to move
himself around after the crash.
They both considered that to be extremely unlikely. For my part, taking into
account the medical
evidence but also applying my own life experience and what I
think is common sense, I consider the likelihood of Billy Smith being
move his position after the crash in any significant way to be fanciful. His
injuries included bilateral pelvic fractures
and bilateral knee fractures,
broken ribs, and many other very serious injuries.
injuries/Blood
were surprisingly few apparent cuts and abrasions to the upper part of Billy
Smith’s body, in particular his head. He
did have a fractured nose and
some facial bruising, lacerations, and abrasions. He also had bilateral rib
fractures. He did not suffer
any cervical spine injuries. I will return to the
relevance of this finding. He did bleed considerably. There was blood all over
the cabin. Two swabs were taken of some of that blood and both proved to be the
blood of Billy Smith. None proved to be the blood
The injuries to the Accused
Seatbelt injuries
I have already said, like Billy Smith, the Accused suffered multiple very
serious injuries, but there is no evidence in any of
the medical records of
anyone observing anything like a seatbelt injury.
was given by one of the paramedics who arrived at scene, Molly Neville. I accept
her evidence. She explained that seatbelt
chest areas are an important diagnostic tool for first responders to use to
assess appropriate
treatment for a patient. She has no recollection of
observing, one way or the other, any seatbelt injuries on the Accused, but said,
and I accept, that it was her usual practice that if she had made such an
observation, she would have written them in her notes.
As there are no such
notations made by her contemporaneously, I take that fact into account so as to
conclude on the balance of probabilities
that there were no observable seatbelt
again, the experts agreed that the absence of seatbelt injuries, whilst
consistent with a person not wearing a seatbelt,
are possible in circumstances
where a person was wearing a seatbelt, even in very serious crashes.
that reason, whilst I consider the fact that the Accused did not have any
seatbelt-type injuries to be relevant, I propose to
give it limited weight.
to other injuries, the Accused had very serious brain injuries consistent with a
high-speed impact onto a soft surface, such as
dirt or long gras. Those injuries
were inconsistent with his head hitting anything hard or sharp inside the
discharge summary from John Hunter Hospital, dated 21 May 2022, records that he
sustained a traumatic brain injury, thoracic spine
fractures, a scapular
fracture, and soft tissue injuries. There was a significant calf wound,
bilateral lung contusions, and a shoulder
wound. There are no notes recording
any significant wounds to his head. He did not suffer any cervical spine
far as the mobility of the Accused after the crash is concerned, he suffered a
very serious head trauma, which, on all of the medical
evidence, would have
certainly rendered him immediately unconscious and incapable of voluntary
The location of the Accused and Billy Smith after the
first person on the scene that night was Peppah McMullen, followed by Kane Olsen
and Lydia Murray.
to the position of the Accused upon their arrival, their evidence was entirely
consistent. He was not in the vicinity of the ute,
and it took some considerable
amount of time for him to be located about 40m away because he was hidden in the
long grass.
diagram prepared by Sgt Rehwinkel, the police crash investigator (Exhibit F),
measures the location of the Accused, where he was
found, as some 41m short of
where the ute came to rest.
only inference from the location of the Accused after the accident together with
my finding that he would have been immediately
deeply unconscious, and this is
consistent with all the expert evidence, is that, at some point, not necessarily
adjacent to where
he was found, he was thrown clear of the ute. Almost certainly
he was thrown clear short of where he ended up, probably close to
where the ute flipped and commenced to roll and tumble. I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that his injuries were such
that there is no possibility that
he moved himself from where he landed. He was found at the spot that he rolled
after he landed,
being about 41m from the ute.
to Billy Smith, the evidence was not all one way.
first person on scene was Peppah McMullen. I will return to her evidence
next two people on the scene were Kane Olsen and Lydia Murray.
Olsen and Lydia Murray's evidence was consistent. Upon arrival at the scene,
they first saw Peppah McMullen's car with Peppah
standing in the roadway in an
extremely distressed and agitated state. She pointed towards the wrecked ute in
the distance, which
they could see, but was unable to have any coherent
discussions with them at that time. However, she had been speaking to them on
the phone as they approached in a separate car and Lydia Murray remembers she
said something like “
the grass is too long, I don’t know where
.” There were 2 dogs in the ute which were also killed. There
is no evidence of where their bodies ended up, but I consider
that if Peppah
McMullen said those words, she was almost certainly referring to the Accused and
Billy Smith as the “
,” rather than the Accused and the
Olsen and Lydia Murray then ran to the ute, followed closely by Peppah McMullen,
where they all said they located Billy Smith
in the passenger seat, which was in
a slightly reclined position. Neither Peppah McMullen nor Kane Olsen gave any
evidence as to
the passenger seatbelt. However, Lydia Murray gave evidence that
the seatbelt was hanging loose (consistent with it being in the
” position), although not clear, the general impression of her
evidence was that it was undone. Billy Smith was conscious but
only just. He
would have been capable of unbuckling his seatbelt after the ute came to a
Murray stayed with Billy Smith, comforting him whilst the others searched for
the Accused until police and ambulances arrived.
She moved Billy Smith to the
ground next to the ute and comforted him as best she could.
McMullen's evidence was to the following effect. She became agitated that the
boys were late home. She rang the Accused on
a number of occasions but got no
answer. She then used the “
Find My Phone
" app, which identified
that the Accused’s phone was stationary about 7km out of Coonamble off the
road. She rang Lydia Murray
in an agitated state and shortly thereafter got in
her car to drive towards the scene. Lydia Murray and Kane Olsen saw her leave
and followed a few minutes later in a separate car. On the way, Peppah McMullen
rang Lydia Murray, who by that stage was in the car
with Kane Olsen following,
and told her that she was very concerned. They all assumed, by this time, that
there had been an accident.
Kane Olsen rang Triple 0 before his arrival at the
McMullen said that, upon arrival at the scene, she saw the car in the distance
and that she heard and saw Billy Smith standing
by the car calling out to her
for her to “
call an ambulance
." She did not call an ambulance,
rather, she again rang Lydia Murray, but did not say anything to the effect that
she could see Billy
Smith standing up in the distance. She does not remember
what she said but as I have already recorded, Lydia Murray remembers her
that she could not find “
” because the grass was too
long. She then says that she ran over to the car where Billy Smith was standing
up holding himself
upright between the passenger door and the cabin, using the
roof of the cabin to support himself. She asked him if he was alright
said he was, although shortly after that he told her that he was dying.
then helped him to get into the passenger seat (the words used in her evidence
back into the car
"), wherein she then left the scene and went
she has no memory, and indeed all of the participants at this point were quite
understandably in an extremely agitated and stressed
state, I am satisfied that
she did not tell them that she had just seen Billy Smith at the car standing up
saying he was all right.
timing of Peppah McMullen’s account does not sit at all comfortably with
the objectively known facts as to when the phone
calls occurred. In short, there
does not seem to have been sufficient time for her to have got over to the ute,
put Billy Smith in
the seat, and returned to the road before Kane Olsen and
Lydia Murray arrived. This is because the timing of the various calls between
them and the call to Triple 0 are all objectively
Billy’s injuries
I have already said, Billy Smith suffered multiple catastrophic and ultimately
fatal injuries. They included, but were not limited
to, bilateral displaced
comminuted pelvic fractures and bilateral tibial plateau injuries. In other
words, Billy had suffered very
serious orthopaedic injuries to both sides of his
hips and both knees. He also had multiple broken ribs and a fractured nose.
the assistance of any expert opinion, in the context of those injuries
(including facial fractures, broken ribs, and multiple
cuts and abrasions), it
does seem to me to be very unlikely, to the point of impossible, that Billy
Smith would have been able, in
those circumstances, to either move himself from
the driver’s seat to the passenger’s seat and/or to get himself out
of the car, or off the ground, and stand up or, if he had been thrown clear of
the car, to get up, walk to the car, and be in a standing
position next to the
ute, holding onto the roof for well over half an hour, perhaps close to an hour,
after he suffered those injuries
when Peppah McMullen arrived.
was expert evidence on this question.
McIntosh prepared a Biomechanics and Collision Report and is appropriately
qualified, he opined as follows:
“In my opinion, the injury suffered by both the Accused and the deceased
(Billy) would have rendered them both immobile"
particular, concerning Billy Smith, he said as follows:
“Billy Smith suffered injuries to the pelvis and lower limbs that would
have, at least, made it extremely painful to weight
bear and move the lower
limbs and, most likely, made it impossible to weight bear and move. Crawling
would have equally improbable
for Billy Smith because he would have applied
loads directly onto the tibial fracture sites. The autopsy report is limited
with regards
to ligament and muscle injuries that may have been associated with
the tibial and pelvic fractures. A stable pelvis is a pre-requisite
weight bearing and walking and provides areas of large muscles to attach which
are essential for movement -walking, crawling
etc. Assuming pain was not an
issue and there was normal brain function, Billy Smith may have been able to
drag himself using his
upper limbs. Billy Smith's rib fractures would have
limited upper limb movement due to pain.”
accept that evidence. Dr McIntosh was a very impressive witness. I found all of
his evidence reliable. Although, I should say that
I do not think his
assumptions as to pain not being an issue or there being normal brain function
are reasonable. I am sure Billy
Smith would have been in excruciating pain. When
Lydia Murray and Kane Olsen arrived, Billy Smith was conscious, but only barely.
The Autopsy Report records that when the ambulance arrived, he was on the ground
next to the ute trying to get up. The medical conclusion
accords with what I
consider common sense. I think it is close enough to impossible that Billy Smith
managed, after the accident,
by his own efforts, to get himself standing up
beside the car or to move himself from where he ended up.
does this then leave the evidence of Peppah McMullen? It cannot be overlooked
that she was at the time, and remains, the Accused's
partner. She waived her
right to decline to give evidence in the trial against him, but she obviously
has a profound interest in
him not being convicted.
being said, I observed her giving her evidence. She was obviously very
distressed when she gave her evidence but was, it seemed
to me, trying as best
she could to recall what happened on the night.
understandably, on the night, she was even more distressed and by the time she
reached the crash site would have already been
extremely traumatised. She had
worked out there had been an accident. She would have assumed it was at high
speed. She knew the phone
was not being answered, was well off the road, and had
been stationary for some time. In short, she knew what she was going to find
when she got to the scene would be bad. As it turned out, it was worse than she
could have imagined. She was confronted with a horrific
scene, involving her
partner. She could not find him. She would have thought the Accused was either
dead or seriously injured.
generally I accept her to be an honest and reliable witness, I do not accept and
am not prepared to act on that part of her
evidence, to the effect that she saw
and spoke to Billy Smith, who was standing outside the car when she first got
there, and that
she helped him back into the passenger seat, as reliable
from anything else, it is not consistent with Dr McIntosh's opinion that it
would not have been physically possible for Billy
to stand up. It is also not
consistent with her saying nothing to that effect to Kane Olsen and Lydia
Murray, i.e. that she had seen
and spoken to Billy Smith and that he was in the
ute. I also think it extremely unlikely that she would have put him back in the
passenger seat, then have left him there alone to return to the roadway. The
timing of the various phone calls also seem inconsistent
Accordingly,
I conclude, as a matter of fact, that when the ute came to a halt, Billy Smith
was in the passenger seat and that the
Accused was 40 odd metres away in the
long grass.
that I conclude by inference that the Accused was thrown clear of the ute early
on during the period of the crash at about the
point where it started rolling
over and that Billy Smith remained with the ute until it came to a halt. I will
explain later why
I think the Accused was thrown clear early in the roll
Dr McIntosh’s opinion
I have said, Dr McIntosh has prepared a comprehensive report, together with a
short, supplementary Report, and gave evidence before
me. He was a very
impressive witness, not least because of the very careful, fair, and balanced
way that he sought to give his evidence.
part, his Report reads:
“The reasons for my opinions are presented below.
Blake Olsen was found along the roll path of the Toyota at a position
approximately 42 m south-east of the Toyota's resting place.
Therefore, it is
most likely that he was ejected. In my opinion, it is very unlikely that Blake
Olsen could have walked from the
vehicle to this location.
Assuming that Blake Olsen was the driver, he did not suffer cervical spine
injuries as a result of roof crush. The driver of the
Toyota was vulnerable to
roof crush related injury because the driver side was trailing during the
rollover. Roof crush was greater
over the driver side than the passenger side.
Blake Olsen was most likely ejected early in the Incident. Unrestrained
occupants can
be fully ejected from either side of the vehicle, once an opening
is created. They can retain the speed of the vehicle and move in
front of the
vehicle as it rolls. Neither occupant suffered cervical spine injuries, despite
the threat associated with rollover
and roof crush.
Blake Olsen's most severe injury was TBI [traumatic brain injury]. The brain
injuries are consistent with a high-speed direct impact
resulting in high
magnitude head [deceleration]. In my opinion, his head impacted a large
non-rigid surface, such as the ground.
Had the surface been rigid or with an
angled profile, for example the vehicle pillars or door frame, the force of the
impact that
caused the brain injuries would also likely have caused cranial or
facial fractures.
In total, Blake Olsen's injuries are consistent with being ejected, but not
specifically consistent with being the driver or passenger.
Billy Smith's injuries are also not unique to being the driver or passenger.
There are strong indications based on the injuries that
he was the passenger:
1. The bruising and superficial injuries to the abdomen and pelvis are
consistent with the geometry of the front passenger belt.
Assuming that Billy
Smith was wearing the seatbelt, the belt would have applied high magnitude
forces to his pelvis, abdomen and
2. The origin of the left upper limb injury in the vicinity of the elbow is
unknown. It is plausible that this was caused by partial
ejection of the left
arm during the rollover.
4. There are numerous lower limb superficial injuries. These could have been
caused within the vehicle or, hypothetically, after
ejection. However, the
presence of these injuries and absence of similar upper limb injuries is
unusual. The lower limb injuries
could have been caused within the vehicle as
the lower limbs impacted the vehicle interior and as a result of intrusion into
occupant area.
the pelvic and tibial fractures could have been caused in one substantial impact
to the lower limbs or in a series of separate impacts.
I have not been provided
with sufficient information to form a stronger opinion and this may not be
possible, even if more information
was available. There would have been numerous
opportunities for frontal or lateral impacts to the lower limbs and pelvis
vehicle, even for a restrained occupant as a result of the frontal
and lateral impacts that the vehicle was exposed to during the
rollover phase of
the crash and vehicle intrusion. As the rollover progressed, the benefit of the
seatbelt in managing impacts within
the vehicle would be reduced as the occupant
became out of position and the vehicle structures deformed.
In addition to the injuries, the inspection of the Toyota provided clear
evidence that the front passenger seatbelt had been worn
during the crash.
In total, Billy Smith's injuries are consistent with him being the
seatbelt-restrained front passenger, but it is also plausible
that an occupant
could be ejected and suffer many of the reported injuries.
In total, Billy Smith's injuries are not consistent with him being the
seatbelt-restrained driver of the Toyota. As considered above,
he could have
been the unrestrained driver (setting aside the witness statement regarding his
position in the vehicle). If he had
been the unrestrained driver, he would most
likely have been ejected.
2. The effects the injuries had on the accused and the deceased respectively
with regard to ability to move, walk, crawl etc.,
In my opinion, the injuries suffered by both the accused and deceased would have
rendered them both immobile.
The reasons for my opinion are presented below.
Billy Smith suffered injuries to the pelvis and lower limbs that would have, at
least, made it extremely painful to weight bear and
move the lower limbs and,
most likely, made it impossible to weight bear and move. Crawling would have
[been] equally improbable
for Billy Smith because he would have applied loads
directly onto the tibial fracture sites. The autopsy report is limited with
to ligament and muscle injuries that may have been associated with the
tibial and pelvic fractures. A stable pelvis is a pre-requisite
weight bearing and walking and provides areas of large muscles to attach which
are essential for movement - walking, crawling
etc. Assuming pain was not an
issue and there was normal brain function, Billy Smith may have been able to
drag himself using his
upper limbs. Billy Smith's rib fractures would have
limited upper limb movement due to pain.
Blake Olsen suffered severe brain injuries that would have most likely prevented
any voluntary and coordinated movement. The impairments
related to the brain
injuries would have been most likely immediate. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was
6/15 at 23:54 after the Incident.
Diffuse axonal injury usually results in
unconsciousness.
3. Whether it is plausible that the deceased was able to move himself from
the driver's seat into the passenger's seat with his injuries.
In my opinion, it is not plausible that the deceased was able to move himself
from the driver's seat into the passenger's seat with
his injuries.
In my opinion, the following are plausible explanations for the deceased being
found in the passenger seat:
1. The deceased was seated in the passenger seat and was restrained by a
seatbelt. Most Likely Reason.
2. The deceased was the unrestrained driver. The accused was the passenger. The
accused was ejected and the deceased was moved by
the forces in the rollover
into the passenger seat. Unlikely.
The reasons for my opinions are presented under opinions 1 and 2. In addition,
to the reasoning earlier in my report:
1. In order to 'move himself' from the driver seat to passenger seat, Billy
Smith would have had to extract his lower limbs from
the driver footwell area
and away from the steering wheel, and then use his upper limbs (and whole body)
to lift and transfer himself
across the centre console of the Toyota. Based on
the extent of his injuries and the related impairment of movement, it is very
that Billy Smith would have been able to transfer himself.
2. Had Billy Smith been the unrestrained driver, in the scenario described above
and based on the rollover characteristics (high
speed and multiple complete
rolls), it is likely that Billy Smith may have suffered cervical spine and/or
more severe head and facial
injuries as a result of uncontrolled impacts within
the vehicle.”
McIntosh’s conclusions in his first Report were as follows:
“1. The injuries sustained by:
i. Both vehicle occupants were caused by impact forces applied to the occupants
during the rollover, either within the vehicle, while
being fully or partially
ejected and/or after ejection.
ii. The deceased are consistent with the deceased being the
seatbelt-re[s]trained front passenger.
iii. The accused are consistent with being ejected from the vehicle and
non-specific regarding the seated position in the vehicle.
2. The injuries suffered by both the accused and deceased would have rendered
them both immobile.
3. It is not plausible that the deceased was able to move himself from the
driver's seat into the passenger's seat with his injuries.
i. Billy Smith suffered injuries to the pelvis and lower limbs that would have,
at least, made it extremely painful to weight bear
and move the lower limbs and,
most likely, made it impossible to weight bear and move (walk, crawl, drag).
ii. Blake Olsen suffered severe brain injuries that would have most likely
prevented any voluntary and coordinated movement.
4. The following are plausible explanations for the deceased being found in the
passenger seat:
i. The deceased was seated in the passenger seat and was restrained by a
seatbelt. Most Likely Reason.
ii. The deceased was the unrestrained driver. The accused was the passenger. The
accused was ejected and the deceased was moved by
the forces in the rollover
into the passenger seat. Unlikely.”
a second Report dated 19 February 2024, Dr McIntosh responded to the following
specific question:
“please clarify whether in your opinion it is a reasonable or rational
possibility that the following occurred:
“82.4(ii) The deceased was the unrestrained driver. The accused was the
passenger. The accused was ejected and the deceased
was moved by the forces in
the rollover into the passenger seat”
this question, Dr McIntosh responded:
“7. My opinion is that it is possible, but unlikely (not a reasonable or
rational possibility) that the forces in the subject
crash could have moved an
unrestrained driver into the passenger seat and that person would occupy the
passenger seat when the vehicle
came to rest.
8. It is a reasonable and rational possibility (the most likely outcome) that
the forces in the subject crash would have resulted
in the full ejection of the
unrestrained driver of the Toyota.”
McIntosh is more than well qualified to express the various opinions I have
has considerable expertise in the field of biomechanics and ergonomics/human
factors, he has completed traffic crash reconstruction
training courses, studied
injury causation, safety systems and devices, crash and accident investigation,
and is published reasonably
widely in all those areas.
has experience in researching, studying, and/or examining motor vehicle crashes,
crash causation and contributing factors, vehicle
dynamics, vehicle performance,
vehicle safety systems performance in rollover crashes, occupant injuries in
motor vehicle crashes,
the biomechanics of occupants in motor vehicle crashes,
occupant kinematics, occupant injury, injury biomechanics, and so on. He
investigated many motor vehicle accidents, and he has qualifications as a
physiotherapist, and has a PhD.
his capacity as a physiotherapist by way of training and professional work, he
has much experience in assessing the movement capacity
of people following
trauma. However, he is not qualified as a medical practitioner.
can be seen from his second Report, Dr McIntosh was asked by the solicitors for
the Crown to express his opinions in terms of “
not a reasonable or
rational possibility
a reasonable or rational
possibility
” as opposed to his preferred language of
possible but unlikely
so on. His ultimate opinion was that he considered it not to be a reasonable or
rational possibility that Billy Smith
had been the unrestrained driver and ended
up being thrown into the passenger seat.
McIntosh was questioned extensively by the Crown and cross-examined by Mr Fren
and phrases. I also asked
him a number of questions. Many of these questions were directed to what he
meant by words such as “
reasonable or rational possibility
became clear to me that Dr McIntosh was struggling with the linguistics. Often
when he identified something as a possibility he
was conveying little more than
acknowledging that “
anything is possible
," which he was trying to
make clear by adding the rider “
but not likely
using the word “
” he was seeking to explain that
what was being discussed was possible as a matter of physics.
do not blame him for struggling with these concepts. The phrase
reasonable or rational possibility
" is an invention by lawyers
often used in discussions about levels of legal proof. It ought not be
surprising that nonlawyers find
such concepts difficult to grasp.
number of things are clear to me from Dr McIntosh’s evidence. First, he
was extremely well qualified to give the evidence
he gave. Second, he is also a
very careful and measured man and was doing his best to present his opinions in
a way that was fair,
balanced, and reasonable. He was seeking to avoid coming to
the ultimate issue before the Court based on the beyond reasonable doubt
standard. Third, I have no hesitation in accepting his opinions as his opinions
and consider them to be logical, well-reasoned, and
easy to understand. Finally,
there is no doubt that his expert opinion is that it is very likely that the
Accused was the driver
and very unlikely that Billy Smith was the driver. He was
prepared to describe the level of unlikelihood as not a reasonable or rational
possibility.
I have already directed myself, just because he is an expert and has expressed
expert opinions, does not mean that I am bound to
accept them. Moreover, he was
expressing opinions as a scientist by reference to scientific-type proof, in
terms of likelihood and
unlikelihoods, and theoretical possibilities.
Ultimately,
the question for me in this case is whether I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the Accused was the driver at
the time of the crash.
is a mixed question of fact and law. I need to be satisfied as to factual
matters and then, by a process of logical reasoning,
consider whether those
factual matters taken together justify a finding of driver beyond reasonable
doubt. If there is another explanation
inconsistent with a finding of guilt, I
must acquit, unless I am satisfied that other explanation is not a reasonable or
An intermediate fact
a strand in the cable inference case, none of the primary facts need to be
proved to my satisfaction to any particular level. However,
the level of
satisfaction I reach as to each primary fact must be factored into the weight I
give that fact. In a link in a chain
inference case, essential findings to the
ultimate conclusion can be required, as a matter of law, to be proved beyond
this case, I think there is an essential link in the chain involved in the
Crown’s reasoning, in fact it is the first link
in any chain of reasoning
as to what happened. That is the alleged fact that the driver was not wearing a
seatbelt, and the passenger
was. I direct myself that is an intermediate fact
that must be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
is direct and uncontradicted expert evidence on that topic, including but not
limited to Dr McIntosh. Sergeant Rehwinkel gave
consistent evidence. I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that, at the time of the crash, whoever was
the driver was not wearing
a seatbelt and whoever was the passenger was wearing
a seatbelt.
other primary facts relied upon by the Crown are the physical injuries sustained
by both Billy Smith and the Accused, the location
of both Billy Smith and the
Accused in and out of the vehicle when the ute came to rest, the expert evidence
as to the physical forces
involved, and the likelihood or otherwise of either
Billy Smith or the Accused being able to move themselves from the position they
ended up in immediately after the crash.
Ultimately,
and perhaps this is obvious, there are only two real explanations open as to
what happened in the crash. The first is
that the Accused was the unrestrained
driver and Billy Smith was the restrained passenger and that, during the course
of the crash,
the Accused was ejected from the ute and Billy Smith remained in
the ute in the passenger seat. That is the explanation that the
Crown submits is
the only reasonable inference to be reached from all of the facts.
second explanation is that Billy Smith was the unrestrained driver, and the
Accused was the restrained passenger. During the mechanism
of the crash, the
Accused, notwithstanding that he was wearing a seatbelt, was ejected from the
ute and Billy Smith was thrown around
inside the ute so as to end up in the
passenger seat.
was a third possibility the subject of submissions. It depended, in the first
instance, on acceptance of the evidence of Peppah
McMullen, which I have already
determined not to accept, that is that Billy Smith was seen shortly after the
accident standing next
to the ute, holding himself up. This hypothesis is that
it is possible that the mechanics of the crash caused the ejection of, firstly,
the Accused from the passenger seat, notwithstanding he was wearing a seatbelt,
and then later towards the end of the rolling over
aspect, ejected Billy Smith
in a way that caused him to land either on his feet or in a position where it
was possible for him to
get to his feet so as to be standing next to the ute
when Peppah McMullen arrived on the scene, which on any view of the timing had
to be more than half an hour after the crash, probably longer.
of the medical evidence, including Dr McIntosh's expert opinion, is that it
simply would not have been possible for Billy Smith
to get himself upright in
circumstances where he had bilateral fractures to his pelvis and two broken
knees and many other serious
injuries. Applying my own common sense and life
experience to the situation I consider the possibility of him being able to do
to be fanciful and reject it. Moreover, the injuries to both the Accused
and Billy Smith are such that the driver must have been
ejected early in the
rollover because of the lack of cervical injuries to either occupant. As Dr
McIntosh explained, such injuries
would have been caused to the driver if he
stayed in the ute for any length of time. Moreover, the lack of any of the
blood being located in the cabin is relevant. All this leads me
to be satisfied that the Accused was ejected very early in the rollover
my acceptance of Peppah McMullen’s evidence, this third explanation I
reject as fanciful and put to one side.
McIntosh acknowledges that both the remaining explanations are possible, but
concludes that the former is the likely reason and
the latter is, to use his
words in his first Report, “
," or as he said in his second
““my opinion is that it is possible but unlikely (not a reasonable
or rational possibility) that the forces in the subject
crash could have moved
an unrestrained driver into the passenger seat and that person would occupy the
passenger seat when the vehicle
came to rest
It is a reasonable and rational possibility (the most likely outcome) that the
forces in the subject crash would have resulted in
the full ejection of the
unrestrained driver of the...”
myself of the direction I have given myself as to findings of guilt based on
inference, the real question here is whether
the second explanation, described
by Dr McIntosh as unlikely, is possible or plausible to the extent that it is
sufficient to cause
me to have reasonable doubt as to accepting the only other
available explanation.
The parties’ competing
submissions
behalf of the Crown, it is submitted that, not only is the first explanation I
have identified the conclusion that ought be reached,
but also that the
competing inference is not a reasonable or rational inference properly to be
drawn from the proven facts. To put
it another way, the second explanation is
not a rational and reasonable conclusion from the facts otherwise proved so as
not to rise
to a level sufficient to cause me to have reasonable doubt as to the
other explanation.
Crown's submission is that I should be satisfied that, firstly, whoever the
driver was, was not wearing a seatbelt and, whoever
the passenger was, was
wearing a seatbelt. I have already concluded that I am satisfied of that matter
beyond reasonable doubt. Second,
that it is likely that the driver was ejected
from the ute early on in the rollover portion of the crash because of the lack
of cervical
spine injuries to either of the occupants. The lack of the
Accused’s blood being identified in the cabin is consistent with
conclusion. As is the absence of blunt force trauma to the Accused’s skull
causing head fractures. Third, it is more likely
that the unrestrained driver
was ejected from the ute early in the rollover process as opposed to the
restrained passenger. Fourth,
the injuries to the Accused, whilst very serious
brain injuries, are consistent with his head hitting a soft surface, like ground
with long grass on it, and inconsistent with hitting hard material inside a ute
rolling over. Fifth, it is extremely unlikely, albeit
possible, for a person
wearing a seatbelt to be fully ejected from a motor vehicle in a rollover
situation. Sixth, both Billy Smith
and the Accused must have been rendered
immobile immediately after the crash and could not have moved themselves from
ended up. Seventh, the possible seatbelt injuries to Billy Smith and
the lack of any such injuries to the Accused are not inconsistent
conclusion that it was Billy Smith who was wearing a seatbelt and therefore in
the passenger seat, and the Accused, who was
not wearing a seatbelt, therefore
in the driver's seat. The Crown accepts that any one of these facts would not be
enough to support
a finding beyond reasonable doubt but that the totality of the
evidence does support a finding to that level.
behalf of the Accused, Mr Fren, in very carefully calibrated and powerful
submissions, made the following points.
I ought be satisfied that, whilst unlikely, it is a reasonable possibility that
a person wearing a seatbelt can be fully ejected
from a motor vehicle involved
in a rollover incident, such as occurred here. Second, whilst it is unlikely, it
is reasonably possible,
the Accused having been ejected from the passenger seat
early in the rollover process, that Billy Smith, being the unrestrained driver,
was then thrown around by the gravitational forces in the cabin of the ute, so
as to eventually land sitting upright on the passenger
Mr Fren emphasises the dangers in drawing conclusions from the seatbelt injuries
or lack thereof, and, whilst he accepts that
evidence is relevant and not
inconsistent with Billy Smith wearing a seatbelt and the Accused being
unrestrained, submits that it
should be given little weight. He makes the same
submission about the blood findings.
Ultimately,
Mr Fren's submission is that there is an explanation for what occurred which is
reasonable and rational, and ought be
sufficient to give rise to reasonable
doubt so as to lead to the acquittal of his client. That explanation is that
Billy Smith was
the unrestrained driver, and the Accused was the restrained
passenger. The Accused was ejected from the ute, notwithstanding the
he was wearing a seatbelt, early on in the rollover process, and Billy Smith was
bounced around the ute so as to move from
the drivers’ seat and end up in
the passenger seat towards the end of the
attractive as it is, and whilst each of the two primary steps in the explanation
identified by Mr Fren is a possibility (i.e. a
seatbelt-restrained passenger
being ejected and an unrestrained driver ending up in the passenger seat), each
is, in my opinion,
very unlikely, and the sum total of those two very unlikely
events, combined with the totality of all the other evidence, is such
end result is that I do not consider it to be a reasonable or rational
explanation.
expert evidence of Dr McIntosh, together with the application by me of what I
think is some common sense or rational thinking
based on my life experience, is
that it is extremely unlikely that the seatbelt restrained passenger would have
been ejected from
the ute at all, let alone early in the rollover process. Not
only is that unlikely on its own, the injuries to both Billy Smith and
Accused are in many ways inconsistent with that occurring. It is, on the other
hand, close to inevitable that the un-seatbelt-restrained
driver was ejected
early in the process. Second, it is also close to certain that whoever the
driver was at the start of the rollover
process would have suffered significant
cervical spine injuries if they had stayed in the ute for any period of time,
but neither
Billy Smith nor the Accused did. This is consistent with the driver
being ejected very early in the rollover process. Third, it is
possible but, in
my judgement, again very unlikely that an unrestrained driver, the restrained
passenger having already been ejected
from the ute, would by processes of
gravitational forces be thrown around the car so as to land sitting upright in
the passenger
seat without suffering injuries consistent with being thrown
around the cabin. Finally, whilst I do not give very much weight to
the seatbelt
injury evidence or the lack of the Accused’s blood being found in the
cabin, the simple fact is there are injuries
on Billy Smith inconsistent with
him not wearing a seatbelt. They do look like seatbelt-type injuries, which are
not to be found
on the Accused. For my own part, if I contemplate the Accused
being ejected from the ute, notwithstanding he was wearing an operational
seatbelt, I would expect there would be some injuries consistent with his body
violently escaping the seatbelt, yet there were none.
this was a civil case to be decided on the balance of probabilities, I would be
very comfortably satisfied that the Accused was
probably the driver, and Billy
Smith was probably the passenger. Moreover, that balance of probabilities
conclusion would not be
anything like the level of 51%/49%. Rather, I would have
considered it a very strong case.
neither probable nor likely is the question. The question is whether I am
satisfied that the Accused was the driver to the
very high standard of proof
required by the criminal law, that being beyond reasonable doubt. In a
circumstantial case such as this,
where the conclusion must be reached by a
process of inference, I must be able to exclude any other non-fanciful scenario
with a finding of not guilty to a level of satisfaction so as to
consider such alternative scenario to be irrational and or unreasonable.
do so, I must consider all of the primary facts about which I am satisfied but
should ascribe to each of them such weight as I
consider appropriate. In other
words, the more unlikely a possibility might be, the less weight I should give
that aspect. For example,
I consider it extremely unlikely, close to but not
quite to the level of implausible, that a seatbelt restrained passenger would
have been thrown from the ute early in the rollover process. I also consider it
very unlikely that an unrestrained driver, the restrained
passenger having been
ejected, would end up in the passenger seat without exhibiting injuries
consistent with being thrown around
Dr McIntosh explained in his oral evidence, when one focuses on each primary
fact in a vacuum, the possibility of an alternative
reasonable explanation
cannot be excluded. However, when I look at the totality of the evidence, this
involves adding unlikelihoods
on top of each other and quite quickly I get to
the stage where, taken together, a series of plausible explanations become, in
insufficient to support a reasonable conclusion.
is what I have determined in relation to the alternative explanation. For it to
have occurred, a series of events ranging from
extremely unlikely to very
unlikely had to occur almost simultaneously.
mechanics of what occurred here, the location of the two people after the crash,
and their respective injuries satisfy me beyond
reasonable doubt that the
Accused was the unrestrained driver, Billy Smith was the restrained passenger,
the Accused was ejected
from the ute very early in the rollover process. Billy
Smith remained because of his seatbelt in the passenger seat. That is why
Smith was in the passenger seat when the car stopped rolling and the Accused was
some 50m away. I have taken the seatbelt injury
evidence into account but have
not given it much weight, but it needs to be said it is not inconsistent with
the above finding, and
I consider the lack of seatbelt injuries on the Accused
to be unlikely if what happened was he was ejected from the ute, even though
was wearing a seatbelt. There is no evidence at all that I can identify that is
inconsistent with this finding.
those reasons, taking all of the primary facts I have identified together, I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused
was driving the vehicle at
the time the ute went out of control and crashed.
those reasons:
(1) I find the Accused Guilty on Count 1.
(2) I note that, in those circumstances, Count 2 falls away.
(3) I find the Accused Guilty on Count 3.
(4) I find the Accused Guilty on Count 4.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter