URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/848.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Upper Lachlan Shire Council v Roberts [2025] NSWPICMP 848; (3 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Upper Lachlan Shire Council v Roberts [2025] NSWPICMP 848
Upper Lachlan Shire Council
RESPONDENT:
Scott Andrew Roberts
APPEAL PANEL
Marshal Douglas
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Gregory McGroder
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Robert Kuru
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
whether Medical Assessor (MA) erred by not providing sufficient reasons for why
permanent impairment the respondent has from his right shoulder injury is not
due to a pre-existing condition, and by not making
a deduction under
for pre-existing conditions; whether MA provided sufficient reasons for
adding 2% whole person impairment (WPI) for the effects the
respondent’s
cervical spine injury has on his activities of daily living, and for the effects
the respondent’s cervical
spine injury has on his activities of daily
– MA did not provide sufficient reasons for why a
pre-existing condition in the respondent’s right shoulder did not form
proportion of the respondent’s permanent impairment; Appeal Panel
corrected the error by providing reasons for why that
is so; MA erred by not
making a deduction under
section 323(1)
; MA erred by adding 2% WPI for the
effects the respondent’s cervical spine injury has on his activities of
daily living; MAC
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
22 August 2025 the Upper Lachlan Shire Council, the appellant, lodged an
Application to Appeal Against the Decision of a Medical
Assessor. The medical
dispute was assessed by Dr Peter Honeyman, a Medical Assessor, who issued a
Medical Assessment Certificate
(MAC) on 25 July 2025.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the
Guidelines) and the
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
appellant employed Scott Andrew Roberts between February 2006 and August 2022 as
a roadside supervisor. On 20 August 2019 the
respondent suffered an injury to
his right shoulder and cervical spine when he used a sledgehammer to hit a pole
into hard ground.
An MRI scan of his right shoulder was done on 5 September 2019
which revealed an undisplaced humeral head greater tuberosity fracture,
SLAP tear between 3 and 11 o’clock, supraspinatus tendinosis with bursal
sided fraying and low grade partial thickness
tearing, and moderate
osteoarthritis in the acromioclavicular joint (AC joint) with mild subacromial
respondent came under the care of orthopaedic surgeon Dr Hamish Rae. In a report
Dr Rae wrote to the appellant’s insurer on 19 September 2019 he
advised it that the respondent’s injury is a greater tuberosity
and a SLAP tear. Dr Rae in a subsequent letter he wrote on 11 October 2019 to
the respondent’s general practitioner
noted that the respondent had
developed associated capsulitis and stiffness due to the fracture of his right
January 2020 Dr Rae undertook surgery on the respondent carrying out a right
shoulder arthroscopic capsular release and biceps
tenodesis. The respondent
continued to suffer symptoms and in March 2022 Dr Rae performed a right shoulder
arthroscopic capsular
release and subacromial decompression.
3 September 2024 the respondent’s solicitors wrote to the
appellant’s insurer advising it that the respondent claimed
compensation
for permanent impairment resulting from his injury. They enclosed with their
correspondence a report they obtained from
orthopaedic surgeon Associate
Professor Brett Courtenay dated 25 June 2024 to support the respondent’s
claim. In that report
Associate Professor Courtenay advised he assessed the
degree of the respondent’s permanent impairment from his injury is 18%
whole person impairment (WPI), being a combination of 7% WPI relating to his
cervical spine (which included 2% WPI for the effect
the respondent’s
injury had on his activities of daily living) and 12% WPI relating to the
respondent’s right shoulder.
respond to that claim the insurer had the respondent examined by orthopaedic
surgeon Dr Richard Powell on 28 October 2024, who
advised in a report dated 3
December 2024 he assessed the degree of the respondent’s permanent
impairment relating to his injury
is 9% WPI, which related entirely to the
respondent’s right shoulder. Dr Powell said that the respondent had 0% WPI
to his cervical spine.
insurer notified the respondent on 11 February 2025 that it disputed he was
entitled to compensation for permanent impairment.
It advised him this was
because it took the position that the degree of his permanent impairment was not
more than 10% WPI. It provided
him with a copy of Dr Powell’s report.
the respondent initiated proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) by filing an Application to Resolve
a Dispute dated 7 March 2025.
Following the appellant filing a reply to that, a delegate of the President of
the Commission issued
a referral to the Medical Assessor to assess the degree of
the respondent’s permanent impairment from his injury.
Medical Assessor recorded in the history he detailed in the MAC relating to the
respondent’s injury that the respondent
had “an almost immobile
right shoulder”, that the respondent has continuous pain in his right
shoulder and that the respondent
also has pain in his neck. The Medical Assessor
noted that the respondent could not do much around his house either indoor or
because of “the useless right shoulder” and that prior to
his suffering his injury the respondent engaged in recreational
activities and
had a boat. The Medical Assessor noted that now “all these are
Medical Assessor detailed in the MAC his findings from his examination of the
respondent. No issue had been raised in the appeal
against the medical
assessment regarding the Medical Assessor’s findings.
Medical Assessor referred to two investigations, one of which was an MRI of the
respondent’s right shoulder done on 1 February
2021, and which the Medical
Assessor noted revealed AC joint degeneration, a previous bicep tenodesis,
rotator cuff tendinopathy
and reduced signal within the superior labrum. The
other was an MRI of the respondent’s cervical spine done on 3 May 2023
the Medical Assessor commented was unremarkable.
Medical Assessor diagnosed the respondent had a soft tissue injury to his
cervical spine and had an unresolved soft tissue injury
to his right shoulder.
Medical Assessor advised that he based his assessment on “a thorough
history, a comprehensive physical examination, a review
of the documentation
made available by the Personal Injury Commission with reference to the SIRA
Guidelines (2021) and AMA-5”.
The Medical Assessor repeated that
subsequently in the MAC when explaining what matters he took into account in
making the assessment.
Medical Assessor certified that he assessed the degree of the respondent’s
permanent impairment from his injury is 19% WPI.
That was a combination of 13%
WPI of the right upper extremity and 7% WPI of the cervical spine. The Medical
Assessor provided the
following explanation within part 10a of the MAC for his
assessment:
“The cervical spine is assessed by the DRE
method, as set out in T15-5 p 392. There was no dysmetria, but a significant
spasm on the right on my examination. There were no suggestions of
radiculopathy. DRE 2, with 5% WPI.
A further rating is added from interruptions to ADLs as per 4.34 P 28 NSW
guides. He has lost all recreational and outside maintenance
tasks and is
useless inside the house, awarding 2% WPI for loss of these ADLs. WPI 7%.
The shoulder is rated by loss of ROM, as set out in table below. This results
in 21% UEI which converts to 13% WPI.”
medical disputes that were referred to the Medical Assessor to assess included
whether any proportion of the respondent’s
permanent impairment is due to
any previous injury or pre-existing condition or abnormality, and the extent of
proportion. With respect
to that particular dispute the Medical Assessor
certified that his assessment is that no proportion of the respondent’s
impairment is due to a previous injury, pre-existing condition or
abnormality.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the respondent to undergo a further
medical examination. This is
because the material before the Appeal Panel is sufficient for it to determine
the appeal.
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions. They are not repeated in full, but have been
considered by the Appeal Panel.
summary, the appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor erred by not making a
deduction under s 323(1) of the 1998 Act when
assessing the degree of the
respondent’s permanent impairment relating to both the respondent’s
cervical spine and right
shoulder. The appellant contended that a proportion of
the respondent’s permanent impairment with respect to both body parts
due to a pre-existing condition. The appellant referred to various parts of the
evidence before the Medical Assessor including
reports of MRI investigations
done of the respondent’s right shoulder on 5 September 2019, 5 May 2020, 1
February 2021 and
3 May 2023, and a report on an MRI investigation of the
respondent’s cervical spine done on 3 May 2023, and the reports of
Associate Professor Courtenay and Dr Powell. The appellant submitted that the
reports of the MRI investigations revealed arthritic
change in the
respondent’s right shoulder and facet joint osteoarthritis at C2/3. The
appellant submitted Associate Professor
Courtenay had concluded that there was
evidence of the respondent having underlying facet joint arthritis in his
cervical spine,
and that Dr Powell had identified the respondent suffered an
injury to his cervical spine in a motor vehicle accident in 2000 and
that he had
underlying changes cervical spondylosis and aggravation of underlying
degenerative disease in his right shoulder as a
consequence of the injury the
respondent suffered.
appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor did not give consideration to
those matters. The appellant submitted that the Medical
Assessor was required to
have regard to the consequence of a prior injury or pre-existing condition or
abnormality. The appellant
submitted that the Medical Assessor ought to have
addressed this evidence when determining what proportion of the
respondent’s
impairment is due to a prior injury or pre-existing condition
or abnormality.
appellant submitted that the evidence revealed extensive and significant prior
pathology and warranted intervention by the Appeal
appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor did not provide adequate reasons
for not making a deduction under s 323(1) of the
appellant referred to statements the Medical Assessor made in the MAC that the
respondent is unable to do activities because of
his useless right shoulder.
The appellant submitted the respondent’s impairment with respect to his
activities of daily living
is due to the injury to right shoulder rather than
the injury to his cervical spine. The appellant submitted to the effect that the
Medical Assessor was wrong to add a percentage WPI for the impact the
respondent’s injury to his cervical spine had on his
activities of daily
living. The appellant further submitted that the Medical Assessor’s
reasons were inadequate with respect
to the 2% WPI he added when assessing the
degree of the respondent’s permanent impairment relating to his cervical
the impact of this injury on the respondent’s activities of
daily living. The appellant submitted that there is no evidence
to indicate that
the respondent’s inability to undertake activities of daily living is due
to the injury to his cervical spine.
appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor did not have regard to reports
that it had received from Gary Cox Investigations
dated 14 April 2023, 10 May
2023, 12 June 2024 and 25 November 2024 relating to surveillance that
organisation undertook of the respondent.
The appellant submitted that this
evidence conflicted with the respondent’s “self-report” that
he has a useless
right shoulder.
appellant highlighted the Medical Assessor’s findings relating to the
respondent’s range of movement of his right
shoulder along the planes of
abduction, internal rotation and external rotation was much more limited than
that which Dr Powell and
Associate Professor Courtenay found from their
respective examinations. The appellant contended that there had been a marked
deterioration
in the respondent’s range of movement since Dr Powell and
Associate Professor Courtenay had examined him and the appellant
submitted to
the effect that the respondent’s inability with his activities of daily
living would be due to that deterioration
of his shoulders rather than the
injury to his cervical spine.
reply, the respondent submitted that there is no evidence that he had
experienced any symptoms in his right shoulder or cervical
spine before he
suffered injury on 20 August 2019. The respondent noted that the cause of his
impairment of his right shoulder is
the fracture of his greater tuberosity and
that this fracture is responsible for the entirety of his impairment.
respondent submitted that the appellant did not refer to any medical or other
evidence regarding the existence of a pre-existing
pathology in his cervical
spine other than the MRI of the cervical spine done on 3 May 2023. The
respondent submitted that the Medical
Assessor had to be satisfied that the
pre-existing condition was present before his injury. The respondent submitted
that the MRI
of 3 May 2023 did not substantiate he had a pre-existing condition.
respondent submitted that in accordance with the Medical Assessor’s
clinical discretion it was open to the Medical Assessor
not to make a deduction.
respondent submitted that the Medical Assessor was also entitled to use his
clinical discretion, in the circumstance involving
multiple bodies systems, to
determine that the injury to his cervical spine affected his activities of daily
respondent submitted that the series of still photographs contained in the
reports of Gary Cox’s Investigation carried little
or no probative weight
relating to his functionality. The respondent submitted that the reports do not
say anything about the impact
his injury has had on his ability to engage in
regular domestic tasks.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons.
323 deduction
Appeal Panel agrees with the appellant’s submission that the Medical
Assessor did not provide sufficient reasons for why
any proportion of the
permanent impairment the respondent has from his right shoulder injury is not
due to a pre-existing condition
that the respondent had in right shoulder.
MRI scan done on 5 September 2019 of the respondent’s right shoulder
revealed moderate osteoarthritis in the respondent’s
AC joint. That would
have been present in the respondent’s right shoulder at the time of his
injury on 20 August 2019. That
degeneration in the respondent’s right
shoulder could not have occurred in the two weeks between his injury and the
MRI scan was done and so necessarily it was a pre-existing condition.
said however, it is the Appeal Panel’s view that that pre-existing
degeneration does not make up a proportion of the respondent’s
impairment relating to his right shoulder. The other findings that the MRI
revealed, that is the fracture of the respondent’s
greater tuberosity, the
caused by the respondent’s
injury. That pathology resulted in the
respondent developing capsulitis, stiffness and synovitis. That pathology
necessitated the
respondent to have surgery.
respondent’s impairment with respect to his right shoulder has been
correctly assessed by reference to the restricted range
of movement he has in
his right shoulder. That restricted range of movement the respondent has in his
right shoulder is due entirely
to the injury the respondent suffered to his
right shoulder, and to repeat that injury is a fracture greater tuberosity, the
2 SLAP tear, from which the respondent developed complications in the form
a capsulitis, stiffness and synovitis that necessitated
his having surgery. None
of the restriction of movement he has in his right shoulder is explicable by the
pre-existing osteoarthritis
which was likely to have been existing for some
years prior to the respondent suffering injury and which had caused no
complication
or had resulted in the respondent suffering symptoms. Absent the
injury to the respondent’s right shoulder, and the subsequent
treat complications arising from it, he in all likelihood would have no current
impediment with respect to the movement
of his right shoulder, by reference to
which his permanent impairment has been correctly assessed. It cannot be known
whether the
pre-existing pathology the respondent had in his shoulder would have
ever impeded his movement in his shoulder, or even if it would
have, at what
point in time that would have occurred.
Consequently,
although the Medical Assessor erred by not providing adequate reasons for
explaining why the respondent’s pre-existing
condition in his right
shoulder forms no part of the respondent's permanent impairment relating to his
right shoulder, when the Appeal
Panel corrects that error by providing an
explanation, the result remains the same. That is the respondent’s
permanent impairment
relating to his right shoulder is correctly assessed at 13%
Appeal Panel also agrees with the appellant’s submission that the Medical
Assessor made an error by not providing adequate
reasons for not making
deduction why a pre-existing condition in the respondent’s cervical spine
did not form a proportion
of the permanent impairment the respondent had
relating to his cervical spine. The Appeal Panel also considers that the Medical
erred by not making a deduction under s 323(1) of the 1998 Act for the
extent to which a pre-existing condition that the respondent
had in his cervical
spine contributes to his permanent impairment.
Appeal Panel does not accept the respondent’s submission that the
investigation that was done of his cervical spine on 3
May 2023 does not reveal
he had a pre-existing condition at the time of his injury. Whilst the
investigation was done some three
and a half years after the respondent suffered
his injury, the degeneration that the investigation revealed at C2/3 is such, in
Appeal Panel’s view, that a large part of it would have to have been
in existence at the time the respondent suffered injury.
Indeed, noting the
symptoms the respondent suffered, his injury was correctly diagnosed as an
aggravation of the degeneration that
was extant in his cervical spine.
respondent’s impairment relating to his cervical spine has been assessed
on the basis of the Medical Assessor’s finding
that the respondent had
significant muscle spasm during his examination of the respondent and that the
respondent suffers pain in
his neck. The spasm and the pain the respondent
experiences are due to the continuing aggravation he has of the degeneration he
in his cervical spine. In other words, the pre-existing condition he had at
the time of his injury currently contributes to his permanent
impairment he has
relating to his cervical spine and therefore forms a proportion of it.
medical evidence that is available, which consists of MRI done of the respondent
cervical spine, the Medical Assessor’s
findings from his examination of
the respondent’s cervical spine and the respondent’s report of
symptoms, does not enable
a precise assessment to be made of the extent to which
the pre-existing degeneration in the respondent’s cervical spine
contributes
to his current permanent impairment. No evidence would be available
that could be gathered to determine that precisely. Consequently,
in accordance
with s 323(2) of the 1998 Act the Appeal Panel assumes that the deductible
proportion for purpose of s 323(1) is 10%.
Making that assumption is not at odds
with the evidence, that evidence being that the respondent did not experience
symptoms in his
cervical spine before he suffered injury, notwithstanding he had
degeneration in his cervical spine at the time of his injury and
notwithstanding
that he could have for years in arduous work.
Activities of
daily living
Appeal Panel agrees with the appellant’s submission that the Medical
Assessor did not provide adequate reasons with respect
to his assessment of the
degree of the respondent’s permanent impairment relating to his cervical
spine for adding 2% WPI for
the effect that that injury had on his activities of
daily living. The Appeal Panel also agrees that the Medical Assessor made an
error by adding 2% WPI.
Medical Assessor stated in the MAC that the respondent could not do much around
his house because of his useless right shoulder.
The Medical Assessor noted that
the respondent was unable to participate in his past recreational activities. It
is implicit, noting
the context in which the Medical Assessor made mention of
that, that the Medical Assessor considered that the respondent’s
to participate in his past recreational activities is also due to the respondent
having “a useless right shoulder”.
The Medical Assessor did not
explain how it is that the respondent’s injury to his cervical spine
affects his activities of
daily living.
the severe limitation the Medical Assessor found the respondent has with respect
to his right shoulder, the Appeal Panel considers
that it is this injury that
impedes entirely the respondent’s capacity with respect to his activities
of daily living. It is
a significant injury that has significant impacts that
inhibits his ability to undertake any meaningful task. His cervical spine
does not in the Appeal Panel’s view impede his capacity in this regard in
any significant way.
Appeal Panel notes for completeness that the Medical Assessor in the MAC stated
that he did have regard to all the documentation
that had been forwarded to him,
which included the reports that Gary Cox Investigations provided the appellant.
In the Appeal Panel’s
view, and consistent with the respondent’s
submission, the still photographs in those reports do not substantiate the
Assessor made any error by concluding the respondent is unable to engage
in his past recreational activities and that he is unable
to do much around his
house. The photos do not indicate that the Medical Assessor’s findings
with respect to the respondent’s
range of movement of his shoulders are
incorrect. A couple of the photos reveal the respondent carrying a box and a bag
of groceries.
The weight of those packages is not known, but they appear to be
any event, the Appeal Panel has accepted the appellant’s submission that
no percentage WPI ought to have been added by the
Medical Assessor when
assessing the degree of the respondent’s permanent impairment relating to
his cervical spine. Hence,
even if it were the case that the Medical Assessor
was wrong to conclude that the respondent is unable to do much around his
or is unable to participate in his past recreational activities, once
the Appeal Panel has corrected the Medical Assessor’s
error with respect
to his assessment of the respondent’s impairment relating to his cervical
spine, the consequence is neutral.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 25 July
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate is
attached to this statement of reasons.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Scott Andrew Roberts
Respondent:
Upper Lachlan Shire Council
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Peter Honeyman and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Right upper extremity
Cervical spine
Paragraph 1.26
5% (rounded)
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter