URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AYZ [2013] NSWGT 33 (2 August 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 33
(2 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
2 August 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr John Currie
Professional Member:
Ms Roslyn Curran
Community Member:
Dr Margaret Spencer
Guardianship – previous involuntary patient
– schizophrenia - private guardian appointed - functions of accommodation
(with the authority to seek the assistance of others to implement or enforce
accommodation decisions), healthcare, medical and dental
consents, services,
travel and passport.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 2 August 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal decided to make a guardianship order for Mr AYZ. Mr UBZ was appointed
as Mr AYZ’s guardian for a period of 12 months
with authority to make
decisions on his behalf about his accommodation (with the authority to seek the
assistance of others to implement
or enforce accommodation decisions), health
care, medical and dental consents, services, travel and passport
AYZ is a 56-year-old man who lives with his son Mr UBZ at North West Sydney. For
a period during 2012 Mr AYZ lived in New Zealand.
Unfortunately, on 31 December
2012 Mr AYZ was severely assaulted in an Auckland street and he sustained a
severe brain injury and
was hospitalised in New Zealand for three months. Mr AYZ
was then brought to Sydney to continue his recovery process. The Tribunal
understands that on 19 May 2013 Mr AYZ was admitted as an involuntary patient at
a public hospital, subject to a Temporary Patient
Order under the
Health Act.
Mr AYZ was discharged from public hospital on 25 July
11 July 2013 the Tribunal received from Mr UBZ, the son of Mr AYZ, an
application seeking the appointment of a guardian for Mr
AYZ. It is that
application which was the subject of the hearing on to August
The Hearing
Guardianship Act 1987
requires that before the Tribunal makes a decision
on any application, it must bring the parties to a settlement or use its best
to do so. This is not required if the Tribunal considers that it is
not possible, or appropriate, to attempt to bring the parties
to a settlement.
At the hearing the Tribunal use its best endeavours to identify the issues which
were in dispute between the parties
and to bring the parties to a settlement of
those issues. Mr AYZ was in dispute with his son, the applicant Mr UBZ in
relation to
the extent of Mr AYZ’s disabilities, the need for a guardian
and the functions and authorities which a guardian would need.
discussion between the parties and the Tribunal’s intervention to attempt
to assist a narrowing of the issues and
settlement of them, the Tribunal
perceived that it had been partially successful in resolving these
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability
which prevents him from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order?
If so, what
order should be made? Specifically what functions should the guardian have?
guardianship order is to be made, who should be the guardian?
How long should
the guardianship order last?
Participation in the
hearing by Mr AYZ and his views
the commencement of the hearing the Presiding Member explained the functions of
the Tribunal, the procedures which would be adopted
for hearing this application
and the issues which needed to be decided by the Tribunal. Mr AYZ appeared to
have a reasonable understanding
of the explanation by the Presiding Member. He
participated actively in the hearing and appeared to understand the questions
were put to him, the issues which needed to be decided by the Tribunal and
the implications for him of the making of a guardianship
asked by Tribunal Members whether he thought he needed a guardian or some other
form of alternate decision-maker, Mr AYZ said
that he did not need anyone to
to him in the last
12 months, Mr AYZ gave an account of how he had made
investments in New Zealand being a purchase of interest in 4 investment
properties.
When prompted Mr AYZ provided a brief account of being assaulted in
a city-centre street on New Year’s Eve 2012. When asked
of this on his health Mr AYZ said that: “after I recovered nothing was
affected.” When asked whether
he had any residual problems Mr AYZ said
that the only residual problem was that his memory was not quite as good as it
before the assault but he emphasised that “from day 2 basically
there has been no effect on me.”
asked why he had been in a public hospital, Mr AYZ said that he was not
completely sure, that a doctor had visited him at home
and had misled him
because he thought he was going to have further treatment but instead was
admitted to a public hospital. When
Tribunal Members pointed out to Mr AYZ that
the Tribunal had a psychiatrist’s report indicating that he has chronic
schizophrenia,
Mr AYZ denied that he had this disability. When asked when he
last saw a doctor Mr AYZ said he had only needed to see a doctor once
leaving the public hospital a few weeks before the hearing.
TRIBUNAL’S ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE AND DETERMINATION OF THE
Is Mr AYZ someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has
a disability which prevents him from being able to make
important life
Tribunal had received and considered a number of medical and professional
reports in relation to Mr AYZ. In particular there was
a report dated 4 July
2013 from Dr Z. Dr Z was part of Mr AYZ’s treatment team at the public
hospital. She reports that he
suffers from chronic schizophrenia and also
cognitive deficits with the latter apparently being the result of his severe
brain injury
on 31 December 2013.
Z reports that Mr AYZ’s schizophrenia presents with chronic persecutory
delusions that someone is shooting him with electrical
beams. Unfortunately this
results in Mr AYZ attributing all physical pain and symptoms to these delusional
beliefs and for that reason
Mr AYZ has failed to address his health issues
including severe dental problems and follow-up for his head injury. He is
also to have no insight into his schizophrenia. Dr Z understands that
Mr AYZ does not wish to take his medication and wants to leave
the country to
avoid treatment. Dr Z also reports that neuropsychological testing at the public
hospital has recently identified
a concerning degree of cognitive impairment in
Mr AYZ. In particular his executive functioning has been affected and that may
risks in terms of decision-making, impulse control and planning. He is
reported also to have some memory impairment.
diagnosis was supported in an occupational therapy report from a Mental Health
Drug and Alcohol Centre following their assessment
of Mr AYZ on four occasions
between 24 May and 3 June 2013. Amongst the areas of concern noted in the report
were Mr AYZ’s
lack of insight into his mental illness and the fact that he
requires supervision in order to take his medication. He was also reported
isolated with a limited social network and to have difficulty handling money and
remembering PIN numbers. The Tribunal also
reviewed an extract from a
rehabilitation report from ABI Rehabilitation of Auckland New Zealand apparently
carried out during the
period of Mr AYZ’s treatment in New Zealand. This
report strongly recommends ongoing treatment for Mr AYZ and a full
neuropsychological
assessment.
the hearing Mr AYZ’s son Mr UBZ gave a detailed account to the Tribunal of
his father’s current lifestyle and his difficulty
in making decisions. Mr
UBZ said that Mr AYZ had demonstrated a continuing loss in his short-term
memory, some loss of vision and
a refusal to accept treatment or medication. Mr
UBZ confirmed that his father had had chronic persecutory delusions for many
and that he had received treatment and been prescribed medication at
hospitals for more than five years. Mr UBZ said that the condition
“peak” about every five years. It was also confirmed that currently
the Outreach Community Team attends Mr
AYZ on a daily basis to administer his
medications. Mr UBZ said that without this assistance it would be impossible to
ensure that
his father took his medications which include medications for
schizophrenia and for depression.
Tribunal accepted the evidence of Mr UBZ as credible and persuasive. It also
accepted the medical reports referred to above as
professional analytical
professional reports and for that reason reliable and persuasive. The Tribunal
preferred the evidence in
those reports and the evidence of Mr UBZ to the belief
expressed by Mr AYZ that he had no schizophrenia and no substantial ongoing
effects from the assault on New Year’s Eve 2012. On that basis the
Tribunal was satisfied that Mr AYZ is someone for whom it
could make a
guardianship order because he has disabilities which prevent him making some
important life decisions.
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship
Tribunal reminded those participating in the hearing that the Tribunal could
only make a guardianship order for Mr AYZ if it could
be satisfied that there
was a current need for such an order and that such an order would be in his best
interests. The Tribunal
also confirmed that it would have to take into account
the practicability of providing services to him in some way other than by
making of an order.
The evidence
medical and professional care witnesses were in consensus that Mr AYZ was
currently in need of a guardianship order, although
the appointment of a
guardian was actively opposed by Mr AYZ himself.
UBZ, the son of Mr AYZ was strongly of the view that only a guardianship order
would provide the protection that his father needed,
both in terms of his
medical and psychiatric treatment in Australia and in order to prevent his
father from leaving Australia and
returning to New Zealand. Mr UBZ, Ms AIZ, the
sister of Mr AYZ and Ms BAA, the partner of Mr AYZ were in consensus that there
a substantial threat that Mr AYZ would attempt to leave Australia and would
try to live by himself in New Zealand. All of them believed
strongly that there
was no prospect of Mr AYZ being able to look after himself in New Zealand.
Tribunal asked Mr AYZ whether this was the case and he confirmed that he would
like to return to New Zealand. It became clear
from Mr AYZ’s answers to
the Tribunal’s questions and from the evidence of the members of his
immediate family that Mr
AYZ has no family members and no friends or other
connections in New Zealand. Mr UBZ pointed out that his father is of a retiring
and modest disposition and would have difficulty in making friends and
difficulty in asking for assistance if he needed it.
asked specifically whether he had a doctor in New Zealand or anyone to help him
Mr AYZ confirmed that he did not. When asked
how he would go about obtaining
somewhere to live and obtaining services such as arrangements for cooking and
cleaning Mr AYZ said
that he would “buy all I need from
supermarket.” Mr AYZ said that he did have a friend in Auckland and should
to make his own decision if he wanted to return to New
The legal principles
making decisions under the
Guardianship Act
the Tribunal is
required to have regard to the general principles set out in
Act. There are 8 principles enunciated in
and the section requires
everyone exercising functions under the Act to observe them in respect to
persons who have disabilities.
The principles are that:
(a) the welfare
and interests of persons who have disabilities should be given paramount
consideration;
(b) the freedom
of decision and freedom of action of such persons should be restricted as little
as possible;
persons should be encouraged, so far as possible, to live a normal life in the
(d) the views
of such persons in relation to the exercise of functions under the Act should be
taken into consideration;
importance of preserving the family relationships and the cultural and
linguistic environments of such persons should be recognised;
persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to be self-reliant in matters
relating to their personal, domestic and
financial affairs;
persons should be protected from abuse neglect and exploitation; and
community should be encouraged to apply and promote these
principles.
addition, the Act sets out in
Section 14(2)
specific considerations to which the
Tribunal must have regard when considering whether to make a guardianship order.
(a) the views (if any) of the person under consideration, their spouse (if a
continuing and close relationship exists), and the person
who has the care of
the person;
(b) the importance of preserving existing family
relationships;
(c) the importance of preserving cultural and linguistic environments;
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for making such an order.
effect, the Tribunal is directed to consider whether the circumstances of the
person under consideration require the appointment
of a legally-authorised
substitute decision-maker, or whether their need for appropriate decision-making
can be achieved in other
less formal ways. That was confirmed in the case of
[2012] NSW GT 15
(5 June 2012).
Tribunal’s assessment and conclusions
Tribunal saw the following of the
principles as having particular
relevance to this case and as to whether or not a guardianship order should be
relevant principle is that the Tribunal is required to do such things as are
necessary to protect persons in the position
of Mr AYZ from neglect or abuse and
exploitation;
also requires the Tribunal to give due regard to the importance of preserving
the family relationships and the cultural and linguistic
environments of persons
such as Mr AYZ;
does require the Tribunal to restrict the freedom of decision and freedom of
action of such persons as little as possible and to
encourage such persons to
live a normal life in the community;
(d) However
also requires the Tribunal to give paramount consideration to the
welfare and interests of people in the position of Mr AYZ.
accordance with
Guardianship Act, 1987
in deciding whether
or not to make a guardianship order,
the Tribunal took into account of
the factors mentioned in that sub-section which appeared relevant. These
AYZ’s own views, as expressed at the commencement of the hearing and
outlined above. For
the reasons stated under the previous heading the
Tribunal placed greater reliance on the reports and direct evidence of the care
professionals and their conclusions as summarised above than on the views of Mr
AYZ himself;
importance of preserving Mr AYZ’s existing family relationships. The
Tribunal believed that this was an important consideration
in the present matter
because Mr AYZ is obviously receiving considerable support and care from the
immediate members of his family.
importance of preserving Mr AYZ’s particular cultural and linguistic
environments. The Tribunal noted Mr AYZ’s
Chinese/Mandarin cultural
background and took that into account in making its decision on this issue. In
particular it seemed that
an important part of the Chinese culture which would
be of great benefit to Mr AYZ’s ongoing welfare is the maintenance of
close family ties and the availability of strong family support.
practicality of services being provided to Mr AYZ without the need for the
making of a guardianship order.
the basis of this evidence and these conclusions as to the evidence and its
consideration and application of the
factors as outlined above, the
was satisfied that the services which Mr AYZ appeared from the
evidence to require currently could not be provided practically other
the appointment by this Tribunal of a guardian.
followed that there was a need for a guardianship order for Mr AYZ, that such an
order would be in his best interests; and that
such an order should be
If so, what order should be made? Specifically what
functions should the guardian have?
the basis of the detailed evidence of Mr UBZ, the son of Mr AYZ, which the
Tribunal accepted as reliable and persuasive, the Tribunal
was satisfied that
any guardian for Mr AYZ would need the authority to make decisions about his
accommodation, health care medical
and dental consents and services.
Tribunal also gave consideration to granting the guardian the authority to
engage others, including if necessary members of the
police and ambulance
services, to enforce accommodation decisions. This authority is granted
sparingly, in light of the clear obligation
on the Tribunal under
Guardianship Act
to attempt to restrict the freedom of action and
freedom of decision of the subject person as little as possible. However in this
case there was clear evidence from Mr UBZ, which the Tribunal accepted, which
was supported by the evidence of other close family
members including Mr
AYZ’s partner, that Mr AYZ had no insight into his psychiatric illness,
that he had made frequent mention
of his plans to return to New Zealand, that he
did not recognise the importance of medication and ongoing treatment and that he
made repeated expressions of a wish to live independently and not be
bothered by medical professionals.
the basis of that evidence, which the Tribunal accepted, the Tribunal was
satisfied that this is a suitable case for the granting
of the additional
authority, known commonly as the coercive powers, in respect of accommodation
Tribunal also gave consideration to whether the guardian for Mr AYZ should have
the additional function of making decisions about
his travel and his access and
use of his Australian passport. Again these are functions which are granted
sparingly and only after
careful consideration. Significantly, the Tribunal
Members asked Mr AYZ how he would go about getting to New Zealand Mr AYZ
that he would simply buy an air ticket with his money. When asked what
he would do about his medications while he was in New Zealand
Mr AYZ answered
that he did not have any illness and therefore medications were of no use to
him. Mr AYZ emphasised that he was sure
that his father would attempt to go to
New Zealand notwithstanding any family objections and this could happen on short
with no notice.
light of this evidence, which the Tribunal accepted, the Tribunal concluded that
there was a real and immediate possibility that
Mr AYZ would attempt to leave
Australia and travel to New Zealand, that he would not make proper arrangements
for ongoing medical
care or medication in those circumstances and that it
appeared that he would lack personal care and may well be subject to
exploitation,
neglect and abuse if not outright physical danger if he
implemented his travel plans.
Guardianship Act
require the Tribunal to have as its paramount consideration the welfare and
interests of people in the position of Mr AYZ and
the Tribunal is also required
to do what it can to protect such people from neglect and abuse and
exploitation. Ultimately the Tribunal
was satisfied for these reasons that this
is a suitable case for the appointed guardian to have the additional functions
decisions about Mr AYZ’s travel and passport
If a guardianship order is to be made, who should be the
the application and at the hearing it was proposed that Mr AYZ’s son Mr
UBZ should be appointed as his guardian.
Tribunal may appoint a private person or the Public Guardian as a guardian. The
Tribunal will not appoint the Public Guardian
if an order could be made
appointing a suitable private person as guardian. So, wherever possible, the
Tribunal appoints a family
member or a friend to act as guardian. A private
guardian must be at least 18 years old.
Guardianship Act 1987
expressly prohibits the Tribunal from
appointing a person as guardian unless satisfied that the person meets the
following requirements.
The person must:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship;
(b) have no
undue conflict of interest , particularly but not restricted to a financial
conflict of interest, in respect of the person
under guardianship; and
(c) be willing
and able to exercise the functions of the order.
Tribunal discussed in some detail with Mr UBZ the potentially difficult
decisions which were he would have to make on his father’s
behalf and the
likelihood that these decisions, particularly any restrictions on Mr AYZ’s
and decisions involving the coercive
authority would be strongly opposed by Mr AYZ and might have implications for
the important
relationship between Mr UBZ in his father. Mr UBZ told the
Tribunal that he understood the potential difficulties involved in his
guardian but felt that he was the person with the most influence over his
father, that he had discussed this possibility
in some detail with his father
and that he had the support of family members.
part of this discussion Mr AYZ confirmed that if he were to have a guardian he
would prefer it to be his son Mr UBZ. The appointment
of Mr UBZ also received
the firm support of the other family members present.
Tribunal was satisfied that Mr UBZ had a compatible personality with that of his
father Mr AYZ, that there was no conflict of
interest preventing his appointment
and that he was willing and able to exercise the functions of Mr AYZ’s
guardian. On the
basis of these conclusions the Tribunal was satisfied that Mr
UBZ is a suitable person to be appointed as guardian and that his appointment
would be in Mr AYZ’s best interests. No other private person was
identified to the Tribunal as being willing to be considered
for appointment as
guardian. On that basis the Tribunal decided to appoint Mr UBZ as the guardian
How long should the guardianship order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it was made. However, an order of
up to three years can be made if
the person the subject of the order has permanent disabilities and is unlikely
to become capable
of managing his or her person and there is the need for an
order longer than one year.
Tribunal decided to make an order for one year. In making this decision the
Tribunal took into account the need to restrict the
length of operation of
restrictive authorities such as the coercive authority and the travel and
passport functions, where appropriate.
However, in this case that point was
specifically addressed by Mr UBZ who requested a 12 month term on the basis that
his father’s
ongoing difficulties in accepting the need for treatment and
medication would mean that the potential for him to leave a safe and
environment in Australia would continue for the medium to long term.
Tribunal also took into account the fact that although some early decisions
would be needed from the guardian, particularly in
respect of Mr AYZ’s
current health care including his dental care, there would be an ongoing need
for the guardian to be available
to make decisions for him under each of the
functions granted. The Tribunal was satisfied on the basis of the evidence that
consistent with Mr AYZ’s interests and welfare for the order to be
made for one year and made the order accordingly.
Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter