URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maria (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 27; (20 December 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Maria (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 27
Hearing Date(s):
20 December 2024
Date of Orders:
20 December 2024
Decision Date:
20 December 2024
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
The Financial Management order for Maria made on 16 May 2018 has been
reviewed. The order now is as follows:
1. The appointment of Lana
of [address removed for publication] as the financial manager(s) of the estate
of Maria is revoked.
2. The estate of Maria is subject to
management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
The management of the estate of Maria is committed to the NSW Trustee and
4. Lana is to hand over or pay over the estate to NSW
Trustee and Guardian of Justice Precinct Offices, Ground floor, 160 Marsden
Street PARRAMATTA NSW 2124.
Catchwords:
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – review of financial management order –
whether the financial management order should be revoked
– whether it is
in the best interests of the subject person that the financial management order
be revoked – where the
appointed financial manager has failed to comply
with the directions and authorities of the NSW Trustee and Guardian –
the appointed financial manager and the subject person currently reside
overseas – order revoked.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
NSW Trustee and Guardian
(NSW), Div 2 of
Cases Cited:
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
Holt & Anor v
Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
[2013] NSWSC 1495
Texts Cited:
NSW Trustee and Guardian, “Private Manager’s
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/noindex/2024-03/private-financial-managers-handbook.pdf
14 July 2025
Principal judgment
007: Review or Revoke Financial Management Order
NSW Trustee and Guardian (applicant)
Lana (appointed financial
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2018/00056320
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an 87-year-old woman who ordinarily lives with her niece and carer, Lana, in
her own home in a suburb in the Upper North
Shore region of Sydney. At the time
of the Hearing, Maria and Lana were residing in Taiwan.
16 May 2018, the Tribunal appointed Lana as Maria’s financial manager,
subject to the authorities and directions of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian. On
the same date the Tribunal appointed Lana as Maria’s guardian.
This order has subsequently been reviewed.
Most recently, on 25 May 2023
the Tribunal reappointed Lana as Maria’s guardian for a period of three
years with the functions
of accommodation, services, health care and
medical/dental consent.
11 December 2024, the Tribunal received an urgent request from the NSW Trustee
and Guardian seeking a review of the financial management
order made on 16 May
Reasons for Decision relate to the requested review of the financial management
order requested by the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Hearing was urgently listed on 20 December 2024 and was conducted virtually from
the Tribunal’s Sydney Registry.
Hearing was attended by the following people:
(1) Maria, the subject person;
(2) Lana, the appointed financial manager;
(3) a representative on behalf of the NSW Trustee and Guardian, the applicant;
(4) Patrick, Lana’s son.
Tribunal was also assisted by a certified interpreter in the Mandarin
Maria attended the Hearing, she was unable to engage in the Hearing process,
even with the assistance of a Mandarin interpreter.
Maria is reported to live
with advanced dementia, and the Tribunal was informed that Maria would not be
able to understand the discussion
or converse with the Tribunal either in
Mandarin or English. This was consistent with the Tribunal’s attempts to
engage with
Maria, where she was noted to be non-responsive to the
Tribunal’s attempts to converse with her in both languages.
the conclusion of the Hearing the Tribunal decided to revoke Lana’s
appointment as Maria’s financial manager and commit
the management of
Maria’s estate to the management of the NSW Trustee and
WHAT DID THE TRIBUNAL HAVE TO DECIDE?
reviewing the appointment of the manager of Maria’s estate, the Tribunal
may either confirm or revoke the appointment. The
Tribunal may revoke the
appointment under review only if:
(a) The appointed manager seeks the revocation; or
(b) The Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the best interests of Maria that the
appointment be revoked.
the appointment of the manager is revoked but the financial management order
remains in place, the Tribunal must appoint a substitute
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW), the Tribunal must act with the interests of
the person concerned as the paramount consideration and in accordance with the
other principles set out in
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a
financial management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the
estate or may commit the management of the estate to the
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of an estate.
Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective Commissioner.
the side of the Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest independence
of the statutory office, the advantages of a dispassionate
and neutral approach
in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the best interests of
the person, expertise and experience
in managing estates, an impeccable
reputation and the security provided to an estate against loss or damage.
advantages of the appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (that is, freedom from fees)
and a greater familiarity with
assets and liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a
disability to interact
with the manager so as to exercise a greater influence
over the broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection
for and knowledge of the protected person and concern for his or her quality of
life, and particular qualities or qualifications
enabling family members to act
as managers.
Application by AMAM; Re SAM
[2011] NSWSC 503
, Hallen AsJ
“[34] It would be unwise to attempt any definition of
the matters that may legitimately be enquired into to determine whether
applicant is suitable. Each case must depend on its own circumstances. Needless
to say, however, the Court must consider, at
least, the proposed manager’s
character, honesty and ability to manage, diligently, the managed person’s
property in
the managed person’s best interests.”
matters or “guidelines” which a Tribunal should consider when
determining who to appoint as a financial manager are
discussed by Lindsay J in
[2013] NSWSC 1495
Guardianship Act
outlines that the appointment of a
suitable person as the manager of an estate does not authorise the manager to
interfere in any
way with the estate concerned unless the NSW Trustee and
Guardian has authorised the person to exercise functions in respect of the
estate in accordance with Div 2 of
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
outlines that the NSW
Trustee and Guardian may, inter alia:
(1) Make such orders as it thinks fit in relation to the administration and
management of the estates of managed persons;
(2) Make such orders as it thinks fit in connection with authorising, directing
and enforcing the exercise of the functions of the
managers under the Act;
(3) Authorise a manager to have all, or any specified functions, necessary and
incidental to the management and care of an estate
and such other functions as
the NSW Trustee and Guardian may direct or authorise the manager to have or
(4) Give a manager such directions in respect of the orders, authorities and
directions authorised as the NSW Trustee and Guardian
thinks fit.
SUMMARY OF WRITTEN EVIDENCE
Tribunal received various documents from NSW Trustee and Guardian and Lana in
relation to the current application. Although the
Tribunal has considered each
of the documents received, only those that are of particular relevance to the
Tribunal’s decision
are recounted herein.
Tribunal was provided with a Private Management Report prepared by the
representative on behalf of the NSW Trustee and Guardian,
dated 17 December
2024 (“the TAG Report”).
TAG Report outlines the following:
(1) Directions and authorities were issued to Lana on 21 May 2018.
(2) Maria has substantial assets, including:
(a) Funds held in an Australian bank totalling approximately $340,000;
(b) Shares with the Australian Bank valued at approximately $835,000;
(c) Real property situated in Sydney North Shore, valued at approximately
(3) Maria’s annual payments towards “personal living expenses”
were recorded as $7,962.06.
(4) During the operation of the order Lana has submitted various Change in
Estate requests to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
(5) On 1 February 2024, the NSW Trustee rejected a Change in Estate requested by
Lana involving expenditure of $25,000 from Maria’s
estate for Maria, Lana
and Lana’s husband to travel to Taiwan for the purpose of obtaining
medical treatment for Maria. This
decision was made following the engagement of
an Authorised Visitor.
(6) The decision made on 1 February 2024 was affirmed following an Internal
Review of Decision, with a further direction made for
Lana to engage Maria with
a Geriatrician in Sydney.
(7) It has since been discovered by the NSW Trustee and Guardian that Lana
failed to comply with the decision made. The NSW Trustee
and Guardian has
obtained records from the Australian bank which identify that funds in excess of
$43,000 have been transferred from
Maria’s bank account to a travel card,
with there being no record of a travel card being held in Maria’s name.
Tribunal was provided with a copy of the NSW Trustee and Guardian Authorised
Visitor Assessment Report, prepared by a Clinical
Psychologist, dated 20 January
2024 (“the Authorised Visitor Report”).
Authorised Visitor Report outlines the following:
(1) Lana and her husband have lived with Maria since 2018 under the conditions
of a Carer Visa (subclass 836).
(2) Lana and her husband proposed to accompany Maria to Taiwan for the purpose
of securing guardianship under Taiwanese law and thereafter
to access medical
services at the Kaohsiung Veteran’s General Hospital, Centre for
Geriatrics and Gerontology.
(3) Although Lana identified that the intention of the trip was to “seek
medical treatment overseas,” she was vague about
any anticipated
treatment, including the nature of the treatment or the time frame involved.
Lana asserted that it was not possible
to obtain the help and support Maria
requires in Australia.
(4) Lana has not sought appropriate medical treatment for Maria in Australia
during the last five years, reporting that she has saved
Maria nearly $200,000
by not engaging such care. The Authorised Visitor states:
“It is difficult to reconcile Lana’s statement ‘Aunty
[Maria]’s life and health are of top priority, I cannot
give up applying
for [Maria] to seek medical treatment overseas’ (sic) with the fact that
[Maria]. Does not appear to have
received appropriate medical treatment in
Australia.”
(5) It is reported that Maria is opposed to medical intervention, and the
Authorised Visitor “cannot see why she would comply
with the same
intervention in Taiwan”.
(6) Comprehensive overseas travel insurance would be essential should Maria
travel to Taiwan, and it is unlikely that such approval
would be given on
account of Maria’s medical status. Lana was opposed to obtaining overseas
travel insurance for Maria.
(7) The Authorised Visitor raises concerns about Maria’s ability to
cope with the flight and the suitability of any accommodation
that would need to
be sourced for Maria in Taiwan (including that hotel accommodation would not be
(8) Lana expressed a belief that “travelling is good for
dementia”. The Authorised Visitor disagrees with Lana’s
assertion, reporting that “it is likely that any extended stay away from
the familiarity of her home environment, is likely
to trigger behaviours a
degree of distress to the extent that external help and intervention would be
necessary”.
(9) The Authorised Visitor makes the following conclusions and
recommendations:
“Without comprehensive overseas travel insurance (medical), travel to
Taiwan, along with residency there (for a period of some
contra-indicated;
[Maria]’s likely compliance and co-operation with any proposed medical
treatment in Taiwan is questionable;
[Maria] requires comprehensive assessment by a psycho-geriatrician (with
recommendations for suitable treatment options in Sydney);
Exploration of respite care options for [Maria] so that [Lana] is temporarily
relieved of the care of her aunt and thereby able to
have a holiday with her
In conclusion, in my opinion, Maria has an unstable medical condition which
precludes her both from overseas travel by air and/or
an extended stay overseas
away from the security of her own home environment with access to appropriate
Tribunal was provided a copy of the Internal Review of Decision dated
1 March 2024 and made by Mr Dennis, Manager, Estate Management
(“the Internal Review”).
Internal Review includes the following comments:
“In reviewing the above decision and requestors review request, I have
applied the General Principles of Section 39 of
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
(a) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given paramount
consideration,
And guided by this General Principle, I note that the Authorised Visitor’s
Report clearly indicates that travel is not possible
under the present
circumstances for [Maria] and, therefore, not in her best interests.
I conclude that while [Lana] (and her husband) has been caring for [Maria] for
more than five years - noting [Lana]’s care
with [Maria]’s money
– [Maria] must see a psychogeriatrician here in Sydney to determine
appropriate treatment/s and
care for [Maria], and to also provide [Lana] and her
husband with time for holidays.
It is clear that [Lana] needs to access appropriate local medical professional
assistance to make sure that the care being provided
is best adapted to [Maria]
and her circumstances. This has not happened to date and, therefore, no trip can
be considered as [Maria]’s
reactions to travel, and stays in unknown
environments, cannot be determined.”
Internal Review records the following decision:
the decision made by [the NSW Trustee and Guardian
representative], made on 1 February 2024 to decline the proposed travel. While
affordable for [Maria]’s estate it is not her best interests or welfare
and that the Authorised Visitor has detailed that [Maria]
does not have the
capacity to travel.
to the decision that [Lana] must follow the Authorised
Visitor’s recommendation that Maria receives a comprehensive assessment,
by a local Sydney psycho-geriatrician, to provide suitable treatment options in
Sydney so that appropriate respite care options for
[Maria] can provide [Lana]
(and her husband) with temporary relief from her aunt’s care so that
[Lana] is able to take holidays
with her husband.”
Tribunal was provided (by NSW Trustee and Guardian) with a number of bank
statements from Maria’s Australian bank accounts
(accounts ending ...937,
...805, ...478 and ...404 for the period (various dates in) May 2024 to 9
December 2024 (“the [Bank]
Statements”).
Bank Statements identify the following transfers from Maria’s account
ending ...805 with transaction details recorded as
[Australian Bank]
TRAVEL MONEY [Details removed for publication] to a Travel Money
(1) Payment on 20 June 2024 of $6,000;
(2) Payment on 3 August 2024 of $6,000;
(3) Payment on 10 September 2024 of $6,000;
(4) Payment on 18 October 2024 of $5,000;
(5) Payment on 11 November 2024 of $5,000;
(6) Payment on 9 December 2024 of $6,000.
TAG Report outlines that similar payments were made prior to May 2024, however
statements regarding those earlier transactions
were not before the
provided the Tribunal with a letter from the Department of Home Affairs dated 27
June 2024 (“the DHA letter”). The
DHA letter outlines that on
23 June 2024 Lana applied for a Visitor (class FA) Visitor (Tourist)
(subclass 600) visa, and that this
application was refused on 27 June 2024.
The application was made for a tourist visa for a period of 3 months.
provided the Tribunal with what appear to be receipts, though the documents
provided were not in English. At the Hearing, Lana
confirmed with the Tribunal
that the documents are receipts for payments made regarding medical/allied
health treatment obtained
for Maria in Taiwan. Those receipts indicate
expenditure of NTD $2,698 on 12 December 2024 (roughly equivalent to AUD $129)
$5,412 on 26 December 2024 (roughly equivalent to AUD
SUMMARY OF ORAL EVIDENCE
NSW Trustee and Guardian representative provided evidence on behalf of NSW
Trustee and Guardian; however, her oral evidence was
largely confirming the
confirming the contents of the written evidence provided to the Tribunal, with
no significant additional evidence
provided orally.
provided oral evidence to the Tribunal. Lana’s oral evidence was often
tangential or of limited relevance to the questions
asked by the Tribunal.
It was often difficult for the Tribunal to discern the nature of the
evidence intended to be provided by Lana.
At one point during the Hearing the
Tribunal was required to ascertain from Patrick whether there are any
concern’s regarding
Lana’s cognitive function on account of the
manner in which she presented her evidence. Patrick denied that there are any
for his mother regarding cognitive impairment, commenting words to the
effect of “she has always been like this”.
Notwithstanding
the difficulty in following Lana’s oral evidence at times,
the Tribunal was able to clearly ascertain the following:
(1) Lana confirmed that she was aware of the decision made by NSW Trustee
and Guardian, both the initial decision made on 1 February
2024, and the
Internal Review decision made on 1 March 2024.
(2) Lana informed the Tribunal that she and Maria departed Australia on 31 March
2024, arriving in Taiwan on 1 April 2024.
(3) Lana informed the Tribunal that Maria’s travel to Taiwan was initially
intended to be temporary, however she is “getting
worse” and Lana is
unsure whether Maria will be in a position to return to Australia.
(4) Lana maintained her position that it was necessary for Maria to travel to
Taiwan to obtain appropriate medical treatment, though
the exact nature of that
treatment was not clear to the Tribunal. Lana outlined that Maria is in the
“late stages of dementia”
and that she is “getting better care
in Taiwan”. She queried why Maria “can’t use her own
access this treatment.
(5) In response to the concerns identified by NSW Trustee and Guardian, Lana
told the Tribunal “I don’t understand what
they are worried
(6) Lana informed the Tribunal that the use of a Travel Card was necessary
because Maria’s Australian bank cards could not
be used in Taiwan. The
rationale for this was not clear to the Tribunal.
(7) Lana denied having used Maria’s funds to pay for Lana and her
husband’s travel expenses, asserting that these expenses
were paid from
Lana’s personal bank account.
Tribunal attempted to summarise the legal implications of significant concerns
raised by the NSW Trustee and Guardian. The Tribunal
noted that on the face of
the evidence Lana appears to have demonstrated a complete disregard for the
scope of her authority and
the legislative role of the NSW Trustee and
Guardian. In response to these observations Lana provided evidence as
(1) Lana denied that she has failed to comply with the authorities and
directions of NSW Trustee and Guardian. She outlined that
she has always sought
authority when needed and has always followed restrictions imposed on her by the
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
(2) Lana denied that she required authority from NSW Trustee and Guardian to
incur the expenses currently subject to challenge. She
outlined that she
has been following the guidance provided in the Private Manager’s
Handbook, and that there are no restrictions
on her using Maria’s funds
for the payment of daily expenses and medical expenses. Lana asserted that this
was the nature of
the disputed transactions.
maintained her position that “the most important thing is [Maria]’s
wellbeing” and recounted the differences
between the Australian medical
system and the Taiwanese medical system in attempting to justify why it had been
necessary for Maria
to travel to Taiwan.
asserted that Maria is being disadvantaged by the involvement of the NSW Trustee
and Guardian, describing their “office”
“dysfunctional”.
provided evidence to the effect that he does not support Lana continuing in the
role as Maria’s financial manager. It
was not clear to the Tribunal,
however, whether this position was a consequence of concerns regarding
Lana’s management of
Maria’s affairs, or the impact Lana’s
appointment has had on her own wellbeing.
CONSIDERATION
expressed a desire to continue as Maria’s financial manager, and
accordingly her appointment cannot be revoked on the basis
that she seeks
revocation. It is, therefore, necessary for the Tribunal to consider whether it
would be in Maria’s best interests
for Lana’s appointment to be
the avoidance of doubt the Tribunal notes that these proceedings are not a
review of the decision made by the NSW Trustee and
Guardian on 1 February
2024, confirmed on internal review on 1 March 2024. Whilst Lana clearly
disagrees with the decision made by
the NSW Trustee and Guardian, on the face of
the material provided to the Tribunal that decision has not been the subject of
administrative
review and has not been set aside or varied. Accordingly,
pursuant to
Guardianship Act
, Lana was required to exercise
the functions of her appointment as financial manager in accordance with the
directions issued by
the NSW Trustee and Guardian, even if she did not agree
with those directions.
denies that she has failed to comply with the directions and authorities of the
NSW Trustee and Guardian. In support of this
position Lana asserts that the
expenses incurred on Maria’s behalf whilst in Taiwan were for the payment
of Maria’s day
to day expenses, and in accordance with the guidance
provided in the Private Manager’s
, Lana was not required to
obtain the approval of the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
page 11 of the Private Manager’s Handbook, under the heading
“Spending”, it states:
“The Directions and Authorities gives you the power to meet a range of
day-to-day expenses on behalf of the managed person.
These expenses include:
● General living costs such as accommodation, care and
medical expenses.”
in the Private Manager’s Handbook (page 10 under the heading “Key
Duties”) it states:
“As a private manager, you also have specific obligations relating to the
oversight of your financial management by NSW Trustee
and Guardian. These
● Following any directions given by us
● Ensuring that at all times you keep the managed
person’s financial affairs separate from your own, including using
separate bank accounts in the managed person’s name
● Seeking prior approval from us for expenditure other
than day-to-day expenses”
Tribunal simply cannot accept Lana’s assertions that the funds transferred
to the Travel Money Card were used exclusively
for the payment of Maria’s
day to day expenses for the following reasons:
(1) The evidence provided by the NSW Trustee and Guardian outlines that in
excess of AUD $43,000 has been transferred from Maria’s
Australian bank
account to the Travel Money Card.
(2) The evidence provided by Lana justifies expenditure of approximately AUD
$388 on medical expenses for Maria in December 2024.
(3) Maria’s annual personal living expenses (groceries, entertainment,
transport, medical) for the reporting year ending May
2024 (whilst living in
Australia) were $7,962.06, well below the amount in question. There was no
explanation provided by Lana with
respect to the significantly inflated
(4) Maria’s bank accounts identify that during her absence from the
country she has continued to be responsible for the payment
accommodation expenses, property expenses and utilities in Australia. In the
Tribunal’s view, Maria’s “day-to-day”
expenses include
maintaining her property in Australia, and do not extend to the payment of
expenses for additional accommodation,
which would constitute a discretionary
Hearing, it was evident that Lana and Maria are residing in Taiwan in
apartment-style accommodation (not a hotel). There is no
evidence to suggest
that authority has been obtained from NSW Trustee and Guardian for a lease or
similar to be entered into in Maria’s
name, or for her estate to be
applied towards rental payments over and above her usual accommodation expenses.
Whilst the Tribunal
acknowledges that the financial management order does not
have extra-territorial effect, and would not necessarily prevent Maria
entering into an overseas lease agreement, the funds held in her Australian bank
account are subject to management and could
not be applied for this purpose
without approval from NSW Trustee and Guardian.
if the Tribunal is wrong in relation to the appropriate classification of
Maria’s expenses whilst residing in Taiwan, Lana’s
argument that she
was acting within the scope of her authority cannot succeed for the following
(1) To the extent that Lana has relied on a general authority to be permitted to
pay day-to-day expenses on Maria’s behalf
without the need to obtain
further authority, such general authority was displaced by the decision made by
the NSW Trustee and Guardian
on 1 February 2024 and confirmed by internal review
on 1 March 2024.
(2) Lana was provided an explicit direction by the NSW Trustee and Guardian to
the effect that she was not permitted to incur expenses
on Maria’s behalf
in relation to travel to Taiwan, accommodation in Taiwan, and the provision of
medical care in Taiwan.
(3) Lana, with knowledge of the decision made by NSW Trustee and Guardian, has
acted with complete disregard of the decision and
incurred expenses that far
exceed Maria’s ordinary day-to-day expenses on matters where authority to
incur such expenses has
been explicitly and categorically refused by NSW Trustee
and Guardian.
concerns are identified by the Tribunal with respect to Lana’s use of the
Travel Money Card as follows:
(1) The Tribunal accepts the evidence provided by NSW Trustee and Guardian that
the Travel Money Card is not held in Maria’s
(2) Assuming that the Travel Money Card is held in Lana’s name (or some
other third party), there was no approval sought from
the NSW Trustee and
Guardian to deplete Maria’s estate in the vicinity of $43,000 by
transferring those funds to another person.
(3) In the event that the Travel Money Card is held in Lana’s name, she
has failed to comply with her obligation to keep her
affairs and Maria’s
affairs separate.
(4) The Tribunal understands that by using the Travel Money Card for the payment
of expenses there is a lack of transparency and
accountability with respect to
the obligation to lodge accounts with the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
further complication in the matter relates to the ability or otherwise of either
Lana or Maria to return to Australia. As outlined
above, Lana asserts that due
to a decline in Maria’s health it may not be possible for her to return to
the written evidence provided by Lana it is evident that there are restrictions
around her ability to return to Australia. As at
the time of the meeting with
the Authorised Visitor it was reported that Lana was residing in Australia under
a Carer Visa (subclass
836). As at 27 June 2024, Lana had been denied a Tourist
Visa (subclass 600). There was no evidence provided to the Tribunal as to
Lana was required to apply for a Tourist Visa to enter Australia if she were
otherwise entitled to re-enter Australia under her
Carer Visa. The Tribunal
infers from this evidence that Lana’s Carer Visa no longer remains valid
(perhaps as a consequence
of Maria’s removal from Australia).
Tribunal is concerned that Lana has demonstrated wilful non-compliance with the
decision made by the NSW Trustee and Guardian
and disregard for the role of the
NSW Trustee and Guardian in the appropriate oversight of Maria’s affairs.
The fact that she
disagreed with the decision of the NSW Trustee and Guardian
and believed that the expenditure would be in Maria’s interests
justify her actions.
Lana be permitted to continue to manage Maria’s affairs contrary
to the directions and authorities of the NSW Trustee
and Guardian,
her absence from Australia raises significant barriers to the ability of
NSW Trustee and Guardian to take appropriate
recourse for the protection of
Maria’s estate.
Lana expressed a desire to continue in the management of Maria’s estate,
her conduct to date demonstrates a fundamental
inability to fulfil the practical
and legal requirements of her appointment as financial manager. In these
circumstances the Tribunal
cannot be satisfied that Lana continues to be a
suitable person to be appointed as Maria’s financial manager.
light of the above finding, the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in
Maria’s best interests for Lana’s appointment as
financial manager
to be revoked. The Tribunal is satisfied that it is in Maria’s best
interests for her estate to be managed
by a person or entity who is able to
fully comply with the legal requirements associated with such management.
was no evidence to suggest that Maria has become capable of managing her
affairs. Indeed, the Tribunal’s observations
on Maria during the Hearing
were consistent with a person living with advanced dementia, and this was not in
dispute at Hearing.
Maria’s absence from the country (whether that be on a permanent or
temporary basis), Maria continues to hold significant
assets in New South Wales.
Accordingly, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make a
financial management order is retained.
revoked Lana’s appointment as financial manager, and there being no other
suitable person to be appointed to the role,
the Tribunal decided to commit the
management of Maria’s estate to the NSW Trustee and
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/noindex/2024-03/private-financial-managers-handbook.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (286 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter