URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v Festa & Maintenance Exteriors Pty Ltd [2000] NSWFTT 18 (18 December 2000)
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v Festa & Maintenance
Exteriors Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWFTT 18
(18 December 2000)
File No. BU 2000/2245
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Director-General, Department of Fair
: Festa & Maintenance Exteriors Pty
APPLICATION
: Show Cause
APPEARANCES
T Lynch of Counsel for Applicant
Mr. Casselden of Counsel for
: 9 October 2000 & 29 November
Legislative Provisions:
Disciplinary action against licensed
Cases cited:
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association(1960)
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
Breaches of
established
disciplinary action,
The allegations of breaches of the
Building Act 1989
set forth in Annexure A to the Notice to Show Cause issued to
Mr. Festa dated 7 March 2000 have been established.
Mr. Festa is cautioned pursuant to
Section 74 (b) of the
Mr. Festa is to notify the Department of
Fair Trading, of the full contract details and insurance certificates in place
of every contract entered into by him in the state of New South Wales
in the sum of $5,000 and over, within 7 days of the date of
entering into the
contract, for a period of 180 days from the date of this
The Respondent is to pay the
Applicant’s costs of $7,000 within 180 days of the date
Exhibits to be returned after 28
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
The Director-General of the Department of
Fair Trading has issued a Notice to Show Cause to Mr. Festa dated 7 March 2000
and the company
of which he was a director, Maintenance Exteriors Pty Ltd, of
the same date.
Each Notice to Show Cause addressed to
the respective Respondent, requires the Respondent to show cause why he or it
should not be
dealt with under
deals with, amongst other things,
a disciplinary regime with respect to the activities of the holder of a licence
operating in the State of New South
In respect to the second Respondent, the
Director-General discontinued the proceedings as the company, Maintenance
Exteriors Pty Ltd,
is in liquidation.
Mr. Festa is the holder of an individual
licence as a painter and also operated a painting business through two companies
Maintenance
Exteriors Pty Ltd a company of which he was a director and
Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd a company of which he was a sole director and secretary.
Stretch-Guard is not licensed to carry out residential building work in New
South Wales.
Mr. Festa’s work was based in rural
Queensland and northern New South Wales where he conducted business by way of
advertising
for work mainly in the painting of farm buildings. The evidence is
that he has carried out this business over some 30 years and
is now aged 61
In relation to certain works conducted in
New South Wales, complaints were made by two separate consumers which resulted
in hearings
in the Fair Trading Tribunal’s predecessor, the Building
Disputes Tribunal. The first of the allegations was that on and from
September 1997 the Respondent failed to take any steps to ensure that
Maintenance Exteriors Pty Ltd complied with an order of
the Consumer Claims
Tribunal dated 27 August 1997.
The second claim was in similar terms in
respect of an order of the Consumer Claims Tribunal dated 23 March 1998.
The third allegation against the
Respondent arose out of a contract entered into by Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd by way
of a document described
as Contract 27 dated 26 February 1997 whereupon the
first Respondent as the company representative proposed to carry out roof and
wall painting on a property at Coolabah for Mr. and Ms. Hall. The company was
not at the time licensed to carry out building services
in New South Wales.
Legislative Framework
The jurisdiction of the Fair Trading
Tribunal to hear a show cause action is established under
Building Act 1989
in the following terms
66 Jurisdiction of Tribunal
The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine show cause
64 Content of Show Cause Notice
A show cause
notice must state the ground on which the Respondent is required to show
section 63(2)
(2) In deciding whether to issue a show cause notice, the
Director-General is required to have regard to :
to whether any complaint has
been resolved, and
protection of the interests of home owners, ......... and the users of building
Improper Conduct Provisions
The Notice to Show Cause issued to Mr.
Festa recites a number of breaches of the provisions of
Building Act 1989
Section 51(2)(c)
The holder of a licence is guilty of improper
conduct if the
.........................................
does not comply with an order
of the Tribunal.....
Section 54(1)
An individual who
is...an officer of a corporation that is the holder of a licence is guilty of
improper conduct if the holder does
any of the things referred to in
Section 51(1)(a)
A holder of a licence
who is authorised by the licence to contract to residential building work.....,
or a holder of a supervisor
certificate, is guilty of improper conduct if the
commits an offence against
this Act.......
person must not contract to do:
any residential building
except as or on behalf of an individual,
partnership or corporation that is the holder of a
licence.......
Particulars of the Allegations
The Department did not proceed against
the company as it was already in liquidation at the time of hearing.
In respect of Mr. Festa who held an
individual building licence at the time of hearing, the allegations
On and from the 22 September 1997,
the Respondent failed to ensure that Maintenance Exteriors Pty Ltd complied with
an order of the
Consumer Claims Tribunal dated 22 August 1997, contrary to the
requirements of
section 51(2)(c)
section 54(1)
On and from the 23 April 1998, the
Respondent failed to ensure that Maintenance Exteriors Pty Ltd complied with an
order of the Consumer
Claims Tribunal dated 23 March 1998, contrary to the
requirements of
section 51(2)(c)
section 54(1)
On or about 26 February 1997, the
Respondent entered into a contract to do residential building work on behalf of
a corporation, namely,
Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd, which at the relevant time, did
not hold a licence authorising it to contract to do the work, contrary to
section 51(1)(a)
Applicant’s Evidence
The Applicant tendered 5 affidavits
Ms. Nixon sworn 3 February
Ms. Nixon gave affidavit evidence that she and her husband signed a
one-page contract with Mr. Testa on 16 December 1995 in the sum
of $13,800.00
for the painting of parts of the homestead. The Contractor was named as
Maintenance Exteriors Pty. Ltd.
The work was carried out by a
sub-contractor , Mr. Cavello. The work proved to be unsatisfactory. An order of
the Building Disputes
Tribunal was made on 23 March 1998 that the companies
Maintenance Exteriors Pty. Ltd. and Stretch-Guard Pty. Ltd. pay to the
The order was not complied with by the
respondent.
Ms. Hall sworn 2 February
Ms. Hall’s evidence is that she and her Husband were canvassed
for painting work on their farm buildings on or about 26 February
1997 by Mr.
Festa and an assistant “Don”. A contract was prepared with the
contractor being named as Stretch-Guard Pty.
Ltd. The sum was
Following work on the roof, the Applicants found damage to the
roof caused by the workmen walking on the roof.
The dispute went to the
Building Disputes Tribunal and an order was made in favour of the Applicants in
the sum of $11,578.
The order was not complied with but the respondent
sought a rehearing at which time the sum was reduced to $8,000. Again the order
was not complied with.
Mrs. Murray sworn 2
February 2000
Mr. and Mrs. Murray contracted to have the roof of their
commenced and the Home Owners commenced action in the
Local Court. They were
awarded an order for $1,000.on 22 August 1997.
The order was not
complied with.
Mr. Bradford sworn 15
February 2000
In his first affidavit , Mr. Bradford gave evidence of
the result of searches of the Department of Fair Trading licence records.
Stretch-Guard Pty. Ltd. was not licensed in New South Wales. Mr. Testa was
licensed in N.S.W. to do, inter alia, painting from
26/04/1994.
Mr. Bradford sworn 15 February
Due to objection this affidavit was not read.
In relation to
certain of the documents tendered objection was taken and allowed as follows
Exhibit D – paragraph 5 not read;
Exhibit E – paragraphs 3
and 4 not read.
Respondent’s Evidence
The Respondent relied on the Affidavit
of Mr. Festa (
) sworn 15 June 2000. Mr. Festa was present at
hearing and was cross-examined by Counsel for The Director-General of the
of Fair Trading.
In an Answer document filed on behalf of
the First Respondent Mr. Festa, Mr. Festa contested the allegations in paragraph
of the Notice to Show Cause.
He argued through Counsel that, as the
Second Respondent is in liquidation, the First Respondent did all things
reasonably necessary
to ensure that the Second Respondent complied with both
orders of the Consumer Claims Tribunal.
In respect to the third allegation, the
First Respondent Mr. Festa admitted that a contract was completed on 26 February
Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd a company which did not hold a licence to carry
out building services in New South Wales.
However, in answer to the third
allegation Mr. Festa argued the work, the subject of the contract, was carried
out by Maintenance
Exteriors Pty Ltd which at the time was the holder of a
licence and that the contract set up by Festa and Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd arose
out of an inadvertence.
He further admits that at the material
times that he Mr. Festa was sole director and secretary of Stretch-Guard Pty
In cross-examination , Mr. Festa
admitted that he banked a cheque drawn by Mrs. and Mr. Hall on the day of a
rehearing of a Consumer
Claims Tribunal action brought by Mr. and Mrs. Hall
against Mr. Festa.
This resulted in a credit to his bank
account of $4,000 which was later reversed by the bank. He agrees that neither
of the judgement
debts arising out of decisions of the Consumer Claims Tribunal
has been satisfied by or on behalf of the Second Respondent now liquidated.
In cross-examination, Mr. Festa also
admitted that the contract with Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd, the subject of the third
allegation, was
not the only instance where work had been carried out in New
South Wales pursuant to a contract made between home owners and Stretch-Guard
Pty Ltd, such company being unlicensed in New South Wales.
Mr. Festa stated in re-examination that
he no longer conducted business by way of subcontracting but seeks work and
carries out work
as a sole trader and carries out the works with the assistance
of casual employees.
Respondent’s Submissions
Counsel for Mr. Festa relied on
which provide:
sufficient defence to a complaint that an individual was a member of a
partnership, an officer of the corporation that is
a member of a partnership or
a director of a corporation (being a partnership or corporation that is the
holder of a licence) had
been guilty of improper conduct if the
individual proves to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that
............................................................
individual, being in such a position, used all due diligence to prevent the
occurrence of the improper conduct
It was argued that it was not reasonable
to require Mr Festa to meet the obligations of the company of which he was a
director in
circumstances where the company was in financial difficulties and
unable to pay its debts. Further at the relevant time, Mr. Festa
was himself
engaged in litigation relating to family law proceedings by his former wife and
jointly held assets with his wife were
the subject of orders restraining the
further mortgaging or disposal of jointly held property.
In relation to the third allegation he
said that the contract with Stretch-Guard Pty Ltd, an unlicensed entity in New
South Wales,
was mere inadvertence and not designed to deceive.
Applicant’s Submissions
Counsel for the Director-General argued
that in relation to the first two allegations which relate to the failure of the
second Respondent
to pay judgment debts following orders of the Consumer Claims
Tribunal, that the failure of Mr. Festa to use all due diligence to
payment of the debts amounted to improper conduct.
There was no early action by Mr. Festa
to wind-up the company when it became clear it was unable to meet its
obligations and in fact
he did nothing.
It was argued that 51(2)(c) of the
Building Act 1989
is in imperative terms and a failure to do anything is
sufficient to amount to improper conduct.
In respect of the third action of
contracting with an unlicensed entity, it was argued that
section 37(1)
An endorsed licence or a
supervisor or registration certificate that allows its holder to do or supervise
residential building work:
does not authorise its holder
to do or supervise specialist work merely because it authorises its holder to do
or supervise residential
building work;
does authorise its holder
to do or supervise such work declared by the regulations to be roof plumbing
work as is included in that
residential building
fixes Mr. Festa with responsibility as, not
only did he contract with an unlicensed entity, he was the sole secretary and
of such entity and signed a contract with the consumer on behalf of the
Mr. Festa was represented on the day of
hearing 9 October 2000 by counsel. In effect, the allegations of fact relating
against the companies were not denied. Counsel did however, raise the
defence available to a director under
The section provides, in
It is sufficient defence to a complaint...of
improper conduct if the individual proves to the satisfaction of the Tribunal
...............................................................
individual was not in a position to influence ...the corporation...so as to
prevent the occurrence of the improper conduct,
individual,..., used all due diligence to prevent the occurrence of the improper
The allegations of the Director General
relate to two incidents of failing to cause the relevant company to meet
Tribunal orders and
one of causing an unlicensed company to contract to carry
out residential building work.
The facts in each allegation are
admitted by the respondent.
In each case, Mr. Festa was the director
of the relevant company at the time and was in the third matter the signatory to
the contract
on behalf of an unlicensed company.
The evidence strongly points to the
enterprises which were the subject of the allegations as creatures of the
Respondent. There was
not a management structure or board of directors to direct
the management of the companies.
The admissions by the Respondent and the
fact that the companies were essentially a “one man band” make it
difficult for
the Tribunal to find that the various limbs of the defence have
been made out.
The structure of the companies and Mr.
Festa’s involvement suggest to the contrary. The evidence required to
successfully raise
the defence has not been advanced.
The best that can be said is that the
Respondent experienced difficulties in his family life and business at the
relevant times.
This however, does not amount to
evidence such as is necessary to raise the defence. Mr Festa controlled his
companies and placed
his signature on the offending
The Tribunal is not persuaded that the
defence has been made out.
The Tribunal finds the case proved
against Mr. Festa on all three grounds.
The Tribunal, if it finds improper
conduct within the meaning of the
, must then determine an
appropriate penalty.
The power of the Tribunal to impose a
penalty in such matters is found in Section 74 of the
“After considering the evidence given and
produced at a hearing, the Tribunal may make any one or more of the following
determinations
which to it seems proper:
determine to take no further
action against the
respondent,
reprimand the
respondent,
determination requiring the respondent to pay to the Administration Corporation,
as a penalty, an amount not exceeding 50 penalty
impose a condition on
a licence or a supervisor or registration certificate held by the
respondent,
if the respondent
is the holder of a licence, or a supervisor or registration certificate, suspend
the licence or certificate for
a period not exceeding its unexpired
if the respondent is
the holder of a licence or a supervisor or registration certificate, cancel the
licence or certificate and, if
it thinks it appropriate, disqualify the
respondent, either permanently or for such period as may be specified in the
determination,
from being any one or more of the
the holder of any
licence, or supervisor or registration certificate (or of a licence, or
supervisor of registration certificate,
of a specified
a member of a
partnership, or an officer of a corporation that is a member of a partnership,
that is the holder of a
an officer of a
corporation that is the holder of a licence,
if the respondent
a member of a
partnership, or an officer of a corporation that is a member of a partnership,
that is the holder of a licence,
an officer of a
corporation that is the holder of a licence,
determination authorised by paragraph (a), (b) or (c) in respect of the
respondent or disqualify the respondent, either permanently
or for such period
as may be specified in the determination, from being any one or more of the
licence or certificate holders, members
and officers specified in paragraph (f)
(I), (ii) or (iii).”
The various penalties provided in
Section 74 traverse a wide range. The scale of penalty ranges from either taking
no further action
or imposing a caution or reprimand (Section 74 (a) and (b)) to
permanent cancellation of a trades licence.
The determination of an appropriate
penalty must be made both with regard to the particularities of the individual
case as well as
a more general and comparative assessment of the
In the present case, the
Respondent’s previous record in New South Wales does not indicate a long
or persistent pattern of failing
to meet satisfactory standards of work and
compliance with the statutory regime.
The Respondent appears to have
encountered strife due to apparently over-reaching himself with painting
contracts in relatively remote
areas and then failing to properly supervise
subcontractors. This period coincided with his divorce proceedings. Without
to minimise the inconvenience, financial disadvantage and stress caused
to homeowners who contracted with him and who encountered
unsatisfactory work,
the nature of the work carried out has not been such as to cause irreparable or
structural damage. Nevertheless,
several homeowners suffered financial loss and
inconvenience.
The length of time the Respondent has
operated in New South Wales and the date of the last work which gave rise to the
prosecution
of an offence herein is relevant to give context to the alleged
The hearing of this matter was adjourned
on 9th October 2000 prior to final submissions, to allow the Respondent an
opportunity to
consider his position in relation to outstanding judgement debts
arising out of actions taken by the homeowners adversely affected.
judgement debts were not against Mr. Festa personally.
In the intervening period, Mr. Festa
made the following payments to judgment
On account of Hall (by settlement with the DFT)
In considering penalty, the Tribunal
notes that the latest work carried out which is the subject of the present
notice to show cause
occurred in or about December 1997.
There has been no evidence presented to
indicate that there are further causes for complaint since that time. The
company has been
put in liquidation, the Respondent has severed his relationship
with sales people acting on his behalf and has suffered a marriage
At the time of hearing, the Respondent was still engaged in an ongoing family
law property dispute with his former wife.
Mr. Festa now operates as a sole trader
and directly carries work and supervision of his contracted
The Tribunal takes into account,
therefore, the elapse of some three years since the work the subject of the
various complaints, the
Respondent’s long work record, his age of 61 years
and his recent concerted efforts resulting in him paying off some $19,510
outstanding claims against his former company.
His acceptance of Departmental
directions and requests and co-operation with the Tribunal have also assisted
his standing in respect
to assessment of penalty.
The Tribunal is not persuaded that a
substantial financial penalty on top of the monies already paid by Mr. Festa on
behalf of his
failed companies is warranted.
The purpose of the legislation is not to
punish the Respondent but to protect the public.
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association(1960)
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
The Tribunal finds that the public
interest can be best protected in the current circumstances by a relatively
lenient penalty.
In this regard, the Tribunal notes the
submissions on behalf of the Applicant that suspension or disqualification is
not now sought
by the Director-General.
The Applicant, as anticipated in its
submissions on 9 October 2000, has responded appropriately in respect to the
level of penalty
sought, by taking into account the efforts made in the
intervening period by Mr. Festa to meet his failed company’s judgement
Further large financial penalties levied
against the Respondent could well be counterproductive, particularly when he is
the issue of the payment of the Department’s
In turn, Mr. Festa has conceded in his
closing submissions that he would consent to certain conditions sought by the
Department in
respect of notification to the Department of Fair Trading for a
period of six months of contract and insurance details of any painting
entered into by Mr. Festa for a sum in excess of $5,000.
Mr. Festa has observed in his closing
submission that he has made considerable effort to discharge his liquidated
judgement debts and has incurred costs and expenses in respect
of the litigation. The area in New South Wales in which he operates,
matter of public record, has recently been devastated by widespread flooding.
Mr. Festa’s work opportunities in this
area where he has worked in the
past are for the foreseeable future greatly diminished.
Mr. Festa has shown in his final
submission an understanding of his statutory obligations and has recognised, the
Tribunal believes,
a necessity for him to act scrupulously in the carrying out
of his trade and his dealings with homeowners.
Mr. Festa put that in relation to any
financial penalty, the Tribunal consider his capacity to pay and asked that the
Tribunal provide
for time to pay.
For the reasons outlined above, the
Tribunal believes there is justification to favourably consider such a
submission.
Determination and Orders
The allegations of breaches of the
Building Act 1989
set forth in Annexure A to the Notice to Show Cause against
Mr. Festa dated 7 March 2000 have been established.
Mr. Festa is cautioned pursuant to
Section 74 (b) of the
Mr. Festa is to notify the Department of
Fair Trading, of the full contract details and insurance certificates in place
of every contract entered into by him in the state of New South Wales
in the sum of $5,000 and over, within 7 days of the date of
entering into the
contract, for a period of 180 days from the date of this
The Respondent is to pay the
Applicant’s costs of $7,000 within 180 days of the date
Exhibits to be returned after 28
Ian McDonell David Baker
Deputy Chairperson Member
Fair Trading Tribunal Fair Trading Tribunal
Date : 18 December 2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (78 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter