URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2004/1187.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dynayski v Grant [2004] NSWSC 1187 (16 December 2004)
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT
CITATION: Dynayski v Grant
[2004] NSWSC 1187
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity Division
NUMBER(S): 4842 of 2003
HEARING DATE{S): 7 December
JUDGMENT DATE: 16/12/2004
Dennis Dynayski v
Matthew Grant and Helen Grant
JUDGMENT OF: Master Macready
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable
LOWER COURT FILE
NUMBER(S): Not Applicable
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not
Mr M.W. Sneddon for
SOLICITORS:
Packer & Austin for plaintiff
Defendant appears in person
CATCHWORDS:
Power of attorney - duty
of donee to act in accordance with the direction of the donor.
THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Master Macready
Thursday 16
December 2004
4842 of 2003 Dennis Dunayski v Matthew Grant and
Helen Grant
dispute between family members all of whom are related by blood or marriage.
The dispute concerns events that took place
prior to the death of the plaintiff
and the second defendant’s father. The two defendants are married and the
first defendant
prior to the date of death of the deceased was appointed the
deceased’s attorney.
2 The deceased had made a will in which he
left his estate to the plaintiff and the second defendant in equal shares on the
of certain events that have happened. Some time prior to his death
it was agreed that his house would be sold and the proceeds,
less whatever was
necessary to maintain the deceased, would be divided between the plaintiff and
the second defendant in accordance
with their entitlements under the
3 The first defendant was appointed the deceased’s attorney
for this purpose and in due course the house was sold. The dispute
inter alia, the application of the proceeds from that
Short Chronology
The deceased, Stanislaw
Dunayski, made a will on 27 October 1979. That will provided for the whole of
his estate to pass to his wife
or if she did not survive him, then for the
estate to be divided between his two children in equal shares.
deceased’s wife did not survive him and she died on 12 December 1989. On
22 April 2000 the deceased had a stroke and was
admitted to Bowral Hospital. In
June of that year he moved to Abbey Nursing Home and the plaintiff continued to
reside in the deceased’s
property at 60 Queen Street, Croydon.
4 On 26 July 2000 the deceased executed a general power of attorney in
favour of the first defendant. It was an enduring power of
attorney and gave
authority to the attorney to do on the deceased’s behalf, anything that he
might have lawfully authorised
an attorney to do. It was accompanied by the
appropriate solicitor’s certificate.
5 In mid September 2000 some
$30,000.00 of the deceased’s funds were transferred by the first defendant
and consolidated with
the second defendant’s funds apparently to increase
the interest yield on those funds. The first defendant says he forgot
this when disbursing the proceeds of the sale of the house that I will refer to
6 The plaintiff vacated the deceased’s house in early July
2001 and on 28 July 2001 it was sold for $482,000.00. The contract
of sale was
settled on 3 September 2001 and the deceased’s pension was then cancelled.
7 Thereafter there were distributions of the amount received on the
sale. Between September 2001 and June 2002 the plaintiff received
$191,466.75.
This is not quite a half share and the first defendant concedes that he retained
$54,000.00 from the sale proceeds.
This was said to be part of an arrangement
whereby both of the deceased’s children would fund the upkeep costs and
other expenses
of the deceased for a period up to five years at $900.00 per
month. The first defendant retained the $54,000.00 out of the plaintiff’s
share of the proceeds so that the money would still be available to pay for the
deceased’s upkeep. This was because the plaintiff
had for many years
suffered from drug addiction and other difficulties which made it unwise to
leave him with these funds.
8 A similar contribution was to be made by
his sister, the second defendant. However, it was thought that as she would be
responsible,
she should receive and still hold her half share of the proceeds.
Precisely how much she received is a matter of dispute in the
9 Between mid 2001 and 10 May 2002 the first defendant borrowed various
amounts from the funds of the deceased. These were alleged
to have been with
the agreement of the deceased. The precise amount borrowed is $16,428.14 and
the first defendant concedes that
he is liable to repay that amount to the
estate. He also concedes that he obliged to pay interest from the date of death
22 February 2003 when a caveat was lodged on his property immediately
prior to the commencement of these proceedings.
10 The deceased died on
10 May 2002 and the plaintiff retained David Austin, solicitor to act on his
behalf. In due course a grant
was made to the plaintiff. Initially the second
defendant refused to take any part in the grant but later she obtained a double
grant of probate.
Claims made by the
11 The plaintiff has at all times been legally represented
and at the final trial before me he appeared by counsel. The first defendant
has at all times appeared in person and the second defendant initially appeared
by her solicitor. Thereafter she discharged her
solicitor and represented
herself. Since 4 February 2004 she has filed a submitting appearance. When the
matter was initially before
me for hearing on 7 September 2004 the second
defendant, who had been joined because she was a necessary party as an executor
the estate, indicated that she wished to take an active role in the
proceedings. I directed her to file any evidence and also if
she wished to take
an active part to file and serve an appearance that was not a submitting
appearance. She declined to do so and,
accordingly, she has not taken part in
the hearing other than being present and reading her affidavit so far as it may
with costs.
12 When the matter was before me on 7 September
2004 the solicitor, Mr Austin, who then appeared indicated that he wished to
a claim for equitable compensation. I directed him to give notice of the
basis of that claim to the defendants so that they would
understand it. This he
13 By an amended summons filed on 23 September 2003 the relief
sought was orders for an account. The account was sought against the
defendant in respect of his dealings under the power of attorney and against the
second defendant in respect of the funds received
by her from the first
defendant. There were miscellaneous claims in support of these such as delivery
up of books of account and
a declaration for breach of fiduciary duty by the
first defendant. There was also a claim for equitable damages and it was this
that was said to support the claim for equitable compensation.
the matter came on for hearing on 7 December 2004 the claims for an account were
abandoned. Instead the plaintiff sought
the following orders:
the first and second defendant pay to the estate the sum of $29,493.73 to be
distributed in accordance with the will of the
2. That the
first defendant pay $8,000.00 to the estate, it being the difference between the
amount of cash which the two defendants
claim had been left by the deceased.
The first defendant claimed that the deceased had left $14,000.00 and the second
claimed it was $22,000.00.
3. That the first defendant repays a
loan of $16,428.14 plus interest.
15 The plaintiff sought interest on all
the amounts from the date of death until judgment. The first defendant resisted
after the date from when caveats were placed on his property shortly
prior to the commencement of the proceedings. The basis for
his objection seems
to be that he was accorded no opportunity to account prior to proceedings being
16 The sum of $29,493.73 is said by the plaintiff to be the
amount that was overpaid to the second defendant in the distributions
sale proceeds prior to the date of death.
17 In relation to the third
claim there is no doubt that these sums were lent by the deceased to the first
defendant who used the
funds to meet various family bills. He concedes that he
is liable for the amount and accordingly there can be judgment against the
defendant for that sum.
18 I turn to consider the claim for repayment of
the amount overpaid.
19 Normally, notwithstanding the width of the
power of attorney, a donee has a duty and obligation to obey the instructions of
The Margaret Mitchell
(1858) Swab 382;
166 ER 1174
1199 it was held that the use of a power of attorney by the donee, contrary to
the known wishes and directions of the donor is
a breach of trust. This
principle was approved in
(1983) 12 Aust Crim Rep 1 where the
Victorian Supreme Court at page 14 said:
“It is not the law that an
attorney given power by instrument under seal may, so long as the instrument
remains unrevoked, exercise
the power it confers in disregard of any subsequent
orders of his principal conveyed to him... Subject to any contrary sense of the
instrument there always resides in the donor the right later to instruct the
donee not to act on the power, or to act only in a stated
effect of a power of attorney, even if given under seal, may be modified by
parol is made clear by the decision of The Margaret
Mitchell (1858) Sw 382
the authority of which has so far as I am aware never been doubted.
There, a power of attorney was given under seal by the owner
of a ship to her
master, one Stiles, who purported to sell her under authority conferred by the
power of attorney. Dr Lushington,
sitting in the High Court of Admiralty, found
as a fact that:
’... though the power of attorney was not formally
revoked, yet that Captain Stiles, long before the sale, received letters
informing him that he was to be dismissed, and of the owner’s intention to
dispose of the ship; the whole contents of those
letters show that the owner did
not desire that Stiles should sell this ship under this power of attorney, and
Captain Stiles’s
letter shows that he was about to sell the ship not in
accordance with the wishes and directions of the owner, but in despite of
...’ (p400).
"The learned judge continued, in a passage which I
think exactly covers the present case, to say:
'I apprehend that, as a
general rule, the grantee of a power of attorney is bound to follow the
directions and wishes of the grantor;
as, for instance, with respect to a power
of attorney to sell stock, the grantee must exercise that power according to the
of the grantor. I conceive, that to use a power of attorney contrary to
the known wishes and directions of the grantor is a breach
"So here, assuming that the power of attorney given to the
applicant on its face authorised him to sell Morgan’s shares, that
was exercisable as between the applicant and Morgan subject to Morgan’s
later expressed instructions, if any. It cannot
have been wrong to have left to
the jury that question of fact whether Morgan conveyed to the applicant
extraneously to the power
of attorney a limitation of his authority to sell
Morgan’s shares.”
20 These principles have recently been
applied by Austin J in
Vickery v JPP Custodians
[2002] NSWSC 782.
21 Therefore the claim against the first defendant is based upon the
breach of his fiduciary obligations relating to the terms which
were conveyed to
him by the deceased.
22 The power of attorney, as I have said, was given
on 26 July 2001 and the first defendant in his affidavit described the
circumstances
in which instructions were given to sell the house during April
2001. The details of that conversation were expanded upon in the
course of the
first defendant’s oral evidence in these terms:
“Q. Pursuant
to that power of attorney you got instructions from the deceased?
Q. Part of those instructions was in order to accommodate his life
in the nursing home his house would be sold?
Q. Indeed, part
of the proceeds of which sale were put into a bank account?
asking me were part put into a bank account?
Q. $54,000?
don’t know if it was $54,000 but from the proceeds of the sale of the
house some went direct to one or other beneficiary
and others went direct to the
bank account.
Q. The bank account was the Abbey Fund, are you familiar
with that name?
A. I am familiar with that name. It was not a single
contiguous physical fund.
Q. The Abbey Fund was set up to make the
payments to the nursing home for the deceased’s expenses for his expected
would be paid by my client, the plaintiff?
Q. Indeed, the deceased did not live five years after admission
to the hospital?
A. No, definitely not.
Q. He lived about eight or
nine months?
Q. It is fair to say the fund itself was
approximately $54,000 derived out of a figure to accommodate about $900 per
month payments?
A. Yes, $54,000 exactly as you say to be withdrawn at $900,
equivalent to $900 a month for his maintenance from the
plaintiff.”
23 Later in his cross-examination he
“MASTER: Q. There are one or two matters I would like to
ask questions on. What happened to the Abbie account?
A. The Abbie account,
as I tried to explain before, wasn’t on one physical repository, like one
physical bank account but for
argument sake it was by and large, it was one St
George pensioner account.
Q. In whose name?
deceased’s.
Q. Is that funds that have been paid to Mr Austin,
Q. In paragraph 14 of your affidavit you talk
arrangements
to finance his living expenses.” In oral evidence you have
said that the deceased instructed you to sell the house, that is
Q. What else did he say to you at that time
when giving you those instructions to sell the house, that you were to do with
the proceeds
of the sale of the house?
A. What did the deceased instruct me
to do with the proceeds of the sale of the house?
A. To distributed them as according to the will but in a way that
would provide for his financial needs.
Q. How did he describe that way
that you were to deal with that?
A. I put to him that the best way probably
would be - for each of the beneficiaries to be responsible to fund his real
costs 50/50.
Q. Was that the only discussion about that matter with the
A. Well I am not - I obviously had discussions with financial
institutions about what other options there might be, including whether
there is a need to sell the house or not. All the options just seemed to be
more costly in terms of fees, charges and interest
and these sorts of things and
the deceased basically had resigned himself to the fact that beyond being
financially supported there
wasn’t much point in him having any residue
tied up until his death. He seemed happy to pass that on to his beneficiaries.
Now, at the time when I was speaking with him--
MASTER: Thank you. Mr
Sneddon, do you have any questions arising from the questions I have
SNEDDON: No.”
24 There does not seem to be any doubt
that the instructions of the deceased were that apart from looking after him,
the proceeds
were to be distributed equally between his children in accordance
with their prospective entitlements under his will. Earlier in
proceedings the first defendant filed an affidavit on 17 December 2003 which,
because of the earlier claim for an accounting,
contained a detailed set of
accounts by him prepared as far as he was able to as a layperson to show the
distribution of funds that
he had received in exercise of the power of attorney.
25 In that accounting the first defendant set out the details of the
funds which he had received and he conceded that after taking
into account
$14,000.00 cash in jars, the term deposit from the NRMA and the house sale
proceeds, less the sale costs, the net funds
for the beneficiaries were
$499,106.37. As he expressed it, the plaintiff and the second defendant were
each entitled to a gross
amount of $249,553.19.
26 I have already
explained that most of this entitlement was paid to the plaintiff as part of his
share except for the sum of $54,000.00
which was retained and referred to as the
Abbey fund in order to support the deceased. The balance of this $54,000.00 was
collected by the executor plaintiff, and this was accounted for by
the solicitor for the estate. I will return to this matter
27 The first defendant’s accounting went on to deal with
the actual transfer of the funds to the second defendant by reference
entitlement of $249,553.19. Taking into account, for instance, the earlier
$30,012.00, the first defendant concedes that
the second defendant, his wife,
was overpaid the sum of $29,493.73. His accounting then goes on to claim that
this amount should
be reduced by the second defendant’s entitlement to one
half share in the estate. Taking into account what in fact he believed
should have been entitled to as of her first half share of that amount which was
overpaid, he conceded that there was an amount
of $13,133.35 due by way of
overpayment.
28 The question therefore is whether it is appropriate
that these other adjustments should be taken into account. The problem that
arises is that the balance of the Abbey fund, which was $54,000.00, was paid to
the solicitors for the purposes of the estate. Their
trust account shows a
receipt, which included this amount, and perhaps the sale of some ING (NRMA)
shares in the sum of $37,660.38.
There is in evidence exhibit “C”
which is a copy of the ledger and that shows the whole of those sums have been
to Packer & Austin, solicitors or others substantially in payment of
fees for administering the estate of the deceased and the
plaintiff’s
costs of these proceedings.
29 It should be borne in mind that the
cause of action against the first defendant is a claim for equitable
compensation based upon
the breach of his fiduciary duties as the donee of the
power of attorney. In the circumstances it seems that on his own admission,
overpaid the amount and, accordingly, he is liable for that amount by way of
equitable compensation. Any entitlement resulting
from the fact that his wife
has a half share in the estate to those monies is her entitlement and will be
paid to her as a result
of her interest under the will. It is not available to
the first defendant as a setoff against the claim by the plaintiff acting
behalf of the estate. In these circumstances it seems to me that the plaintiff
is entitled to an order sought in the terms of
order 1 above.
that there was no cross-claim brought by the first defendant against the second
defendant in order to recover any overpayment.
No doubt he would be able to
recover such overpayment and I assume no such cross-claim has been brought
because there are appropriate
arrangements or understandings between them on
this aspect.
31 The next question is whether the second defendant is also
liable. The basis for the claim against the second defendant was said
submissions to be “unjust enrichment”. There is no expansion of how
this was said to arise other than that she
had been overpaid.
plaintiff sought to rely on the first defendant’s accounting to prove that
the second defendant had in fact been overpaid.
That accounting did not involve
any primary documents and it was really the first defendant’s conclusions
based on his analysis
of the primary documents. Accordingly, it is nothing more
than admissions by him as to his disbursement of the funds. For her part,
second defendant in that part of her affidavit that was in evidence admitted
that she received funds and the way she referred
to it did not concede that she
had received or owed amounts in the amount claimed by the first defendant. In
other words she did
not concede that she had been overpaid. The plaintiff
sought to suggest that the second defendant was bound by the admission of
first defendant simply because of the fact that they were husband and wife.
However, this cannot be. In the circumstances it
seems that no entitlement to
recover against the second defendant has been established.
33 The first defendant gave evidence on oath that the amount
of money in the jars was $14,000.00. There was an email from the second
defendant to the solicitor for the plaintiff claiming that the amount was some
$22,000.00. She gave no sworn evidence on this aspect.
34 The first
defendant was cross-examined on his evidence. He gave a credible explanation as
to the amount notwithstanding that some
of it was in notes and some of it was in
coins. In the circumstances I accept the first defendant’s evidence that
of cash was only $14,000.00 and accordingly there is no liability to
account for this amount.
35 The only outstanding issue that needs to be
determined is the question of from when interest should run. This dispute as to
interest should be up until 26 February 2003 or should continue until
36 Notice of the proposal to bring the claim was given and
this resulted in a somewhat intemperate response from the first defendant
solicitors for the plaintiff. Even if the first defendant may have had some
complaint about the shortness of the notice given
before commencing action, it
seems to me that he has had adequate time over the years since the action was
commenced to make the
payments for which he is now liable. In these
circumstances interest should continue up until judgment. The first
defendant’s
complaint seems to be that a caveat was lodged against his
property and he considered this a quite inappropriate way of challenging
administration of the deceased's funds pursuant to the power of attorney. It
may well be that the first defendant has some appropriate
concerns about the
caveat but that is not a matter which is an issue in these proceedings as there
is no cross claim seeking its
removal and apart from a passing reference in the
first defendants affidavit no submissions were put on the validity of the
37 The orders that I make are as follows:
1. That the
first defendant pay to the executors of the estate of the late Stanislaw
Dunayski the sum of $29,493.73 together with
interest from 10 May 2002 at the
Supreme Court rates to the date of judgment.
2. That the first defendant
pay to the executors of the estate of the late Stanislaw Dunayski the sum of
$16,428.14 together with
interest from 10 May 2002 at Supreme Court rates to the
date of judgment.
38 I will hear the parties on
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (44.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter