URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/446.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Feilo [2025] NSWDC 446 (30 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 446
Hearing Date(s):
17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Mahony SC DCJ
Intensive Correction Order imposed. For orders see [88]-[93]
Catchwords:
SENTENCE – Stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm –
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of others
– Aggregate
sentence – Intensive Correction Order
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
Cases Cited:
[2010] NSWCCA 35
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
201 A Crim R 379
[2010] NSWCCA 159
Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
Cahyadi v R
[2007] NSWCCA 1
168 A Crim R 41
DPP (Cth) v De
La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
[2012] NSWCCA 32
[2008] NSWCCA 51
Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
[2012] NSWCCA
R v Van Ryn
[2016] NSWCCA 1
[2012] NSWCCA 214
[2025] NSWCCA 121
[2025] NSWCCA 165
Vaeluagomatagy Feilo (the offender)
Director of Public Prosecutions
(NSW) (The Crown)
Representation:
Mr R Baldeo (the offender)
Ms E Blizard; Mr A Isaacs (the
Solicitors:
Mr K Kyriacou (the offender)
Ms D Horsley (the
File Number(s):
2021/00185423
Publication Restriction:
Nil. There is however a non-publication order regarding the name of the
co-accused who is referred to as MS
REMARKS ON SENTENCE
offender who was born in 2002 has pleaded guilty and is to be sentenced in
respect of the following two offences:-
Count 1 – Offence
pursuant to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
(“the CDPVA”) of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm. The
maximum penalty for this offence is 5 years
imprisonment and/or $5,500 fine and
there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
Count 2 – Offence pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(“the CA”) of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of
others. The maximum penalty prescribed for this
offence is 7 years imprisonment
and there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
offences occurred on 14 April 2021, and the offender was arrested on 28 June
2021. He was in custody for a period of 5 months
and 20 days (173 days) until
granted conditional bail on 17 December 2021. The offender was in custody for a
period of 6 months and
7 days (200 days) for the period 1 June 2021 to 17
December 2021 when he was bail refused in relation to other matters. When
sentenced in respect of that matter (H81363954) the time spent in
custody in relation to the index offences was taken into account
sentencing judge. I refer to that below.
The sentence hearing
sentence hearing took place on 17 October 2025. The Crown Sentence Summary
became Exhibit A. It included a Statement of Agreed
Facts which may be
summarised as follows.
or about 14 April 2021, a co-offender MS organised for a supply of 2 kilograms
of cocaine to another drug dealer referred to as
"Person A". Person A took the 2
kilograms of cocaine and handed over a block of paper of $50 notes on one end
and otherwise contained
blank paper instead of $660,000. MS held Stuart MacGill
("the victim") responsible for Person A's theft of the drugs because he had
introduced MS to Person A. On 14 April 2021, MS met with the victim telling him
that the victim needed to pay money to cover the
theft or provide information as
to the whereabouts of Person A. The victim denied responsibility for the debt
left by Person A's
conduct constituting the two offences commenced at 5:50 p.m. on 14 April 2021
when a co-offender, Frederick Schaaf was tasked
to drive from his home in the
Sutherland area to Cremorne with the intention of intimidating the victim into
providing money or information
co-offender Richard Schaaf joined Frederick, and they left Caringbah arriving at
just before 7 p.m.
of long handled garden shears, three sets of gloves,
cable ties and rope. The
garden shears were later found in Frederick Schaaf's car. The offender then
travelled from Rouse Hill to
Bringelly arriving there at 7:20 p.m.
the afternoon and after the second meeting with the victim, MS waited outside
the victim's apartment building in Cremorne
in his car. At about 7:00 p.m. the
victim escaped his apartment in the boot of another resident's car, met with
friends and went
to a friend's house nearby. The victim was then lured back to
his apartment by MS just before 8:00 p.m. under the guise of looking
photographs to identify Person A. The victim met MS on a street close by his
are here to see you". The
victim kept walking towards his home and came across the co-offender Richard
Schaaf who was standing in
the street outside of a car. The co-offender Richard
Schaaf said to the victim, "I don't want to hurt you, we know you have nothing
to do with it, we just want to talk to you, get in the car". The victim resisted
and the co-offender said, "Don't make it difficult"
and placed his hand on his
is an agreed fact that the victim got in the car because he thought that gesture
meant that the co-offender had a firearm. The
victim did not see a firearm, nor
did he communicate his belief to either co-offenders and the Crown does not
contend that the co-offender
intended to imply possession of a firearm. Nor does
the Crown contend that either co-offender had a firearm. Nor does the Crown
that either co-offender actually knew or were reckless to the victim's
lack of consent to enter the car.
victim got in the car and the co-offender Richard Schaaf sat next to him. The
co-offender Richard Schaaf said, "We've got a problem
because they (a reference
to the drugs) were mine". However it is not contended that co-offender was
actually involved in the failed
cocaine deal or that the drugs in fact belonged
to the offender.
victim told the co-offender Richard Schaaf that the drug deal had nothing to do
with him. The co-offender asked the victim about
the whereabouts of Person A and
the victim told him that he had been trying to contact Person A all day without
co-offender Frederick Schaaf drove the car from Cremorne to Bringelly arriving
at about 9:00 p.m. The car pulled over and the
offender got in the car with a
bag containing the garden shears. The offender was wearing a balaclava and sat
in the front passenger
seat. It is an agreed fact that the intimidation
commenced at the time the offender entered the car.
car was driven to premises at Bringelly, being an unoccupied house with a
driveway which led to a shed. When they arrived the
offender and co-offenders
got out of the car leaving the victim in the car for about 10 minutes. The
victim was then told to go to
the shed, photos of which are contained in Exhibit
A. The co-offenders demanded proof that the victim was not wearing "a wire" and
all three of them searched the victim which caused him to be intimidated.
garden shears were placed on the floor near the victim, and the co-offender
Richard Schaaf slapped the victim across the face
causing him to fall down. The
co-offender asked the victim again about the whereabouts of Person A and was
told that he didn't know
where he was. The co-offender Richard Schaaf then said,
"They want me to take your fingers" and said “they” needed $150,000
and asked where he would get it from and how long it would take. The co-offender
then asked for the victim's phone which was provided.
offender and co-offender Richard Schaaf punched the victim multiple times in the
head. In this assault the victim suffered a cut
lip. The co-offender Richard
Schaaf said it was enough, and the co-offender Frederick Schaaf then asked the
victim, "Are you ok?",
and handed back to the victim his glasses which had
fallen off.
co-offenders and victim then returned to the car and Frederick Schaaf drove to
Belmore arriving at 10:30 p.m. The co-offender
Richard Schaaf then had a
conversation with the victim by the side of the road telling him that someone
would provide a phone to
him the following morning and that he should not leave
partner what had happened. The matter was reported by way of formal report to
police on 20 April 2021.
A included the offender’s NSW Police Force record of convictions. On 6
December 2024, the offender was sentenced by
Judge Grant of this Court having
been found guilty after a trial by jury of an offence of detain with intent to
obtain advantage
(ransom) contrary to
of the CA and an offence of
tamper with evidence with intent to mislead a judicial tribunal pursuant to
of the CA. The offender had also pleaded guilty to one count of damage
property by means of fire pursuant to
s195(1)(A)(b)
CA. He was sentenced by way
of aggregate sentence to 3 years imprisonment to be served by way of an
Intensive Correction Order (“ICO”)
commencing 6 December 2024 and
concluding 5 December 2027. Those offences occurred on 1 June 2021.
A also included the sentencing remarks by Judge Grant and a report from Dr Adam
Martin, forensic psychiatrist dated 29 October
2024 which was obtained as a
response to a psychological report prepared by Dr Kim Dilati, psychologist dated
30 August 2024 prepared
on behalf of the offender. Exhibit A also included the
custodial history and bail chronology relating to the
The offender’s evidence
offender relied on a bundle of evidence which became Exhibit 1.1 to 1.7. Exhibit
1.1 was a letter of apology from the offender
in which he stated that the
history contained in an updated report from Dr Dilati, psychologist dated 9
September 2025 was accurate,
true and correct. He set out his family and
relationship history together with his employment, i.e. his apprenticeship as a
offender stated that his offending has brought great shame on his family and
that he has become a burden on them. He described
his time in remand custody as
extremely difficult and expressed that he was deeply sorry to the victim and
sorry to his family.
offender has stated that he has complied with his supervision pursuant to the
ICO to which he was sentenced in December 2024 and
that supervision was
suspended after 8 weeks, given his compliance with the community service
offender also stated that he has commenced an online clothing business with two
friends from high school which is on hold pending
his sentence for the index
offending. He has the support of his family and intends to repay them by not
ever reoffending.
1.2 is the report of Dr Dilati, psychologist dated 30 August 2024 which I do not
intend to rehearse, as it was dealt with
in detail by Judge Grant when
sentencing the offender in December 2024.
1.3 is a further report from Dr Dilati dated 7 October 2025. He was assessed via
telehealth on 23 August 2025 and Dr Dilati
confirmed that the treatment
recommendations outlined in her initial report remain unchanged. In her report
Dr Dilati outlined the
offender’s family history. As a child he was
exposed to domestic violence in a home environment filled with anger and
He also reported difficulties with learning, focus, attention and
social interactions during his developmental years. His behaviour
in school was
disruptive leading to suspensions and truancy and in his teenage years he
gravitated towards anti-social peers.
offender left school during year 10 without completing his school certificate.
He had worked in several short term jobs in which
he had developed basic skills
but expressed a desire to complete an apprenticeship following his sentencing to
further a career in
the construction industry. The psychologist also referred to
his online clothing business but stated that it remains in its developmental
stage and is not generating an income.
Dilati took a long-standing history of substance abuse beginning with regular
cannabis and cocaine consumption from the age of
13. She noted that he has
reportedly abstained from all drug and alcohol abuse since his last
psychological assessment in 2024.
author noted under the heading “Psychological history”, a
long-standing history of “poor impulse control, limited
consequential
thinking, anger management difficulties, and avoidant behaviours. He also
described enduring depressive symptoms, including
suicidal ideation,
difficulties with concentration and focus, sleep disturbance, appetite changes,
emotional reactivity, impatience,
and recurrent nightmares involving his
grandmother for several years.”
Dilati stated he reported further symptoms consistent with Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) and alluded to a history of auditory
hallucinations and
paranoia. However he had not engaged in psychological therapy and had not
followed the recommended treatment regime.
assessment Dr Dilati suggested that the offender is expressing significant
psychological distress, including high levels
of anxiety, depression and
paranoia. She opined:-
“There are also indications of possible psychotic symptoms, emotional
instability, and a predisposition towards aggressive
behaviour. The elevated
Negative Impression Management Score suggests the possibility of exaggerating
symptoms or presenting in an
especially negative manner, which should be
considered when interpreting the results.”
Dilati opined that the offender’s overall risk of future interpersonal
violence remains assessed as high, with a moderate/imminent
high-risk of serious
physical harm. Protective elements most relevant to reducing the
offender’s risk of violence include stable
accommodation, meaningful
activity, improved self-control, pro-social pursuits and effective financial
management as well as motivation
to engage in treatment and the establishment of
pro-social networks.
Dilati opined that the offender currently meets the criteria for Dysthymic
Disorder, PTSD, anti-social personality disorder, cannabis
use disorder in
remission and stimulus use disorder in remission. She opined that the offender
was expressing significant mental
health difficulties at the time of the
offending and her previous diagnosis of major depressive disorder remained
clinically relevant
as he continues to report chronic low mood, diminution of
motivation and trauma related symptoms.
Dilati stated that the offender’s account of his offending reflected
limited insight into the offending, and he was unable
to clearly articulate his
motivations or involvement, other than being under financial pressure at the
time. She opined there was
a nexus between his mental health and offending given
his history of persistent depressive symptoms and PTSD, which likely impaired
his ability to regulate emotions, tolerate distress and make considered
decisions. She stated:-
“At a cognitive and emotional level, Mr Feilo demonstrates poor
consequential thinking, impaired impulse control, and limited
insight into his
offending. His remorse has been expressed vaguely, and he minimises the role of
his mental health difficulties in
contributing to his behaviour.”
She described a number of cultural aspects to his behaviour relating to his
Samoan culture.
the heading “Prospects for rehabilitation”, Dr Dilati opined that
his prospects are “mixed and depend on several
factors, including his
willingness to engage in treatment, the availability of appropriate therapeutic
resources, and his sustained
motivation for change”. She further opined
that his progress was hindered by limited insight into his difficulties and lack
of engagement with recommended treatment.
Dilati concluded by assessing the offender “as presenting with a high-risk
of further offending, given the combination of
unresolved trauma, chronic
depressive symptoms, anti-social traits, and a history of substance
misuse”. She annexed a recommended
treatment plan which was consistent
with his last psychological assessment in August 2024.
1.4 was an affidavit sworn by Mrs F Feilo, the mother of the offender on 3
October 2025. She set out the family history, the
offender being the middle of
five children. She also deposed as to the extensive impact on her and her family
as a result of the
offender’s criminal conduct which included the family
being forced to sell their house to support the offender.
Feilo deposed that the offender now has displayed insight into his offending by
apologising many times for the pain he has brought
to his family. She deposed
that he has matured since his arrest and subsequence release to bail and
expressed her honest belief that
he will not reoffend.
1.5 is a letter from the offender’s partner, Ms D Karauzumcu. She
described the offender as having “always been
a solid and honest
person” who she found trustworthy and honest. She described the offender
further as a caring person who
has empathy and was respectful for everybody. She
expressed her belief that he was now a completely different person and in the
considerable
time that has passed since his arrest he has grown and matured.
1.6 is a letter from Mr D Banaba, who has known the offender for over a decade
and who is a co-founder of the online clothing
business referred to above. Mr
Banaba states that the offender is genuinely remorseful for his actions and is
highly unlikely to
reoffend. He further states that the offender has many
admirable qualities, is deeply devoted to his family, ambitious, reliable
committed. Mr Banaba expressed his belief that the offending was influenced in
part by negative influences at the time and anti-social
associations.
1.7 is a letter from Mr M Sopi who has known the offender for 12 years and is
also a co-founder of the online clothing business.
He describes the offender as
one of the most loyal, reliable, creative and protective people he has known. He
stated his belief that
the offender is very much remorseful and apologetic for
the crimes that he has committed. He further expressed a strong belief that
offences were committed at a vulnerable time of the offender’s life, and
he is now very regretful for his offending.
submissions
Crown relied on a written and detailed outline of submissions setting out the
procedural history and noting that the offender
is entitled to a 5% discount for
both Counts 1 and 2 pursuant to s25D(2) of the CSPA.
Crown noted that the offender was arrested, and bail refused on 28 June 2021. At
that time he was already bail refused in relation
to other offending (Sequence
H81363954). The offender was granted conditional bail on 17 December 2021 after
spending 173 days in
pre-trial sentence custody. He was bail refused in relation
to the other offending for the entirety of that period. When sentenced
other offending by Judge Grant, the whole of the pre-sentence custody was taken
into account. The Crown therefore submitted
that this period on remand was only
partially referable to the sentence to be imposed for the index offences.
Crown submitted that in assessing the objective seriousness of the offending
where there is a joint-criminal enterprise the Court
must assess the degree of
participation of the offender. The Crown referred to Somba v R
[2012] NSWCCA 214
where Hall J had held that it was necessary to refer to and take into account
particular conduct of each participant in a joint-criminal
enterprise with a
view to determine the level of culpability for which each must be sentenced. The
Crown referred to the judgment
of Latham J in KR v R
[2012] NSWCCA 32
respect to the distinction between the offender's responsibility for criminal
conduct and his moral culpability for the offending.
Crown submitted the following features were relevant to the assessment of
objective seriousness of the offences:-
(a) The offences were not spontaneous and involved a significant degree of
planning and organisation, as evidenced by:
(i) The surveillance of the victim by co-accused MS and attendance at his
personal residence by Frederick Schaaf and Richard Schaaf.
(ii) The use of a ruse to lure the victim back to his home where Richard Schaaf
and Frederick Schaaf were waiting.
(iii) The purchase by the offender of items for use or possible use in the
offending, namely a pair of long handled garden shears,
three sets of gloves,
cable ties and rope.
(iv) The victim’s phone was taken by MS from him to isolate him and
prevent him from calling for help.
(v) Prior arrangements had been made for Frederick Schaaf and Richard Schaaf to
pick up the offender in Bringelly, and on the way
to Robinson Road,
(vi) The offender was wearing a balaclava when he entered the car.
(vii) The victim was transported to an isolated and semi-rural property,
approximately 70kms from his home.
(b) Regarding the intimidation:
(i) The victim was in the presence of three unknown males, without means of
escape or contacting police or other parties for assistance.
(ii) The victim was taken to an unoccupied property and directed to go with the
offenders to an isolated and dilapidated shed type
(iii) On entering the shed, the offenders demanded proof the victim was not
wearing a wire and searched him. This caused him to be
intimidated.
(iv) The offender put the garden shears on the floor near the victim.
(c) Regarding the AOABH:
(i) Extent and nature of the injuries:
The victim suffered a cut lip as a result of the assault.
(ii) Degree of violence:
Richard Schaaf commenced the conduct comprising the assault by slapping the
victim across the face and causing him to fall down.
Richard Schaaf and the offender punched the victim multiple times to the
head. The assault ended when Richard Schaaf said words to
the effect that
“That’s enough”.
(iii) Intention of the offenders:
The offenders intentionally caused harm to the victim. The offenders were
motivated by obtaining information as to the location of
Person A, or $150,000
from the victim.
Crown submitted that the offender played a lesser role than the co-offender
Richard Schaaf but a role that was still significant.
Having regard to the
following:-
(a) The offender attended Bunnings with another person for the purchase of the
long handled garden shears, three sets of gloves,
cable ties and rope.
(b) The offender travelled to Bringelly to participate in the subsequent
criminal conduct. The offender brought the garden shears
with him and placed
these on the floor near the victim in the shed.
(c) The offender with Richard Schaaf, punched the victim multiple times to the
Further all the co-offenders participated in the search of the victim to
ensure that he was not wearing a listening device.
Crown submitted that it was an aggravating factor pursuant to s21A(2)(c) of the
CSPA that the offence involved the threatened
use of a weapon, namely the garden
Crown conceded that a mitigating factor pursuant to s21A(3)(e) was that the
offender had no record of prior convictions.
respect to the offender’s subjective matters, the Crown acknowledged the
content of the report of Dr Dilati dated 23 August
2025 and the application of
the principles in Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013] HCA 37 and DPP
(Cth) v De La Rosa (2010)
79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194.
The Crown referred to
the offender’s difficult childhood in a “home environment filled
with anger and conflict”
where he was subjected to domestic violence and
exposed to his father’s alcohol abuse and gambling problems. In addition
he was in year 9 at school, his best friend committed suicide. The Crown
noted the offender’s long-standing history of substance
commenced with regular cannabis and cocaine abuse at age 13, together with
alcohol abuse.
Crown noted the previous divergence of expert opinion between Dr Dilati and Dr
Martin for the Crown in the offender’s previous
sentencing by Judge Grant.
The Crown submitted that the index offending was of the “planned,
instrumental and protracted behaviour”
inconsistent with a mood disorder or PTSD. The Crown submitted that the violence
directed towards
the victim in this matter was not of a reactive type suggested
by Dr Martin as being more associated with mental illness of the type
by the offender. Therefore the Crown submitted that any reduction in the
offender’s moral culpability as a result
of his mental health conditions
should be limited. The Crown did accept that any further time in custody will
weigh more heavily
on this offender as a result of his mental health conditions.
The Crown also accepted that the Bugmy principles have been enlivened,
weight should be given to the offender’s deprived background in
determining the appropriate sentence.
Crown noted that the offender was 23 years of age and therefore rehabilitation
remains a significant purpose of sentence. The
Crown noted that the offender had
not engaged in the treatment plan ordered by the Court in his previous sentence,
however he had
not re-offended in 4 years and has significant familial support.
As the offender was 19 years of age at the time of the offending,
his youth was
a significant matter to take into account, referring to TH v R
[2025] NSWCCA 121
[2008] NSWCCA 51
Crown submitted that both general deterrence and specific deterrence are
important in sentencing for the index offences so as
to ensure that the purposes
of sentencing set out in s3A of the CSPA are met.
the case of this offender, the Crown submitted that the threshold in s5 of the
CSPA had been met and that no penalty other than
imprisonment was
appropriate.
his oral submissions, the Crown rehearsed his submissions concerning the role of
the offender and the need for a focus on rehabilitation
in the sentencing of a
youthful offender. The Crown further rehearsed his submissions regarding the
mental health issues suffered
by this offender. The Crown noted that the
offender had expressed his willingness and ability to undertake intervention to
his abstinence from substances as set out the in SAR, however he had not
yet participated in formal treatment. In the SAR under the
“Insight into impact of offending”, the author had noted that the
offender had failed to acknowledge the impact
on the victim, maintaining that he
was not involved in the offence. This demonstrated a lack of remorse and
disentitled him to leniency.
The offender’s
submissions
for the offender also relied on a thorough and detailed written outline of
submissions setting out the procedural history
and summarising the agreed facts.
They demonstrated that the offender did not participate in the background to the
offences in any
way. It was submitted that “contextually, the victim had
participated in the supply of prohibited drugs. Self-evidently, the
offender’s role was to participate in the intimidation of the victim with
a view to ascertaining the whereabouts of Person
A”. It was submitted that
there was no evidence that the offender took part in any of the planning to take
the victim to Bringelly
and that his participation occurred over the course of
1 was below mid-range and the duration of the assault in Count 2 was short and
the injury sustained was relatively minor. The
objective seriousness of that
offence fell below the mid-range.
the heading “Antecedents”, counsel noted that the offender had no
prior convictions at the time of this offending,
however on 1 June 2021 he was
charged with offences relating to the detention of another person and was
sentenced on 6 December 2024
following a trial before Judge Grant to an
aggregate sentence of imprisonment for 3 years to be served by way of an ICO. In
of that sentence which the offender is currently serving, the application
of the totality principle is an important consideration.
on the report of Dr Dilati dated 30 August 2024, the offender who was 19 years
of age at the time of offending and is now
23 years of age, had clearly suffered
a childhood characterised by significant adversity having been exposed to
domestic violence
and alcohol abuse by his father and other members of his
family. He had a history of substance and alcohol abuse from 13 years of
referred to the opinion of Dr Dilati in her report dated 7 October 2025 that the
offender was experiencing significant mental
health difficulties at the time of
the offending. The nexus between the offender’s persistent depressive
symptoms and PTSD
and the offending behaviour was submitted to be an impairment
of “his ability to regulate emotions, tolerate distress and make
considered decisions”. Dr Dilati further opined that it was a combination
of his PTSD and depression together with a personality
disorder characterised by
anti-social traits, and long-standing substance abuse which compounded his
vulnerabilities and had increased
the likelihood of his re-offending. Thus, the
offender’s background and youth were important factors to be considered in
sentencing synthesis.
referred to the well known principles of sentencing young persons as summarised
[2008] NSWCCA 51.
It was submitted that the gravity of the offence, by
itself, demonstrated “adult-like” behaviour but assessment must
one of maturity and conduct, not only the degree of violence.
submitted that the offender’s participation in the planning for the
offence was limited and that he was involved for
a relatively short period of
time, his role ostensibly was to assist the co-offenders. Beyond that, he had no
interest in the underlying
dispute and gained nothing from his participation.
Having regard to the offender’s youth, considerations of general
and retribution should be subordinate to promoting the
offender’s rehabilitation.
submitted that the Court would accept the offender’s letter of apology as
expressing genuine remorse for his offending.
Notwithstanding Dr Dilati’s
opinion that he presented a high risk of further offending, the offender was
charged over 4 years
ago during which time he has not been charged with any
further offences and has complied faithfully with strict bail conditions
the 3 years. His relationship with his family has improved and he is
in a stable relationship and has committed himself to operating
a business. It
was therefore submitted the offender has good prospects of rehabilitation.
referred to the sentence imposed by Judge Grant to submit that the offender has
already served a substantial period of imprisonment
for offences closely related
in time and character to these offences. His youth and the need to give weight
to the progress of his
rehabilitation call for a measure of understanding and
flexibility of approach. It was submitted that applying principles of totality,
had the offender been sentenced for the current matter at the same time, it is
unlikely the offender would have received a sentence
of full-time imprisonment.
submitted that a Community Correction Order (“CCO”) was an
appropriate penalty given the offender had no prior
convictions and the
objective seriousness fell below the mid-range. The Bugmy principles should be
given full effect and his 200
days in custody should be taken into account as
well as the fact that the offender was 19 years of age at the time, and a
based order recognises his youth and promotes his rehabilitation. The
offender had demonstrated progress towards rehabilitation through
behaviour, compliance with strict bail conditions and compliance with an ICO.
his oral submissions, counsel rehearsed his submissions regarding the assessment
of objective seriousness and the absence of evidence
concerning planning to any
significant extent in this offender’s role. Counsel rehearsed his
submissions regarding the role
of the offender here and the short period of time
the offending. Whilst the injuries suffered by the victim were not trivial, they
were relatively minor.
rehearsed his submissions regarding the significant subjective factors to be
taken into account, particularly the offender’s
youth, his lack of
previous convictions and his deprived and disadvantaged background and mental
health issues. Whilst any nexus
between the offender’s mental health and
his offending was in dispute, the Court would conclude that his mental health
contribute in a material way to his offending thereby reducing his moral
culpability for it. The Court may rely on the evidence of
Dr Dilati in her
report dated 7 October 2025 to establish the relevant nexus. Counsel submitted
that the offender’s mental
health was inextricably linked to his offending
conduct thereby reducing significantly his moral culpability. The SAR
demonstrated
that the offender had insight into his offending conduct and his
prospects for rehabilitation. Counsel referred to Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
to submit there could be rehabilitation without confession. This was
approved in Ali v R
[2010] NSWCCA 35
rehearsed his submissions regarding the very lengthy period since the offending
during which the offender has been of good
behaviour and abstinent from
prohibited drugs. Since December 2024 he had been compliant with his ICO and had
a positive response
to supervision.
rehearsed his submission that had he been sentenced for the index offences at
the time Judge Grant sentenced him for subsequent
offences it was most unlikely
that a different penalty would have been imposed. These offences were much less
serious than those
offences and the offender had spent 5 months and 20 days in
custody referrable to both matters.
submitted the offender had significant subjective factors which could be
differentiated from his co-offenders, namely his
age, absence of prior
offending, different role and differences in their subjective cases. Given his
mental health issues and youth,
general deterrence and denunciation should be
subordinate to this offender’s need for rehabilitation. Therefore it was
a CCO would meet the purposes of sentencing in s3A of the CSPA.
Determination
3A of the CSPA sets out the purposes of sentencing as follows:-
"3A The purposes for which a Court may impose a sentence on an offender are as
(a) To ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the offence,
(b) To prevent crime by deterring the offender and other persons from committing
similar offences,
(c) To protect the community from the offender,
(d) To promote the rehabilitation of the offender,
(e) To make the offender accountable for his or her actions,
(f) To denounce the conduct of the offender,
(g) To recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the community."
assessing the objective seriousness of the offending in Count 1, I have had
regard to the context in which the offending arose
as a result of the rip-off of
MS in the drug transaction with Person A and his motivation to obtain
information from the victim as
to the whereabouts of Person A or to extract
money from the victim. Whilst there was clearly planning involved by which the
two co-offenders
were directed to drive to Cremorne and then to take the victim
to Bringelly, there is no evidence that the offender was responsible
planning. His role was to first attend Bunnings to obtain the items which
included the long-handle garden shears, to travel
to Bringelly where he was
subsequently picked up the co-offenders and entered the vehicle wearing a
balaclava, and then at the shed
placed the garden shears on the floor near the
victim, and was involved with the other co-offenders in the search to ensure
the victim was not wearing a wire. I find that his role was lesser than the
co-offender Richard Schaaf but still constituted serious
offending in the upper
part of the low range for an offence pursuant to s13(1) of the CDPVA.
assessing the objective seriousness of the offence in Count 2 I find that the
offender, with the co-offender Richard Schaaf, punched
the victim to the head
multiple times and the victim suffered a cut to his lip. The offending stopped
when Richard Schaaf said words
to the effect of “That’s
enough”. For an offence pursuant to s59(2) of the CA the objective
seriousness fell in
the middle of the low range for such an offence.
was an aggravating factor that the offending involved the threatened use of a
weapon, namely garden shears, pursuant to s21A(2)(c)
of the CSPA. A mitigating
factor pursuant to s21A(3)(e) was that the offender had no record of prior
convictions.
have taken into account the maximum penalties prescribed for an offence under
s13(1) of CDPVA of 5 years imprisonment and/or $5,500
fine and the maximum
penalty for an offence pursuant to s59(2) CA of 7 years imprisonment. The
maximum penalties demonstrate the
seriousness with which Parliament regards such
criminal conduct and act as guideposts in the sentencing process.
deterrence is important in sentencing for such offences. Like-minded members of
the community must understand that Parliament
has set relatively lengthy maximum
penalties of imprisonment for the offences and that the Courts will impose
condign punishment
in appropriate cases. Specific deterrence is also relevant in
that the offender must understand the serious consequences if he was
are significant subjective factors to take into account on sentence here. The
offender was 19 years of age at the time of the
offending and is now 23 years.
It is well established that immaturity may play a major role in youth crime even
crime involving adult-like
behaviour such as the present offending. In TH v R
[2025] NSWCCA 121
, Yehia J said at [92]-[93]:-
“Even in cases of serious offending, while the acts may resemble
“adult like conduct”, one should not lose sight
of the fact that
where the offender is a child, neurodevelopment, emotional maturity, impulse
control and consequential thinking
is less advanced than it is in adults. The
courts should not be “...over-ready to discount the relevance of an
youth on the basis that the offender has engaged in adult
behaviour or acted as an adult”: BP at [6] (Hodgson JA).
As I said in TM at [49]:
“The qualification to the principles concerning young persons where they
conduct themselves in an “adult like manner”
should be applied with
some caution. While in some cases, significant planning, or other indicia of
mature decision-making, may result
in a diminution of the relevant principles,
the gravity of an offence does not, by itself, demonstrate “adult
like” behaviour.
The assessment must be one of maturity and conduct, not
only the degree of violence. Here, the applicant engaged in violent conduct
resulting in serious injury to the victim. However, the conduct had all the
hallmarks of youth, including immaturity, absence of
impulse control, poor
self-regulation, and a tendency to go along with the group. I agree with the
sentencing judge’s remarks
that the distinction between “adult
like” and “non-adult like” behaviour was unhelpful in this
(2010) 201 A Crim R 379
[2010] NSWCCA 159
Hodgson JA, having referred to
KT v R, said as follows:
“4 First, statements that, in relation to young offenders, principles of
retribution may be of less significance and considerations
of rehabilitation may
be of more significance, may tend to obscure the point that even in relation to
retribution the youth of an
offender may be a mitigating circumstance. In my
understanding, considerations of retribution direct attention to what the
deserves; and in my opinion, where emotional immaturity or a young
person’s less-than-fully-developed capacity to control impulsive
contributes to the offending, this may be seen as mitigating culpability and
thus as reducing what is suggested by considerations
of retribution: see TM v R
[2008] NSWCCA 158
5 Second, while I agree with the statements in KT at [26] that the weight to be
given to considerations relevant to a person’s
youth diminishes the closer
the offender approaches the age of maturity, and that a ‘child
offender’ of almost 18 years
cannot expect to be treated substantially
differently from an offender who is just over 18 years of age, it does not
follow that
the age of maturity is 18 (albeit that for certain purposes the law
does draw a line there:
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
understanding, emotional maturity and impulse control develop progressively
during adolescence and early adulthood, and may
not be fully developed until the
early to mid twenties: see R v Slade
[2005] NZCA 19
[2005] 2 NZLR 526
, quoted by Kirby
J in R v Elliott
[2006] NSWCCA 305
(2006 68 NSWLR 1
. As shown by R
[2001] NSWCCA 37
(2001) 124 A Crim R 451
, youth may be a material
factor in sentencing even a 19 year old for a most serious crime.
6 Third, I do not think courts should be over-ready to discount the relevance of
an offender’s youth on the basis that the
offender has engaged in adult
behaviour or acted as an adult. ...”
All of the principles outlined apply here. The offending has all the
hallmarks of youth, including immaturity, absence of impulse
control, poor
self-regulation and a tendency to go along with the group. This mitigates the
offender’s moral culpability for
his offending in a substantial way.
significant feature is the offender’s childhood of disadvantage in which
he was subjected to domestic violence and exposed
to his father’s alcohol
abuse and gambling problems which gave rise to long-standing substance abuse
that commenced at the
age of 13. In Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013]
HCA 37 the High Court held:
1. The circumstances that an offender has been raised in a community surrounded
by alcohol abuse and violence may mitigate the sentence
because his/her moral
culpability is likely to be less than the culpability of an offender whose
formative years have not been marred
in that way [40].
2. The effects of profound deprivation do not diminish over time and repeated
offending and should be given full weight in determining
the sentence in every
case [42-44].
3. A background of that kind may leave a mark on a person throughout life and
compromise a person’s capacity to mature and
learn from experience [43].
The application of these principles, and their impact in diminishing the
offender’s moral culpability for the offending and
how that further
impacts the purposes of sentencing set out in s3A of the CSPA was recently
explained by Weinstein J (with whom Wright
and Sweeney JJ agreed) in YZ v R
[2025] NSWCCA 165
to [68]. The reduction in this offender’s moral
culpability must therefore be given “full weight” in the sentencing
synthesis (per Bugmy at [44]). It is clear that these principles should be given
full effect in the sentencing of this young offender.
divergence of expert opinion between Dr Dilati and Dr Martin was explained by
Judge Grant in his sentencing of the offender on
6 December 2024 in respect of
the following offences:-
(1) Offence of detain with intent to obtain advantage (ransom), contrary to
s86(1)(a) of the CA (Count 2). This offence carried a
maximum penalty of 14
years imprisonment.
(2) Tamper with evidence with intent to mislead judicial tribunal pursuant to
s317(a) of the CA (Count 3). This offence carried a
maximum penalty of 10 years
imprisonment.
(3) An offence of damage property by means of fire pursuant to s195(1A)(b)
). This offence carried a maximum penalty of 11 years imprisonment.
offender had been found guilty of Counts 2 and 3 following a trial in which Dr
Dilati and Dr Martin gave evidence. The sentencing
judge described Dr Dilati as
“a compelling witness”. He was satisfied that the Bugmy principles
were enlivened, and the
offender’s moral culpability was thereby reduced
with diminution of general and specific deterrence, denunciation and an emphasis
on rehabilitation. The offender pleaded guilty to Count 4 and received a 5%
utilitarian discount on sentence. His Honour also made
a finding pursuant to
s22A of the CSPA that the offender had facilitated the administration of justice
by making appropriate concessions
and narrowing issues in the trial.
accept the opinion of Dr Dilati in her report dated 7 October 2025 that the
offender was experiencing significant mental health
difficulties at the time of
the offending, namely persistent depressive symptoms and PTSD which led to an
impairment of his ability
to regulate his emotions, tolerate distress and make
considered decisions. These mental health issues materially contributed to his
offending conduct. In DPP (Cth) v De La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA
McClellan CJ at CL set out at [177] the following principles to be applied
when sentencing an offender suffering from a mental illness,
intellectual
handicap or other mental health problems as follows:-
"Where the state
of a person's mental health contributes to the commission of the offence in a
material way, the offender's moral
culpability may be reduced. Consequently the
need to denounce the crime may be reduced with a reduction in the sentence: R v
[1999] NSWCCA 111
; 46 NSWLR 346 at
; Miller v R
[1999] WASCA 66
; R v Jiminez
[1999] WASCA 7
, [25]; Tsiaras at 400; Lauritsen at
[51]; Israil at [23]; R v Pearson
[2004] NSWCCA 129
[2007] NSWCCA
It may also have
the consequence that an offender is an inappropriate vehicle for general
deterrence resulting in a reduction in the
sentence which would otherwise have
been imposed: Engert at 71; R v Wright
(1997) 93 A Crim R 48
at 50-51; Israil at
[22]; Pearson at [42]; Henry at [28].
It may mean that
a custodial sentence may weigh more heavily on the person. Because the sentence
will be more onerous for that person
the length of the prison term or the
conditions under which it is served may be reduced: Tsiaris at 400; Jiminez at
[25]; Israil
at [26]; Henry at [28].
It may reduce or
eliminate the significance of specific deterrence: Courtney at [14]; Tsiaras at
400; Israil at [25]; JW at [192].
Conversely, it
may be that because of a person's mental illness, they present more of a danger
to the community. In those circumstances,
considerations of specific deterrence
may result in an increased sentence: Israil at [24]; Henry at [28]. Where a
person has been
diagnosed with an Antisocial Personality Disorder there may be a
particular need to give consideration to the protection of the public:
(2005) NSWCCA 91
per Spigelman CJ at [23] - [24]."
Notwithstanding
Dr Dilati’s assessment that the offender was a high risk of re-offending,
he has not re-offended since his release
to bail. His prospects for
rehabilitation must remain somewhat guarded and dependent upon his capacity to
abstain from prohibited
the SAR indicates a lack of remorse by this offender, he has expressed some
remorse and insight into his offending conduct,
and I accept his counsel’s
submission that there may be rehabilitation without confession, relying on
Alseedi v R.
reject, however his counsel’s submission that, applying principles of
totality, had the offender been sentenced by Judge Grant
at the same time of his
sentence for subsequent offending, then a sentence of no more severity would
have been imposed. Judge Grant
imposed an aggregate sentence of 3 years, with
indicative sentences as follows:-
(1) Count 2 – 30 months imprisonment
(2) Count 3 – 12 months imprisonment
(3) Count 4 – With the 5% discount and rounding down, 18 months
imprisonment
(4) He then proceeded to order that the sentence be served in the community by
way of an ICO. If the index offending had been included
in that sentence it
would have warranted accumulation on the sentence imposed given that this was
separate and serious offending.
Notwithstanding that, the principle of totality
would have meant some telescoping of the eventual sentence imposed. I have
taken that into account.
intend to impose an aggregate sentence pursuant to s53A of the CSPA. In doing
so, I take into account the objective seriousness
of the offending, the 5%
utilitarian discount on sentence for each count, the need to give full effect to
the principles in Bugmy,
and the material contribution of the offender’s
mental health issues which diminished his moral culpability for the offending
thereby reducing emphasis on deterrence and denunciation as well as the
offender’s youth which warrants a focus on his rehabilitation.
am required to provide indicative sentences for the purposes of transparency in
the sentencing process. The indicative sentences
– 1 year and 8 months imprisonment
Count 2 – 1 year and 4 months imprisonment
arriving at an aggregate sentence I must have regard to the principles of
proportionality and totality.
Cahyadi v R
[2007] NSWCCA 1
168 A Crim R 41
, Howie J stated at
“There is no general rule that determines whether sentences ought to be
imposed concurrently or consecutively. The issue is
determined by the
application of the principle of totality of criminality: can the sentence for
one offence comprehend and reflect
criminality for the other offence? If it can,
the sentences ought to be concurrent otherwise there is a risk that the combined
will exceed what is warranted to reflect the total criminality of the
two offences. If not, the sentences should be at least partly
cumulative,
otherwise there is a risk that the total sentence will fail to reflect the total
criminality of two offences. Similarly,
where they are part of a single episode
of criminality with common factors, it is more likely that the sentence for one
of the offences
will reflect the criminality of both.”
regard to all of those matters, I intend to impose an aggregate sentence of 2
years and 4 months imprisonment.
note that the offender was in custody for a period of 173 days until he was
granted conditional bail on 17 December 2021. He was
in custody for a period of
200 days when he was bail refused in relation to his subsequent offending and
when sentenced by Judge
Grant, the time spent in custody relating to the index
offences was taken into account.
considering whether to impose an order pursuant to
of the CSPA, that the
sentence be served by way of an ICO, I must have regard to community safety as a
paramount consideration pursuant
to s66 of the CSPA. Notwithstanding that the
offender was assessed as a high risk of reoffending, as outlined above, the
has now progressed his rehabilitation and has not offended for a period
of 4 years. Having regard to not only the purposes of sentencing
in s3A of the
CSPA, by virtue of the offender’s youth rehabilitation must be given some
prominence, and I find on balance,
his risk of reoffending will be best managed
in the community rather than by way of a custodial sentence. In accordance with
Court of Criminal Appeal’s decision in Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
I may take into account the offender’s remand custody, and applying
principles of totality may take that into account notwithstanding
Grant also took the whole period of remand custody into account on sentence. I
am therefore persuaded that the offender
should be sentenced by way of an ICO
pursuant to
of the CSPA and that the term of that order, having regard to
his pre-sentence custody, should be for a period of 21 months.
are convicted of the following offences:-
Count 1 – Offence
pursuant to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm.
Count 2 – Offence pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of others.
sentence you by way of an aggregate sentence pursuant to s53A of the CSPA to a
term of imprisonment of 2 years and 4 months imprisonment.
That sentence is to
be served by way of an ICO for a term of 21 months to commence today pursuant to
of the CSPA.
(1) The standard conditions of the order apply:-
(a) You must not commit any offence; and
(b) You must submit to supervision by a Community Corrections officer.
(2) The following additional conditions apply:-
(a) That you perform community service work for 250 hours.
(3) I am satisfied pursuant to 17D(1)(a) of the CSPA that I have sufficient
information before me to justify the making of the above
Intensive Correction
Order without obtaining an assessment report.
must report to the Community Corrections Office at Windsor as soon as
practicable but no later than 7 days from today.
you fail to comply with the conditions of this order sanctions may be imposed by
the Commissioner of Corrective Services or State
Parole Authority. Those
sanctions may include a formal warning, imposing more stringent conditions or it
may include revocation of
this order.
the order is revoked, you may be required to a serve all or some of the period
of your sentence in full-time custody.
you are now directed to attend the court registry where a copy of this order
will be explained and given to you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (316 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter