URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/270.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2025] NSWCATAD 270; (5 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Walker v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 270
Hearing Date(s):
11 August 2025
Date of Orders:
05 November 2025
Decision Date:
5 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
Dr Linda Kirk, Senior Member
The decision made by the Respondent on 25 October 2024 is set aside.
Catchwords:
TAXES AND DUTIES — Dutiable transactions —Exemption from duty
under First home buyers assistance scheme — Reassessment
proof satisfied
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Duties Act 1997
Taxation Administration Act
Cases Cited:
Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1983)
83 ATC 4015
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (RD)
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
Ferrington v Chief Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] NSWADTAP 41
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Nicholas Walker (Applicant)
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(Respondent)
Representation:
I Walker (Applicant)
T Allchurch (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00123125
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
12 November 2019, Nicholas Walker (‘the Applicant’) entered into a
contract to purchase a property in Hunters Hill
(‘the Property’) for
$510,000. The Property was transferred with an existing
Applicant received a transfer duty exemption (‘the exemption’) under
the First Home Buyers Assistance Scheme (‘the
FHBAS’) in the
Duties Act 1997
’). The Property was
acquired by the Applicant as his first home, and the dutiable value was below
the statutory limit at that
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (‘the Respondent’) formed the
view that the Applicant had not occupied the Property
as required to be eligible
for the exemption, and on 25 October 2024 the Respondent made an assessment of
the duty payable, plus
penalty and interest under the
Assessment’).
Applicant applied to this Tribunal under
Taxation Administration
(NSW) (‘TA Act’) for administrative review of the
Assessment.
4 September 2024, Revenue NSW (‘RNSW’) contacted the Applicant by
email to inform him that it was conducting a review
of his purchase of the
Property on behalf of the Respondent. On the same day, the Respondent issued a
Notice of Investigation which
requested that the Applicant provide a completed
Residence Declaration and Residence Requirement
4 September 2024, the Applicant provided evidence in support of his residence at
the Property,
and a completed
Residence Declaration
in which he
he understood
that to retain the exemption he had to occupy the Property as his principal
place of residence for a continuous period
of at least six months, commencing
within 12 months of settlement;
he understood
that if the residence requirement has not been met, he may be required to repay
the first home benefit which may include
penalty tax and/or interest;
he acknowledged
that he may be liable for penalties for making false statements in the
declaration;
residing in the Property on 30 July 2020 and ceased living in the Property on 1
March 2021; and
answered “No” to
the question “Did you occupy another property as a residence during
the above period?” and
therefore did not complete the
section “Reasons for not living in the
subsequently conducted investigations into the Applicant’s residence at
the Property, including further correspondence
with the Applicant and
requisitions to third parties.
25 October 2024, RNSW advised the Applicant that he had not met the residency
requirement for FHBAS, following which the Assessment
was issued by the
Respondent.
The Applicant lodged a
Notice of Objection on same
13 January 2025, RNSW completed a report in response to the objection which
recommended that the objection be
disallowed.
On 15 January 2025, the
Respondent issued a further Duties Notice of Assessment to the Applicant
(‘further Assessment’).
It consisted of $18,412 in transfer duty, $4,595.50 in penalty tax, and
$7,732.53 in interest, totalling $30,740.03.
24 January 2025, RNSW informed the Applicant that the Respondent had disallowed
his objection.
Applicant applied to this Tribunal for review on 31 March 2025. The application
was lodged out of time, but the Respondent consented
to an extension of time
which was granted at a directions hearing on 29 April
Legislative framework
Duties Act 1997
provides that the FHBAS is intended to help people
who are acquiring their first home. Under the scheme, the acquisition is subject
to a concession or exemption from duty.
Eligible agreements or transfers
(1) The agreement or transfer must be for the acquisition of a first home or for
the acquisition of a vacant block of residential
land intended to be used as the
site of a first home.
(2) The agreement or transfer must be for the whole of the property.
(3) The dutiable value of the dutiable property that is the subject of the
agreement or transfer must be less than:
(a) $800,000 if the property has a private dwelling built on it, or
(b) $450,000 if the property comprises a vacant block of residential land. Note-
dutiable value
of dutiable property is the greater of:
(a) the consideration (if any) for the dutiable transaction (being the amount of
a monetary consideration or the value of a non-monetary
consideration), and
(b) the unencumbered value of the dutiable property.
Section 76(1)
Residence requirement
(1) The home must be occupied by the first home owner or one of the
first home owners who is acquiring it as a principal place of
residence for a
continuous period of at least 6 months, with that occupation starting within 12
months (or such longer period as
the Chief Commissioner may approve) after
completion of the agreement or transfer. This requirement is referred to
the residence requirement
(2) The Chief Commissioner may, if satisfied there are good reasons to do so in
a particular case:
(a) modify the residence requirement by approving a shorter period of occupation
by a first home owner, or
(b) exempt a first home owner from the requirement to comply with the
residence requirement.
provides that the Chief Commissioner may reassess the duty chargeable in
respect of an agreement or transfer that is initially approved
under the FHBAS
if he forms the opinion that the agreement or transfer is not eligible under the
scheme (because of failure to comply
with the residence requirement or
otherwise).
Applicant has the onus of proving his case: TA Act, s 100(3). He must prove all
matters necessary for the Tribunal to answer the
statutory question in his
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
. The standard of proof is the balance of
probabilities.
Issues for determination
issues for determination are first, whether the Applicant occupied the Property
for a continuous period of at least six months
within 12 months after
settlement. If the answer to that question is yes, the second question is
whether the Property was occupied
by the Applicant as his principal place of
Evidence before the Tribunal
Applicant provided a statutory
declaration,
and gave oral
evidence at the hearing. The following witnesses provided written statements and
gave oral evidence:
Applicant filed a bundle of materials on 13 June 2025 (‘AB’).
Respondent filed documents pursuant to s58 of the ADR Act on 6 May 2025
(‘s58 Bundle’).
Occupation of the Property
is not in dispute that the tenant vacated the Property on 30 June
his Notice of Objection dated 25 October 2024, the Applicant claimed that he
took up residence at the Property on 30 June
other documents filed as part of his evidence, the Applicant claimed that the
Property was his principal place of residence between
30 June 2020 and 7
February 2021.
Those claims are
included in documents seeking to amend his Individual Tax Return for 2020/2021
(‘2021 ITR’), lodged
with the Australian Tax Office and instructing
a tax agent to do the same.
his written submissions to the
in a statutory
declaration,
and in his oral
evidence at the hearing, the Applicant stated that he resided in the Property
from 3 July 2020 to 7 February 2021
(‘the relevant period’). Prior
to moving to the Property, the Applicant was living at his parents’ home
Ryde. The Applicant’s father, Ian Walker, explained to the
Tribunal that on the first weekend following 30 June 2020, he and
the Applicant
loaded up his land cruiser with the Applicant’s personal belongings and
took them to the Property. They moved
his mattress from his bedroom at his
parents’ home to the Property, and the Applicant slept on it until a new
Koala sofa bed
was delivered some weeks
Applicant recalls that shortly after he moved into the Property, he travelled to
Byron Bay during the school holiday period at
that time. While he was away, he
arranged for the Property to be painted. He asked his friend, James Eccles, to
check on the work
done by the painters in his absence. On 15 August 2020, the
Applicant hosted a house-warming party at the Property which was attended
many of his friends.
evidence is consistent with that of James Eccles in his statutory
declaration:
I have fond memories of helping Nick set up the unit. Specifically, I recall
Nick showing me around his apartment for the first time
on 5 July 2020. I had
access to the unit to check on the progress of the painters who my mother had
arranged through her interior
design contacts. Once they were finished, I helped
assemble some flat pack furniture on 10 July 2020 and then again on 19 July 2020
while Nick was away at Byron Bay. When Nick returned, we had a house-warming
Eccles told the Tribunal that he had been able to confirm the dates in his
statement by reviewing his Facebook messages with the
Applicant at the time. The
flat pack furniture he assembled was the Koala sofa bed. A photo taken showing
the mattress on the bed
is included in the documentary evidence filed by the
Applicant’s bank statements indicate that he was in Byron Bay from around
13 July to 22 July 2020.
Applicant’s electricity account with Powershop was connected on 14 August
2020 and it was disconnected on 8 February
The Applicant’s
evidence is that when the tenant vacated the property the electricity was not
disconnected, and he did not
connect the electricity in his name until some
weeks after he moved into the
The Applicant’s
lnternode Fetch TV account was set up on 30 July
evidence of the Applicant’s friends who provided statutory declarations
and gave oral evidence is that the Applicant held
a housewarming party at the
Property on 15 August 2020. In her oral evidence, Ms Nadall told the Tribunal
that the Applicant’s
invitation to his friends to attend the housewarming
was posted on Facebook.
Principal place of residence
the relevant period in which the Applicant claims he lived in the Property, he
did not update his address to that of the Property
on any of the following:
driver’s licence;
the electoral
superannuation statements;
insurance and policies; and
insurance and
Applicant’s evidence is that his failure to update these addresses was an
oversight on his part.
address listed on his electricity account, water bill and council rates was that
of the Property.
Applicant told the Tribunal that during the relevant period, he was provided
with breakfast and dinner at the school where he
works. In the evenings he
cooked for himself at the Property, or he would go to his parents’ house
for dinner, or he would
order Uber Eats.
Applicant explained that he decided to move out of the Property and return to
live with his parents during the school holidays
in December 2020 –
January 2021. He had planned for his then-girlfriend to move into the Property
and live with him, but their
relationship broke down around this
He explained that his work
role was very demanding and stressful at the time, and he was missing the
emotional support that his parents
provided to him when he was living at their
for the Property to be listed for rent on 4 January 2021. The Applicant
moved back to live with his parents at their
and a tenant moved into
the Property on 8 February
Applicant originally claimed that he rented the Property for 52 weeks in the
2020-21 tax year and he reported rental income of
$23,807 in his 2021 ITR. He
subsequently corrected this to report he rented the property for 21 weeks in the
2020-21 tax year and
earned $7,112.00 in rental
In the 2021 ITR, the
Applicant claimed expenses associated with renting
the Property for items
including the Koala bed, plantation shutters, painting and washing machine
CONSIDERATION
administrative review is conducted under
Administrative Decisions
Review Act 1997
(NSW) (‘ADR Act’) and
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act).
The Tribunal “stands
in the shoes” of the Respondent in conducting a merits review of the
Assessment. The Tribunal’s
task is to decide what the correct and
preferable decision is having regard to the material before it, including any
relevant factual
material and any applicable written or unwritten law: ADR Act,
s 63. The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and
may inquire
into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks
fit, subject to the rules of natural justice.
Is the Applicant
entitled to the exemption?
Applicant bears the onus of proving his case on the balance of probabilities:
100(3). He must satisfy the Tribunal that he is entitled to the
exemption, having regard to the relevant statutory criteria. He must
matters necessary to enable the Tribunal to answer the statutory questions in
his favour. In the absence of that evidence,
the Assessment will prevail as
correct, as the starting point is that there is no entitlement to an
Although there
is no statutory requirement for the Applicant to produce as a witness
any particular person or produce any documentary
Pastoral Holdings Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
(1983) 83 ATC 4015), the Applicant must produce
sufficient evidence to discharge the onus. Part of that evidence may
comprise documents
or correspondence in the s58
Did the Applicant occupy the Property for a continuous
six month period?
accept the Applicant’s evidence that he moved into the Property on 3 July
2020 and moved out on 8 February 2021. His evidence
that he moved from his
parents’ house to the Property after the tenant vacated on 30 June 2020 is
supported by his father whose
evidence is that he assisted the Applicant to move
his personal belongings to the Property on 3 July 2020. Mr Eccles’
is that he went to the Property on 5 July 2020 and met with the
Applicant. During the school holiday period in July 2020, the Applicant
travelled to Byron Bay. During his absence the Property was painted, and Mr
Eccles went to the Property to check on the painter’s
progress. Mr Eccles
returned to the Property on 10 July 2020, and he assembled some flat pack
furniture. He went to the Property
again on 19 July 2020. The Applicant returned
from Byron Bay on or around 22 July 2020.
Did the Applicant
occupy the Property as his principal place of residence?
Tribunal must also be satisfied that the Applicant occupied the Property as his
principal place of residence for him to qualify
for the exemption.
term ‘principal place of residence’ is not defined in the
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Ferrington (GD)
(‘Ferrington’),
53 the Appeal Panel set out the following
criteria in respect to what is required to establish a principal place of
First, the words ‘principal place of residence’ should be given
their ordinary meaning in the context in which they appear.
Secondly, consideration of whether a person has been residing or occupying
premises as their principal place of residence is to be
assessed objectively, in
the light of the circumstances relating to the actual occupation of the
Thirdly, the intention of the person concerned, gauged objectively, is relevant
but not determinative of the issue.
Fourthly, to occupy a home as her principal place of residence a person’s
occupation must have a degree of permanence to it:
a connection to a place of
residence of a transient, temporary, contingent or passing nature is not
sufficient, nor is occupation
for some other purpose.
Fifthly, the short length of a person’s residence, while relevant, is not
determinative of the issue. This is so since a recipient’s
occupation of a
will not happen if, when considered
objectively, the occupation was transient,
temporary, contingent or of a passing nature, or for some other purpose. One may
premises for a short time on a transient, temporary, or contingent basis,
but one can also occupy for a short time as one’s
principal place of
residence. It is the nature of that occupation which provides the element of
permanence. The fact that a period
of actual occupation is short, as in the
present case, will in practice make it harder for a recipient to show that the
was as his or her principal place of residence, but it will not make
it impossible.
Sixthly, the reasons for a person’s departure from the home must be both
reasonable and adequately explained when considered
objectively in the light of
their personal circumstances.
Respondent contends that the objective evidence does not establish that the
Applicant occupied the Property as his primary place
of residence for any
duration of time, having regard to the criteria identified in
Ferrington.
In relation
to second to fourth criteria in
Ferrington,
the Respondent contends that
the evidence does not establish that the Applicant intended to reside in the
Property as his principal
place of residence with any degree of
permanence.
The Respondent
points to the Applicant’s failure to update his address on his
driver’s licence, the electoral roll, pay
slips, superannuation
statements, home insurance and policies, and car insurance and policies to
support its contention that the
Applicant’s occupation of the Property was
‘temporary and
transient’.
The Respondent
also relies on the analysis of the Applicant’s bank statements during his
occupation of the Property which do
not show a notable change in his spending
habits, to support his argument that the Property was not the Applicant’s
place of residence during the relevant
Tribunal accepts the Applicant’s evidence that he did not update his
address on his driver’s licence, pay slips, superannuation
statements,
roll for reason that at the time he
was very busy at work, and did not think it
was essential to update his address as he would be able to collect any
correspondence
for him sent to his parents’ home.
Tribunal also accepts the Applicant’s evidence that he had planned to make
the Property his long-term residence and intended
his then-girlfriend to move in
with him. I accept that when the Applicant’s personal circumstances
changed following the breakdown
of his relationship, he decided to move back
with his parents where he would receive the emotional support he needed during a
time in his life.
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s contention that the evidence
that indicates that there was no notable change in
the Applicant’s
spending habits during the relevant period establishes that he was not living in
the Property on a permanent
basis. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
Applicant’s spending habits did not change markedly because his daily
routine was
not significantly impacted by his move to the Property.
Respondent further contends that the Applicant’s claiming of deductions in
his 2021 ITR for items he purchased for the Property
indicate that he purchased
the Property as an investment and did not intend for it to be his principal
place of residence. The Tribunal
notes the inconsistencies in the information
the Applicant provided to the ATO, the lack of evidence of the correction he
made to the amount of rental income he received in the 2020-21 tax year
and the verification of this change, and his claiming of
deductions for expenses
associated with the rental of the Property in the same financial year.
is no evidence before the Tribunal that the Property was ever rented out to a
tenant or that rent was paid to the Applicant
during the relevant period.
The Tribunal finds that the Applicant incorrectly declared rental income and
claimed expenses associated
with renting the Property for 52 weeks during the
2020-21 tax year which he subsequently corrected to align with the Property
rented for 21 weeks from 8 February 2021 when he vacated the Property. The
Tribunal finds that the Applicant’s decision to
rent the Property when he
moved back to live with his parents is not inconsistent with his intention when
he purchased the Property
that it would be his principal place of
an objective assessment of the evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that the Applicant resided at
the Property on a
permanent basis from 3 July 2020 to 8 February 2021.
Tribunal is satisfied that the Applicant has discharged his onus in relation to
establishing that he occupied the Property for
a continuous period of six months
as his principal place of residence and he therefore qualifies for the
regard to the above findings on the material before the Tribunal, the correct
and preferable decision is to make the order
(1) The decision made by the Respondent on 25 October 2024 is set aside.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
05 November 2025 - Title changed
Bundle, Tab 1, Notice of
Bundle, Tabs
Bundle, Tabs
Bundle, Tabs
Bundle, Tabs
Bundle, Tabs
50-50(b) Email from RNSW to the Applicant attaching Letter and Duties Notice of
Assessment, pages 521-525.
Bundle, Tab 51 Applicant's objection, pages
Bundle, Tab 53
RNSW objection determination report, pages
Bundle, Tab 54
Duties Notice of Assessment issued to the
Bundle, Tabs
55-55(a) Email from RNSW to the Applicant attaching Objection determination
notice - objection disallowed, pages
AB, Tab 4.6,
Statutory Declaration of Nicholas Walker, page
AB, Tab 4.2, Statutory
Declaration of Ian Walker, page
AB, Tab 4.3, Statutory
Declaration of James Eccles, page
AB, Tab 4.1, Statutory
Declaration of Damon Bottrill, page
AB, Tab 4.5, Statutory
Declaration of Nadine Dallal, page
AB, Tab 4.4, Statutory
Declaration of Jamie Casaclang, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab 39,
Email from Montano Group to RNSW, page 439; AB, Tab 2.6, Tenant History - per
Real Estate Agent Montano, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab
AB, Tab 2.2 Tax Agent
- Updated 2021 Return - Incorrect Dates with Incorrect Figures, page 21; Tab
2.8, Appointment Request Email
to Tax Agent -10/6/25, page 34; Tab 2.11,
Objections to ATO - Re-lodgement of FY2021 Tax Return, since of 2 years since
tax period,
12Jun 25, ATO reference for lodgement by Tax Agent: proof of Receipt
no: 501016107627, page 47.
AB, Tab 4.6,
Statutory Declaration of Nicholas Walker, page
The tax invoice for the
sofa bed is dated 31 July 2020: s 58 Bundle, Tab 42(a), Tax invoice from Koala,
AB, Tab 1.2, Print
of Docs/References, page 10; Tab 4.1, Statutory Declaration of Damon Bottrill,
page 52; Tab 4.5, Statutory Declaration
of Nadine Dallal, page 58; Tab 5.3,
House Warming Invitation and Photos, pages
AB, Tab 4.3,
Statutory Declaration of James Eccles, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab
12(a)(i), CBA bank statement for period 15 May 2020 to 14 August 2020, pages
56-59. See references to payments on
13 July 2020 in Montecollum, a town in the
Northern Rivers region, and on 22 July 2020 in Forster, a town in the Mid North
s 58 Bundle, Tab
12(f), Screenshot of electricity billing history for period 21 August 2020 to 1
March 2021, page 169.
Table of Considerations, page 4, item
s 58 Bundle, Tab 23(b),
Screenshot of order confirmation from lnternode, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab 47,
RNSW Full Investigation Report, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab 47,
RNSW Full Investigation Report, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab 24,
Email from the Applicant to RNSW, page
AB, Table of
Considerations, page 3, item
AB, Tab 4.6, Statutory
Declaration of Nicholas Walker, page 60. Jamie Casaclang suggests that the
Applicant planned for his then-girlfriend
to move in with him before they
separated: AB, Tab 4.4, Statutory Declaration of Jamie Casaclang, page 56. The
Applicant's father
also gives evidence that the Applicant ‘mentioned [that
his then-girlfriend] may also move to the home unit”: AB, Tab
Statutory Declaration of Ian Walker, page
AB, Tab 4.6, Statutory
Declaration of Nicholas Walker, page
s 58 Bundle, Tab 37,
Email from Ray White Hunters Hill to RNSW, page
AB, Tab 2.3, From ATO
response to application to change FY2021 Return dated 28 February 2025, page
AB, Tab 2.2, Tax Agent
— Updated 2021 Return — Incorrect Dates with Incorrect Figures,
pages 18, 22, 23.
Respondent’s Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions (RSFIC) filed 14
July 2025 [59].
RSFIC [67]: Analysis
in s 58 Bundle, Tab 47, RNSW full investigation report, page 505-506; see also
the underlying bank statements
in S 58 Bundle, Tab 12(a), pages 44-148.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (303 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter