URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/243.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AQQ v QBE (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 243 (10 November 2020)
AQQ v QBE (Claims Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 243
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Motor accident not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the injured
person – a no-fault motor accident – Insurer not
entitled to refuse
payment of statutory benefits – car hit a kangaroo – vehicle lost
traction and swerved off road –
legal costs
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, Schedule 2(3), Schedule (3)(g)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
- r 31.18(4)
Cases Cited
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
San v Rumble (No 2)
(2007) NSWCA 259
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 290
AQQ – Claimant
QBE – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act
and clause 7.441
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
QBE as agent for the Nominal Defendant
Date of Accident
24 October 2019
DRS Reference
Date of Internal Review
DRS Claims Assessor
Maurice Castagnet
Date of Decision
10 November 2020
Conference date and time
Assessment on the papers
Claimant representative
Tanya Maksimovic of Law Partners
Insurer representative
Karen Bulluss of McInnes Wilson Lawyers
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows
the purposes of section 3.28 the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of the injured person
For the purposes
of Part 5 the motor accident is a no-fault motor accident.
For the purposes
of section 3.37 the insurer is not entitled to refuse payment of statutory
The effective
date of this decision is 24 April 2020.
: The amount of the claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
is $8,931.75 inclusive of
A brief statement of my reasons for this determination are
attached to this certificate.
Maurice Castagnet
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
INTRODUCTION
determination relates to a Miscellaneous Claim, which is a reviewable decision
(a) Schedule 2(3)(e) of the
Motor Accident Injuries
2017 (the Act) whether for the purposes of section 3.28 (Cessation of
statutory benefits after 26 weeks to adult persons most at
fault or to injured
persons with minor injuries) the motor accident was caused mostly by the fault
of the injured person.
(b) Schedule (3)(g1) of the Act whether for the purposes of Part 5 (Recovery
for no-fault motor accidents) a motor accident is a no-fault
(c) Schedule 2 (3)(f) of the Act about whether the insurer is entitled to
refuse payment of statutory benefits in accordance with
section 3.37 of the Act
( No statutory benefits payable to injured person who commits serious driving
matter was initially referred to me for determination under Schedule 2(3) (e)
the course of the assessment and after I conducted two teleconferences with the
parties, it became apparent that two further
issues arose for
determination.
first was whether the claimant was involved in a no-fault or blameless accident
within the meaning of s 5.1 of the Act.
second was whether the insurer was entitled to refuse payment of statutory
benefits on the basis that the claimant has committed
a serious driving offence
within the meaning of s3.37 of the Act.
have considered all these issues in my assessment and made my determination
under schedules 2(3)(e), (f) and (g1) of the Act.
claimant is a 64-year-old man who suffered significant injuries in a motor
accident on 24 October 2019 on Windeyer Road, Windeyer.
1 November 2019, the claimant lodged an
Application for Personal Injury
with the relevant insurer
Personal Injury Benefits are
statutory benefits that include weekly payments for loss of earnings and the
costs of reasonable and
necessary treatment and care.
the time of the accident, the claimant was a carer to his spouse and in the
circumstances, did not make a claim for weekly payments
for loss of earnings. He
sought statutory benefits only for treatment and care.
his Application for Personal Injury Benefits, the claimant described the
circumstances of the motor accident in the following terms
Driving along Windyer
Rd Kangaroo appeared in front of
vehicle I braked and ended up on side of Road. I was expelled from vehicle no
other vehicle involved.”
28 February 2020, the insurer issued a
Liability Notice – benefits
after 26 weeks from the motor accident,
determining that the claimant was
wholly at fault in the motor accident and that his statutory benefits would
cease on 24 April 2020
– 26 weeks from the date of the accident.
the notice, the insurer advised the claimant –“
considered all the available information detailing the circumstances of the
motor accident and I have determined that this
is not a blameless accident and
you were wholly at fault in the motor accident as you were deemed at the [sic]
fault of this motor
vehicle accident on 24/10/2019
the notice, the insurer further advised the claimant – “
Police have deemed you at fault of this
8 April 2020, the claimant sought a review of the decision asserting that he was
not at fault in the motor accident and that it
was a no-fault or blameless
accident. In a statement provided to the insurer’s investigator and relied
upon by the claimant
in the review, he again stated that a kangaroo jumped out
from his left in front of his truck which resulted in the motor accident.
1 May 2020, the insurer issued a
Certificate of Determination –
Internal Review
, re-affirming that it was not a no-fault or blameless
accident but on this occasion found that the claimant was “mostly at
fault” in the motor accident. In reaching this decision, the insurer again
did not accept the involvement of a kangaroo in
the accident and relied
essentially on the information contained in the Police Report.
20 May 2020, the claimant lodged an application with the Dispute Resolution
Service (DRS) seeking a review of the insurer’s
review decision and the
application has been referred to me for determination.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the documents provided in the application and the reply.
have also considered further documents and submissions provided to me by the
parties during the assessment.
parties agreed that it was suitable for me to proceed to make my determination
on the papers. The documents which I have considered
in my assessment include:
Application for
Personal Injury Benefits and Certificate of Fitness both dated 1 November
Report dated 24 October 2019.
Clinical Notes
of Westmead Hospital – 24 October 2019 to 6 November 2019.
Pinnacle Rehab dated 16 December 2019.
signed statement provided to Procare dated 11 February 2020.
‘Liability Notice – Benefits after 26 weeks, dated 28 February 2020.
internal review request and submissions dated 8 April 2020.
Certificate of Determination – Internal Review and Reasons dated 1 May
DRS submissions undated but lodged 20 May 2020.
Advice of Court
Result – Local Court of NSW, Mudgee dated 3 June 2020.
submissions dated 22 June 2020.
further submissions by email of 2 July 2020.
Investigative
reports of Procare dated 15 February 2020, 24 July 2020 and 4 September
Procare Record
of Interview with Constable Travis Blewitt on 20 July 2020.
Statement of DW
dated 31 August 2020.
further signed statement dated 1 September 2020.
GIPA file of the
NSW Police Force dated 17 September 2020.
further submissions dated 21 September 2020.
further submissions by email dated 30 September 2020.
further submissions by email dated 22 October 2020.
further submissions by email dated 22 October
THE EVIDENCE
The claimant’s evidence
claimant relied upon two signed statements dated 11 February 2020 and 1
September 2020. The relevant evidence extracted from those
statements is as
24 October 2019 at approximately 6.00pm, he was travelling along Windeyer Road,
Windeyer at 50kms per hour. The speed limit in
that area was 60kms. He was
travelling under the speed limit as he had a load of bales of hay on the
was wearing a seat belt.
the location where the motor accident occurred, Windeyer Road was an undivided
road with one lane of travel in each direction.
was daylight heading into dusk. The claimant does not believe that he had his
headlights on at that time.
he came to a bend nearing Windeyer village, a kangaroo jumped out from his left
to the front of his truck.
braked and swerved to avoid colliding with it. The sudden braking caused his
vehicle to lose traction with the road and veer to
the right side and off the
road. The vehicle hit a tree and then rolled on its side.
was ejected from the vehicle. He does not know exactly where he ended up. He was
told that he was possibly ejected through the
rear window of the truck.
does not know of any witnesses to the accident or who called the ambulance but
he knows that the Ambulance Service attended the
scene to treat him. When asked
what happened by one of the paramedic officers, he said that he swerved to miss
a kangaroo and in
doing so, lost control of his vehicle.
was admitted to Westmead Hospital for treatment and was placed in an induced
coma for a few days.
remained in the care of Westmead Hospital for 13 days. During that time, he
underwent various surgical procedures including the
repair of his degloved right
hand, repair to his left ear and having plates and screws inserted in his
splintered right ribs.
6 November 2020, he was transferred to Mudgee Hospital to continue his
has since undergone an AC joint reconstruction with insertion of hardware in his
right shoulder.
has suffered damage to his false teeth which is due to be repaired by a dental
prosthetist.
two and half hours prior to the motor accident, he had consumed two cans of low
alcohol beer, one having 2.7% alcohol volume
and the other, .0.5%.
January 2020, he was issued with a low range PCA driving infringement notice
with a reading of 0.064. He believes that the medication
he was given after the
accident could have contributed to the reading result.
has not been charged with any other traffic offences by the NSW police.
elected to have the matter determined by a Court. The Local Court at Mudgee
found the PCA charge proved and suspended his licence
for 21 days.
The Ambulance Report – 24 October 2019
Ambulance Electronic Medical Record dated 24 October 2019 records the case event
at the scene of the motor accident as follows:
male involved in single occupant truck ?partial rollover – truck resting
on passenger side Pt amnesiac to extrication
– states wearing seatbelt,
states having a couple of beers 2 hours ago OA of paramedics pt supine on
ground, responding to
questions, complaining of severe back pain Pt denies
cervical neck pain, however moving neck/head aggravates mid back pain... Initial
INH Methoxyflurane for pain relief due to lack of IV access, IV Access gained,
then IV Morphine & Ondansetron Pt given 20mg Morphine
with minimal decreased
in pain...”
page 7 of the Record, the claimant’s Glasgow Coma Score was recorded as
15/15 at 6.43pm, 7.17pm and 7.45pm.
Police Notebook interview
with the claimant – 4 January 2020
4 January 2020, Constable Blewitt attended the claimant’s home address and
interviewed the claimant.
he was asked “
What happened?
”, the claimant said:
Coming down around the corner from Mudgee way just as I was coming
around a roo came in front of me. I tried to dodge it. I had hay
on the back and
it went top heavy and I couldn’t control it. I just tried to steer it into
the gully. The next thing I remember
Chris and Brian, the Fire Captain said
don’t move him. Then I was out for a week.”
he was asked “
Were you wearing a seatbelt?
” the claimant said
he was asked “
Did you have any alcohol prior to the crash?
The claimant said: “
One beer at Dunedoo. I only drove from Honey Haven.
TP drove from Dunedoo to Honey Haven.
The Police Report – 29 January
crash summary of the Police Report dated 29 January 2020 describes the motor
accident as follows:
64-year-old man was driving a 1988 Mitsubishi table top truck east upon Windeyer
Rd, Windeyer.
Approximately 500m east of
Wingraves Rd, Windeyer, the male
driver was seen to lose traction to the rear wheels as it negotiated a
right-hand bend. The vehicle
rolled and the driver was ejected from the truck.
The driver was treated by ambulance officers at the scene where he was
before being air lifted to Westmead Hospital
Particulars
of Seat Belt on Page 4 of the report is noted as
Interview with
Constable Travis Blewitt – 20 July 2020
Travis Blewitt attended the scene of the accident and subsequently prepared the
Police Report. He was interviewed by David
Patterson of Procare on 20 July
the record of interview Constable Travis Blewitt made the following
statements.
arrival at the scene, he observed a Mitsubishi table-top truck laying on its
side near a bend.
did not speak with the claimant at the scene about the circumstances of the
saw skid marks on the road which were close to the verge. They were visible and
went for approximately fifty metres.
took some photographs and obtained details of AQQ.
breath test was not conducted at the time due to the driver’s
spoke to a witness, DW who lives on the corner opposite the accident. She
witnessed the accident. She was at the front of her property
- 1855 Windeyer
Road. She informed him that she looked up to see the brake lights on the truck
as it started to slide and then sort
of flipped or rolled. She saw the driver
was ejected from the vehicle and she raised help immediately.
appeared that the vehicle was heading east and taking the right-hand bend. The
near side tyre or the passenger side tyre at the
rear lost traction on the
gravel causing the vehicle to slide and go off onto the dirt down an
embankment.
(skid) marks indicated that a vehicle crossed onto the wrong side of the road
before rolling and stopping on the shoulder of the
southern side of the road.
the time the vehicle was loaded with lucerne hay. It did not appear to Constable
Blewitt that it was overloaded at the time. However,
a lot of the lucerne hay
had already been taken away and the road was cleaned up by the time he got
officers treated the driver at the scene where he was stabilised before being
airlifted to Westmead Hospital.
Statement of witness DW – 31 August
31 August 2020, DW provided a statement to the insurer’s investigator,
relevant evidence is extracted below.
6pm 24 October 2019, I was on the side of my home located at 1855 Windeyer Road,
Windeyer. I was by myself at the time,
and was fixing the side fence when I
observed a white-coloured truck travelling past my home. It was travelling from
Mudgee direction
towards Pyramul.
made me notice the truck was that it had a load of hay on it, which at the time
in the drought was a rare thing and I wondered
where that had come from.
I first saw the truck I thought that it might have been travelling at the speed
limit. After the truck travelled past where I
was fencing, I heard a noise and
looked up to see that the truck had applied the brakes and was coming to a quick
truck seemed to swerve on the road, then rotated and then rolled off onto the
side of the road. At this time, most of the load
of hay was lost from the truck.
... phoned 000 and was talking to them by the time I got to the vehicle
I got to the vehicle I recognised the driver (but only know him as Mick). He had
been ejected from the vehicle out the back window.
He appeared to be in a lot of
pain and moaning on the ground...
do not recall seeing a kangaroo on the road or the truck swerving to avoid a
kangaroo but they are there on a regular basis and
many have been hit on that
section of road.
did not smell any alcohol on the driver of the truck.
am unable to say whether the driver was wearing a seat belt.
my observations he was ejected out the back window of the truck. I did not look
into the truck, so couldn’t tell if he
was wearing a seatbelt or
THE INSURER’S SUBMISSIONS ON
insurer maintains the claimant is wholly at fault for the accident.
claimant was the driver of a vehicle that was involved in a rollover.
NSW Police hold the claimant to be wholly at fault for the accident. He was
found to have a BAC of 0.064 and the NSW Police issued
him with an Infringement
Notice for driving with low-range PCA.
claimant alleges a kangaroo jumped into his path causing him to brake and
swerve. Based on this allegation, which was reported
late to hospital staff, the
claimant submits this might be a no-fault accident if s 5.1 of the Act
claimant cannot succeed under s 5.1 of the Act. He was not a faultless driver.
He was driving whilst intoxicated and charged with
a driving offence.
s 5.1 of the Act does not apply, the assessor must address s. 3.28.
of whether or not a kangaroo existed (the insurer contends it did not, given its
late report), the claimant’s own
actions caused the subject accident. The
claimant’s GCS was 13/15 on admission to hospital. He was unresponsive.
In his statement
he alleges he vividly remembers the kangaroo immediately prior
to his decision to swerve but cannot recall anything for 4 to 5 days
afterwards.
is clear fault on the part of the claimant. He was intoxicated. His reaction
times and perception times would have been affected
by his intoxication.
claimant is the author of his own misfortune and the insurer submits that the
assessor must issue a certificate concluding the
claimant was wholly at fault
for the subject accident.
THE CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS ON FAULT
insurer relied on the description of the motor accident given in the NSW Police
Police Report does not mention a kangaroo. By failing to review other available
evidence, the insurer has overlooked the reason
as to why the claimant’s
vehicle lost traction and swerved off the road.
clinical notes of Westmead Hospital records various notes about the involvement
of a kangaroo in the motor accident. For example,
at page 117, Medical Officer
Yi Liang records under her progress notes – “
63M MVA car v
”; at page 118, Dr Janice McKenna records under her progress
64M sole occupant, rollover, ejected, avoiding
”; the physiotherapy progress notes of Rebecca Assaf at page
132 records that the claimant was “
admitted to Westmead Hospital on
24/10/19 following MVA – swerved to avoid kangaroo, hit a tree + rollover
resulting in (injury)
”; the ICU Discharge Summary at page 157 notes
MVA – driver swerved to miss kangaroo – hit a tree + roll
over, self-extricated via passenger door and intubated at scene
management.
the ADL report of Pinnacle Rehab dated 16 December 2019 commissioned by the
insurer, the author records the history as follows
AQQ advised as he drove the loaded truck a kangaroo jumped into his
path of travel and AQQ understand that she [sic] swerved sharply
collision with the kangaroo...”
above evidence clearly indicates that the claimant was not at fault and that the
accident was a blameless one.
claimant submits that this was a no-fault accident or blameless accident within
the meaning of s 5.1 of the Act.
that the claimant could not have known a kangaroo would jump in front of his
vehicle, his response in swerving the vehicle to
avoid the collision is
blameless and did not occur due to the claimant’s own negligence. This is
supported by the fact that
the claimant has not been charged for negligent
Accordingly,
the claimant submits that the insurer has erred in their determination and that
he cannot be deemed at fault.
statutory benefits after 26 weeks, Part 3 is concerned with the extent that
“fault” on the part of the claimant with
respect to the accident can
be established. As was noted at [24] of
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC
required close interpretation of Part 3 and Part 5 of the Act.
stands for the proposition that Part 5 of the Act has no application to Part 3
at all. Part 3 is self-contained. Thus the deeming
provisions contained in Part
5 have no application to claims for statutory benefits. His Honour Justice Fagan
makes the point at
paragraph [12].
3.2(1) provides the rule for determining which insurer must pay the statutory
benefits. Thus Part 3 is sufficient to provide
for entitlement to statutory
benefits and to identify the insurer responsible for them in the case of any
motor accident that would
fall within the definition of a “no-fault motor
accident” in s 5.1. There is no need for the provisions of Pt 5 to deal
with statutory benefits, at all.
the observations in
and the facts of the present case, the claimant
cannot be deemed at fault for the subject accident.
claimant submits that the claimant was not at fault as it is a blameless
THE INSURER’S SUBMISSIONS ON SERIOUS DRIVING OFFENCE
insurer says that s 3.37 of the Act does apply to this matter and prevents the
insurer paying statutory benefits to the claimant.
matter what determination the assessor comes to in relation to fault, the
insurer cannot pay statutory benefits to the claimant
due to s 3.37 of the Act.
to s 3.37, no statutory benefits are not payable to an injured person after the
person has been charged with or convicted
serious driving offence
that was related to the motor accident.
ss 3.37(5) of the Act, a
serious driving offence
includes an offence
ss 110(3)(a)
Road Transport Act
— driving a motor
vehicle with a low range prescribed concentration of alcohol.
the present case, the claimant has been charged with driving a motor vehicle
with a low range prescribed concentration of alcohol
infringement notice was issued to the claimant by the NSW Police Force. The
claimant’s appeal was dismissed and the offence
was upheld by Magistrate
Day in Mudgee Local Court.
is no discretion in the application of ss 3.37(5) of the Act.
claimant is not entitled to damages for statutory benefits as he committed a
serious driving offence related to the subject accident.
THE CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS ON SERIOUS DRIVING OFFENCE
claimant says that the blood test results have returned a blood alcohol reading
of 0.064 and it cannot be confirmed with certainty
whether a slight increase was
caused by morphine and other drugs given to him at the scene of the accident or
due to his prior alcohol
that basis, the claimant submits that s 3.37 does not apply.
LEGISLATION
making conducting my review and reaching my decision, I have considered the
following legislation and guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) “the Act”)
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (“the Regulation”)
Accident Guidelines 2017(Version 5 -20 December 2019) (“the
Guidelines”)
Transport Act
CONSIDERATION
Was the motor accident caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the
3 of the Act is concerned with the entitlement to statutory benefits and the
circumstances in which they are payable in respect
of death or injury resulting
from a motor accident.
3.1 provides that the claimant as an injured person is entitled to payment of
statutory benefits regardless of whether he
was at fault in the motor accident.
that basis, the claimant received payment of statutory benefits for his
treatment and medical expenses from the insurer for a period
of 26 weeks.
the end of that period, in reliance on s 3.28 of the Act, the insurer ceased
paying those benefits.
3.28 provides as follows –
Cessation of statutory benefits after 26 weeks to injured adult persons most
at fault or to injured persons with minor injuries
(1) An injured person is not entitled to statutory benefits
under this Division for treatment and care expenses incurred more than
after the motor accident concerned if:
(a) the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault
of the person and the person was over 16 years of age at the time
of the motor
accident, or
(b) the person’s only injuries
resulting from the motor accident were minor injuries.
(2) A motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person
if the contributory negligence of the person in relation to the
motor accident
(as referred to in section 3.38) was greater than 61%.
was common ground that the claimant has suffered more than minor injuries for
the purpose of the Act.
claimant submits that since the entitlement to statutory benefits after 26 weeks
is concerned with the extent of fault on the
part of the claimant, it is the
party asserting the disentitlement that bears the onus in adducing evidence of
facts to establish
the disentitlement.
insurer did not contest this submission.
its decision of 28 February 2020, the insurer found that the motor accident was
caused wholly by the fault of the claimant. In
the review decision, it found
that the accident was mostly by the fault of the claimant.
making both decisions, the insurer did not accept that a kangaroo was involved
in the mechanism of the motor accident. In taking
that position, the insurer
relied on the information contained in the Police Report, in particular, the
description of the motor
its DRS submissions, the insurer maintained that position and went further by
denying the existence of a kangaroo in the context
of the motor accident. It
says that the claimant’s Glasgow Coma Score was 13/15 on admission to
hospital. He was unresponsive.
In his statement he alleges he vividly remembers
the kangaroo immediately prior to his decision to swerve but cannot recall
for 4 to 5 days afterwards.
Considering
the totality of the evidence, I find it difficult to accept the insurer’s
both his initial Application for Personal Injury Benefits and his review
application, the claimant said that he swerved to avoid
a collision with a
his record of interview with Constable Blewitt on 4 January 2020 (which
pre-dated the preparation of the Police Report by Constable
Blewitt), the
claimant said: “
Coming down around the corner from Mudgee way just as I
was coming around a roo came in front of me. I tried to dodge it.”
asked what happened by one of the paramedic officers at the scene of the
accident, he said that he swerved to miss a kangaroo.
The motor accident
occurred around 6pm. The Ambulance Electronic Medical Record records the
claimant’s Glasgow Coma Score as
15/15 at 6.43pm, 7.17pm and 7.45pm which
would suggest that he was fully responsive for at least one hour and 45 minutes
witness DW said she heard a noise and looked up to see that the truck had
applied the brakes and was coming to a quick halt. The
truck seemed to swerve on
the road, then rotated and then rolled off onto the side of the road.
does not recall
seeing a kangaroo on the road but what she saw in my
view, supports the claimant’s evidence that he had to brake suddenly to
avoid something. The witness was at some distance at the rear of the truck and
not looking at the truck until after she heard a noise.
This delay suggests that
she may not have had time to see the kangaroo but the claimant was certainly in
a better position to see
also says that there are kangaroos there on a regular basis and many have been
hit on that section of road.
Considering
all the above facts and circumstances, I prefer the claimant’s evidence.
insurer makes a further submission that the NSW Police hold the claimant to be
wholly at fault because he was found to have a
blood alcohol concentration of
0.064 and the NSW Police issued him with an Infringement Notice for driving with
low-range PCA.
do not accept this submission.
claimant was issued with an infringement notice for driving with a low range
PCA. The claimant was not charged with any other
offences. Constable Blewitt
expressed an opinion in saying that that It appeared to him that the
claimant’s truck was taking
a right-hand bend when his passenger side rear
tyre lost traction on the gravel causing the vehicle to slide and go off onto
dirt down an embankment.
it is being suggested that on the basis of this opinion that the NSW Police
holds the claimant wholly at fault for the motor accident
for that reason, then
that is also rejected. It is merely an opinion from Constable Blewitt that does
not take into account the totality
of the evidence.
no-fault accident?
claimant submits that I should find that this was a no-fault accident or
blameless accident within the meaning of s 5.1 of the
Act and that the claimant
cannot be deemed at fault for the subject accident.
insurer submits that the claimant cannot succeed under s 5.1 of the Act because
he was not a faultless driver. He was driving
whilst intoxicated and charged
with a driving offence. His reaction times and perception times would have been
affected by his intoxication.
I do not accept that submission. There is no evidence before me to show that the
driving with a low range PCA of 0064 was causative
of the motor accident. It may
become an issue when considering the causation of injury under s 3.38 of the Act
but in my view, the
insurer has not discharged its onus of proving that this
caused the motor accident.
relevant provisions of Part 5 of the Act are as follows
5.1 Definition of “no-fault motor accident”
In this Part:
no-fault motor accident
means a motor accident in the State not
caused by the fault of the owner or driver of any motor vehicle involved in the
in the use or operation of the vehicle and not caused by the fault of
any other person.
5.2 Liability in case of no-fault motor accident
(cf s 7B MACA)
(1) The death of or injury to a person that results from a
no-fault motor accident involving a motor vehicle that has motor accident
insurance cover for the accident (within the meaning of section 1.10) is, for
the purposes of and in connection with any claim for
damages or statutory
in respect of the death or injury, deemed to have been caused by
the fault of the owner or driver of the motor vehicle in the use
or operation of
the vehicle.
support of his submission the claimant relies on
AAI Limited v Singh
[2019] NSWSC 1300
). Statutory benefits after 26
weeks, Part 3 of the Act is concerned with the extent that “fault”
on the part of the claimant
with respect to the accident can be established.
required close interpretation of Part 3 and Part 5 of the Act.
stands for the proposition that Part 5 of the Act has no application to Part 3
at all. Part 3 is self-contained. Thus, the deeming
provisions contained in Part
5 have no application to claims for statutory benefits.
agree with the claimant’s submissions and for the purpose of these
reasons, I adopt the guiding observations of his Honour,
in paragraphs 17, 24 and 25 of the judgment.
problem with Pt
5 is the direct contradiction between s
5.6. “No-fault motor accident” is defined
5.1 to mean an accident that is not caused by the fault of an owner or
driver of a vehicle involved in the accident or “by
the fault of any other
person”. Pursuant to s
5.2, injury that results from a “no-fault motor accident”
only one insured motor vehicle is “deemed to have been caused by
the fault of the owner or driver of [that] motor vehicle”
“use or operation”.
The effect of this deeming provision is to
cause the statutory insuring clause in
to respond.
5.6 purports to confer upon the owner or driver an entitlement to
recover contribution in respect of the “liability
for damages or statutory
benefits” that arises from the fault of the owner or driver, deemed
......................
is a statutory deeming of fault in the causation of injury.
In ss 3.11(1)(a)
and 3.28(1)(a) the limitation to 26 weeks of statutory benefits turns upon fault
in the causation of the motor accident.
Fault in the causation of injury and
fault in the causation of an accident are two different things – not in
the empirical
world, or in practical terms, but in the concepts of this statute.
It is the express and apparently deliberate intention of ss 3.11(1)(a)
3.28(1)(a) that the cut-off of statutory benefits at 26 weeks should turn upon
the claimant’s fault in causing the motor
accident. The whole point
5 is to make provision with respect to motor accidents that are no
one’s fault. Section
artificially distinguishes between fault in the causation of
injury and fault in the causation of the accident. It does so in order
fault in the causation of injury (and hence to create a path of liability) in
the case of “no-fault motor accidents”,
where there is by statutory
definition no fault in the causation of the accident and where the legislature
has apparently deliberately
chosen not to deem fault in the causation of the
aspect of the scheme of Pt 3 is that fault in causing the accident is the
criterion for terminating statutory benefits at 26 weeks.
That scheme would
be subverted if a section located in Part 5 (dealing with accidents not caused
by anyone’s fault) should operate
to deem fault in the causation of the
accident for the purposes of the limit on statutory benefits.
s.5.2(1) does not so operate. Section 5.8 reinforces this conclusion. Part 5 has
no bearing upon Mr Singh’s entitlement
to statutory benefits. It provides
no basis for them being terminated after 26 weeks.
[Emphasis added]
his Honour’s distinction between fault for the accident and deemed fault
for the purpose of financial liability to
the facts of this case, I have
(a) The insurer has not established that the claimant was at
fault for the purposes of s 3.28 of the Act.
(b) The claimant was involved in a single vehicle no-fault motor accident
within the meaning of s. 5.1 of the Act.
Are statutory benefits payable to a claimant who has committed a
serious driving offence
put this issue in perspective, it is again necessary to repeat that Part 3,
Division 3.1 of the Act is concerned with the entitlement
to statutory benefits
and the circumstances in which they are payable in respect of death or injury
resulting from a motor accident.
3.1 of the Division provides:
(1) If the death of or injury to a person results from a
motor accident in this State, statutory benefits are payable in respect
the death or injury as provided by this Part.
(2) Statutory benefits are payable (
except as otherwise provided by this
(a) whether or not the motor accident was caused by the fault of the
owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation
of the vehicle,
(b) even if the motor accident was caused by the fault of the person
to whom the statutory benefits are payable.
[Emphasis added]
3.5 of Part 3 concerns the limitations and restrictions on the payment of
statutory benefits. Relevant to the present case,
s 3.37 provides
No statutory benefits payable to injured
person who commits serious driving offence
(1) Statutory benefits under this Part are not payable to
an injured person after the person has been charged with or convicted
a serious driving offence that was
related to the motor
(2) This section does not prevent the payment of statutory
benefits if the person is acquitted of the offence charged or the
proceedings
are discontinued (otherwise than in circumstances of a plea of
guilty to another serious driving offence that contributed to the
person's injury).
If the person is so acquitted or the
proceedings are so discontinued--
(a) statutory benefits are payable from the date the person was charged
with the offence
(b) any limitation period on proceedings for the recovery of those benefits
does not commence until the person's acquittal or the
discontinuance of the
proceedings
(3) A serious driving offence with which an injured person is
charged or convicted is considered
to be related to a motor
accident only if
(a) the offence relates to the driving of a motor vehicle by
the injured person, and
the motor vehicle was involved in the motor accident that caused the
person’s injury.
(4) A person is considered to have been charged with a serious driving
offence if proceedings for a serious driving offence are pending
against the
person, and the person is considered to have been charged when those proceedings
were commenced.
(5) A serious driving offence is—
(a) an offence that is a major offence under the
Transport Act 2013
or an offence under
section 115
(2) (a)–(e) of
that Act, or
(b) any other offence prescribed by the regulations
under this Act as a serious driving offence,
but does not include an offence prescribed by the
regulations under this Act as excepted from this definition.
(6) This section does not entitle an insurer to recover payments of
statutory benefits made before the person is charged with
or convicted of the
relevant serious driving offence.
[Emphasis added]
claimant was charged with a serious driving offence within the meaning of s
3.37(5). That offence was the driving of a motor vehicle
with a low range PCA, a
reading of 0.064.
claimant takes issue with the blood alcohol reading. He says that it cannot be
confirmed with certainty that morphine and other
drugs given to him at the scene
of the accident did not elevate the blood alcohol level.
is not an issue I am able to determine.
find that I am required to proceed on the basis that the claimant has committed
a serious driving offence within the meaning of
insurer submits that once it is established that an injured person has been
charged with or convicted of a serious driving offence
within the meaning of s
3.37(5), section 3.37(1) operates to disentitle payment of statutory benefits to
the injured person.
Considering
s 3.37 in its entirety, I cannot accept this submission.
3.37(1) provides that the serious driving offence must be “
the motor accident”
3.37 (3) provides that a serious driving offence is considered to be related to
the accident only if:
(a) The offence relates to the driving of a
motor vehicle by the injured person, and
(b) The motor vehicle
was involved in the motor
accident that caused the person’s injury.
follows that those circumstances must be addressed before s 3.37(1) can be
the present case, the offence relates to the driving of a motor vehicle by the
claimant. He is the injured person. It follows that
ss 3.37 (3)(a) is
my view, however, the insurer has not shown ss 3.37 (3)(b) to be satisfied in
Section 3 of the Act –
means an incident or accident involving
operation of
that causes
the death of or injury to
where the death or
a result of and is caused
(whether or not as a result of a defect in the
vehicle) during:
(a) the driving of the vehicle, or
(b) a collision, or action taken to avoid a collision, with the vehicle,
(c) the vehicle's running out of control, or
(d) a dangerous situation caused by the driving of the vehicle, a collision
or action taken to avoid a collision with the vehicle,
or the vehicle's
running out of control.
[Emphasis added]
causal elements of the definition that are underlined are not satisfied in this
case. In particular, the claimant’s use
of his vehicle did not cause his
injury. It follows that the claimant’s motor vehicle was not involved in
the motor accident
that caused his injury and ss 3.37(3)(b) is not
the present case, the claimant swerved to avoid a collision with a kangaroo. I
have found that the motor accident is a “no-fault
motor accident”
for the purpose of s 5.1.
am fortified in my conclusion concerning ss 3.37(3)(b) by consideration of s
3.38 of the Act. Subsection 3.38(2) provides that a
finding of contributory
negligence must be made in the following cases:
(a) Where the
injured person has been convicted of an alcohol or other drug related offence in
relation to the motor accident, unless
the injured person satisfied the insurer
or the Dispute Resolution Service that the alcohol or other drug involved in the
of the offence did not contribute in any way to the accident,...
(b) ........
ss 3.38(6),
an alcohol or other drug related offence
is defined to
include PCA offences.
the insurer’s submission is correct, s 3.38 could have no operation in
cases of PCA offences. The claimant would not be entitled
to statutory benefits
and no occasion to consider contributory negligence under this provision would
find that the serious driving offence was not related to the motor accident, and
the claimant is not disentitled to payment of statutory
benefits by reason of
his commission of a serious driving offence.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
claimant has made an application for costs above the regulated fee prescribed by
the Regulation for payment of his legal costs
by the insurer pursuant to s
8.10(4) of the Act on the basis that there are exceptional circumstances.
maximum amount for regulated costs in each miscellaneous matter type determined
in this matter is currently $1,660 plus GST.
have considered the substantial submissions made on the issue by both the
claimant and the insurer. In its submissions, the insurer
concedes that the
claimant is entitled one of the maximum regulated fee of $1,660 plus GST but
opposes any further costs based on
exceptional circumstances.
claimant has submitted a bill of costs dated 1 October 2020, seeking an amount
of $16,167 inclusive of GST, to be assessed, should
I be minded to permit costs
beyond the regulated fee based upon exceptional circumstances.
insurer has had an opportunity to consider the bill and has made submissions in
My determination on costs
8.3(4) of the Act provides that an Australian legal practitioner is not entitled
to be paid or recover legal costs in connection
to a claim for statutory
benefits unless it is permitted by the Regulation or the DRS.
8.10(3) of the Act provides that the claimant is only entitled to recover
reasonable and necessary legal costs if payment
is permitted by the Regulation
8.10(4) of the Act provides that the DRS can permit payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant if exceptional circumstances
exist to justify the
payment of those costs.
San v Rumble (No 2)
(2007) NSWCA 259
the Court of Appeal considered the
term ‘exceptional circumstances’ in the context of whether indemnity
costs could be
claimed under
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
. Campbell JA said at [67]:
In deciding whether it
“exceptional case”
within the meaning of
, the court needs to find that the circumstances of the instant case are
unusual or out of the ordinary, whether that unusualness
or being out of the
ordinary arises from qualitative or quantitative factors.
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 290
, when dealing
with the phrase “exceptional circumstances” in the context of r
31.18(4) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, his Honour also added
the following: exceptional circumstances can include a single exceptional
matter, a combination of exceptional
factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which, although individually of no particular significance, when taken
together are
seen as exceptional; in deciding whether circumstances are
exceptional within the meaning of a particular statutory provision, one
keep in mind the rationale of that particular statutory provision.
do not accept that a liability dispute with conflicting versions of events would
in itself give rise to an exceptional circumstance
in the context of s 8.10(4)
of the Act. That is the very common type of dispute that would ordinarily or
usually find its way to
the DRS for resolution.
this dispute, there were both qualitative and quantitative factors that took the
matter beyond the ordinary.
Significantly
there were three miscellaneous matter types to be determined in this assessment.
Although there was a determination
on the papers, these various matters have
complex issues which required a deal of submissions from the parties, a close
and careful
interpretation of various sections of the Act and a detailed
analysis of recent case law.
Quantitative
factors included the need to consider factual investigations, interviews with
the NSW Police Force and a witness, the
requirement to obtain and analyse Police
documents through GIPA and the requirement for two teleconferences followed by
further submissions.
these circumstances, I am satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist to
justify the payment of the claimant’s necessary
legal costs beyond the
regulated fee for each miscellaneous matter type determined.
Accordingly,
I exercise my discretion pursuant to section 8.10(4)(b) of the Act and determine
that the claimant is entitled to his
reasonable and necessary costs recoverable
from the insurer.
that regard, I have considered the bill of costs submitted by the claimant for
assessment and the reply submissions from the insurer.
allow the claimant’s costs for each of three miscellaneous matter types
determined — $1,660 x 3 = $4,980 plus GST.
the rate for monetary units provided by the Regulation, I allow the claimant 30
monetary units for professional fees ($103.75
x 30 = $3,112.50) beyond the above
regulated fees pursuant to s 8.10(4)(b) of the Act.
allow the claimant $30 free of GST for the GIPA fee.
total costs allowed are $ 8,092.50 plus GST for professional fees and $30 for
disbursements.
My determination of the
Miscellaneous Claim is as follows:
(a) For the purposes of section 3.28, the motor accident was not caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the injured person.
(b) For the purposes of Part 5 the motor accident is a no-fault motor
(c) For the purposes of section 3.37 the insurer is not entitled to refuse
payment of statutory benefits
(d) The effective date of this decision is 24 April 2020.
Legal Costs
The amount of the claimant’s costs
assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
is $8,931.75 inclusive of GST.
Maurice Castagnet
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter